Unifying Conflicting Perspectives in Group Activities:
Roles of Minority Individuals
Kazuhisa Miwa (miwa@is.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Information Science, Nagoya University

Yugo Hayashi (yhayashi@fc.ritsumei.ac.jp)
School of Literature, Ritsumeikan University

Hitoshi Terai (teraihitoshi@gmail.com)
Faculty of Humanity-Oriented Science and Engineering, kinki University
studies also support the notionthat surprising results not predicted by a hypothesis play a crucial role in scientific discovery (Kulkarni & Simon, 1988).
Such conflicts more often emerge in a heterogeneous group
with different perspectives. Preceding studies on pair problem solving have indicated that the important factor for finding new ideas is one member having a different perspective from the other (Shirouzu, Miyake, & Masukawa, 2002;
Miwa, 2004). In group activities, organizational studies have
indicated two types of conflicts: relationship and task conflicts (Simons & Peterson, 2000). Relationship conflicts come
from differences in group members’ personalities and task
conflicts from differences in members’ perspectives on and
ideas for the task. Research has indicated that task conflict brings about positive effects by drawing out new solutions unifying the variable viewpoints that caused conflict
(Tjosvold, Hui, Ding, & Hu, 2003). In such group activities, each member experiences difficulties in accepting other
members’ ideas and different perspectives. Such contradictions bring about conflicts in group interactions and improve
interactive processes through which new innovative ideas
emerge.
In this study, we investigated activities of groups comprising four members in which one individual had a different perspective from the other three members. The following is our
research questions: In such group activities, with asymmetry among group members’ opinions, does a high-level perspective emerge from a minority individual or from majority three members? Nemeth indicated that minority views
foster greater thought about an issue, leading to divergent
rather than convergent thinking (Nemeth & Wachtler, 1983;
Nemeth, 1986). Meyers, et al., also confirmed that minorities
produce significantly more arguable opinions, disagreementrelevant intrusions, and qualifiers than majority members do
(Meyers, Brashers, & Hanner, 2000). These findings guide
the following first hypothesis:

Abstract
For drawing higher-level perspectives in group activities, resolving conflicts among group members is crucial. We investigated group activities with four members
wherein one member had a different perspective from
the other three. Four members engaged in a rule discovery task in which they were required to unify conflicts
for the solution. Through two experiments, we investigated two hypotheses: 1) Innovative high-level perspectives are more likely to emerge from a minority individual than from the majority of group members, 2) Group
members on the majority side might tend to have more
egocentric perspectives than an individual on the minority side. Both hypotheses were supported.
Keywords: Emergence, Minority, Majority, Group problem
solving.

Introduction
In group activities, conflicts often occur among group members. Indeed, such conflicts are important for bringing innovative ideas into a group by overcoming each member’s fixed,
old thoughts. A group found new ideas by producing a unified
meta-perspective while resolving group members’ contradictory local perspectives.
Many studies on divergent thinking have confirmed conflicts’ important functions (Van Dyne & Saavedra, 1996;
Dreu, 2002). In studies of creativity, many researches have
indicated that unifying two conflicting concepts, which seem
not to share any common properties and, therefore, are difficult to merge is important for finding new innovative ideas
and designs (Finke, Ward, & Smith, 1992). Additionally, in
insight problem solving, problem solvers’ thought processes
are tightly fixated by mental blocks that prevent them from
achieving new solutions (Sternberg & Davidson, 1995). They
face many unexpected counter examples that conflict with
their viewpoints. To reach new solutions, they need to relax mental blocks and find a new perspective that resolves
these conflicts. Similarly, the philosophy of science has indicated that anomalies are crucial for constructing new theories. Anomalies are defined as instances that break the symmetry of a classical theory, meaning that anomalies produce
conflicts in current theory. Historical studies indicate cases
of innovative scientific theory constructed through the resolution of such conflicts (Chinn & Brewer, 1993). Empirical

• Hypothesis 1: Innovative high-level perspectives are more
likely to emerge from a minority individual than from
group members on the majority side.
Conflicts are valuable, but also produce miscommunication
and misunderstandings among group members, potentially

247

causing negative effects in group activities. Group members
need to find a meta-perspective that unifies conflicted lowerlevel different perspectives. To produce a high-level perspective, each member must understand other members’ perspectives in the initial stage of arguments. Studies in psycholinguistics have indicated that people tend to be biased by egocentrism (Keysar, Barr, Balin, & Brauner, 2000). Egocentric
people are unable fully to understand other people’s opinions
and are attached to biased facts that can differ from reality.
Previous research has consistently indicated that majorities
generally exert a greater and more direct influence on group
decisions that also leads to an unreflective acceptance of the
majority position (Wood, Lundgren, Ouellette, Busceme, &
Blackstone, 1994; Meyers et al., 2000). To overcome egocentric views, reflective and deliberate thinking is crucial. This
determines our second hypothesis:

participant perceives seven black components (i.e., black perspective), but the other perceives five white components (i.e.,
white perspective), causing conflicts between the two participants. Participants were required to notice the other participant’s perspective by finding the distinction of the background color. Before the experimental session, it was stressed
that stimuli within the fixation (dotted) square were physically identical, but the background color outside the square
was not mentioned. With this understanding of the experimental situation, participants could unify their contradictory
perspectives and shift to a higher unified perspective that resolved the conflicts.

• Hypothesis 2: Group members on the majority side might
tend to have more egocentric perspectives than an individual on the minority side.
This point, i.e., understanding other members’ perspectives
by escaping egocentric views, is crucial because the current
study investigate group activities when very serious conflicts
occur in a group. Many previous studies have also examined
such activities. However, each member’s misunderstandings
of other group members in the current study were more serious compared to preceding studies. The conflicts that are
investigated in the current study are characterized by incommensurability. An individual on one side had a completely
different perspective that could not be understood by individuals on the other side. In the initial stage of discussion,
arguments among them could not be resolved.
Further more, we investigate these group activities compared to collaborative activities by a pair of individuals.
Specifically, if Hypothesis 1 is supported, we assume two
possibilities: A minority individual’s performance in finding a high-level perspective would be better than pair’s performance as the baseline performance, or majority’s performance would be worse than the baseline performance. No
previous research was found, and we have no hypotheses
about this research question.

Figure 1: Example stimuli with two different perspectives.

Stimuli
In the present study, one participant was assigned to a minority role and the other three to a majority role. Either a white or
a black perspective was given to each side by controlling the
background color. Experimental stimuli were presented on a
monitor placed in front of each participant. A workspace was
provided for each member, separated from others by separator panels. Therefore, each member could not notice different
background color on other members’ monitors. Conversations among members were easily made.
For introducing a context that motivated participants to resolve conflicts, participants engaged in a rule discovery task.
In the experiment, stimuli were presented sequentially (see
Figure 2). For each stimulus, a square outer box was displayed for one second, followed by a stimulus picture presented inside the box frame. Participants were allowed to
converse freely about the stimulus pattern presented on their
monitor. When all members agreed to move to the next stimulus, or when 120 seconds had passed, another stimulus was
presented.

Experimental design
We used a modified version of the experimental design developed by Hayashi and Miwa (2009), in which pairs of participants with different perspectives engaged in a rule discovery
task.

Rule setting
Participants were required to find regularity in a sequential
pattern of the number of components. In Figure 2, the pattern of the black components are 3, 4, and 5. The sequential rule does not exit in one color of components; regularity
emerges across both colors of components. Specifically, Table 1 shows a stimuli presentation sequence in which regularity in a sequence of the sums of black and white components
was manipulated (i.e., 6, 8, 10, and 12 in the bottom column).

How to produce conflicts
Figure 1 shows an example pair of two stimuli, one presented
to a minority individual and the other to majority participants. The diagrammatic arrangements of “components” of
both stimuli are identical within the dotted square, but one
against the white background might be perceived differently
from the other against the black background. In this case, one

248

characterized by background colors, and black and white assignment to components.
Previous studies found that typically, participants drew incorrect pictures as in Figure 3 (b2). In the picture, the background color was correctly identified but the colors of corresponding components, which should have been physically
identical, were opposite. The picture contradicted the instruction that each diagrammatic pattern inside the fixation square
for each participant was identical for the other members. This
reversed figure was interpreted as evidence of participants’
egocentric understanding.

Figure 2: Series of stimuli presented on the black perspective
side.
Table 1: Example sequences of the number of components.
Black
White
Sum

3
3
6

Introductory
4 5
6
4 5
6
8 10 12

...
...
...

2
4
6

Contradictory
2 6
5 ...
6 4
7 ...
8 10 12 ...

Introductory phase: The introductory phase was established to let participants believe their own perspectives were
correct. A sequence in white (or black) components was individually manipulated (i.e., 3, 4, 5, and 6) while regularity in
a sequence of the sums of black and white components was
maintained (i.e., 6, 8, 10, and 12). In the introductory phase,
even though participants had different perspectives, no conflicts occurred because each continuously reported the identical sequence of the number (i.e., 3, 4, 5, and 6) to the others.

Figure 3: Four diagrammatic patterns depicted in post questionnaire.
In Experiment 1, we also recorded the participants’ protocols. This secondary data will be examined in the discussion
section.

Experiment 1
Participants

Conflict phase: After the 17th trial, regularity in the number of each color of components was broken: 2, 2, 6, 5 in
black, and 4, 6, 4 and 7 in white, leading to conflicts among
participants, but regularity in the sums of black and white
components was still maintained (i.e., 6, 8, 10, and 12). The
session was terminated after all members agreed on the regularity found in paired components (i.e., 6, 8, 10, and 12), or
time for the problem-solving phase exceeded 60 minutes.

Thirty-eight undergraduates participated in Experiment 1. A
total of 10 groups, i.e., eight groups consisting of four members (one as a minority individual and three as a majority
group) and two groups consisting of three members (one as
minority and two as majority), were constructed.

Results
Our main concern was whether the participants understood
the other members’ perspective for unifying and resolving the
conflicts. Therefore, in the experiment, we did not record
whether each individual found the sequential rule. Rules were
not examined by individual members but rather discussed by
groups. The result shows eight of the ten groups found the
target rule: i.e., the sequential pattern of the sums of black
and white components.
We scored the post questionnaire based on two criteria:
first, whether the arrangement of components inside the fixation square was correctly drawn; second, whether the background color out of the fixation square was correctly drawn.

Post questionnaire
After the problem-solving phase, we conducted a questionnaire in which we asked participants why the conflicts in the
problem-solving phase occurred. In particular, participants’
understanding was tested on how precisely they understood
the arrangement of components on other members’ screens.
An arrangement of components on their own screen was presented on the questionnaire sheet (Figure 3 (a)), and they
were required to draw an arrangement of components from
the other members’ screens. The depicted figures were categorized into four types (Figure 3 (b)), each of which was

249

Table 2 shows the results. Fisher’s exact analysis shows a
marginally significant difference in the distribution between
minority individuals and majority groups for the component
color identification (p < 0.10) and a significant difference for
the background color identification (p < 0.05).
The table shows that more individuals on the minority side
drew correct figures in the questionnaire than did majority
groups, thus confirming that individuals on the minority side
understood the majorities’ viewpoints and acquired a higher
unified perspective that resolved the conflicts. This result supports our first hypothesis.

other incorrect figures do. However, if the reversed figure increased, they may have specific functions such as acting as a
medium for bridging across misunderstanding to acquire the
correct understanding.

Participants
A total of 39 undergraduates were assigned to the asymmetry group conditions, in which nine groups consisting of four
members (one as a minority individual and three as a majority group) and one group consisting of three members (one as
minority and two as majority). Twenty undergraduates were
assigned to the symmetry pair condition in which 10 pairs
were constructed.

Table 2: Distribution of the number of participants who drew
the correct and incorrect figures in Experiment 1. Parentheses
show the ratios of participants.

Minority
Majority

Components
Correct Incorrect
6
4
(.60)
(.40)
8
20
(.29)
(.71)

Procedures
The experimental procedures were almost identical to those
in Experiment 1.
One procedure was added to capture participants’ transition processes from misunderstandings to correctly noticing
other members’ perspective. Specifically, at the end of every
trial (i.e., a set of the presentation of the outer square and the
experimental stimulus), the participants were asked to answer
an intermediate questionnaire. Figure 4 shows an example
shot of the monitor and an experimental sheet from the intermediate questionnaire. A quarter area of the experimental
stimulus was outlined within a red square. Participants were
asked to draw the stimulus pattern in the same area of the
other members’ monitor on the experimental sheet.

Background
Correct Incorrect
8
2
(.80)
(.20)
12
16
(.43)
(.57)

We also analyzed the degree to which the reversed figure
(Figure 3 (b2)) was drawn on the questionnaire sheets. Table
3 shows the distribution of the number of participants who
drew the reversed figure. Fisher’s exact analysis shows a significant difference between minority individuals and majority
groups in the distribution (p < 0.05). The table indicates that
more majority members drew the reversed figure, thus implying that they tended to take egocentric viewpoints more often
than did minority individuals. This result supports our second
hypothesis.
Table 3: Distribution of the number of participants who drew
the reversed figure in Experiment 1. Parentheses show the
ratios of participants.
Minority
Majority

Reversal
1 (.10)
15 (.54)

Others
9 (.90)
13 (.46)
Figure 4: An example shot of the monitor screen and an experimental sheet from the intermediate questionnaire.

Experiment 2
Results

We conducted Experiment 2, adding a symmetric interaction
condition in which a pair of participants solved the same experimental task as in Experiment 1. Additionally, we were
interested in interaction processes in which the concern was
whether the reversed figure, prominently observed in Experiment 1, increased or decreased from the initial stage to the
final stage of problem solving. We expected that through the
development of problem solving, misunderstandings would
be gradually corrected, and then the reversed figure would
decrease. If so, the reversed figure may function similarly as

In Experiment 2, eight of ten pairs in the symmetry pair condition found the target rule, but only three of ten groups in
the asymmetry group condition did (p < 0.05: Fisher’s exact
analysis).
Table 4 shows the distribution of participants who drew the
correct and incorrect figures in the post questionnaire. A chisquare test shows a significant difference in the distribution
for the component color identification (χ2 (2) = 15.61, p <
0.01), but does not for the background color identification

250

(χ2 (2) = 4.47, n.s.). We did not confirm that the performance
of minority individuals is superior to that of pairs; on the other
hand, the performance of majority groups is much worse than
that of pairs.
Additionally, Table 5 shows the distribution of participants
who drew the reversed figure in the post questionnaire. A
chi-square test shows a significant difference in the distribution (χ2 (2) = 13.86, p < 0.01). The result indicates that
more majority members drew the reversed figure than pairs
did. However, the results do not indicate that fewer minority
individuals drew the reversed figure more than pairs did.
Table 4: Distribution of the number of participants who drew
the correct and incorrect figures in Experiment 2. Parentheses
show the ratios of participants.

Pairs
Minority
Majority

Components
Correct Incorrect
17
3
(.85)
(.15)
5
5
(.50)
(.50)
8
21
(.28)
(.72)

Background
Correct Incorrect
17
3
(.85)
(.15)
8
2
(.80)
(.20)
17
12
(.59)
(.41)
Figure 5: Transition of occurrence rates of reversed and other
types of incorrect figures.

Table 5: Distribution of the number of participants who drew
the reversed figure in Experiment 2. Parentheses show the
ratios of participants.
Pairs
Minority
Majority

Reversal
3 (.15)
5 (.50)
20 (.69)

On the other hand, the gradual increase of the reversed figure is interesting. In Figure 5 (a), there was a significant main
effect of the stage factor (F(2, 112) = 7.52, p < 0.01), but
neither a significant main effect of the condition factor nor an
interaction between the two factors (F(2, 56) < 1, n.s.; F(4,
112) = 1.62, n.s.). This result shows that the reversed figure
gradually increased in the development of problem-solving.
This point is discussed in detail later.

Others
17 (.85)
5 (.50)
9 (.31)

Both results consistently confirm that majority group members were more egocentric and less accurate at understanding
other members’ perspective, but do not support that minority
individuals were more sophisticated at unifying the multiple
perspectives than were pairs as the baseline condition.
Next, we analyzed the intermediate questionnaire for capturing the transition process of correcting the misunderstandings. We divided the trials from the initial through final
wherein the participants terminated the experiment into three
stages: initial, middle, and final. Figures 5 (a) and (b) show
the average rates of the reversed and other incorrect figures in
the initial, middle, and final stages of problem solving.
First, for incorrect figures other than the reversed figure in
Figure 5 (b), there were significant main effects of both the
stage and the condition factors (F(2, 112) = 23.06, p < 0.01;
F(2, 56) = 6.92, p < 0.01), but no significant interaction (F(4,
112) < 1, n.s.). The gradual decrease of the ratio of incorrect
figures is reasonable because it means that misunderstandings
were progressively corrected.

Discussion and conclusions
Overall results support our two hypotheses. Experiment 1
supported that minority individuals noticed a unified perspective that resolved the conflicts occurring among group members more often than did majority group members. Majorities tended to misunderstand the causes of the conflicts due
to their egocentric viewpoint. These findings are consistent with preceding minority and majority studies (Nemeth &
Wachtler, 1983; Nemeth, 1986; Wood et al., 1994; Meyers et
al., 2000). Previous studies focused mainly on judgment patterns of third parties who were exposed to minority or majority opinions. Meanwhile, in the current study, by employing
the deliberate experimental paradigm, we investigated how
minorities and majorities formed their ideas through their interaction processes.
In Experiment 2, majorities showed poorer performances
at understanding other members’ perspective compared with

251

References

the pairs in the baseline condition. Studies in social psychology have indicated negative impacts of group activities
such as the Ringelmann effect and social loafing (Karau &
Williams, 1993). These phenomena indicate losses of motivation and coordination of group members, which in turn
diminish the total performance of a group. These aspects that
emerge in a homogeneous group may bring about negative
impacts on members on the majority side.

Chinn, C. A., & Brewer, W. F. (1993). The role of anomalous data in knowledge acquisition: A theoretical framework and implications for science instruction. , 63(1), 149.
Dreu, C. K. W. D. (2002). Team innovation and team effectiveness: The importance of minority dissent and reflexivity. European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology, 11(3), 285-298.
Finke, R. A., Ward, T. B., & Smith, S. M. (1992). Creative
cognition: Theory, research, and applications. MIT press
Cambridge, MA.
Karau, S. J., & Williams, K. D. (1993). Social loafing: A
meta-analytic review and theoretical integration. Journal
of personality and social psychology, 65(4), 681.
Keysar, B., Barr, D. J., Balin, J. A., & Brauner, J. S.
(2000). Taking perspective in conversation: The role of
mutual knowledge in comprehension. Psychological Science, 11(1), pp. 32-38.
Kulkarni, D., & Simon, H. A. (1988). The processes of scientific discovery: The strategy of experimentation. Cognitive
Science, 12(2), 139–175.
Meyers, R. A., Brashers, D. E., & Hanner, J. (2000).
Majority-minority influence: identifying argumentative
patterns and predicting argument-outcome links. Journal
of Communication, 50(4), 3–30.
Miwa, K. (2004). Collaborative discovery in a simple reasoning task. Cognitive Systems Research, 5(1), 41 - 62.
Nemeth, C. J. (1986). Differential contributions of majority
and minority influence. Psychological Review, 93(1), 23.
Nemeth, C. J., & Wachtler, J. (1983). Creative problem solving as a result of majority vs minority influence. European
Journal of Social Psychology, 13(1), 45–55.
Shirouzu, H., Miyake, N., & Masukawa, H. (2002). Cognitively active externalization for situated reflection. Cognitive Science, 26(4), 469 - 501.
Simons, T. L., & Peterson, R. S. (2000). Task conflict and
relationship conflict in top management teams: The pivotal
role of intragroup trust. Journal of Applied Psychology,
85(1), 102 - 111.
Sternberg, R. J., & Davidson, J. E. (1995). The nature of
insight. The MIT Press.
Tjosvold, D., Hui, C., Ding, D. Z., & Hu, J. (2003). Conflict values and team relationships: conflict’s contribution
to team effectiveness and citizenship in china. Journal of
Organizational Behavior, 24(1), 69–88.
Van Dyne, L., & Saavedra, R. (1996). A naturalistic minority influence experiment: Effects on divergent thinking,
conflict and originality in work-groups. British Journal of
Social Psychology, 35(1), 151–167.
Wood, W., Lundgren, S., Ouellette, J. A., Busceme, S., &
Blackstone, T. (1994). Minority influence: a meta-analytic
review of social influence processes. Psychological bulletin, 115(3), 323-345.

In our experiments, the participants engaged in dual tasks.
One task was to explore the reasons for conflicts and resolve
them by unifying the conflicted multiple perspectives. In the
second task, the participants also engaged in a rule discovery
task for finding a regularity of the number of components in
the experimental stimuli.
As we mentioned before, in Experiment 2, the performance of the asymmetry group in finding the regularity was
much poorer that of the symmetry pair. In the seven unsuccessful groups in the asymmetry group condition, a total of
twenty participants were assigned on the majority side, revealing very poor performance for noticing the minority individual’s perspective. Specifically, only five of twenty participants noticed the background color of the minority perspective, and ten of twenty correctly draw the diagrammatic
pattern of components.
Experiment 2 confirmed that with the development of
problem solving, the participants gradually reported the reversed figure, meaning that the reversed figure was generated
through group interaction processes. In both experiments,
majorities drew more reversed figures. Through what processes did they misunderstand causes of the conflicts? To
understand this point in more detail, we transcribed participants’ verbal protocols recorded in Experiment 1. We focused on a set of terms relating to “reversed” such as invert,
opposite, reverse, and turn over. These terms may be interpreted differently based on each problem-solving context. In
correctly understanding situations, these terms may be understood as the figure/ground reversal of components caused by
the change of the background color. However, in misunderstanding situations, these terms were construed wrongly as
simple reversals of colors of the components, white to black
and black to white, thus, causing the reversed figure. As a
result of analysis, 13 out of 20 members on the majority side
mentioned these terms, and 77 % (10 out of 13) of those drew
the reversed figure. However, none of five minority individuals who mentioned those terms drew the reversed figure. We
assume that the latter interpretation, i.e., simple changes of
colors of the components, was more intuitive without deep
consideration; whereas, the former, i.e., the figure/ground reversal by the background color, was more sophisticated and
required deliberate thoughts and deeper understanding about
causes of conflicts. Majorities who tend to be biased by their
egocentric view may quit their deliberate thinking to correctly
understand conflicting situations.

252

