‘Unlikely’ Outcomes Might Never Occur, But What About
‘Unlikely (20% Chance)’ Outcomes?
Sarah Jenkins (s.jenkins.12@ucl.ac.uk) and Adam J. L. Harris (adam.harris@ucl.ac.uk)
Department of Experimental Psychology, 26 Bedford Way
London, University College London, WC1H 0AP, UK

R.M Lark (mlark@bgs.ac.uk)
British Geological Survey, Keyworth, Nottingham, NG12 5GG, UK

certainty is not always well received by the public, resulting
in the potential for reduced trust in (and sometimes criminal
proceedings against) the scientists who make such
predictions.
Budescu and Wallsten (1995) proposed that the choice of
risk communication format should be governed by the
congruence principle: the precision of the risk
communication should match the precision of the event in
question, thus reflecting the nature of its uncertainty.
Estimating the likelihood of a large earthquake might not be
precisely quantifiable. In such instances, a specific numerical
expression of the probability of this event might be perceived
as overly precise. Using a verbal probability expression
(VPE), however, better represents the uncertainty and
underlying imprecision associated with the probability
estimate. This characteristic is one reason for many
organisations’ use of VPEs in risk communication (e.g.,
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [IPCC],
Mastrandrea, 2010).
There is, however, considerable variability in people’s
usage and interpretations of VPEs (e.g., Budescu & Wallsten,
1985). In addition to ‘natural’ inter-individual variability,
interpretations of VPEs are susceptible to contextual and
cultural influences (e.g., Bonnefon & Villejoubert, 2006;
Fischer & Jungermann, 1996; Harris & Corner, 2011; Harris,
Corner, Xu, & Du, 2013; Juanchich, Sirota & Butler, 2012;
Teigen & Brun, 1999, 2003; Weber & Hilton, 1990).
The abovementioned studies have typically used the ‘how
likely’ translation approach to investigate interpretations of
VPEs, whereby people are asked to translate VPEs to
corresponding numerical probabilities. However, more
recently, Teigen and colleagues have demonstrated that a
‘which outcome’ approach to understanding people’s
interpretations of VPEs paints rather a different picture
(Teigen, Juanchich & Riege, 2013; Teigen & Filkuková,
2013, Teigen, Juanchich & Filkuková, 2014). In this
approach, participants are shown a distribution of outcomes
and asked to complete probability statements (e.g. “It is
unlikely that a battery will last… hours”) with a value they
consider appropriate (see Figure 1 for example). This
approach has highlighted a seemingly large qualitative
disparity between the communicator’s intended meaning and
the recipient’s understanding of the information. Teigen et al.
(2013) found when the term ‘unlikely’ was used to describe
outcomes which can be ordered on a unipolar dimension (e.g.,

Abstract
A commonly suggested solution to reduce misinterpretations
of verbal probability expressions in risk communications is to
use a verbal-numerical (mixed format) approach, but it is not
known whether this increases understanding over and above a
purely numerical format. Using the ‘which outcome’
methodology (Teigen & Filkuková, 2013), we examined the
effect of using verbal, numerical and mixed communication
formats, as well as investigating whether marking outcomes as
salient would alter the outcomes people perceived as ‘unlikely’
or having a 20% chance of occurring. We observed no effect
of saliency, but replicated previous findings, with general
preference for values at the high end of a distribution (including
maximum/above maximum values) present in both verbal and
mixed communication formats. This demonstrates the
relevance of these findings for real-world consequential risk
communication. Whilst the estimates differed between the
mixed and numerical formats, we found that the mixed format
yielded the more accurate estimates.
Keywords: verbal probability expressions; numerical
probabilities; risk communication; geological hazards

Introduction
Effectively communicating information about risk and
uncertainty remains an ongoing challenge for the scientific
community. The process relies on recipients of risk
communications both understanding the information, and
also placing enough trust in it that it will be used in
subsequent decision making. Most people do not have indepth knowledge about, nor experience of, hazards and new
technologies (Siegrist, Gutscher & Earle 2005). Individuals
are therefore reliant on mediated information, which tends to
be from an expert source (Sjöberg, 2000). Ensuring the
audience understands the information as intended is a
universal concern for scientific communications. Scientific
forecasts are, however, typically probabilistic (at best). It is
thus not possible to predict with certainty whether a
destructive earthquake will occur in a certain place within the
next month for example. A prediction that such an event is
‘unlikely’ does not imply that the event will not occur. Given
that an estimate of ‘unlikely’ might be used to describe the
likelihood of events with a 20% chance of occurrence (e.g.,
Theil, 2002), approximately 20% of the time, they will occur.
As the prosecution of six experts following the L’Aquila
Earthquake in 2009 attests (Cartlidge, 2012), such a lack of

390

battery life), participants interpreted the term as referring to
outcomes from the higher end of the distribution and most
often completed the sentence with a lifetime that exceeded the
maximum time any sampled battery had lasted (Study 3a) –
hereafter the ‘which outcome effect’. This was despite a mean
translation of around 40% in a pre-test. Furthermore, when a
climate expert claimed a sea level rise of 100 cm was
‘improbable’, participants gave a much lower estimate of the
expected sea level rise, suggesting they were aware
‘improbable’ is used by experts to describe values above the
expected outcome (Study 5c).
These findings from this novel methodology potentially
paint an even gloomier picture for the effectiveness of risk
communications using VPEs. An expert who uses ‘unlikely’
to mean 20% will quickly lose the trust of an audience if they
expect ‘unlikely’ to refer to outcomes which never happen.
More immediately, there could be catastrophic consequences
for those who choose not to evacuate their homes after
hearing the chance of a tsunami is ‘unlikely’ and mistakenly
believe a tsunami will therefore not occur.1
One commonly proposed solution to reduce miscommunication (observed from the ‘how likely’
methodology) is the use of a dual-scale, mixed format
approach to express uncertainty, for example, ‘It is unlikely
(less than 33%)’ (see Budescu, Broomell & Por, 2009;
Budescu, Por & Broomell, 2012; Budescu, Por, Broomell &
Smithson, 2014, Harris & Corner, 2011; Harris et al., 2013;
Patt & Dessai, 2005;Witteman & Renooij, 2003). Budescu
and colleagues have demonstrated that such a ‘verbalnumerical’ format increased the differentiation of
participants’ interpretations of VPEs, an effect that replicated
across 24 countries (Budescu et al., 2014). A question yet to
be explored, however, is whether the addition of a VPE, over
a purely numerical communication, might influence
interpretations of probability estimates in a way that could be
potentially harmful. Teigen and colleagues’ findings using
the ‘which outcome’ methodology suggest that they might. A
citizen who hears that the chance of a volcanic lava flow
extending as far as their village is ‘unlikely’ may discount the
information, believing it will not happen, even if a numerical
estimate is also provided.
This possible consequence, however, relies on the
assumption that the same result from the ‘which outcome’
methodology will be obtained even when one potential
outcome is of particular consequence. Previous research
using the ‘how likely’ methodology suggests that such an
assumption might not necessarily hold, as people’s
interpretations of VPEs are higher when those VPEs describe
a severe outcome than a neutral outcome (Harris & Corner,
2011). More generally, making one outcome particularly
consequential in the ‘which outcome’ methodology will
enhance its salience. When considering the potential extent
of a volcanic lava flow, for example, the location of a school
a certain distance from the volcano might consume the
attention of a communicator, such that all risk

communications are assumed to be relevant to that particular
location. Whether such an influence of saliency could
override the effects reported in Teigen et al. (2013, 2014) and
Teigen and Filkuková (2013) is a question addressed in the
present paper.
The present paper therefore aims to further our
understanding of the ramifications of Teigen and colleagues’
previous work using the ‘which outcome’ methodology by
testing the robustness of the effect across differing situations
and communication formats. Ascertaining the effect of using
different communication formats is instructive for designing
future risk communication instruments. Furthermore, it
enhances our theoretical understanding of the effect by
determining whether it is primarily related to the pragmatics
of linguistic communication, or linked to something more
fundamental about people’s understanding of probability and
frequency. As well as examining whether different
communication formats influenced people’s outcome
estimates, we tested whether marking certain outcomes as
salient would alter the way in which people understood the
risk communication. Owing to our underlying interest in
consequential risk communications, the study also extended
the existing evidence base by investigating scenarios
featuring geological hazards.

Method
Participants
155 participants were recruited for this online study via
Prolific Academic (www.prolific.ac). They were paid £0.85
upon completion of the study. 8 participants were excluded
(6 due to duplicate IP addresses and 2 due to lack of consent)
leaving a final sample of 147 (83 male) participants, aged 1860 years (Mdn = 27).

Design
A 3×4×4 mixed design was employed with communication
format (verbal/numerical/mixed) as a between subjects
factor; scenario (volcano/flood/earthquake/landslide) and
salient site (non-existent/close/far/multiple sites) as withinsubjects factors. Scenario and saliency were randomised
using the Latin Square Confounded method (Kirk, 1969),
such that each participant only saw each scenario and each
salient site once, but the combinations of these differed
systematically across participants. Participants were required
to type a numerical response which corresponded to the
outcome that they believed was being described as either
“unlikely” (verbal format), “there is a 20% chance”
(numerical format), or “unlikely (20% chance)” (mixed
format). We focused on the VPE ‘unlikely’ as it is an
approved VPE of the IPCC. 20% is a plausible value for
‘unlikely’ given the IPCC’s likelihood scale, as well as it
being the average numerical translation of ‘unlikely’ in
Theil’s (2002) meta-analysis.

1

This effect could occur over and above the effects of
directionality (Teigen & Brun, 1995, 1999, 2003).

391

weReminder:
thereforeThe
collapse
across
saliency
conditions
and code
number
of times
the model
has produced
each
responses
(see Figure
2). of how likely that particular
outcome by
is abins
reliable
indication

Materials and Procedure
Participants were first informed about the nature of the study
and told they could withdraw at any time during the
experiment. After consenting to participate, they were asked
to indicate their age and gender, before reading the
introductory text. The introductory text informed participants
that they would see reliable projections of a model designed
to predict future geological events and asked to make a series
of judgements about these.
Each of the next four screens showed one of the four
vignettes describing outcomes of how far lava flows,
floodwater, earthquake tremors and debris flows would
extend. These vignettes were developed in conjunction with
geologists at the British Geological Survey to ensure they
reflected plausible real-world situations. Each vignette was
illustrated by a histogram with 10 bars, which reflected the
number of times the model had produced the outcome. The
shape of the distributions were similar and approximately
normal across the scenarios, though the volcano and flood
histograms had a slightly negative skew. The zero-frequency
options were explicitly included in the histogram. The
sentence completion task was presented at the bottom of each
vignette (see Figure 1 for an example).
Saliency was manipulated through the inclusion of sites of
particular scientific interest, which the event might extend as
far as. These sites either homed rare plants or critically
endangered animal species (e.g., the last habitat of ‘whitespotted Antis’ in Figure 1). There were four saliency
conditions: No site of interest, one close site of interest
(located in the second bin of the histogram), one far site of
interest (last bin of the histogram), or multiple sites (second
bin, modal bin and last bin, see Figure 1). After completing
the study, participants were given a code to claim their
reward, thanked and debriefed.

outcome is.

Mount Ablon has a history of explosive eruptions forming
lava flows. An eruption has been predicted; the figure below
shows the model’s predictions of the distance extended by
lava flows for this eruption, given the volcano’s situation and
recent scientific observations.
Due to the highly fertile soil and rich vegetation, multiple
sites of special scientific interest home to the critically
endangered ‘white-spotted Antis’, exist in the area
surrounding the volcano. Sites A, B and C
lie 1km, 4km and 5km respectively away from the volcano
(shown below). If lava flows reach any of these sites, the last
surviving populations of ‘white-spotted Antis’ in the wild (at
the site) would be lost.

Complete the sentence below with a number that seems
appropriate in this context.
In the event of an eruption, it is unlikely (20% chance) that
the lava flow will extend to a distance of ___ km.

Results

Figure 1. Example vignette (volcano scenario, multiple
salient sites, mixed format)

Effect of Saliency
Because the different scenarios referred to different
geological events, the x-axes on the histograms (see Figure
1) were all different. As it was predicted that responses would
be pulled towards salient outcomes, to investigate the effect
of saliency we standardised the outcomes across scenarios by
‘binning’ responses in accordance to where they were in
relation to the salient points in the multiple site condition.
There were thus 8 response categories. Responses were
similar across all four scenarios. Three Kruskal-Wallis tests
were run to investigate if there was an influence of saliency
in a) verbal b) numerical and c) mixed formats. These showed
that outcome values were not significantly affected by
saliency in either the verbal, χ2 (3) = 0.482, p = .932,
numerical, χ2 (3) = 6.581, p= .087 or mixed format
conditions, χ2 (3) = 3.274, p = .351. In the following analyses,

Effect of Communication Format

2

intermediate, maximum and above maximum), as in Teigen et al.
(2013).

Responses were similar across scenarios. Typical outcomes
for ‘unlikely’ were chosen from the higher end of the
distribution, from maximum and above maximum observed
values. In contrast, typical outcomes for ‘20% chance’ tended
to correspond to lower values, primarily chosen from the
intermediate values2. Results for the mixed format were in the
middle of results for the verbal and numerical formats;
outcomes tended to be chosen from the intermediate values,
but this did not preclude a sizable proportion choosing from
maximum and above maximum values (Bins 11 & 12). The
contrasting patterns of responses are clearly evidenced in
Figure 2.
The proportion of responses indicating high amplitude
outcomes (the maximum value present in the histogram or
above – bin 11 or 12) was highest in the verbal condition,

Effects of communication format were unchanged if responses
were binned into five categories (below minimum, minimum,

392

distance of …” for the four scenarios by using the data the
histograms were created with. The correct answer fell in the
middle, or mid-to high saliency category in every scenario
(either the 7th or 8th bin). It was thus possible to calculate the
proportion of participants’ estimates which were correct or
not. Overall in the numerical and mixed format conditions,
only 7% of all estimates (n= 386) were exactly correct. There
was no significant association between communication
format (numerical/mixed) and number of correct estimates,
χ2 (1) = 0.86, p = .426.
Given the low level of correct estimates, this simple,
dichotomous categorisation of responses seemed rather
crude. A more sensitive measure of accuracy was to therefore
calculate a difference score (observed response – correct
response) which was standardised across scenarios. We first
calculated the mean and standard deviation of the outcomes
implied by the histograms (see Figure 1) for each of the four
scenarios, assuming that each histogram represented 200
datapoints. We consequently represented both the objectively
correct response and the observed response as a z-score in
this distribution. The difference score was subsequently
calculated by subtracting the ‘correct z-score’ from the
‘observed z-score.’ Lower difference scores, indicating
greater accuracy, were observed for the mixed format (M = .003, SD = 1.4) than for the numerical format (M = -0.8, SD
= 1.4), F (1, 377) = 34.45, p < .001, η2p = 0.08 (inferential
statistics performed on reflect and square root transformed
values to correct skew- results unchanged without
transformation). There was no effect of scenario (p = .111),
nor was there an interaction between communication format
and scenario (F < 1).3

Responses (%)

50
40
30

Verbal

20

Numerical

10

Mixed

0
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12

Coding by Bin

Figure 2. The distribution of responses by communication
format.

Frequency

followed by the mixed format condition. The numerical
condition had the lowest proportion of responses indicating
high amplitude outcomes, χ2 (2) = 126.64, p < .001 (see
Figure 3). A Kruskal-Wallis test showed a significant
difference between the three communication formats χ2 (2) =
163.29, p < .001. The verbal format yielded the highest
estimates (mean rank = 402.61) followed by the mixed format
(mean rank = 273.43), with numerical format yielding the
lowest estimates (mean rank = 190.37). Three pairwise
comparisons using Mann Whitney U-Tests were all
significant (all ps < .001).
200

Below Max

150
100

Discussion

Max/Above
Max

50
0

We replicated Teigen et al.’s (2013) results and tested
whether these would hold for numerical and mixed format
expressions of probability. We also examined whether
marking certain outcomes as salient would influence
interpretations of the risk communication. We found
evidence that the tendency to describe outcomes at the very
end, or beyond the range of, a distribution as ‘unlikely’
generalised to consequential scenarios, wherever the word
‘unlikely’ was included - the verbal and mixed format
conditions. This tendency was not apparent in the numerical
condition. We found no evidence that responses were
affected by increasing the saliency of the outcome.
Finding the ‘which outcome’ effect is generalisable to
consequential scenarios in the applied domain of geological
hazards has implications for organisations who are
responsible for communicating the risk of such dangers. As
previously suggested, there exists the real possibility that
citizens will completely disregard the communication,
believing that if the probability of a disastrous event is
described as ‘unlikely’, it will not affect them. The potential
for catastrophic consequences increases further given that

Communication Format

Figure 3. Frequencies of maximum/above maximum
responses in the three communication format conditions
(collapsed across saliency).

Accuracy of Estimates
We have demonstrated that the ‘which outcome’ effect is
robust against a contextual influence of saliency. We have
also shown that numerical and mixed format conditions
produce different estimates, but is it possible to identify
which format yields the most accurate estimates? The ‘20%’
in the numerical and mixed communication formats enables
the calculation of an objectively correct answer to the
statement “there is a 20% chance that the x will extend to a
3

Similar results to this study were also obtained using a
voluntary, laboratory sample (n= 81).

393

marking outcomes as salient was not sufficient to attenuate
the ‘which outcome’ effect.
Our findings also clearly demonstrate that format
influences interpretations of risk communications. The fact
that the ‘which outcome’ effect extends to mixed but not
numerical formats indicates that the effect is related to the
pragmatics of communication rather than people’s
understanding of probability and frequencies. Finding the
effect occurred more in the mixed format than numerical
conditions is of particular relevance to current literature,
given the recent recommendations to use a dual scale, mixed
format approach to express uncertainty (Budescu et al., 2009;
Budescu et al., 2012; Budescu et al., 2014, Harris & Corner,
2011; Harris et al., 2013; Patt & Dessai, 2005;Witteman &
Renooij, 2003). Our results suggest that this may not solve
the problem of misinterpretations as much as first thought.
Given that this preference for values at the high end of the
distribution was not present in the numerical condition, it was
unexpected that estimates in the mixed format were more
accurate than those in the numerical condition. This increase
in accuracy was even more surprising given that the presence
of ‘unlikely’ in the verbal condition was enough to
significantly shift estimates towards outcomes at the higher
end of the distribution and to those with a predicted 0%
frequency of occurrence. There are two complementary
explanations for this which stem from the proposition that
VPEs contain an ‘inbuilt hint’ (Teigen & Brun, 1995) which
provides the participant with extra information.
The first explanation focuses on the calculation of the
objectively correct answer. A shallow reading of the scenario
might have led those in the numerical condition to (wrongly)
calculate 20% from the ‘likely’ end of the scale (given
‘chance’ focuses one’s attention towards the occurrence of
the event). This would shift estimates to the left of the scale,
supported by Figure 2, which shows the numerical condition
has two peaks, one to the left of the scale and one to the right,
clustered around the correct answer’s location. In contrast,
those in the mixed format condition have additional
information, with the inclusion of ‘unlikely’, which tells them
to start from the ‘unlikely’ side of the scale, discouraging a
shallow reading. This would shift their estimates towards the
right of the scale, evidenced by the big peak to the right in
Figure 2.
The extra information contained in VPEs is: “not only the
probabilistic premise, but also the behavioural conclusion”
(Teigen & Brun, 1999, p.163). VPEs can be positive or
negative. If an outcome is described with a positive
expression (e.g. ‘possible’), the focus is on the fact that the
outcome may occur (probability > 0), but if it is described
with a negative expression (e.g. ‘unlikely’), the focus is on
the fact that it may not occur (probability < 1). Numerical
probabilities tend to be presented in conjunction with other
terms such as ‘chance’, which have positive directionality (as
was the case in our study). Therefore, participants in the
numerical condition may have interpreted chance as an
indication that the event would indeed happen and thus given
estimates closer to the likely end of the scale (the left). In

contrast, those in the mixed format condition may have seen
the ‘unlikely’ as extra information, interpreted it as pointing
towards the non-occurrence of the outcome and thus given
estimates closer to the ‘unlikely’ end of the scale.
Teigen and Brun (1999) suggest that neutrality may be
achieved if two VPEs of opposing directionality are presented,
but this was not achieved in the current study. Although the
response pattern for the mixed format condition lies between
the numerical and verbal formats, the general preference for
values at the high end of the distribution in the mixed format
condition is still present in around 45% of cases (see Figure 2)
suggesting that participants are focusing more on the term
‘unlikely’, but why is this?
It is possible that people who focused more on the term
‘unlikely’ had lower numeracy levels and thus felt
uncomfortable using the ‘20%’ to form their estimates.
Research has shown that less numerate decision makers are:
“left with information that is less complete and less
understood, lacking in the complexity and richness available
to the more numerate” (Peters et al, 2006, p.412). Those lower
in numeracy are also more likely to trust information presented
in verbal form (Gurmankin, Baron & Armstrong, 2004). It
would therefore be prudent to include a measure of numeracy
in future studies to establish if the focus on ‘unlikely’ lessens
as levels of numeracy increase.
Overall, although our results show the mixed format
yielded more accurate responses, we would be hesitant to
fully endorse calls to adopt such an approach as the solution
to the problem of misinterpretations in risk communication
research. Only a small proportion of responses were exactly
correct. It is arguable that the increased endorsement of
outcomes with a 0% frequency of occurrence as 'unlikely' in
the mixed format over the numerical format (see Figure 2)
represents a more consequential error, which is most critical
to avoid. The degree to which the enhanced accuracy in the
mixed format condition will generalise across different
outcome distributions is also an open question. These are
questions which future research can seek to address to
maximise the effectiveness of future risk communication.

Conclusion
The present research provides an example of the disparity
between what is communicated by scientists and what is
understood by the audience in the context of geological risk
communications. Whilst it is generally acknowledged that
there is no ‘optimal’ presentation format and no one single
‘fix’ for risk communication (Budescu et al., 2012),
identifying instances in which the format of uncertainty has a
significant impact on audience’s understanding is key to
improving risk communication. Our findings show that the
‘which outcome’ effect extends to risk communications
which use a mixed-format approach. Our study has
significant practical implications for organisations
responsible for communicating risk. Not only may people
discount a hazard described as ‘unlikely’, the addition of a
numerical translation may not be enough to prevent this
disregard, leading to potentially catastrophic consequences.

394

Juanchich, M., Sirota, M., & Butler, C. L. (2012). The
perceived functions of linguistic risk quantifiers and their
effect on risk, negativity perception and decision making.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
118(1), 72-81.
Kirk, R., E. (1969). Experimental Design: Procedures for the
Behavioral Sciences. Belmont, CA: Brooks/Cole.
Mastrandrea, M. D., Field, C. B., Stocker, T. F., Edenhofer,
O., Ebi, K. L., Held, H., et al. (2010). Guidance note for
lead authors of the IPCC fifth assessment report on
consistent treatment of uncertainties. IPCC cross-working
group meeting on consistent treatment of uncertainties,
Jasper
Ridge,CA.
[retrieved
from:
https://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/supporting-material/uncertaintyguidance-note.pdf January 31st , 2016.
Patt, A., & Dessai, S. (2005). Communicating uncertainty:
lessons learned and suggestions for climate change
assessment. Comptes Rendus Geoscience, 337(4), 425-441.
Peters, E., Västfjäll, D., Slovic, P., Mertz, C. K., Mazzocco,
K., & Dickert, S. (2006). Numeracy and decision making.
Psychological Science, 17, 407-413.
Siegrist, M., Gutscher, H., & Earle, T. (2005). Perception of
risk: the influence of general trust, and general confidence.
Journal of Risk Research, 8(2), 145-156.
Sjöberg, L. (2000). Factors in Risk Perception. Risk Analysis,
20(1), 1-11.
Teigen, K. H., & Brun, W. (1995). Yes, but it is uncertain:
Direction and communicative intention of verbal
probabilistic terms. Acta Psychologica, 88(3), 233-258.
Teigen, K. H., & Brun, W. (1999). The directionality of
verbal probability expressions: Effects on decisions,
predictions, and probabilistic reasoning. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 80(2), 155-190.
Teigen, K. H., & Brun, W. (2003). Verbal probabilities: A
question of frame? Journal of Behavioral Decision Making,
16(1), 53-72.
Teigen, K. H., & Filkuková, P. (2013). Can > Will:
Predictions of What Can Happen are Extreme, but Believed
to be Probable. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making,
26(1), 68-78.
Teigen, H. K., Juanchich, M., & Filkuková, P. (2014). Verbal
probabilities: an alternative approach. Q J Experimental
Psychology, 67(1), 124-146.
Teigen, K. H., Juanchich, M., & Riege, A. H. (2013).
Improbable outcomes: infrequent or extraordinary?
Cognition, 127(1), 119-139.
Theil, M. (2002). The role of translations of verbal into
numerical probability expressions in risk management: a
meta-analysis. Journal of Risk Research,5(2), 177-186.
Weber, E. U., & Hilton, D. J. (1990). Contextual effects in
the interpretations of probability words: Perceived base rate
and severity of events. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 16(4),
781–789.
Witteman, C., & Renooij, S. (2003). Evaluation of a verbalnumerical probability scale. International Journal of
Approximate Reasoning, 33, 117-131.

Acknowledgements
SJ was supported by a UCL IMPACT studentship, half
funded by the British Geological Survey. RML's
contribution is published with permission of the Director,
British Geological Survey.

References
Bonnefon, J. F., & Villejoubert, G. (2006). Tactful or
doubtful? Expectations of politeness explain the severity
bias in the interpretation of probability phrases.
Psychological Science, 17(9), 747-751.
Budescu, D. V., & Wallsten, T. S. (1985). Consistency in
interpretation of probabilistic phrases. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 36, 391-405.
Budescu, D. V., & Wallsten, T. S. (1995). Processing
linguistic probabilities: General principles and empirical
evidence. In J. R. Busemeyer, R. Hastie, & D. L. Medin
(Eds.), Psychology of Learning and Motivation: Advances
in Research and Theory (Vol. 32: Decision Making from a
Cognitive Perspective) (pp. 275-318). San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Budescu, D. V., Broomell, S., & Por, H-H. (2009). Improving
communication of uncertainty in the reports of the
intergovernmental panel on climate change. Psychological
Science, 20, 299-308.
Budescu, D. V., Por, H.-H., & Broomell, S. B. (2012).
Effective communication of uncertainty in the IPCC
reports. Climatic Change, 113(2), 181-200.
Budescu, D. V., Por, H-H., Broomell, S. B., & Smithson, M.
(2014). The interpretation of IPCC probabilistic statements
around the world. Nature Climate Change, 4, 508-512.
Cartlidge, E. (2012, October 22). Earthquake Experts
Convicted
of
Manslaughter.
Retrieved
from:
http://www.sciencemag.org/news/2012/10/earthquakeexperts-convictedmanslaughter?_ga=1.23557882.1178859578.1453738159
January 31st, 2016.
Fischer, K., & Jungermann, H. (1996). Rarely occurring
headaches and rarely occurring blindness: Is rarely=rarely?
The meaning of verbal frequentistic labels in specific
medical contexts. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making,
9(3), 153-172.
Gurmankin, A. D., Baron, J., &, K. (2004). The effect of
numerical statements of risk on trust and comfort with
hypothetical physician risk communication. Med Decis
Making, 24(3), 265-271.
Harris, A. J. L. & Corner, A. (2011). Communicating
environmental risks: clarifying the severity effect in
interpretations of verbal probability expressions. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 37(6), 1571-1578.
Harris, A. J. L., Corner, A., Xu, J., & Du, X. (2013). Lost in
translation? Interpretations of the probability phrases used
by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change in
China and the UK. Climatic Change, 121, 415-425.

395

