Using a smartphone game to promote transfer of skills in a real world environment
Inge Doesburg (doesburg.inge@gmail.com)
Department of Artificial Intelligence, University of Groningen, The Netherlands

Niels Taatgen (n.a.taatgen@rug.nl)
Department of Artificial Intelligence, University of Groningen, The Netherlands
Abstract

playing a fun game. This will help with keeping them excited and motivated (Prins et al., 2011). There have already
been successful transfer studies using games to train certain
skills (Anguera et al., 2013), but these were still played on
a computer in an experimental setting. Dufau et al. (2011)
have shown how cognitive research that would normally take
years, can by using smartphones, be done in a couple of
months.
We propose an experiment to see if transfer can occur between a game on a smartphone and three tasks played on a
computer. Two groups of participants will be participating,
a test and a control group. Both groups perform three tasks
(recall, Stroop and task-switching) on a computer before and
after training on their smartphone game. The control group
receives the game Tetris, which trains no cognitive skills.
The test group receives the game Wollie, which trains working memory, task-switching and focusing skills. We expect
the test group to show more improvement on the task, due to
transfer of skills. However, we expect improvement only to
occur in those participants who do not yet posses the skills
and strategies needed in the particular tasks.

This article presents an experiment in which participant’s
working memory, tasks-switching and focusing skills are
trained in a game called Wollie on a smartphone. Before and
after the training period they performed three task (a recall,
Stroop and task-switching). The goal of this research was to
see how the participants, from the test group, learn within
the game and how this affects the three tasks. Only in the
Stroop results a clear difference between the two groups was
found. However, we found that participants who had the most
trouble in playing Wollie, improved the most on Stroop and
task-switching, indicating that these participants still lacked
the relevant skills for all these tasks.
Keywords: transfer; smartphone; working memory; taskswitching; games

Introduction
The goal of this paper is to test if transfer can be found
between a game on a smartphone and multiple cognitive
tasks. The phenomenon of using certain skills learned in
one task, while performing a different task is called transfer of skills. Taatgen (2013) describes transfer as an overlap between tasks. The author explains that skills needed to
perform a task are broken down into small elements, called
primitive information processing elements (PRIMs). While
learning a specific skill, more general skills can be learned
as well, which consist of a combination of PRIMs. When
two tasks both need one or more of the same combination
of PRIMs (units), training on one task can also improve the
performance on the other task. When there is improvement
in the second task, this means that there was transfer of the
combination of PRIMs.
An important point to make is that in this study we focus
on the assumption, as stated by Taatgen (2013), that the main
motor of transfer is growth of skills and strategies. Many
studies on transfer see brain-training as if training a muscle, but this would not explain how transfer occurs. While
the primitive elements (PRIMS) theory shows how skills and
strategies can be more easily understood to transfer between
tasks.
Research on transfer often points to the field of education
as the field that can gain the most from knowledge of transfer. Transfer can help to learn new skills quickly and most
learning opportunities occur in educational facilities. Transfer is not only important within educational facilities, but also
between a student’s education and future workplace (Eraut,
2009; McKeough et al., 2013).
By making people train cognitive skills by using a game
on their phone it will feel less like training and more like

Methods
Participants
54 participants (31 women, 23 men; mean age 23.4 years,
range 19-39 years) participated in this study. Participants
were compensated for their time.

Procedure
Participants came to the university to perform session 1 of the
experiment. They needed an Android phone, with a screen
size between 3.7 and 5.5 inch and have an Android version
of 3.0 or higher. The first 9 digits of the IMEI number was
used as a subject number, to make sure that it was easy to
match the pre and post data to the data send to the server
by the smartphone application. Participants performed three
task, taking about 15 minutes each. The first task was a recall
task, the second a Stroop task and the third a task-switching
task.
After performing these three tasks, the participants were
assigned to one of two groups. This was done semi-randomly
to ensure that the two groups would, on average, not differ too
much on their scores in the first session. For each new participant we would take the average of the three pretest scores,
and compare this to the running averages of the participants
that were already tested. On the basis of that comparison the

650

participant would be assigned to the precondition that would
reduce the difference between the running averages most.

words presented in this tasks are: lazy, caring, arrogant and
tidy.
The task consisted of seven blocks of which the first was
a practice block. Each block contained three types of trials,
one with 4 letters, one with 5 and one with 6 (span 4, 5 and
6). Each trials consisted of the presentation of the first letter,
followed by 4 seconds of the decision task. After this the
next letter was presented, again followed by 4 seconds of the
decision task. This continued until the length of the span was
fulfilled. Each letter was presented for one second. When
all letters where presented followed by the decision task, the
participant had to recall the letters in the correct order.

Stroop task
In the second part of the experiment, the participant performed a Stroop task. This task was created in PsychoPy2
(Peirce, 2007) and is based on the similar Stroop task used by
Juvina & Taatgen (2009). In each trial the participant would
see three words. The word in the middle had a particular
color: red, blue or green. The participant was asked to press
Z if the left word described the color of the word in the middle, or M if the right word described the color of the word
in the middle. The critical measure in the Stroop task is the
Stroop interference: the difference between reaction times on
congruent trials (color and word are the same) and incongruent trials (color and word are different).
There was a practice block containing 12 trials, followed
by 4 blocks of 2x36 trials. The entire task used a list with
36 possible trials of which each was randomly chosen once
in each part of each block. Between each block participants
were allowed to take a short break.

Wollie
The game Wollie was created for the test group to train
the subjects working memory, task switching and focussing
skills. It is based on a smartphone game called Rules, which
can be found in the App Store. See figure 1 for multiple
screen shots of the game Wollie.
The game consists of 9 levels, which can be played in two
difficulty modes, beginner and expert. The goal of this game
is to complete each level, by remembering and applying rules.
Each new level is a bit harder than the previous one, because
the higher the level the more complex the rules. In each level
you will eventually have to remember 10 rules. See table 1
for the rules in level 1. Each level starts with a presentation
of the first rule, for instance: Tap in descending order. After
being presented with this rule, a new screen appears with a
4 by 4 grid of blocks, each block containing a picture and a
number.
The first rule, needs to be applied to these blocks. Applying
this particular first rule, means tapping the blocks in order of
high to low numbers. When the correct block is tapped, it disappears. When an incorrect block is tapped it will expand for
half a second after which it returns to its former size. When
all blocks are removed from the field within the given time
frame the player has successfully completed the first rule. In
the second part of the level, the player is presented with the
second rule, for instance: Tap all green things. After the presentation of the second rule, a new 4 by 4 grid appears. Now
that we have more than one rule, the newest rule is always applied first. In this case this means, that all blocks containing
an image which is green will be tapped first, when there are
no more green images, the first rule must be applied, until all
blocks are removed from the field. Again, when the player
empties the screen within his playing time, he has successfully completed the second part of this level. Whenever one
rule is applied successfully, meaning that there are no more
blocks for this rule and the player needs to switch to an older
rule, the screen flashes yellow for a second. In case the smartphone is on vibrate, the phone will also vibrate on a switch
moment. If the smartphone is on normal mode, it will not
vibrate but it will play a short sound. All of this is to help
the player realize that he needs to switch to a different rule.
This process described above repeats itself until the player

Task-switching task
The final task was created in MATLAB (MATLAB 8.5, The
MathWorks Inc., Natick, MA, 2015). The type of task was
based on the similar task used by Karbach & Kray (2009),
while the design is based on the similar task by Rogers &
Monsell (1995). In this task, the participant is shown 4
squares. Every trial, a picture will appear in one of these
squares. The first picture will always appear in the upper
left square. In later trials, the picture will appear in the next
square in a clockwise direction. Whenever a picture appeared
in the upper two squares, the task was to judge whether the
object in the picture was small or large. Whenever a picture appeared in the lower two squares, the task was to judge
whether the object in the picture was a fruit or a vegetable.
This means that in half of the trials the task is the same as in
the previous trial, and in the other half the task switches.
The measure in task switching is the difference in reaction
times between repetition trials (task remains the same), and
switch trials (task switches).

Recall task
The recall task was created in PsychoPy2 (Peirce, 2007) and
is based on the similar recall task used by Chein & Morrison (2010). In this task the participant was presented with a
number of words and letters. Their goal was to recall only
the letters. When presented with a letter, they did not need
to do anything, but when presented with a word they needed
to perform a decision task. They were asked to press yes,
the right ctrl key, if they thought the word referred to themselves. If they did not think the word referred to themselves
they were asked to press no, the left ctrl key. Examples of

651

has learned and applied 10 rules or fails to tap all images before the time is up.

Figure 2: Screen shots of the smartphone game Tetris. Left:
the home screen, right: the game play screen.

Tetris
The game Tetris was created for the control group. The game
Wollie requires subjects to switch between tasks and recall
rules, while Tetris only requires subjects to focus on one
object at a time. Making it a good control task. Because
Tetris is a well known game, which is reproduced for all
kinds of platform we used some basic Java code found on the
open-source website Github (www.github.com/tdan94/Tetris,
at the moment of publishing this Github repository was no
longer available) and added what we needed to use it in our
experiment. See figure 2 for some screen shots of our version
of Tetris.

Figure 1: Four screen shots of the smartphone game Wollie.
Top left: the home screen. Top right: screen to chose which
level to play. Bottom left: screen showing the newest rule to
apply. Bottom right: game play screen with 4x4 grid.

Both applications show the participants how much they had
to play on that day, to make sure they reached their total playing time of 140 minutes within two weeks. The applications
also presented a reminder at seven o’clock at night, which
told them if they had already played enough and if not, how
much time they still needed to play that day. Data about their
training behavior was stored on the participant’s smartphone
and send to a server. After two weeks of training the participants came back for the second session. They performed
the same three tasks as performed in the first session, namely
recall, Stroop and task-switching.

Table 1: Wollie rules level 1.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Rules level 1 Wollie
Tap numbers in descending order.
Tap all things green.
Tap odd numbers.
Tap nines.
Tap animals.
Tap walruses.
Tap monsters.
Tap green monsters.
Tap birds.
Tap tens.

Results
For each task we will present an array of results. First, we
test the difference in improvement between the control and
test group with an ANOVA. After which we dig a little deeper
into the influence of each group’s smartphone application on
the scores of the task. The influence of the condition (Wollie/Tetris) on the pre/post scores will be given.

The rules that need to be applied to the 4x4 grid have to
be recalled from memory. Learning to store and recall these
rules will help the participants train their working memory.
Every time they have tapped all the images for one rule,
they need to switch to the previous rule and tap the images
for this rule. These switching moments will help train the
participant’s task-switching skills. Learning to focus on the
rule to come and therefore thinking about which attributes of
the images to focus on will train their focusing skills. To help
the participant in remembering to play the game everyday a
notification will appear on their phone everyday at 7 o’clock
at night.

652

For each task a table will be presented showing the correlation between the following variables and the accuracy score
of the task: Time, Level20, Level120, DiffLevel and HighScore. Time is the total amount of time a subject has trained
with the application. This tests whether more training leads
to better transfer. Level20 is the highest level reached after 20
minutes. This tests whether initial progress on the tasks can
predict the amount of transfer. Level120 is the highest level
reached after 120 minutes. This tests whether progress made
in the minimum amount of time subjects had to train predicts transfer. DiffLevel is the difference between Level20 and
Level120. This tests more or less the same as just Level120,
but focusses on the learning gain. HighScore is the highest
level reached. Because Tetris has no levels we use the highest score at the specific time points instead of the level when
looking at the influence of Tetris on the accuracy score of the
task.

ment in switch-costs, namely Level120, DiffLevel and HighScore. Like in the Stroop data these correlations were negative, meaning that the faster subjects progressed through the
game, the lower the improvement on task switching.

Stroop
In figure 3 the average pre and post scores on the Stroop task
are presented. The ANOVA showed a weak effect of group
on improvement in accuracy F(1,52)=3.91, p=0.053. To see
if the game variables had some impact on the improvement
on the task, the correlations were calculated. Table 2 shows
the influence of previously discussed variables on the improvement in the Stroop task. In the Wollie group both DiffLevel and HighScore have a negative significant influence on
the improvement. This means that the lower the DiffLevel
or Highscore, the higher the improvement on the task. For
Tetris no significant correlations were found. In figure 4 the
significant negative correlation between DiffLevel and the improvement in accuracy can be seen. The correlation of -0.42
(p=0.03) means that 17.6% of the improvement on the task
can be assigned to the DiffLevel variable. This figure also
shows us that subjects who improved greatly in Wollie, were
also likely to score high on the first Stroop task session.

Figure 3: The influence of the two different smartphone applications on the Stroop Interference.

Task Switching
In the Task Switching data we excluded one person in the
control group who had a switch-cost of 2182 ms. Figure 5
shows the average pre and post switch-costs for each group.
The ANOVA showed no effect of group on improvement in
accuracy F(1,51)=0.996, p=0.32. However, in table 3 it can
be seen that there are a few variables in the Wollie group
that had a significant correlation with the amount of improve-

Figure 4: The improvement on the Stroop Interference for
subjects with a low and subjects with a high DiffLevel in the
test group.

Table 2: Correlations between performance measures in the training and improvement in Stroop interference. The p-values are
presented within parenthesis. The * means that the result was significant (p<0.05).
Stroop correlation values
Group

Time

Level20

Level120

DiffLevel

HighScore

Wollie

-0.07 (0.74)

-0.20 (0.92)

-0.37 (0.057)

-0.42 (0.03*)

-0.42 (0.03*)

Tetris

0.16 (0.44)

-0.20 (0.32)

0.05 (0.82)

0.29 (0.14)

0.004 (0.99)

653

Table 3: Correlations between performance measures in the training and improvement in switch costs in task switching. The
p-values are presented within parenthesis. The * means that the result was significant (p<0.05).
Task Switching correlation values
Group

Time

Level20

Level120

DiffLevel

HighScore

Wollie

0.05 (0.80)

-0.18 (0.37)

-0.42 (0.029*)

-0.43 (0.023*)

-0.42 (0.031*)

Tetris

0.0 (1.0)

0.08 (0.71)

0.18 (0.38)

0.20 (0.32)

0.03 (0.87)

ment on the switch-costs is shown. The correlation of -0.43
(p=0.023) means that 18.5% of the improvement on this task
can be assigned to the DiffLevel variable. The graph is very
similar to figure 4, where the improvement for the low and
high DiffLevel group was also presented, but then for the
Stroop task. Just like figure 4, figure 6 indicates that subjects who managed to progress through the Wollie levels at a
fast pace (a high DiffLevel) were also likely to score high on
the first task-switching session.

Figure 5: The influence of the two different smartphone applications on the switch-costs in the Task Switching task.

Figure 7: The influence of the two different smartphone applications on the correct amount of recalled letters in the Recall
task.

Recall
Figure 7 shows the average pre and post recall scores of the
two smartphone application groups. Looking at the graph it is
not surprising that when performing an ANOVA it showed no
effect of group on improvement in accuracy F(1,52)=0.412,
p=0.524. Both group seem to improve an equal amount. In table 4 the correlations between the game variables (mentioned
above) and the improvement on the recall task are presented.
There is only one significant correlation, which is between
Level120 and the improvement on the task in the Tetris group.

Figure 6: The improvement on the switch-costs between subjects with a low and subjects with a high DiffLevel in the test
group. A low DiffLevel means that subjects only had a small
improvement in reached levels between 20 and 120 minutes
of training.

Discussion
In figure 6 a graph with a visualization of the correlation between subjects’ DiffLevel and the amount of improve-

The goal of this experiment was to test whether a game in
which skills can be identified that correspond to well-known

654

Table 4: Correlations between performance measures in the training and improvement in recall score. The p-values are presented within parenthesis. The * means that the result was significant (p<0.05).
Recall correlation values
Group

Time

Level20

Level120

DiffLevel

HighScore

Wollie

-0.20 (0.32)

0.10 (0.61)

0.18 (0.36)

0.18 (0.36)

0.10 (0.64)

Tetris

-0.14 (0.48)

-0.27 (0.17)

-0.39 (0.046*)

-0.31 (0.12)

-0.38 (0.051)

experimental paradigms can improve performance on these
paradigms. The evidence we found is mixed: a comparison
to a Tetris control condition does not result in a consistent
benefit of Wollie over Tetris, with only a weak effect on the
Stroop task.
However, when we correlate the improvement on the game
to the tests, we see that subjects that progress through the
Wollie game at a fast pace are already good at both Stroop and
task switching, and therefore show little improvement. On the
other hand, subject that struggle to improve on the game show
considerable improvement on both Stroop and task switching.
A possible explanation is that some subjects has already mastered the appropriate control skills before they came into the
experiment. These subjects had an easy time on the game,
but therefore also had no benefit from playing it. Other subjects were not yet strong on the relevant control skills, and
therefore still had something to learn.
A limitation of the research presented here is that the control condition (Tetris), despite its use in the past as a control
condition in gaming studies, may have cognitive benefits after all. This may be the case for the improvement on recall,
because there subjects that made slow progress with Tetris
made more progress on Recall. However, any benefits from
Tetris are more diffuse, but may still have affected the direct
comparisons with Wollie.
Future research on this topic should focus on those people who do not yet posses the skills and strategies needed
to succeed in particular areas of their lives. Those people are
the ones who will eventually benefit most from knowledge on
transfer. They could be children in an educational facility, but
also adults needing to improve some skills to apply in their
workspace. This research has shown that people can benefit from even a small amount of training with a smart phone
application. Nowadays, most people own a smart phone and
carry it with them all day. Making this an easier and fun way
to practice new skills.

working memory span task. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 17(2), 193–199.
Dufau, S., Duñabeitia, J. A., Moret-Tatay, C., McGonigal, A.,
Peeters, D., Alario, F.-X., . . . others (2011). Smart phone,
smart science: how the use of smartphones can revolutionize research in cognitive science. PloS one, 6(9), e24974.
Eraut, M. (2009). 2.1 transfer of knowledge between education and workplace settings. Knowledge, values and
educational policy: A critical perspective, 65.
Juvina, I., & Taatgen, N. A. (2009). A repetitionsuppression account of between-trial effects in a modified
stroop paradigm. Acta psychologica, 131(1), 72–84.
Karbach, J., & Kray, J. (2009). How useful is executive
control training? age differences in near and far transfer
of task-switching training. Developmental science, 12(6),
978–990.
McKeough, A., Lupart, J. L., & Marini, A. (2013). Teaching
for transfer: Fostering generalization in learning. Routledge.
Peirce, J. W. (2007). Psychopypsychophysics software in
python. Journal of neuroscience methods, 162(1), 8–13.
Prins, P. J., Dovis, S., Ponsioen, A., Ten Brink, E., & Van der
Oord, S. (2011). Does computerized working memory
training with game elements enhance motivation and training efficacy in children with adhd? Cyberpsychology, behavior, and social networking, 14(3), 115–122.
Rogers, R. D., & Monsell, S. (1995). Costs of a predictible
switch between simple cognitive tasks. Journal of experimental psychology: General, 124(2), 207.
Taatgen, N. A. (2013). The nature and transfer of cognitive
skills. Psychological Review, 120(3), 439.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by ERC-StG grant 283597 awarded
to Niels Taatgen.

References
Anguera, J. A., Boccanfuso, J., Rintoul, J. L., Al-Hashimi,
O., Faraji, F., Janowich, J., . . . others (2013). Video game
training enhances cognitive control in older adults. Nature,
501(7465), 97–101.
Chein, J. M., & Morrison, A. B. (2010). Expanding the minds
workspace: Training and transfer effects with a complex

655

