Using Motor Dynamics to Explore Real-time Competition in Cross-situational Word
Learning: Evidence From Two Novel Paradigms
John P. Bunce (jbunce@ucmerced.edu)

Psychological Sciences, University of California Merced
Drew H. Abney (dabney@ucmerced.edu)
Chelsea L. Gordon (cgordon7@ucmerced.edu)
Michael J. Spivey (spivey@ucmerced.edu)

Cognitive and Information Sciences, University of California Merced
Rose M. Scott (rscott@ucmerced.edu)

Psychological Sciences, University of California Merced
Abstract
Children and adults can use cross-situational information to
identify words’ referents. What do learners retain about the
potential referents that occur with a word: do they encode
multiple referents or a single guess? We tested this question
using novel mouse tracking and finger tracking paradigms.
Adults were exposed to novel words in a series of ambiguous
training trials and then tested on the words’ referents. In some
test trials, participants saw the target and three referents that
had never occurred with the word; other test trials included a
high-probability competitor that had repeatedly occurred with
the word. Participants’ mouse movements were slower, less
accurate, and took a more complex path to the selected
referent when the competitor was present, indicating that
participants were aware that both the target and competitor
had previously occurred with the word. This suggests that
learners can accrue information about multiple potential
referents for a word, and that mouse tracking provides a
promising way of assessing this knowledge. However, this
knowledge was not evident in participants’ finger movements,
suggesting that the dynamics of finger movements might not
capture real-time competition between referents.
Keywords: cross-situational learning; language acquisition;
mouse tracking

Introduction
For any given utterance of a word, the referential scene
offers many possible interpretations. Researchers have long
assumed that learners cope with such referential ambiguity
in part by considering additional referential contexts in
which the same word occurs (e.g., Fisher, Hall, Rakowitz, &
Gleitman, 1994; Pinker, 1984; Siskind, 1996; Yu & Smith,
2007). Across situations, scene elements that are relevant to
a word’s meaning should occur more consistently than those
that are not relevant. If learners could identify the elements
that consistently co-occurred with a word across uses, then
this would help them determine the word’s likely referent.
Recent evidence suggests that children and adults can use
cross-situational information to identify a word’s referent
(e.g., Scott & Fisher, 2012; Smith & Yu, 2008; Yu & Smith,
2007). For instance, Yu and Smith (2007) presented adults

with a series of training trials in which they saw four novel
objects and heard four made-up words. Across trials, each
novel label consistently co-occurred with only one object.
Following training, participants received a series of test
trials in which they heard one novel label and saw its target
referent and three distracters. Participants selected the target
referent significantly more often than expected by chance.
These findings have raised many questions about the
mechanism by which learners exploit cross-situational
information in word learning. In particular, how much
information do learners retain about the potential referents
that occur with a word? Some researchers have proposed
that learners simultaneously accrue information about an
entire set of potential referents for a word (Fazly, Alishahi,
& Stevenson, 2010; Yurovsky, Fricker, Yu, & Smith, 2014).
On their first encounter with a word, learners encode
whatever referents co-occur with that word. The next time
they encounter the word, learners compare the current set of
potential referents to the set previously stored in memory,
adding new possibilities and updating the co-occurrence
probabilities for previously encountered referents.
Other researchers, however, have argued that when
learners first encounter a word, they make a guess or
conjecture about the word’s meaning (e.g., Medina,
Snedeker, Trueswell, & Gleitman, 2011; Trueswell, Medina,
Hafri, & Gleitman, 2013). Learners retain this hypothesis
and discard information about alternative referents. The next
time learners encounter the word, they retrieve and evaluate
their conjecture. If the hypothesized referent is present, then
they strengthen and retain the hypothesis. Otherwise,
learners discard the hypothesis and generate a new one
based on the current referential scene.
Empirical attempts to test these accounts have yielded
mixed results. While some studies suggest that learners
accumulate knowledge about multiple competing referents
for a word (e.g., Dautriche & Chemla, 2014; Smith, Smith,
& Blythe, 2011; Yurovsky & Frank, 2015; Yurovsky et al.,
2014), others suggest that participants retain only a single
potential referent for a word across observations (Medina et
al., 2011; Trueswell et al., 2013). These conflicting findings

1439

are difficult to reconcile because the experiments have
differed along many dimensions, including the number of
potential referents that occurred on each observation,
whether those referents were presented in isolation or in a
natural scene, and the interval between observations for a
word (see Yurovsky & Frank, 2015; Yurovsky et al., 2014).
Here, however, we focus on a feature that all of these
prior studies share: participants’ knowledge about the
potential referents for a word was inferred from their
patterns of explicit guesses across trials. Although the
referent that a participant selects provides one index of their
knowledge, this measure might nevertheless fail to capture
valuable information about the process by which that
selection was made. A participant might select the correct
referent for a word because that participant had previously
guessed that referent and thus confidently selects it again
without considering other referents. Alternatively, the
participant might consider how often each of the available
referents had occurred with the word in the past and select
the correct referent because it had the highest co-occurrence
probability. In order to distinguish between these two
possibilities, one would need to examine the participant’s
decision-making process as it unfolded in real time.
Mouse tracking provides one way of capturing this
decision-making process (e.g., Dale, Kehoe, & Spivey,
2007; Spivey, Grosjean, & Knoblich, 2005). For instance,
Spivey et al. (2005) asked participants to click on one of
two objects on a computer screen. When the objects were
phonological competitors (e.g., pickle, picture), participants
took longer to select the target, achieved maximum velocity
later, and exhibited more deviation toward the distracter
than they did when the two objects’ names were dissimilar.
Thus, the velocity, duration, and shape of participants’
mouse trajectories revealed real-time competition between
alternative referents as they made their selection.
When participants select a referent for a word in a crosssituational learning task, do they experience real-time
competition between referents that previously co-occurred
with the word? To test this question, we devised novel
mouse-tracking (Experiment 1) and finger-tracking
(Experiment 2) versions of Yu and Smith’s (2007)
paradigm. Participants viewed training trials in which
multiple novel labels occurred with multiple referents,
followed by test trials in which a single label occurred with
four objects. On each test trial, participants selected the
object that they thought the word referred to, and we tracked
their mouse/finger movements as they did so. In half of the
test trials (competitor-absent trials), participants saw the
target referent and three objects that had not previously
occurred with the word. In the remaining test trials
(competitor-present trials), one of the three non-target
objects had occurred with the word in 50% of the training
trials (high-probability competitor). If participants retain cooccurrence information for the set of potential referents for a
word, then in the competitor-present trials they should
experience online competition between the high-probability
competitor and the target as they make their selection. This

competition should impact their response trajectories in the
competitor-present trials, resulting in differing patterns of
motor dynamics across the two trial types. If, however, the
participants track a single conjecture, then the frequency
with which the available referents had previously occurred
with the word should have no influence and response
trajectories should not differ across trial types.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants 208 undergraduates (139 females) completed
the experiment for course credit. All the participants used
their right hand to perform the task.
Stimuli Referents were high-resolution photos of 18
common objects; each was paired with a 1- or 2-syllable
nonsense word. Words were phonotactically probable in
English and recorded by a female native English speaker.
Design Participants received 27 training trials and 18 test
trials. On each training trial, participants saw four objects,
one in each corner of the screen, and heard four labels
played over the computer speaker (Figure 1). The objects
for each trial were randomly selected with the constraint that
each word occurred six times with its target referent, three
times with a high-probability competitor referent, and less
than three times with all other objects. We randomly
generated two unique sets of word-object pairs.

Figure 1: Sample of a single learning trial.
In each test trial, participants saw four objects, one in
each corner of the screen, and heard a single label. On
competitor-absent trials, objects consisted of the target and
three objects that had appeared in training but had never cooccurred with the word. On competitor-present trials, the
objects consisted of the target, the high-probability
competitor, and two objects that had appeared in training
but had never co-occurred with the word. Participants saw
one of two randomized test orders. The onscreen positions
of the objects were randomly generated with the constraint
that on competitor-present trials the target and the highprobability competitor could not be diagonally adjacent.

1440

This ensured a consistent angle between the target and the
high-probability competitor relative to the starting position.
Procedure Participants were instructed that they would see
a series of objects and hear words and afterwards they
would be tested on which word went with which object.
Participants then viewed the training trials on a 65 cm by 45
cm computer screen. On each trial, participants saw four
objects and heard four consecutively presented audio labels.
The first label occurred 1s after the onset of the trial; each
subsequent label occurred 1s after the previous label. Each
trial lasted 12s; trials were separated by 1s of black screen.
Following training, participants moved to a second
identical computer in an adjoining room. Participants were
told that they would see sets of objects accompanied by a
single word and that after hearing each word, they should
drag the green dot that appeared in the center of the screen
to the object that they thought matched the word.
Participants were told to make their decision as quickly and
accurately as possible. At the start of each trial, the objects
and the green dot appeared on screen; after 1s, a single
audio label was delivered. The green dot was initially
locked in place and unlocked at the offset of the audio label.
This prevented the participants from making a selection
prior to hearing the word. Once the participants released the
green dot over one of the objects, the trial ended. Trials
were separated by 1s of black screen. During each trial, we
recorded the streaming x, y coordinates of the computer
mouse as participants dragged the dot from the start position
to their chosen referent object (sample rate ≈ 71 Hz).
Data Preprocessing On each trial, participants’ final x, y
coordinates were taken as their referent selection. To
examine participants’ real-time decision making, trajectories
were remapped to orient the target location to the top-right
corner by inverting the trajectories along the x-axis and yaxis. All trajectories were lined up to a common x, y starting
position (0, 0), then individually normalized by resampling
trajectories at 101 equally time-spaced values and
computing, by means of linear interpolation, the
corresponding mouse-coordinate values (separately for the x
and y coordinate vectors).
All data analyses were conducted with R 3.1.2 (2014) and
the lme4 package (Bates, Maechler, Bolker, & Walker,
2015). All of the subsequent analysis of variance (ANOVA)
models include participant as a random effect.

Results and Discussion
Participants selected the target significantly more often than
expected by chance (.25) on both competitor-absent trials
(M = .50, SD = .24), t(207) = 14.88, p < .001, d = 2.07, and
competitor-present trials (M = .41, SD = .25), t(207) = 9.22,
p < .001, d = 1.28. However, participants selected the target
significantly more often on competitor-absent trials than on
competitor-present trials, t(207) = 5.93, p < .001, d = .37.
To determine whether participants experienced real-time
competition between potential referents, we examined

participants’ mouse trajectories. We identified trials where
participants’ selected either the target or the high-probability
competitor (we did not analyze trials in which participants
selected other objects because the angle between the start
position and the object varied based on the object selected).
We then separated the trajectories into three trajectory
types: competitor-absent (795 trajectories), competitorpresent correct (target selected; 454 trajectories), and
competitor-present incorrect (high-probability competitor
selected; 275 trajectories).
We next examined the participants’ reaction times (from
label offset to mouse-click release). A one-way ANOVA
revealed a significant main effect of trajectory type, F(2,
325) = 6.06, p = .003. Planned comparisons revealed
significantly faster reaction times for competitor-absent
trajectories (M = 1618 ms, SD = 947) than for competitorpresent correct trajectories (M = 1767 ms, SD = 1030), z = 2.74, p = .015, and competitor-present incorrect trajectories
(M = 1802 ms, SD = 942), z = -2.86, p = .01. The speed of
competitor-present correct and competitor-present incorrect
trajectories did not differ, z < 1. The fact that participants
were slower on competitor-present trials suggests that they
experienced real-time competition between the target and
the high-probability competitor.
To further examine this competition, for each trajectory
we computed the maximum deviation (MD): the largest
positive x-coordinate deviation from a straight line between
the starting position and the selected object. For each
participant, we calculated average MD values for each
trajectory type. A one-way ANOVA on participants’ MD
revealed a significant main effect of trajectory type, F(2,
325) = 5.44, p = .005. Planned comparisons revealed
significantly smaller MD values for competitor-absent
trajectories (M = 65.60, SD = 68.07) than competitorpresent correct trajectories (M = 76.23, SD = 77.66), z = 2.38, p = .05. Competitor-absent trajectories exhibited
significantly smaller MD values than competitor-present
incorrect trajectories (M = 82.77, SD = 83.89), z = -2.91, p =
.01. The MD values of competitor-present correct and
competitor-present incorrect trajectories did not differ, z < 1.
Finally, angle information and sample entropy were
computed using the mousetrack R package (Coco & Duran,
2015). Angle information has been used in previous mousetracking studies (e.g., Dale et al., 2007) to investigate how
initial movements deviated from the point of origin. Angle
trajectory of mouse movements is computed as the angle
relative to the y-axis for each sample in a trajectory. This
provides a single measure that integrates information about
x-axis and y-axis movements. A trajectory starting at the
origin and moving directly to the participant’s final
selection would have a constant angle trajectory. If
participants experienced competition between referents,
then this should result in more complex angle trajectories.
To measure the complexity of angle trajectories, we
submitted angle trajectory to an analysis of sample entropy
for each trial (Richman & Mooreman, 2000). Sample
entropy measures the complexity of a given time series. It is

1441

robust for small time series (Yentes et al., 2013) and has
been used to measure the complexity or “disorder” of mouse
movement trajectories (Dale et al., 2007; McKinstry, Dale,
& Spivey, 2008). Sample entropy is computed for the angle
trajectories by counting the number of similar sequences, m
and m+1 (up to m=5), within a similarity tolerance
parameter, 0.2*SDangle trajectory and then taking the negative
logarithm of the ratio of similar sequence pair across m and
m + 1, –ln(m/m+1). A time series of similar distances
between data points across sequence lengths will result in
lower sample entropy values. Larger sample entropy values
are considered to have higher complexity.
We interpret higher values of sample entropy of angle
trajectories as exhibiting competition effects through more
disordered movements toward the selected object, whereas
lower values of sample entropy indicate more ordered,
regular movements toward the selected object. A one-way
ANOVA on sample entropy revealed a significant main
effect of trajectory type, F(2, 325) = 6.67, p = .002. Planned
comparisons revealed that trajectories were significantly
less complex for competitor-absent trajectories (M = .13, SD
= .06) than for competitor-present correct trajectories (M =
.14, SD = .07), z = -2.63, p = .023, and competitor-present
incorrect trajectories (M = .15, SD = .08), z = -3.23, p =
.003. Within the competitor-present trajectories, the
complexity of the trajectories did not differ, z < 1.
Participants were slower and their trajectories exhibited
greater deflection and complexity when the competitor was
present than when it was absent. This suggests that on
competitor-present trials, the target and high-probability
competitor were partially active as potential response
alternatives as participants were making their selection.
These results are inconsistent with what one would expect
if learners retained only a single conjecture about a word’s
meaning. If participants only recalled their prior guess for a
given word, then when that hypothesized referent was
present in the test trial, they should have selected it. When
that conjecture was absent, participants should have selected
a referent at random from the available choices. In either
case, their decision-making process should not have been
affected by how frequently the available referents had
previously co-occurred with the word. Contrary to this
prediction, the accuracy, speed, and shape of participants’
response trajectories differed across trial types, suggesting
that participants were sensitive to the fact that both highprobability competitor and target previously co-occurred
with the word. Thus, our results suggest that under at least
some circumstances, learners can accrue information about
multiple potential referents for a word.

Experiment 2
The results of Experiment 1 suggest that mouse tracking has
the potential to capture learners’ underlying knowledge
about alternative referents for a word during crosssituational learning. In Experiment 2, we explored whether
we would obtain similar results if we tracked participants’
fingers as they performed our task with a touchscreen

device. If so, this would provide a portable way of assessing
cross-situational learning outside of the laboratory. It would
also facilitate the assessment of real-time decision-making
in young children, who have difficulty interacting with a
mouse (e.g., Agudo, Sanchez, & Rico, 2010).

Method
Participants 79 undergraduates (60 females) completed the
experiment for course credit (none participated in the
previous experiment). All participants used their right hand
to perform the task.
Stimuli, Design, and Procedure The stimuli, design, and
procedure were identical to Experiment 1 with one
exception: participants completed the test phase on a 24 cm
by 19 cm touchscreen tablet and we recorded the streaming
x, y coordinates of the participants’ finger position as they
dragged the dot from the start position to their chosen
referent object (sampling rate ≈ 143 Hz). Participants were
instructed to not lift their finger as they dragged the dot.

Results and Discussion
Participants selected the target significantly more often than
expected by chance (.25) on both competitor-absent trials
(M = .48, SD = .28), t(78) = 7.16, p < .001, d = 1.62, and
competitor-present trials (M = .47, SD = .27), t(78) = 7.38, p
< .001, d = 1.67. Unlike in Experiment 1, participants’
accuracy did not differ across trial types, t < 1.
We next examined participants’ finger trajectories,
separated into three trajectory types: competitor-absent (293
trajectories), competitor-present correct (211 trajectories),
and competitor-present incorrect (59 trajectories).
A one-way ANOVA on participants’ reaction times
revealed a marginally significant main effect of trajectory
type, F(2, 99) = 2.93, p = .058. Planned comparisons
revealed that competitor-present incorrect trajectories were
significantly slower (M = 540 ms, SD = 408) than
competitor-absent trajectories (M = 395 ms, SD = 298), z =
2.38, p = .04, and marginally slower than competitor-present
correct trajectories (M = 392 ms, SD = 331), z = 2.15, p =
.08. However, competitor-absent and competitor-present
correct trajectories did not differ in speed, z < 1.
A one-way ANOVA on participants’ MD also revealed a
significant main effect of trajectory type, F(2, 99) = 6.08, p
= .003. Competitor-present incorrect trajectories (M =
38.70, SD = 50.08) exhibited significantly larger MD values
than did competitor-absent trajectories (M = 22.48, SD =
29.35), z = 3.25, p = .003, or competitor-present correct
trajectories (M = 21.45, SD = 28.91), z = 3.31, p = .003. MD
values for competitor-absent and competitor-present correct
trajectories did not differ, z < 1.
Finally, a one-way ANOVA on sample entropy revealed a
significant main effect of trajectory type, F(2, 99) = 4.22, p
= .02. Competitor-present incorrect trajectories (M = .14, SD
= .11) were significantly more complex than competitorabsent trajectories (M = .11, SD = .10), z = 2.76, p = .02, or
competitor-present correct trajectories (M = .11, SD = .09), z

1442

= 2.78, p = .01. Competitor-absent and competitor-present
correct trajectories did not differ in complexity, z < 1.
The presence of the high-probability competitor did not
impact the accuracy, speed, or shape of participants’ finger
trajectories. In contrast to the findings of Experiment 1,
these results provide no indication that participants’
considered the high-probability competitor as a potential
response alternative as they made their selection.

General Discussion
Recent studies suggest that adults and children are able to
use cross-situational information to identify the referents of
novel words under at least some circumstances (e.g., Yu &
Smith, 2007). However, it remains unclear how much
information learners retain about the potential referents for a
given word. The present study attempted to shed light on
this question using novel mouse- and finger-tracking
paradigms. Adult participants were exposed to novel words
in a series of ambiguous learning trials and then tested on
their knowledge of the words’ referents. In some test trials,
participants saw the word’s target referent and three
alternative referents that had never co-occurred with the
word before, while in other trials the target referent was
accompanied by a high-probability competitor that had
repeatedly occurred with the word during training. In
Experiment 1, participants were faster and more accurate
when the high-probability competitor was absent than they
were when it was present, and their mouse trajectories
revealed differing patterns of motor dynamics across the
two types of test trials: when the high-probability
competitor was present, participants deviated more from a
straight line and followed a more complex path to the
selected referent. In Experiment 2, however, we observed no
differences in accuracy or motor dynamics across trial types.
On the one hand, the results of Experiment 1 demonstrate
that continuous measures can provide information about
learners’ knowledge of potential referents that is not evident
in their discrete guesses. For instance, participants’ in
Experiment 1 were more accurate on competitor-absent than
on competitor-present trials. This could reflect the fact that
participants were tracking multiple potential referents for
each word and the resulting competition increased the
difficulty of competitor-present trials. However, unlike
competitor-absent trials, competitor-present trials included
two referents that had previously co-occurred with the word.
These trials therefore afforded the opportunity to confirm an
incorrect conjecture: if participants had previously guessed
that the word referred to the high-probability competitor,
they would select it if present, resulting in lower accuracy
on competitor-present trials. Examining participants’ mouse
trajectories as they made their guesses allowed us to tease
apart these two possibilities: the differing patterns of motor
dynamics across the two trial types indicated that
participants experienced competition between the highprobability competitor and the target. Even when
participants ultimately selected the target, the way in which
they did so differed when the high-probability competitor

was present. These results thus suggest that assessing the
decision-making process in real-time can reveal information
not captured by forced-choice measures.
Converging evidence for this conclusion comes from
Trueswell et al. (2013), who eye-tracked participants as they
performed a cross-situational learning task. Adults viewed a
series of trials in which a novel label occurred with two or
five everyday objects. On each trial, participants selected
the object that they thought the word referred to.
Examination of participants’ trial-by-trial guesses revealed
that when they incorrectly guessed which referent went with
a word, they performed at chance on the next encounter with
that word. This suggested that participants only remembered
their previous conjecture and if that guess was disconfirmed
on the next trial, they were unable to remember which
alternative referents were present the last time they heard
the word. In contrast to their forced-choice responses,
however, participants’ eye movements suggested that under
some conditions, they retained knowledge of multiple
referents. Specifically, when participants saw only two
referents on each trial, they looked significantly longer at
the target than the competitor referent, regardless of whether
they had guessed correctly on their previous encounter with
a word. Together with the findings of Experiment 1, these
results suggest that continuous measures have the potential
to capture fine-grained information that learners retain about
alternative referents, even when this information does not
appear to impact their overt guesses.
More generally, the results of Experiment 1 suggest that
mouse tracking offers a promising avenue for exploring the
mechanisms behind cross-situational word learning.
Incorporating mouse tracking into cross-situational
paradigms in which participants select a referent on each
exposure to a word (e.g., Smith et al., 2011; Trueswell et al.,
2013) could provide new insight into the amount of
information participants retain on a given exposure as well
as how this information changes across observations. Recent
work also suggests that when learners receive similar crosssituational evidence for two potential referents for a word,
this can disrupt cross-situational learning (e.g., Bunce &
Scott, in press; Yurovsky, Yu, & Smith, 2013). Mouse
tracking could be used to examine the influence of carefully
controlled co-occurring distracters in order to better
understand when and how competition between referents
leads to breakdowns in cross-situational word learning.
On the other hand, the negative results of Experiment 2
suggest that finger tracking, at least as implemented here,
might not capture real-time competition between potential
referents. This failure to replicate the results of Experiment
1 could be due in part to the smaller sample size in
Experiment 2. However, a power analysis indicated that this
sample size should have been more than adequate to detect
the difference in accuracy between competitor-absent and
competitor-present that we observed in Experiment 1. The
fact that we nevertheless failed to observe a difference in
accuracy across trial types suggests that the results of
Experiment 2 were not merely a product of sample size.

1443

Why then was there no impact of the high-probability
competitor on participants’ performance in Experiment 2?
One possibility is that the shift in context (computer to
tablet) interfered with participants’ memory of the potential
referents for each word, especially those that had occurred
with the word less frequently. If so, then perhaps we did not
observe real-time competition between the referents because
participants’ memory for the non-target referents was
degraded and thus there was no competition to detect.
Alternatively, it may be that the participants in
Experiment 2 did retain knowledge of multiple competing
referents, but our finger tracking measure failed to capture
that knowledge due to differences in how participants
interacted with the touchscreen. Specifically, participants
tested on the computer tended to keep their hand on the
mouse throughout the test phase, whereas those tested on
the tablet only touched the screen while making their
selection. As a result, participants tested on the computer
may have been more likely to initiate the movement of the
dot during the decision-making process. Those tested on the
tablet may instead have waited to touch the dot until after
they had decided which referent they intended to select.
Consistent with this possibility, the interval between the
audio label and when participants’ engaged the dot was
longer on average in Experiment 2 than in Experiment 1.
This suggests that perhaps we did not detect competition in
Experiment 2 because our finger-tracking measure did not
capture participants’ online decision-making process. Future
work will examine whether requiring participants to touch
the dot throughout each trial will allow us to detect real-time
competition in finger movements.

References
Agudo, J. E., Sánchez, H., & Rico, M. (2010). Playing
games on the screen: Adapting mouse interaction at
early ages. In Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies
(ICALT), 493-497.
Bates, D., Maechler, M., Bolker, B., & Walker, S. (2015).
Fitting linear mixed-effects models using lme4. Journal
of Statistical Software, 67, 1-48.
Bunce, J. P. & Scott, R. M. (in press). Finding meaning in a
noisy world: Exploring the effects of referential
ambiguity and competition on 2.5-year-olds’ crosssituational word learning. Journal of Child Language.
Coco, M. I. & Duran, N. D. (2015). mousetrack: Mousetracking measures from trajectory data. R package
version 1.0.0.
Dale, R., Kehoe, C. E., & Spivey, M. J. (2007). Graded
motor responses in the time course of categorizing
atypical exemplars. Memory & Cognition, 35, 15–28.
Dautriche, I. & Chemla, E. (2014). Cross-situational word
learning in the right situations. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 40,
892-903.
Fazly, A., Alishahi, A., & Stevenson, S. (2010). A
probabilistic computational model of cross‐situational

word learning. Cognitive Science, 34, 1017-1063.
Fisher, C., Hall, D. G., Rakowitz, S., & Gleitman, L. R.
(1994). When it is better to receive than to give:
syntactic and conceptual constraints on vocabulary
growth. Lingua, 92, 333-375.
McKinstry, C., Dale, R., & Spivey, M. J. (2008). Action
dynamics reveal parallel competition in decision
making. Psychological Science, 19, 22-24.
Medina, T. N., Trueswell, J. C., Snedeker, J., & Gleitman,
L. R. (2011). How words can and cannot be learned by
observation. PNAS, 108, 9014-9019.
Pinker, S. (1984). Language learnability and language
development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
R Core Team. (2014). R: A language and environment for
statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical
Computing, Vienna, Austria.
Richman, J. S., & Moorman, J. R. (2000). Physiological
time-series analysis using approximate entropy and
sample entropy. American Journal of Physiology:
Heart and Circulatory Physiology, 278, H2039–H2049.
Scott, R. M. & Fisher, C. (2012). 2.5-year-olds use crosssituational consistency to learn verbs under referential
uncertainty. Cognition, 122, 163-180.
Siskind, J. M. (1996). A computational study of crosssituational techniques for learning word-to-meaning
mappings. Cognition, 61, 39-91.
Smith, K., Smith, A. D. M., & Blythe, R. A. (2011). Crosssituational learning: an experimental study of wordlearning mechanisms. Cognitive Science, 35, 480-498.
Smith, L. B. & Yu, C. (2008). Infants rapidly learn wordreferent mappings via cross-situational statistics.
Cognition, 106, 1558-1568.
Spivey, M. J., Grosjean, M., & Knoblich, G. (2005).
Continuous attraction toward phonological competitors.
PNAS, 102, 10393–10398.
Trueswell, J. C., Medina, T. N., Hafri, A., & Gleitman, L.
R. (2013). Propose but verify: Fast mapping meets
cross-situational word learning. Cognitive Psychology,
66, 126-156.
Yentes, J. M., Hunt, N., Schmid, K. K., Kaipust, J. P.,
McGrath, D., & Stergiou, N. (2013). The appropriate
use of approximate entropy and sample entropy with
short data sets. Annals of Biomedical Engineering, 41,
349-365.
Yu, C. & Smith, L. B. (2007). Rapid word learning under
uncertainty
via
cross-situational
statistics.
Psychological Science, 18, 414-420.
Yurovsky, D. & Frank, M. C. (2015). An integrative
account of constraints on cross-situational learning.
Cognition, 145, 53-62.
Yurovsky, D., Fricker, D., Yu, C., & Smith, L. B. (2014).
The role of partial knowledge in statistical word
learning. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 21, 1-22.
Yurovsky, D., Yu, C., & Smith, L. B. (2013). Competitive
processes in cross-situational word learning. Cognitive
Science, 37, 891-921.

1444

