Viewing time affects overspecification:
Evidence for two strategies of attribute selection during reference production
Ruud Koolen (r.m.f.koolen@uvt.nl)
Tilburg center for Cognition and Communication (TiCC), Tilburg University

Albert Gatt (albert.gatt@um.edu.mt)
Institute of Linguistics, University of Malta

Roger P.G. van Gompel (r.p.g.vangompel@dundee.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of Dundee

Emiel Krahmer (e.j.krahmer@uvt.nl)
Tilburg center for Cognition and Communication (TiCC), Tilburg University

Kees van Deemter (k.vdeemter@abdn.ac.uk)
Department of Computing Science, University of Aberdeen
Abstract

to target objects in rather complex visual domains, including
cluttered domains (e.g., Clarke, Elsner & Rohde, 2013), and
domains with a high amount of visual variation between the
target referent and its distractors (e.g., Koolen, Goudbeek &
Krahmer, 2013; Rubio-Fernández, 2016).
So why do speakers overspecify their object references so
frequently? The answer to this question may be found in the
incremental nature of speech production (Pechmann, 1989),
and, in particular, in the recent suggestion that speakers rely
on quick heuristics during attribute selection. Heuristics can
be defined as “beliefs concerning the likelihood of uncertain
events (...) that reduce the complex tasks of assessing probabilities and predicting values to simpler judgmental operations” (Tversky & Kahneman, 1974, p. 1124). Recent work
in psycholinguistics has suggested that heuristics also affect
attribute selection during reference production. In particular,
it has been argued that speakers are in some cases prevented
from making exact calculations about the shortest possible
description in a referential domain (Van Deemter, Gatt, Van
Gompel & Krahmer, 2012).
If speakers indeed use heuristics during attribute selection,
this could explain their tendency to overspecify. We want to
argue that heuristics cause speakers to include attributes that
are salient in a given domain. In many referential situations,
speakers are simply lacking time and / or cognitive effort to
perform a careful object-by-object scan of the target and its
distractors. Instead, they might rely on a heuristic, and select
attributes that are easily and quickly processed by the visual
system. The most notable example here is color, which is an
absolute attribute that does not require comparison to any
other object in the domain in order to be perceived. In other
words, color “pops out” of the scene (Belke & Meyer, 2002;
Treisman & Gelade, 1980). As a result, color is a preferred
attribute, which is included irrespectively of the number of
distractors that it rules out in a domain (Dale & Viethen,
2009). Also size can be salient, when size differences between the objects in the domain are sufficiently large (Van

Speakers often produce definite referring expressions that are
overspecified: they tend to include more attributes than necessary to distinguish the target referent. The current paper investigates how the occurrence of overspecification is affected by
viewing time. We conducted an experiment in which speakers
were asked to refer to target objects in visual domains. Half of
the speakers had unlimited time to inspect the domains, while
viewing time was limited (1000 ms) for the other half. The results reveal that limited viewing time induces the occurrence
of overspecification. We conjecture that limited viewing time
caused speakers to rely heavily on quick heuristics during attribute selection, which urge them to select attributes that are
perceptually salient. In the case of unlimited inspection time,
speakers seem to rely on a combination of heuristic and more
deliberate selection strategies.
Keywords: Definite reference; overspecification; heuristics;
viewing time.

Introduction
In everyday language use, speakers often refer to objects in
the world around them. Such references often take the form
of a definite description that contains an article, one or more
modifiers, and a head noun (e.g., “the brown chair”, or “the
large table”). Among the various reasons why speakers refer
to objects, identification is perhaps the most obvious one: in
many cases, speakers aim to distinguish one target from the
distractors that are present in the context. Therefore, deciding what to say (or, in the terminology of Levelt, 1989, conceptualization) is a crucial part of referring: which attributes
should be selected to make the target identifiable?
For this attribute selection process, previous research has
shown that speakers tend to overspecify their object descriptions: they often use redundant attributes that are not strictly
needed for unique identification of the target. For example,
speakers might produce “the green chair” in a visual domain
where only one chair is present. In general, one can say that
overspecification is most likely to occur when speakers refer

159

Gompel, Gatt, Krahmer & Van Deemter, 2014), or due to
speakers’ general tendency to repeatedly include the same
attributes during reference production (Tarenskeen, Broersma & Geurts, 2015).
The use of heuristics may serve as a plausible explanation
for the occurrence of overspecification: if speakers include
attributes based on salience and preference, they may end up
with a description that contains attributes that are not strictly
needed to identify the target referent. Furthermore, in some
situations, also less preferred attributes might be required to
rule out some last remaining distractors in the domain. Thus,
given that speakers and listeners cooperate during referential
communication (Brennan & Clark, 1996), it seems plausible
to assume that attribute selection is usually determined by a
combination of preference and discriminatory power (i.e.,
the number of distractors that an attribute excludes in a particular domain). This assumption implies that there are multiple influences on attribute selection, which has been modeled in various recent computational interpretations of the
conceptualization process. For example, the Visible Objects
Algorithm (Mitchell, Van Deemter & Reiter, 2013) models
these influences as two consecutive stages: an early stage in
which visually salient and preferred attributes are selected,
and a later stage where attributes are included based on their
discriminatory power. Also the algorithm proposed by Gatt,
Goudbeek and Krahmer (2011a) distinguishes between heuristic and more stable strategies, but models them in parallel
rather than consecutively.
Despite the above computational models, prior research in
psycholinguistics that has tested the procedures proposed in
these models is mostly lacking. Therefore, in this paper, our
goal is to investigate if speakers are indeed guided by both
heuristic and more deliberate processes during attribute selection. In order to reach this goal, we performed a reference
production experiment where we manipulated viewing time:
half of our speakers could take as much time as necessary to
inspect the visual domains they were presented with, while
the other half had limited viewing time. To see how viewing
time influenced reference production, we analyzed speakers’
tendency to overspecify their descriptions. Our expectations
are as follows.
For speakers with unlimited viewing time, we expect that
they will overspecify their referring expressions, but only to
some extent. For one thing, heuristic viewing strategies will
cause them to include properties that are perceptually salient
for them. However, since there is unlimited time to inspect
the visual domain here, we expect selection based on inherent salience to interact with selection based on discriminatory power and exact calculations. As a result, the amount of
overspecification may be small: preferred attributes may be
avoided in some cases, and speakers might rather select attributes to exclude as many distractors at once as possible.
This strategy allows the listener to rule out the remaining
distractor objects and identify the target (Olson, 1970).
For speakers who have limited time to inspect a scene, the
situation might be different: in this case, they may not have
enough time to calculate the shortest possible description

and to perform an object-by-object scan of the visual scene.
Instead, these speakers may base attribute selection heavily
on inherent preferences for certain attributes, and might thus
be guided primarily by heuristics rather than discriminatory
power. For example, they might start uttering a description
before they have scanned all distractor objects that are present in the visual scene. As argued by Pechmann (1989),
this incremental process may in turn cause speakers to overspecify, since it makes them include salient attributes for
which they are not sure if they are needed for identification
or not. After all, the limited viewing time could prevent
them from taking the listener perspective into account (Horton & Keysar, 1996), and from searching for attributes with
the highest discriminatory power.

Method
To study the effect of viewing time on overspecification, we
performed an experiment in which participants took part in a
simple director-matcher task. In this task, one participant –
the speaker – described a target referent from a group of
seven objects, to a listener who saw the same objects but in
a different configuration. The speaker was instructed to refer
to target objects in such a way that the listener could identify the intended referents.

Participants
Participants were 36 undergraduate students from Tilburg
University (19 female, 17 male, age range 17-34 years old,
M = 21 years and 9 months), who took part as fulfillment of
course credits. The participants were all native speakers of
Dutch (the language of the study), and took part in the role
of the speaker. A confederate – who was the same person
for all participants – took part in the role of the listener.

Materials
The stimulus material consisted of thirty-six visual domains
such as those shown in Fig. 1 on the next page. All domains
depicted one target referent, which was marked with a red
square, and six distractors. We constructed thirty-six domains that served as critical trials, and selected thirty-six
different objects for the target objects. These objects were
the same as those used in an earlier experiment by Gatt, Van
Gompel, Krahmer, and Van Deemter (2011b). In all domains, the six distractors had the same type as the target
referent. The seven objects were placed randomly in a 3x3
grid, such that the positions of the objects and the empty
cells varied across domains.
Again following Gatt et al. (2011b), trials were manipulated in three conditions: (i) C, where color was required to
identify the target referent; (ii) S, where size was necessary;
and (iii) C/S, where participants could either use color or
size to produce a distinguishing description. The use of size
in the C condition, or color in the S condition, excluded only
three out of six distractor objects. Example domains for the
three conditions can be found in Fig. 1a-c. The thirty-six
target objects were distributed across three lists, so that each

160

in the domain, and thus to avoid underspecified descriptions
that do not contain enough information to identify the target.
From the pre-test, we learned that speakers were able to
avoid underspecification when they were given 1000 milliseconds to inspect the domain; speakers confirmed that they
could then indeed to take a look at all the objects that were
visible. In the experiment itself, we found that only 1.3% of
the descriptions were underspecified. The visual scenes for
the confederate listener were always displayed for the duration of the whole trial, irrespective of condition.
In addition to the thirty-six domains for the critical trials,
we created thirty-six filler domains. The fillers consisted of
two abstract 3D ‘Greebles’ figures (Gauthier & Tarr, 1997),
all purple, so that speakers were not primed with using color
in the critical trials. One Greeble was marked as the target,
and could be distinguished from the other Greeble by means
of its main shape or by the direction in which its protrusions
were pointing.

Figure 1: Experimental domains. The manipulations of color
may not be visible in a black and white print of this paper.
target referent appeared in a different condition in each list.
Participants were randomly assigned to one of the three
lists, and the conditions always had twelve trials each.
Color contrast between the target and the distractors in the
domains was manipulated in such a way that speakers could
not use basic color terms to refer to a target’s color. In Figure 1a-c, for example, speakers naturally used light green
when their description included color, because some (or all)
of the distractor objects were dark green. In half of the critical trials, the target’s color shade was light, and in the other
half it was dark. Target objects occurred either in red, grey,
blue, or green.
The use of basic color terms was disabled in an attempt to
balance the trade-off between speaker preferences for color
and size attributes. As we have seen in the Introduction, it is
known that speakers prefer to use color, even if this leads to
overspecification (e.g., Pechmann, 1989; Belke & Meyer,
2002; Koolen et al., 2013, among many others). By contrast,
attributes such as size tend to be used only when absolutely
required. However, the inclusion of color becomes less likely when the color differences between the target and its distractors are small, and when basic color terms are not sufficient to identify the target (Viethen, Goudbeek & Krahmer,
2012). Both these conditions were met in the current experiment.
The second independent variable of the experiment, pace,
manipulated viewing time. This variable was tested between
participants. Half of the speakers took part in the self-paced
condition, and could take as much time as needed for each
trial to inspect the domain and describe the target. The other
half of the speakers took part in the system-paced condition,
Although the speakers in this condition could again take as
much time as they needed to describe the target, the visual
domains disappeared automatically after 1000 milliseconds
for each trial. This means that the time that speakers had to
inspect the domains and to find the distinguishing attributes
for the targets was limited. The time window of 1000 milliseconds was decided upon with a pre-test. The main criterion here was that participants should experience pressure, but
should still be given enough time to take a look at all objects

Procedure
The experiment took place in a quiet office room at Tilburg
University. The average running time was approximately 15
minutes for each participant. After signing the consent form,
participants were randomly assigned to either the self- or the
system-paced condition, which resulted in eighteen speakers
per condition. Participants sat at a table facing their listener,
in front of a computer screen. The seventy-two trials (thirtysix critical trials and thirty-six fillers) were presented on the
screen one by one, in randomized order for each participant.
The visual domains for the confederate listener were shown
on a laptop placed in front of him. The computer screen and
the laptop were positioned such that eye contact between the
speaker and the listener was possible. E-prime 2.0 was used
to run the experiment.
The instructions emphasized that speakers had to describe
the target objects so that the listener could uniquely identify
them, and mark them on a paper answering form. Given that
the listener was presented with the same visual domains as
the speaker, but with the objects in a different configuration,
the instructions for the speaker also mentioned that it would
not make sense to refer to objects with location information.
Irrespective of the condition that speakers were assigned to,
they could take as much time as necessary for every trial to
describe the target. Once the listener had identified a target,
he pressed the space bar to continue to the next trial. Before
each trial, a fixation cross was depicted in the middle of the
screen for 1 second. There were three practice trials, including one with Greebles, and the speakers’ descriptions were
recorded with a microphone. The confederate listener never
asked clarification questions, so the data presented here can
be regarded as one-shot reference.
In order to measure if speakers in the system-paced condition indeed experienced more pressure than those in the selfpaced condition, all speakers filled out a short questionnaire
after finishing their referential task. This questionnaire consisted of five questions on a 10-point scale, derived from the
NASA task load index (Hart & Staveland, 1988). We asked

161

speakers to estimate: the task load (1); the pressure that they
experienced (2); how well they had succeeded in describing
the objects (3); how hard they worked to describe the targets
(4); and how frustrated they were during the experiment (5).
After reversing the scores for the second question and calculating the mean for each speaker, we found that the speakers
in the system-paced condition (M = 4.62; SD = 1.54) indeed
experienced their task as more demanding than the speakers
in the self-paced condition (M = 3.37; SD = 1.24), F(1,34) =
7.27; p = .011).

Data coding
In total, our 36 speakers produced 1296 object descriptions.
There were 25 missing cases due to technical issues with the
audio recordings. The remaining 1271 descriptions were all
coded for the occurrence of referential overspecification. A
description was either overspecified (score = 1) or not (score
= 0). Overspecified descriptions always contained color and
size: one attribute which was necessary for identification of
the target referent, and one redundant attribute. Descriptions
that were coded as not overspecified were mostly minimally
specified, and contained either color or size. References that
were underspecified (16 in total) were coded with 0 as well.
We did not consider whether speakers used a type attribute
or not in coding the references, because the seven objects in
the domains were always of the same type. Naturally, type
attributes were often mentioned by our speakers to produce
proper noun phrases.

Figure 2: Proportion of color-only, size-only, and color-andsize descriptions as a function of the three Conditions and
the Pace manipulation. Note that only the color-and-size
descriptions (see the lower, darker bars) are overspecified.
on the occurrence of referential overspecification: redundant
modifiers were more frequent in the system-paced condition
(40.7%) than in the self-paced condition (31.3%), β = 0.72;
SE = 0.57; p < .05. As can be seen in Figure 2, this effect of
Pace was consistent across the three Conditions: the patterns
for the C, S, and C/S conditions separately all show a higher
proportion of overspecification for speakers who had limited
time to inspect the scene. There was no main effect of Condition on the occurrence of overspecification (β = -0.01; SE
= 0.36; n.s.).
Further inspection of the proportions in Figure 2 suggests
that the effect of Pace is mediated by Condition. For instanc
ple, in the S condition - where only size is needed to uniquely identify the target - the difference between speakers in the
self-paced (28%) and the system-paced (50%) conditions is
considerable in terms of overspecification, or at least bigger
than in the C and C/S conditions. However, the interaction
between Pace and Condition did not reach significance (β =
0.40; SE = 0.43; n.s.). This lack of interaction may be due to
a substantial amount of speaker variation. We come back to
this issue in the Discussion.

Research design and statistical analysis
The experiment had a 3x2 design, with Condition (levels: C,
S, C/S) as a within-participants factor and Pace (levels: selfpaced, system-paced) as a between-participants factor. The
dependent variable was the proportion of object descriptions
that was overspecified.
To test the effect of Pace and Condition on the occurrence
of referential overspecification, we performed a logit mixed
model analysis (Jaeger, 2008). In our model, Pace and Condition were included as fixed factors, and items and participants as random factors. The fixed factors were centered to
reduce collinearity. The model had a maximal random effect
structure and included random intercepts and random slopes
for all within-participant and within-item factors, in order to
ensure optimal generalizability (Barr, Levy, Scheepers &
Tily, 2013). As such, the model contained random intercepts
for participants and items, and random slopes for Condition
and Pace at both the participant level and the item level. The
p-values were estimated via parametric bootstrapping over
100 iterations.

Discussion
The current paper investigated the effect of viewing time on
attribute selection in the production of definite reference. In
particular, the data revealed that viewing time influences the
occurrence of referential overspecification: redundant modifiers were more frequent in the system-paced condition than
in the self-paced condition. This effect did not interact with
the type of visual domain, which we manipulated in terms of
the attributes that were needed to uniquely identify the target referent (i.e., color, size, or color/size).

Results
Figure 2 plots the proportion of descriptions containing only
color, only size, or color-and-size, as a function of the three
Conditions (C, S, C/S) and the manipulation of Pace.
Overall, 36% of the referring expressions produced by our
speakers contained both a color and a size attribute and were
thus overspecified. Our model showed a main effect of Pace

162

The main effect of Pace is in line with our expectations,
and we regard it as converging evidence for the notion that
speakers use quick heuristics when selecting the content of
their referring expressions (e.g., Van Deemter et al., 2012;
Dale & Viethen, 2009). In fact, speakers seem to particularly do so when their time to inspect the domain is limited, as
was the case in our system-paced condition. The higher proportion of overspecified descriptions that we observed there
suggests a heuristic, preference-based approach for speakers
under pressure, where they select attributes merely based on
inherent salience rather than discriminatory power. After all,
these speakers may simply have lacked time and thus cognitive capacity (Horton & Keysar, 1996) to perform a deliberate object-by-object scan of the domain. Instead, they might
have selected the content of their referring expressions in an
incremental way (Pechmann, 1989). As we have seen in the
Introduction section, this incremental process may eventually cause speakers to overspecify.
The lower proportion of overspecified object descriptions
produced in the self-paced condition implies that a heuristic
strategy is less dominant when speakers have unlimited time
to inspect the visual scene. In this condition, there seems to
have been sufficient time available for speakers to put effort
in selecting the attribute that was most efficient in ruling out
the distractor objects that were present. This way, speakers
were – at least to a certain extent – able to avoid overspecification. However, it is important to note that if speakers in
the self-paced condition had based the selection of attributes
on discriminatory power alone, they may not have overspecified their descriptions at all, since there was in all domains
one attribute that excluded all distractors at once. Hence, we
take the finding that speakers did not avoid being redundant
here as yet another argument for a model of human attribute
selection where heuristic and more deliberate processes take
place in parallel. As referred to in the Introduction section,
such a model is similar to various computational models of
attribute selection for definite reference (Gatt et al., 2011a;
Mitchell et al., 2013).
The data did not show a significant effect of Condition on
the occurrence of overspecification, in contrast to the related
experiment by Gatt et al., 2011b, which manipulated similar
conditions. This lack of main effect can be explained by the
fact that in our study, the use of basic color terms was disabled, in an attempt to balance the trade-off between speaker
preferences for color and size attributes. Normally, speakers
have a strong preference to use color (e.g., Pechmann, 1989;
Koolen et al., 2013), which could result in a high proportion
of color-only descriptions in the C and C/S conditions, and
a ceiling effect for overspecification in the S condition, even
for self-paced speakers. In other words: speakers might then
simply select color all the time, just because it is highly salient. However, with our subtle manipulation of color differences, we managed to discourage this strategy.
Close inspection of Figure 2 suggests the existence of an
interaction between Pace and Condition: at least numerically, the effect of pressure was far most convincing in the S
condition, where size was needed to distinguish the target.

In this condition, the proportion of overspecifications almost
doubled for speakers under pressure, while there was only a
slight increase in the C and C/S conditions. However, the
interaction between Pace and Condition was not significant.
As mentioned earlier, we expect that this lack of interaction
was due to a substantial amount of speaker variation, especially in the self-paced condition. The pattern that emerges
there is that for almost half of the speakers, we find a proportion of 0 - 10% overspecified references, while the proportions for the other speakers range from 10 - 100%. In the
system-paced condition, these proportions are more centered
around the mean. This difference in consistency between the
two conditions could explain why the interaction between
pressure and condition was not significant.
Although the interaction effect was not significant, it remains of course interesting to speculate about the nature of
the large numerical increase in the number of overspecified
descriptions in the S condition. We reason that the inherent
preference for color over size pays off here anyway, in spite
of the subtle color differences in our domains. In cases with
unlimited viewing time, color differences are generally detected faster than size differences (Belke & Meyer, 2002),
because color is an absolute attribute that does not require
comparison to other objects to be perceived, unlike the relative attribute size. In our experiment, this natural difference
between size and color may explain the large increase in the
proportion of overspecified descriptions in the S condition:
speakers under pressure could simply have lacked sufficient
time to compare the objects and sizes. Selecting color could
provide a solution here, since it reduces the distractor set to
three rather than six objects. This subset may be sufficiently
small for speakers to detect if also size is needed to uniquely
identify the target, perhaps even after the domain has disappeared, based on memory. In order to test this idea, it would
be interesting to replicate our experiment in an eye-tracking
paradigm, to test if speakers indeed rely on a subset of distractors before (and after) the domain has disappeared.
Related to the above, another next step could be to look at
the way in which viewing time affects reference production
at the surface, word level. In Dutch, which was the language
of the experiment, color and size are usually realized before
the head noun. However, if speakers indeed mentioned color
to reduce the number of distractors, and ‘decided’ about the
need for size later, one may expect that many size modifiers
in the system-paced condition were produced after the head
noun. Hence, there could also be more speech repairs in this
case, with speakers producing descriptions such as “the light
green light bulb, the large one”. Third, there may be effects
of pressure on speech onset times, which might be longer in
the self-paced rather than the system-paced condition. These
kinds of analyses can all be conducted with the current data;
we are planning to do so in the near future. Hence, it would
also be interesting to replicate our experiment in a language
where post-nominal modification is the default, which is for
example the case in Spanish or Maltese.
Other directions for future research include for example to
run an experiment in which one of the attributes rules out no

163

distractors at all. In all conditions of the current experiment,
both color and size ruled out at least one distractor object. In
the system-paced condition, speakers might have included a
redundant attribute because – during their quick scan of the
scene – they realized that it excluded at least one distractor,
although they were not sure how many distractors. If such a
strategy is indeed applied, limited viewing time might not
give rise to overspecification when certain attributes rule out
no distractors at all, since during the quick scan, the speaker
will not identify any distractor that these attributes would
rule out. Second, one could conduct a follow-up experiment
in which it is crystal clear for speakers that minimality (i.e.,
producing the shortest possible distinguishing description) is
the aim, while giving them a very short inspection time. It is
then the question to what extent their referential behavior
resembles the behavior in the normal situation, where minimality is not particularly stressed. Finally, it would be interesting to explore the interplay between limited viewing time
and overspecification from a more listener-oriented perspective, for example with a colorblind listener.

production. In Proceedings of PRE-CogSci 2011. Boston,
Massachusetts.
Gauthier, I. & Tarr, M. J. (1997). Becoming a "Greeble"
expert: Exploring mechanisms for face recognition. Vision Research, 37(12), 1673–1682.
Hart, S., & Staveland, L. (1988). Development of NASATLX: results of empirical and theoretical research. In:
Hancock, P.A., Meshkati, P. (Eds.), Human Mental Workload (pp. 139-183). Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Horton, W. & Keysar, B. When do speakers into account
common ground? Cognition, 59, 91-117.
Jaeger, T. (2008). Categorical data analysis: Away from
ANOVAs (transformation or not) and towards logit mixed
models. Journal of Memory and Language, 59, 434-446.
Koolen, R., Goudbeek, M. & Krahmer, E. (2013). The effect
of scene variation on the redundant use of color in definite
object descriptions. Cognitive Science, 37(2), 395 – 411.
Levelt, W. (1989). Speaking: from intention to articulation.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Mitchell, M., Van Deemter, K. & Reiter, E. (2013). Generating expressions that refer to visible objects. In Proceedings of the North American chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies. Atlanta, Association for Computational Linguistics.
Olson, D. (1970). Language and thought: Aspects of a cognitive theory of semantics. Psychological Review, 77,
257-273.
Pechmann, T. (1989). Incremental speech production and
referential overspecification. Linguistics, 27, 89-110.
Rubio-Fernández, P. (2016). How redundant are redundant
color adjectives? An efficiency-based analysis of color
overspecification. Frontiers in Psychology, 7: 153.
Tarenskeen, S., Broersma, M. & Geurts, B. (2015). Overspecification of color, pattern and size: salience, absoluteness, and consistency. Frontiers in Psychology, 6: 1703.
Treisman, A. & Gelade, G. (1980). A feature integration
theory of attention. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 97-136.
Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 185, 1124-1131.
Van Deemter, K., Gatt, A., Van Gompel, R., & Krahmer, E.
(2012). Toward a computational psycholinguistics of reference production. Topics in Cognitive Science, 4 (2),
166-183.
Van Gompel, R., Gatt, A., Krahmer, E. & Van Deemter, K.
(2014). Overspecification in reference: modelling size
contrast effects. Poster Presented at AMLaP 2014 (Edinburgh, UK).
Viethen, J., Goudbeek, M. & Krahmer, E. (2012). The impact of colour difference and colour codability on reference production. Proceedings of CogSci 2012. Sapporo,
Japan, 1084-1098.

Conclusion
This paper explored the impact of viewing time on attribute
selection in definite reference, and on referential overspecification in particular. We found more redundant attributes in
the system-paced condition than in the self-paced condition,
and conjectured that speakers rely heavily on fast heuristics
when they have limited time to inspect the visual domain. In
the case of unlimited inspection time, they seem to rely on a
combination of heuristic and more deliberate strategies.

References
Barr, D., Levy, R., Scheepers, C. & Tily, H. (2013). Random effects structure for confirmatory hypothesis testing:
keep it maximal. Journal of Memory and Language, 68,
255– 278.
Belke, E. & Meyer, A. (2002). Tracking the time course of
multidimensional stimulus discrimination: Analysis of
viewing patterns and processing times during “same”
“different” decisions. European Journal of Cognitive
Psychology, 14, 237-266.
Brennan, S. & Clark, H. (1996). Conceptual pacts and lexical choice in conversation. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory & Cognition, 22, 1482-1493.
Clarke, A., Elsner, M. & Rohde, H. (2013). Where’s Wally:
the influence of visual salience on referring expression
generation. Frontiers in Psychology, 4: 329.
Dale, R. & Viethen, J. (2009). Referring expression generation through attribute-based heuristics. Proceedings of the
12th European workshop on natural language generation
(ENLG). Athens, Greece, 58–65.
Gatt, A., Goudbeek, M. & Krahmer, E. (2011a). Attribute
preference and priming in reference production: Experimental evidence and computational modeling. Proceedings of CogSci 2011. Boston, Massachusetts, 2627-2632.
Gatt, A., Van Gompel, R., Krahmer, E. & Van Deemter
(2011b). Non-deterministic attribute selection in reference

164

