What Causal Illusions Might Tell us about the Identification of Causes
Robert Thorstad (rthorst@emory.edu)
Phillip Wolff (pwolff@emory.edu)
Emory University Department of Psychology

Abstract
According to existing accounts of causation, people rely on a
single criterion to identify the cause of an event. The
phenomenon of causal illusions raises problems for such
views. Causal illusions arise when a particular factor is
perceived to be causal despite knowledge indicating
otherwise. According to what we will call the Dual-Process
Hypothesis of Causal Identification, identifying a cause
involves two cognitive processes: 1) an automatic, intuitive
process that identifies possible causes on the basis of
perceptual cues (spatial and temporal) and 2) a slow,
reflective process that identifies possible causes on the basis
of causal inference, in particular, a consideration of possible
mechanism. Consistent with this hypothesis, we found that in
response to a causal illusion shown in a naturalistic setting,
people’s initial judgments of causation were higher than their
ultimate judgments of causation (Experiment 1). Using an
online measure of the time-course of people’s causal
judgments, we found that people initially view animations of
causal illusions as causal before concluding that they are noncausal (Experiment 2). Finally, we obtained similar results
using a deadline procedure, while also finding that the lower
the cognitive reflectiveness (as measured by the CRT), the
stronger people’s impressions of causation were (Experiment
3). Implications for different classes of theories of causation
are discussed.
Keywords: causal reasoning; thinking & reasoning

Introduction
In 1977 New York City experienced a major blackout.
Remarkably, some individuals felt, at least momentarily,
that the blackout was caused by their own actions. For
instance, Sparrow (1999) reports a child who hit a ceiling
light fixture with a paddle ball at the exact moment the
lights went off, and an opera singer who touched a door just
as the power went out. One person exclaimed after plugging
in a toaster, “I blew out the whole neighborhood!”
(Sparrow, 1999). In situations such as this, people may
experience strong feelings of causation while at the same
time knowing that such feelings are unwarranted. We will
term this experience of causation absent a plausible
mechanism a causal illusion.
The fact that people can have conflicting judgments
about the existence of a causal relationship is consistent
with the idea that judgments of causation may be based on
two kinds of processes: 1) a fast and intuitive process that
identifies potential causes on the basis of perceptual cues,
temporal cues in particular, and 2) a slow and reflective
process that identifies potential causes on the basis of causal
mechanisms, and in particular, how the entities in an event
might be spatially arranged in order to allow for the
transmission of energy or force (Wolff & Shepard, 2013).

According to what we will call the Dual-Process Hypothesis
of Causal Identification, these two processes occur regularly
in people’s analyses of everyday events. The two processes
may not be easily recognized as distinct processes because
in most cases they lead to the same conclusion. In the case
of causal illusions, the conclusions of the two processes
diverge, and hence their presence is revealed.
The distinction between intuitive and reflective processes
is not new. Various forms of this distinction can be found in
the perception, reasoning, and social cognition literatures.
According to dual-processing theories, System 1 represents
the statistical structure of the environment in a sub-symbolic
format and involves processes that are implicit,
unconscious, and heuristic, while System 2 represents the
environment in a symbolic format and involves processes
that are explicit, sequential, and rule-based (Sloman, 2015;
Evans, 2008; Kahneman, 2003; Stanovich & West, 2000).
In the causation literature, the distinction between intuitive
and reflective processes is implied in the work of
Schlottmann and Shanks (1992), who proposed a distinction
between perceived and judged causation. This distinction is
also indirectly suggested by the existence of a major
partitioning of the causation literature into two areas:
research on the perception of causality, which concerns
processes that operate independently of background
knowledge (e.g., Hubbard, 2013; Michotte, 1963; Rips,
2011; Scholl & Tremoulet, 2000; White, 2006) and research
on causal reasoning and learning that involves the use of
prior knowledge in the creation of new causal relations (e.g.,
Ahn et al, 1995; Lien & Cheng, 2000; Goldvarg & JohnsonLaird, 2001; Mayrhofer and Waldmann, 2015; Sloman &
Lagnado, 2015; Wolff & Barbey, 2015). Implicit in the
causation literature is the view that different kinds of causal
reasoning might occur in the intuitive and reflective
systems.
According to Sloman (2015) the intuitive system does not
represent statistical associations directly, but rather
generates such associations though the representation of
causal structure. According to Sloman, the intuitive system
is capable of making relatively sophisticated distinctions,
such as whether an outcome was merely observed or the
result of an intervention. In Sloman’s (2015) proposal, the
reflective system is slower than the intuitive system and
capable of exerting some control over the intuitive system,
though not completely. When in conflict, people will
usually chose the conclusion generated from the reflective
system over that generated by the intuitive system. In
Sloman’s (2015) view, the intuitive system is impressive in
how much causal reasoning it is able to perform correctly.

1991

Figure 1: An example causal illusion. A man appears to
open elevator doors using only his hands.
We do not necessarily disagree with Sloman’s (2015)
proposal on how causal reasoning might be instantiated in
the intuitive and reflective systems. Like Sloman (2015), we
see the intuitive system as able to perform certain types of
causal reasoning. Where we may disagree is in the relative
level of sophistication of the reasoning in the intuitive
system. Causal illusions, we propose, occur in situations in
which the intuitive system is getting things wrong, and we
speculate that such illusions are relatively common.
To date, however, no studies have directly examined the
unique contributions made by the intuitive and reflective
systems to the identification of a cause. According to our
Dual-Process Hypothesis, the intuitive and reflective
systems are expected to come to different conclusions about
a cause in situations in which perceptual cues conflict with
inferences from background knowledge. In particular,
conclusions generated by the intuitive system are expected
to occur earlier in the time-course of processing than
conclusions generated by the reflective system. This basic
prediction was tested in the following three experiments.

Experiment 1: “Jedi Powers”
In Experiment 1, we aimed to establish the phenomenon
of causal illusions, and to begin to investigate the timecourse of causal identification. In this study participants
experienced an unexpected causal illusion on their way to
our lab: a man appeared to open an elevator door by merely
gesturing with his hands (Figure 1). Importantly, the man
made no physical contact with the doors or with any of the
buttons in the elevator. Unbeknownst to the participants, the
doors were opened by a confederate outside of the elevator
pushing the elevator button. Our main prediction was that
the intuitive system would lead to feelings of causation that
would ultimately be reduced by the reflective system.
Participants’ impressions of causation were measured in the
subsequent interview, which included a short questionnaire.

Methods
Participants. 23 undergraduate participants were recruited
for a study on perception and tested in groups of 1-4. One

participant was excluded because they personally knew the
confederate.
Causal Illusion. Participants were informed that the study
would take place in our lab on another floor and followed a
research assistant to the building elevator. There, a
confederate pretended to re-open the elevator doors using
only his hands (see Figure 1). The confederate re-opened the
doors a total of three times, and maintained a neutral
expression. In reality, the doors were controlled by an
unseen confederate; no participants reported discovering the
unseen confederate.
Causality Ratings. After the causal illusion, participants
completed two sets of written ratings. (A) Causality
Description: participants answered three questions about
their experience: “what do you think you saw?,” “please
describe how this impression unfolded over time,” and “did
you think the man caused the elevator doors to open?” (B)
Time-Course Ratings: participants rated the following
statements on a 1-5 Likert scale: “to what extent did you
[feel for a moment / ultimately conclude] that the man
caused the elevator doors to open?”
Causality Coding. Two raters unfamiliar with the
experiment coded participants’ written descriptions for two
features. (A) Link Rating: did the written descriptions
mention a link between the man and the doors opening? (B)
Causality Rating: did the written descriptions attribute
causality to the man in causing the doors to open?

Results
Causality Descriptions. If causal illusions are in part
causal, participants should spontaneously attribute causality
to the Jedi in their causal descriptions. Participants’ written
descriptions frequently attributed causality to the
confederate. Example descriptions were that “A man was
controlling the doors of the elevator with his hands,” “The
man in the elevator kept causing the door to stay open on
the wrong floor, like magic,” and “A man […] was able to
open the doors simply by moving his hands.” Coders rated a
mean of 87% of written descriptions as causal (inter-rater
reliability=89%, kappa=0.33), suggesting that participants
spontaneously perceived causal illusions as causal.
Time-Course Ratings. According to the dual-process
hypothesis, causal illusions should create a strong initial
impression of causality, but weaker subsequent impression
of causality, due to the conflict between intuitive and
reflective systems. Participants’ time-course ratings
supported this account: participants rated a stronger initial
than ultimate impression of causality, t(21)=3.72, p<0.01
(Figure 2). This difference in causality ratings was
consistently observed in individual participants. A majority
of participants (13/22) rated a stronger initial than ultimate
impression of causality, while just 2 participants rated a
stronger ultimate than initial impression.

1992

Because the number of participants varied from trial to
trial, we conducted an additional analysis to ensure that
participants’ ratings were not driven by the impressions of
other participants. There was no effect of the number of
participants on either participants’ initial impression of
causality, F(3,18)=1.10, p=0.37, or on their ultimate
impression of causality, F(3,18) < 1, n.s..

Discussion
There are two main results of Experiment 1. First, the
results show that causal illusions give rise to impressions of
causality, even in the absence of a possible mechanism. The
majority of participants’ written descriptions attributed
causality to the confederate, and causal illusions received
high initial ratings of causality. Second, the results provide
initial support for the predictions of the dual-process
hypothesis. Causal illusions created a stronger initial than
ultimate impression of causality, consistent with a conflict
between a fast intuitive system using perceptual cues and a
slower reflective system using background knowledge. This
effect was consistent across participants and rarely occurred
in the other direction.
A limitation of Experiment 1 is that we were only able to
measure participants’ impressions of causation well after the
occurrence of the event, rather than as they actually
unfolded in real-time. The results are vulnerable, then, to the
possibility that participants really did not have a strong
initial impression of causation, but merely attributed this
impression after the fact. In Experiment 2, this limitation
was addressed through the use of a real-time measure of
participants’ impressions of causation.

the non-causal version of the event, the hand did not move.
In the causal illusion version of the event, the hand moved,
but did not make physical contact with the record. The
experiment included six different sets of animations. As
participants watched an animation, they indicated the degree
to which they felt the event was causal or non-causal by
how far they turned a dial to the right (causal) or left (noncausal) (see Figure 3D). Participants could change how far
they turned the response dial at any point during the
presentation of the animation. The dual-process hypothesis
predicts that for the causal event, participants should move
and keep the dial in the cause direction. For the non-causal
event, participants should move and keep the dial in the
non-causal direction. Critically, for the causal illusions, the
dual-process hypothesis predicts that participants should
initially move the response dial to cause, but later move the
response dial to non-cause.

Figure 2: Participants rated a stronger initial than
subsequent impression of causality when experiencing
causal illusions. Error bars +/- 1 SEM.

Experiment 2: Time Course
In Experiment 2, participants viewed three kinds of
events: causal, non-causal, and causal illusions (see Figure
3A). The temporal unfolding of the three kinds of events
was exactly the same, except for the position of the causer
in the scene. For example, in one set of animations,
participants saw a record begin to turn. In the causal
version, the hand made physical contact with the record. In

Figure 3: Experimental design for Experiment 2.

Methods
Participants. 60 adult participants were tested individually
in the lab. 3 participants were excluded for failing to
respond to at least 2 animations.
Animations. Animations were constructed using 3D Studio
MAX animation software and rendered in Mental Ray or
VRAY to increase realism. Six experimental animations
were created (Figure 3A,B); each animation had a causal,
non-causal, and causal illusion variant. All animations were

1993

B

A

Figure 4: The average decision function for causal, non-causal, and causal illusion animations
(shading +/- 1 SEM). Causal illusions are plotted separately for the 1 st and 2nd causal illusions in
Figure 4A and 4B, respectively.
matched at the single-frame level for duration (7s) and for
when the resulting effect occurred (4s). Animations were
displayed at a rate of 30 frames/s. An additional 5s of a still
first frame was added to the beginning of the animations to
allow participants to orient to the scene. 6s of a still last
frame was also added to the end of the animation to allow
the causal impression additional time to unfold. Six practice
animations were created with clear cases of causation and
non-causation to allow participants to become comfortable
with the procedures in the experiment.
Trial Structure. The experiment was conducted on lab
computers using a javascript application. Participants first
completed 6 practice trials with clear causal or non-causal
animations. Before the animation played, one of the objects
in the scenes was named. Participants were instructed to
evaluate the causality with respect to this object (see Figure
3C). Participants then viewed the animation, and were
instructed to use a response dial to judge causality in real
time. Participants responded “yes” or “no” by moving the
dial right and left, respectively. Dial position was recorded
as a continuous variable from +15 (yes) to -15 (no) every 10
ms. Participants were instructed that the position of the dial
should always reflect their current opinion of whether a
particular event was caused by the named object.
Data Analysis. Data analysis was conducted using custom
Python scripts. For each participant, we averaged the
responses to causal, non-causal, and causal illusion
animations separately to create a single average decision for
each animation type. We considered only data recorded at or
after the time the effect occurred, resulting in 3 separate
13s-long decision functions, 1 for each animation type, with
position recorded every 10 ms.

Results
The average decision function for each type of animation is

shown in Figure 4. Significance tests were conducted by
binning decisions at the group level using 100 ms bins, and
testing whether the mean of that bin (which could range
from +15 to -15) differed from 0 (i.e., no decision), using
single-sample t-tests, α=0.05, 2-tailed.
As expected, causal animations were quickly judged as
causal, with decisions differing significantly from 0
beginning 800 ms after the effect occurred. Non-causal
animations were quickly judged as non-causal, with
decisions differing significantly from 0 beginning 1,200 ms
after the effect occurred. Critically, the predictions of the
dual-process hypothesis were also supported for the causal
illusions, provided the analyses are restricted to only the
first causal illusion participants saw. In particular, for the 1st
causal illusion, as seen in Figure 4A, causal illusions were
initially judged as causal 1,160 ms after the effect occurred,
and then later judged noncausal at 12,700 ms after the effect
occurred. The results from all of the causal illusions show a
similar pattern, but are not significantly different from 0.
The results suggest that participants viewed the animations
in a more reflective manner once they saw one of the causal
illusions. In particular, participants may have been able to
use remembered knowledge about the 1 st causal illusion to
suppress the causal impression of the 2 nd causal illusion.
This result is consistent with the dual-process hypothesis,
since prior inferences may have had a chance to interact
with perceptually-based judgments.

Discussion
The main predictions of the dual-process hypothesis were
supported. For causal illusions, but not for clear causes or
non-causes, participants made two opposite decisions over
the course of the single trial. Participants initially judged the
1st causal illusion to be causal, but subsequently judged it to
be non-causal. In addition to providing evidence for the

1994

existence two kinds of processes, the results from this
experiment provide some indication about when in time the
two kinds of causal processes take place. In particular, it
appears that the results of the intuitive process become
available at around about 1000 ms, whereas the results from
the reflective process might not be felt until 1300 ms. With
these temporal benchmarks in place, we can test the dualprocess hypothesis using a standard methods for examining
the temporal time-line of processing, as demonstrated in the
next experiment.

keys to judge (yes/no) whether the first event caused the
second event. Half of participants (short-deadline group)
had 1s to respond; half of participants (long-deadline group)
had 10s to respond. Response deadline was manipulated
between participants because of possible order effects
discovered in Experiment 2. All participants saw each of 30
animations twice in random order for a total of 60 trials.
Individual Differences Measures. After the deadline task,
participants completed other tasks in our lab, and then
completed the revised 7-item version of the Cognitive
Reflection Test (CRT-7; Toplak et al, 2014).

Figure 5: The deadline procedure in Experiment 3.
Participants made a yes/no decision about causation under
either a short or long response deadline.

Experiment 3: Thinking Styles
Experiment 3 had two aims. First, we sought to provide
converging evidence for the existence of multiple processes
in the interpretation of causal events using a deadline
methodology, as well as by examining whether people’s
impressions of causation might depend on their cognitive
reflectivity.
As in the previous experiment, participants viewed causal,
non-causal, and causal illusion animations. In the current
experiments, however, participants were prompted to make
a yes/no decision about causation after either a short or long
response deadline (Figure 5). The dual-process hypothesis
predicts that participants will be more likely to judge causal
illusions as causal under a short than long response
deadline.
In addition to completing a deadline procedure,
participants also completed a measure of reflective thinking
style, specifically the Cognitive Reflection Test (CRT7;
Toplak et al, 2014). If heuristic processes are responsible for
the impression that causal illusions are causal, than
participants higher in cognitive reflectiveness may be less
susceptible to causal illusions.

Methods
Participants. 51 adult participants were tested individually
in the lab.
Stimuli. Stimuli were the animations used in Experiment 2,
as well as 4 new animations for a total of 10 different
animations, each with a causal, non-causal, and causal
illusion variant. The new animations were added to ensure
results are not specific to items from Experiment 2.
Deadline procedure. The deadline procedure is outlined in
Figure 5. Participants were first prompted which events to
judge. Participants were then presented with an animation
with the same time-course as in Experiment 2, except that
the animation terminated 1s after the effect occurred.
Participants then used the left and right arrow keys arrow

Figure 6: Participants high in cognitive reflectiveness
were less likely to endorse causal illusions as causal.

Results
Just as predicted by the dual-process hypothesis, ratings
of causation were higher for causal illusions when the
deadline was short (M = 25.0%) than long (M = 18.2%), t(9)
= 3.76, p < 0.01. In contrast, ratings of causation did not
differ between the two deadlines for the animations showing
clear cases of causation, t(9) = 1.33, p = 0.215, or noncausation, t(9) = 0.27, p = 0.793.
An analysis of participants’ individual differences
provided further support for the dual-process hypothesis. In
these analyses, we correlated participants’ CRT7 scores
with the percent of times participants judged causal illusions
as causal. As shown in Figure 6, cognitive reflectiveness
correlated negatively with ratings of causation, r(50) = 0.579, p < 0.001. The effect was specific to causal illusions:
cognitive reflectiveness was unrelated to judgments of
causation in response to the causal, r(50) = 0.03, p = 0.036,
and non-causal stimuli, r(50) = -0.247, p = 0.081. This
pattern of results suggests that cognitive reflectiveness is a
strong predictor of resistance to causal illusions.

General Discussion
In a series of three experiments, the predictions of the
dual-process hypothesis were supported. In Experiment 1,
we documented the phenomenon of causal illusions outside
the lab. We showed that participants had a strong initial

1995

impression of causation, but a weaker ultimate impression
of causation, supporting the claim that two cognitive
processes are involved in causal reasoning. In Experiment 2,
we replicated this dual pattern of response using a novel
online measure of decision-making. Additionally, we
showed an order effect, where participants were most
susceptible to causal illusions for the very first illusion
viewed. Finally, in Experiment 3, we demonstrated the same
dual pattern of response using a deadline procedure.
Additionally, we showed individual differences in
susceptibility to causal illusions, where individuals high in
reflective thinking were less susceptible to causal illusions.
An alternative interpretation of our results is that the
intuitive process really processes dependency, not
perceptual cues (Cheng, 1993). On this account, participants
may judge a contingency between sub-events in a causal
illusion: that the effect is more likely to occur after rather
than before the causer moves. However, this interpretation
does not easily account for our finding that the impression
of causation declines over time for causal illusions
(Experiments 1 and 2). With repeated presentations of a
causal illusion, contingency should remain constant or
increase; however, participants’ judgments of causation
decreased with repeated presentations.
The results have implications for theories of causal
identification. As noted by Sloman and Lagnado (2015) and
Copley and Wolff (2014), theories of how people identify
causes fall into two categories: 1) Dependency theories
which characterize causal relations with respect to
statistical, logical, or counterfactual dependency relations,
and 2) Process theories which characterize causal relations
with respect to the notions transmission and force. The
results reported in this paper might be viewed as
problematic for all of these theories, because these theories
define causation with respect to only one process. On the
other hand, the results from this paper might be viewed as
an opportunity. It may be that the different processes
implies in this paper point to the need for multiple theories
of causation. As suggested by Sloman (2015) dependency
theories might be well suited for explain intuitive
processing, whereas as suggested by Wolff and Shepard
(2013), process theories might be well suited for reflective
processes used in the identification of a mechanism that
allows for the transmission of energy or force. An
examination of the time-course of the processing of
dependency relations and of forces may provide some
resolution to the feasibility of a pluralistic theory of
causation.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by NSF grant #134088 to the
second author. The authors also with to thank Yiwei Gao for
programming assistance and Jason Shepard for helpful
comments on the project.

References
Ahn, W., Kalish, C.., Medin, D., & Gelman, S. (1995). The
role of covariation versus mechanism information in
causal attribution. Cognition, 54, 299–352.
Cheng, P. (1993) Separating causal laws from causal facts:
pressing the limits of statistical relevance. In D. Medin
(Ed.), The psychology of learning and motivation (pp.
215-264). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Copley, B. & Wolff, P. (2014). Theories of causation can
and should inform linguistic theory. In. B. Copley, F.
Martin, & N. Duffield (Eds.), Causation in grammatical
structures (pp. 11-56). Oxford: Oxford UP.
Evans, J. (2008). Dual-processing accounts of reasoning,
judgment, and social cognition. Annual Review of
Psychology, 59, 255-278.
Goldvarg, E. & Johnson-Laird, P. (2001). Naïve causality: a
mental model theory of causal meaning and reasoning.
Cognitive Science, 25(4), 565-610.
Hubbard, T. (2013). Phenomenal causality I: varieties and
variables. Axiomathes, 23, 1-42.
Kahneman, D. (2003). A perspective on judgment and
choice. American Psychologist, 58, 697 – 720.
Lien, Y., & Cheng, P. (2000). Distinguishing genuine from
spurious causes: a coherence hypothesis. Cognitive
Psychology, 40, 87 – 137.
Mayrhofer, R. & Waldmann, M. (2015). Sufficiency and
necessity assumptions in causal structure induction.
Cognitive Science. Advance online publication.
Michotte, A. (1963). New York: Basic Books.
Rips, L. J. (2011). Causation from perception. Perspectives
on Psychological Science, 6, 77–97.
Schlottmann, A. & Shanks, D. (1992). Evidence for a
distinction between judged and perceived causality.
Quarterly JEP, 44A, 321-342.
Scholl, B. & Tremoulet, T. (2000). Perceptual Causality and
Animacy. TICS, 4(8), 299-309.
Sloman, S. (2015). Two systems of reasoning, an update. In
J. Sherman, B. Gawronski, & Y Trope (Eds.), Dual
process theories of the social mind. Guilford Press.
Sloman, S. & Lagnado, D. (2015). Causality in
thought. Annual Review of Psychology, 66, 223-247.
Sparrow, J. (1999). The blackout history project. Retrieved
from http://sloan.stanford.edu/SloanConference/papers/.
Stanovich, K. & West, R. (2000). Individual differences in
reasoning: implications for the rationality debate.
Behavioral Brain Sciences, 23, 645–726.
Toplak, M., West, R., & Stanovich, K. (2014). Assessing
miserly information processing: an expansion of the CRT.
Thinking & Reasoning, 20(2), 147-168.
White, P. (2006). The role of activity in visual impressions
of causality. Acta Psychologica, 123, 166–185.
Wolff, P., & Barbey, A. (2015). Causal reasoning with
forces. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 9.
Wolff, P., & Shepard, J. (2013). Causation, touch, and the
perception of force. Psychology of Learning and
Motivation, 58, 167 – 202.

1996

