When the Words Don’t Matter: Arbitrary labels improve categorical alignment
through the anchoring of categories
Ellise Suffill (E.M.Suffill@sms.ed.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, 7 George Square
Edinburgh, EH8 9JZ UK

Holly Branigan (Holly.Branigan@ed.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, 7 George Square
Edinburgh, EH8 9JZ UK

Martin Pickering (Martin.Pickering@ed.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, 7 George Square
Edinburgh, EH8 9JZ UK
Abstract
Novel labels provide feedback that may enhance categorical
alignment between interlocutors. However, the nature of this
feedback may not always be linguistic. Lupyan (2008) has
demonstrated the effects of labels on individual
categorization, and even non-word labels have seemingly
produced greater consistency in sorting strategies (Lupyan &
Casasanto, 2014). We extend this to alignment by
demonstrating that arbitrary labels can increase sorting
consistency to bring people’s categories closer together, even
without dialogue. Importantly, we argue that increased
alignment is not always due to labeling in a linguistic sense.
Results suggest that it is not the content of the non-word
labels driving the alignment effects, but the very presence of
the labels acting as ‘anchors’ for category formation. This
demonstrates a more general cognitive effect of arbitrary
labels on categorization.
Keywords: Alignment; Categorization; Labels; Lexical
Effects.

Introduction
Shared understanding of the world is crucial for successful
communication. Such alignment occurs through the
formation of shared representations and the development of
common ground (Clark & Brennan, 1991; Pickering &
Garrod, 2004). Because of this, alignment is often discussed
as a product of interaction. However, interaction may not
always be necessary: Alignment can be considered in terms
of the alignment of information states across individuals,
rather than the explicit transfer of this information between
them (Pickering & Garrod, 2006). For example, individuals
may align without interaction if they simultaneously listen
to the same speaker whilst in different rooms.
Alignment has often been studied with respect to
phonological, lexical and syntactic information (Branigan,
Pickering, & Cleland, 2000; Garrod & Anderson, 1987;
Pardo, 2006). However, it may also include the alignment of
conceptual information, and, thus, alignment can occur not
only based on speakers’ externally observable language, but
also on their internal representations, such as alignment
upon a given situation model (Zwaan & Radvansky, 1998).

We posit multidirectional feedback between several levels
of linguistic information available to interlocutors. This is in
contrast to feed forward accounts, such as that of Levelt,
Roelofs and Meyer (1999). Instead, feedback to the
conceptual level could potentially occur from any of the
other, more linguistic levels. Evidence already exists for the
effects of linguistic feedback on alignment across multiple
levels of processing: Both word repetition and semantic
relatedness can enhance syntactic alignment (Branigan,
Pickering, & Cleland, 2000; Cleland & Pickering, 2003).
Thus, it is possible that linguistic information such as labels
could affect conceptual alignment. We will focus on the
effects of word-based information on conceptual alignment,
and do so through the use of categories as proxies to
concepts.
According to Murphy (2002), categories act as the
external application of concepts to groups of items within
the world. Storing concepts as categories allows us to deal
with novel objects and having exemplars related to each
concept aids us in correctly categorizing novel items with
other similar and previously encountered items. Thus,
categories are essential to the way in which we respond to
items. In language, we reinforce these categories through
the application of labels that aid us in learning category
boundaries (Lupyan, 2006). Thus, it seems plausible that
this dependency on labels could affect categorization.

Effects of Existing Labels on Categorization
Lupyan (2008) has provided evidence for the
representational shift account, which posits that labeling
can cause a distortion of items most reliably associated with
a category label, in terms of the physical features associated
with that specific item. Memory was worse for items that
were labeled at a basic level (e.g., chair vs. table), compared
to those that were not labeled. Recall decreased more as a
result of this labeling. This suggests that applying a category
label to an item causes the item to become a mix of its
idiosyncratic features and those typically associated with the
category. Lupyan posits that this leads to greater

1715

consistency in categories through the selection of more
robust category attractors.
Lupyan and Spivey (2010) demonstrated that the effects
of labeling are not limited to single items and can work
across item groups. They found that hearing a redundant
label leads to faster detection of visual cues placed near the
‘labeled’ items. For example, hearing ‘chair’ resulted in
faster detection of a probe placed near one of multiple chairs
in a display, despite participants having already been told to
attend to chairs in prior instructions. Thus, labels can
facilitate the process of visual perception, by affecting how
individuals pay attention to groups of items, even when the
labels appear redundant.

Utilizing Novel Labels
Non-word labels can be used in experiments to examine
interactions between the characteristics of the labeled
stimuli, and the meanings that develop for the novel labels
applied to them. Using novel words has the advantage of the
labels not being associated to specific entries in the mental
lexicon. This gives greater potential for new label meanings
to develop on the basis of the stimuli properties. Lupyan and
Casasanto (2014) demonstrated that the application of
meaningless, non-word labels (e.g., ‘fooves’ vs. ‘crelches’)
to novel, ‘alien’ stimuli can facilitate the categorization
process. Categorization was based upon physical
characteristics, such as the smoothness versus pointedness
of the aliens’ heads. Results demonstrated that the novel
labels worked as successfully as conventional labels (e.g.,
‘smooth’ vs. ‘pointy’) at increasing sorting consistency.
However, the form of the non-word labels strongly reflected
sound symbolism for the physical characteristics of the
items and, thus, there were expectations regarding how the
labels would be applied to the stimuli (e.g., ‘foove’ referring
to ‘smooth’; cf. Köhler, 1929). Thus, it is questionable how
arbitrary these labels were when placed within such a
specific context. If one wanted to investigate the potential
effects of more arbitrary labels, then sound symbolism
should be reduced as much as possible, and stimuli could
equally be made more abstract (i.e. by not having
characteristics that can be readily linked to the non-word
labels). Then, one could examine whether novel labels
intrinsically improve consistency in categorization by
developing associated meanings, if indeed labeling effects
remained.

Extension to Alignment
In order to examine the nature of novel labeling effects, we
developed a task that allowed us to investigate categorical
alignment by utilizing non-word labels with more simplistic,
abstract stimuli. For half of the experiment, participants
sorted stimuli into groups with access to non-word labels,
whilst in the other half of the experiment they did not have
access to the non-word labels. Half of the participants were
exposed to their partner’s categorizations throughout, and
half were not exposed. Participants were not allowed to

explicitly communicate with each other in any part of the
categorization task (i.e. no dialogue or gesturing).
We aimed to test whether any labeling effect remained
when the non-word labels had as little influence of prior
word-meaning associations as possible and when they could
not be consistently linked to the stimuli via sound
symbolism. Specifically, we asked whether the effect was
due to the labels acquiring meaning, or whether it was due
to a less linguistic process by which labeling increased
consistency in participants’ sorting strategies without
acquiring meaning.
We also examined whether the effects of labeling were
affected by exposure to one another’s sorting strategies. The
Exposed condition tested for the effect of labels on the
alignment of categories through participants seeing their
partner’s categories at intervals throughout the task. The
Non-exposed condition focused on whether alignment
would be higher when categorization occurred alongside
access to labels, regardless of the fact that participants did
not have exposure to each other’s categories (i.e., if there
would be greater consistency between individuals when
they had access to labels, compared to when they did not
have labels). If the non-word labels increased sorting
consistency by developing an associated meaning, then it is
possible that this meaning could be communicated across
the individuals within a pair, given the shared nature of
words and associated meanings (Laskowski, 2010). This
could lead to differences in alignment for the Exposed
versus Non-exposed conditions, as information transfer as
an effect on alignment could only occur in the Exposed
setting.
The items to be categorized were randomly generated,
triangular shapes (Laskowski, 2010). The non-word labels
were provided in order to help participants divide up the
stimuli into more discrete categories. The dependent
variable of the study was how aligned participants were in
their assignment of items to categories i.e., the extent to
which their categorizations overlapped.	  	  

	  

Method
Participants
64 British participants (45 female) formed 32 experimental
pairs. Ages ranged from 18 to 27 years, with an average of
19.86 years. All participants identified themselves as native,
monolingual speakers of English. Written consent was
obtained prior to testing. The University of Edinburgh’s
Ethics Committee approved this study.
Stimuli
Perceptually morphed, triangular shapes (from Laskowski,
2010) were used as experimental items (see Figure 1).
Shapes were morphed across the dimensions of size, shape,
angles and pointedness. Items were printed on 3x3 inch
cards. There were two sets of triangles (Set A and B), each
comprising 26 items.
The non-word labels were “TEB” (/tɛb/) and “DUP”
(/dʌp/). These were presented as printed labels alongside the

1716

stimuli sets in the With-labels condition, and were absent in
the No-labels condition. The labels were constructed to be
similar in linguistic qualities, so as to reduce the possible
effects of sound symbolism. That is, both /t/ and /d/ are
alveolar plosives, /ɛ/ and /ʌ/ are open-mid, unrounded
vowels (although they vary slightly in position), and /b/ and
/p/ are both bilabial plosives.

2.

3.
4.
5.

6.
Figure 1: Items 1-6 from Set A as examples of stimuli.

7.

Design
There were two independent factors: Exposure (betweenparticipants; Exposed vs. Non-exposed) and Labels (withinparticipants; With-labels vs. No-labels). In the Exposed
conditions participants viewed their partner’s categories at
intervals throughout the study. In the Non-exposed
conditions, participants never saw the other person’s
categories. For Labels, participants who had access to nonword labels (With-labels) in one block (e.g., trials 1–5)
would not have labels (No-labels) in the second block (e.g.,
trials 6–10), and vice versa. We counterbalanced in which
block participants had access to labels and which set (A or
B) they sorted first. A barrier was used to obscure the
participants from each other. In the Exposed conditions, this
barrier remained in place for the sorting phases, but was
removed during the intervals so that participants could see
each other as well as their item groups. In the Non-exposed
condition, the barrier obscured the view of the other
participant and their item groups for the entirety of the
experiment.
Participants were instructed to categorize the stimuli into
two groups using a minimum group size of 9 and a
maximum group size of 17, but could use any number
between this (e.g. 12 and 12, or 16 and 10, etc.). This is
because limiting group sizes to a specific number could
have led to more unnatural category formation, by forcing
participants to place items under categories that they would
not otherwise have chosen to.

Procedure
The experimental set up and procedure was as follows, with
each experiment comprising 10 rounds (see Figure 2):
1.

Participants were given the instructions; “Sort the
triangles into two groups in a way that would make
sense to you, as well as to another person”.

8.
9.

Upon receiving the labels participants were told;
“You have these two labels to place upon your
groups. Place one label on one group each. You
choose how to use them. You can move them
across groups between rounds if you wish”
Participants faced each other across a table with the
barrier in place.
Participants sorted one set of A or B into two
groups, with a time limit of 2 ½ minutes. All
triangles had to be assigned to a group.
There was a 30-second interval between sets. In the
Exposed conditions, participants saw their
partner’s groups (plus labels, if they were on the
Labels block of the experiment); in the Nonexposed condition participants did not see their
partner’s sorting strategies.
The barrier was replaced (for Exposed conditions)
and participants sorted the next 4 sets.
After trial 5 (end of block one), participants took a
short break from the task in which they filled in
demographic information.
In the second block, whichever set was not used in
block one was sorted over trials 6–10.
Participants completed a post-test questionnaire
regarding their sorting strategies and whether they
applied meaning to the labels.

Figure 2: Two participants faced each other across a
table with the central barrier in place.

Results
Calculating Alignment Scores
Scoring reflected how similarly the two participants in a
pair split items across groups. For each set, a participant
would finish with two groups of items. Each item was
identifiable to the coder by number. If both Participants A
and B placed items 1–8 in ‘group 1’ and items 18–26 in
‘group 2’, this would result in an alignment score of 17 for
the round. We then reversed the assignment of groups for
Participant A and determined the alignment score. We
selected the higher of these two scores (as assignment of
group number was arbitrary).

1717

Descriptive Statistics

Table 3: Variance and residual for random effects. Model
fit by REML.

The average alignment scores for each Condition were
numerically higher in With-labels blocks relative to Nolabels blocks (see Table 1).

Random Effects
Pair
Intercept
Labels(With)
Residual

Table 1: Mean alignment scores (SD) by Block for each
Condition of Exposure by Labels.
Condition
Ex+Labels1st
Ex+Labels2nd
Non-Ex+Labels1st
Non-Ex+Labels2nd

No. of Observations = 320.

Mean Alignment
Block1
Block2
20.15 (4.00)
19.05 (3.82)
18.6 (4.30)
19.85 (2.93)
18.63 (3.74)
17.4 (2.76)
18.48 (3.27)
18.6 (3.47)

Labels-specific Analysis

Linear Mixed Effects (LMER) Analysis
In order to test for the effects of Labels and Exposure on
alignment, data were analyzed in R 3.2.1 (R Core Team,
2015) with a linear mixed-modeling approach via the lme4
package, version 1.1-8 (Bates, Maechler, Bolker & Walker,
2013). This approach was chosen as it allowed us to account
for random variance due to differences between participant
pairs. Under this approach, the threshold for statistical
significance was set at |t| > 2. A backwards, stepwise
elimination approach was used to select factors for the final
model, using likelihood ratio tests to compare models.
Models included random slopes and intercepts for the
variable Labels, with Pair (participant pairs) also entered as
a random effect. The initial model included Set (A or B),
Labels (With-labels or No-labels), Exposure (Exposed or
Non-exposed) and Order (Labels 1st or Labels 2nd).
Removing Order as a fixed effect did not significantly
reduce model fit (X2(1)=0.61, p=.44). Removing Exposure
as a fixed effect also did not significantly reduce model fit
(X2(1)=2.07, p=.15). However, removing Labels as a fixed
effect did significantly reduce model fit (X2(1)=6.13, p=.01),
as did removing Set (X2(1)=7.51, p=.01). Including the
interaction between Set and Labels did not contribute
significantly to model fit (X2(1)=2.46, p=.12). The best-fit
model therefore included the main effects of Set and Labels
as fixed effects (see Table 2). With-labels produced
significantly higher alignment scores than No-labels
(β=0.93, SE=0.37, t=2.52). Thus, there was a significant
effect of Labels, regardless of Exposure. Set A also
produced significantly higher alignment scores than Set B
(β=1.04, SE=0.37, t=2.83).
Table 2: Beta, standard errors and t-values for fixed effects
on alignment score. Model fit by REML.
Fixed Effects
Intercept
Set(A)
Labels(With)

β
-0.98
1.04
0.93

S.E.
0.50
0.37
0.37

t
-1.96
2.83
2.52

5.383
1.252
7.67

A labels-specific analysis was conducted using LMER to
assess whether having labels matched across groups led to
significantly higher alignment scores. Matched status was
dependent on whether the non-word labels matched across
the groups used to calculate a pair’s alignment scores: that
is, whether Participant A placed specific items under TEB
and others under DUP in the same manner as Participant B.
For example, if Participant A’s group 1 was compared to
Participant B’s group 1 in order to calculate their alignment
score, matched status would depend on whether both
participants placed the same label upon that group. There
were 160 data points overall for the With-labels condition,
with 4 similarly sized groups in terms of data points across
Match and Exposure conditions (see Table 4).
Table 4: No. of observations and mean alignment (SD) for
Matched vs. Unmatched labels for Exposed and Nonexposed Conditions
Exposure
Exposed
Non-exposed

Match
Matched
Unmatched
Matched
Unmatched

N
42
36
38
44

Mean (SD)
20.76 (2.99)
19.26 (3.87)
18.81 (3.83)
18.48 (3.51)

Models included random slopes and intercepts for Set,
Exposure and Match (Matched or Unmatched), with Pair
(participant pairs) entered as a random effect. The initial
model included Set, Exposure, Match and Order as fixed
effects. Removing Order did not significantly reduce model
fit (X2(1)=1.02, p=.31). Removing Match also did not
significantly reduce model fit (X2(1)= 0.48, p=.49).
Removing Exposure significantly reduced model fit (X2(1)=
4.23, p=.04), as did removing Set (X2(1)= 3.91, p=.04).
Including the interaction between Set and Exposure did not
significantly increase model fit (X2(1)=1.00, p=.32).
Therefore, the model of best fit included Set and Exposure
as a fixed effects (see Table 5). The Exposed condition
produced significantly higher scores than the Non-exposed
condition (β=2.07, SE=0.79, t=2.61). Set B produced
significantly lower scores than Set A (β=-1.74, SE=0.79, t=2.19).

1718

Table 5: Beta, standard errors and t-values for fixed effects
on alignment score. Model fit by REML.
Fixed Effects
Intercept
Set(B)
Exposure(Expo)

β
19.16
-1.74
2.07

S.E.
0.61
0.79
0.79

data only from trials in which participants did have access to
labels does suggest an effect of exposure. It appears that
whilst arbitrary labels can improve alignment without the
need for interaction, having exposure to a partner’s sorting
strategies can build upon this labeling effect.

t
31.28
-2.19
2.61

Exposure Effects in Alignment

Table 6: Variance and residual for random effects. Model fit
by REML.
Random Effects
Pair
Intercept
Set(B)
Exposure(Expo)
Match(Match)
Residual

0.74
4.33
9.48
2.54
7.81

No. of Observations = 160.

Qualitative Analysis
Data from post-test questionnaires were analyzed to check
for patterns in assigned label meanings. In 32 instances
(50% of participants), one or both of the labels were
reported to hold no significance to the individual. There was
a great deal of variation in the meanings that the remaining
participants assigned to the labels, as reflected by the 34
different terms that they used to refer to them. These ranged
across references to stimuli size, length, angle size,
roundness of corners and even number of items.
Sound symbolism effects associated with the slight
differences in vowel position for TEB and DUP appear
highly unlikely to explain the effects: There were only 3
instances in which both participants within a pair reported
assigning meanings to the label that could be considered
semantically similar. For example, one participant
associated DUP with ‘Fat’ and TEB with ‘Thin’, whereas
their partner associated DUP with ‘Heavy’ and TEB with
‘Light’. This high variability in meanings and low
occurrence of matches in label associations is consistent
with our finding that label content did not significantly
contribute to the increased alignment scores across
participants in a pair, at least on an explicit level.

Discussion
Pairs of participants were more likely to categorize abstract
stimuli in the same way when they had access to non-word
labels, than when they did not. This is consistent with
Lupyan and Casasanto’s (2014) proposals, in that it suggests
that arbitrary, non-word labels may gain significance in
meaning and, through this, focus the categorization process
to create more consistent sorting patterns. In the current
study, the labeling effect held regardless of exposure (i.e.,
whether participants saw each other’s sorting strategies, or
not), which suggests labels may increase consistency in
sorting across individuals, so that people’s categorizations
are more aligned without interaction. However, examining

Language transmission studies have demonstrated how
novel language systems for open-ended meaning spaces can
begin to evolve categorical structure with enough exposure
across generations of participants, as sorting patterns are
transmitted from one individual to the next, and as a
function of how much iteration occurs (Kirby, Cornish &
Smith, 2008; Carr, Cornish & Kirby, 2015). This categorical
structure appears to develop on the basis of cognitive biases
for physical features such as item shape and size.
As such, these processes could occur within the current
paradigm, but with information being repeatedly passed
between a pair of individuals, rather than being transmitted
down from one generation to the next. For internal
consistency in the non-exposed condition, iteration would
reinforce sorting strategies through repeated exposure to
items, in order to increase overall consistency within and
across individuals (and this would be facilitated by the
presence of non-word labels). As for alignment in the
exposed condition, a similar scenario could develop, but
with transmission occurring at the interval in which
participants transfer information regarding sorting strategies
via exposure.

Labeling vs. Anchoring
We found that, whereas alignment scores were higher in the
presence of non-word labels, alignment was not affected by
specifically which items the labels were applied to. This was
corroborated by the qualitative analysis of label meanings
reported by participants in the post-test questionnaire.
Although it is possible that implicit labeling effects could
have occurred, it does not seem that any consistent meaning
was tied to TEB or DUP in a way that would enhance
alignment.
Instead, the labels may have led to higher categorical
alignment through a form of ‘anchoring’, by providing a
point of reference for each category, but without explicitly
linking to that category through an associated meaning. In a
sense, anchoring can be thought of in terms of Kirsh’s
(1995) markers, as opposed to perfect reminders. That is,
the labels may act as markers that indicate to the individual
that there is an important distinction to be made between the
items (the two categories into which they are to be sorted),
without telling us anything specific about the nature of that
distinction. Existing labels (or novel labels that have gained
an associated meaning) act as perfect reminders, in that they
can communicate something important about the category
(and category items) that they are applied to. Thus, the
anchoring effect demonstrated here could not be readily
referred to as linguistic, but is instead something seemingly
more general, perhaps linking to other cognitive functions

1719

commonly considered as external to the linguistic domain.
Specific, cognitive functions that language is argued to
support include memory, attention and simplification of
tasks, as well as the development of representations (Clark,
1998). Given this, the effect could stem from having the
label there as a “word”, rather than it mattering specifically
what that word is.

Conclusion
The effect of labels on categorical alignment is seemingly
not always due to a linguistic process of associating
concepts to words as linguistic units. In the current study,
the labels did not appear to lead to higher categorical
consistency and alignment through linguistic labeling
effects, but through a more general cognitive process of
anchoring, or marking out the distinction between
categories. This finding has important implications for
studies investigating what may appear to be ‘labeling’
effects. The non-word labels led to higher alignment even in
the absence of exposure between pairs, demonstrating that
alignment does not rely exclusively on interaction and
sometimes can occur through increased consistency across
non-interacting individuals. However, it does appear that
exposure to a partner’s sorting strategies can build upon the
effects of labeling on alignment. Future studies should aim
to discover the generalizability of this anchoring effect, by
introducing new forms of potential markers to the
categorization process, as well as by investigating at what
point the markers could potentially gain communicative
meaning through interaction.

Acknowledgements
The research leading to these results has received funding
from the European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme
for research, technological development and demonstration
under grant agreement no. 613465. A very special thank you
to Eleanor Drake and Jia Loy for their support, patience and
wit throughout this project.

References
Bates, D., Maechler, M., Bolker, B., & Walker, S. (2013).
lme4: Linear mixed-effects models using Eigen and S4. R
package version, 1(4).
Branigan, H. P., Pickering, M. J., & Cleland, A. A. (2000).
Syntactic co-ordination in dialogue. Cognition, 75(2),
B13-B25.
Carr, J. W., Cornish, H., & Kirby, S. (2014, April). The
cumulative cultural evolution of category structure in an
open-ended meaning space. Paper presented at the 10th
International Conference on the Evolution of Language,
Vienna, Austria.
Clark, A. (1998). Magic words: how language augments
human computation. In P. Carruthers and J. Boucher, eds,
Language and thought: interdisciplinary themes (pp.162–
183). Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.

Clark, H. H., & Brennan, S. E. (1991). Grounding in
communication. Perspectives on Socially Shared
Cognition, 13, 127-149.
Cleland, A. A., & Pickering, M. J. (2003). The use of lexical
and syntactic information in language production:
evidence from the priming of noun-phrase structure.
Journal of Memory and Language, 49(2), 214-230.
Kirby, S., Cornish, H., & Smith, K. (2008). Cumulative
cultural evolution in the laboratory: an experimental
approach to the origins of structure in human language.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
105(31), 10681-10686.
Kirsh, D. (1995). The intelligent use of space. Artificial
Intelligence, 73(1), 31-68.
Köhler, W. (1929). Gestalt psychology. Oxford, England:
Liveright.
Laskowski, C. (2010). The role of language in conceptual
coordination. Unpublished PhD thesis, University of
Edinburgh.
Levelt, W. J., Roelofs, A., & Meyer, A. S. (1999). A theory
of lexical access in speech production. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 22(01), 1-38.
Lupyan, G. (2006). Labels facilitate learning of novel
categories. In A. Cangelosi, A.D.M. Smith, & K. Smith
(Eds.), The Sixth International Conference on the
Evolution of Language (pp. 190–197). Singapore: World
Scientific.
Lupyan, G. (2008). From chair to" chair": a representational
shift account of object labeling effects on memory.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 137(2),
348-396.
Lupyan, G., & Casasanto, D. (2014). Meaningless words
promote meaningful categorization. Language and
Cognition, 7(2), 167-193.
Lupyan, G., & Spivey, M. J. (2010). Redundant spoken
labels facilitate perception of multiple items. Attention,
Perception, & Psychophysics, 72(8), 2236-2253.
Murphy, G. L. (2002). The big book of concepts.
Cambridge, MA: MIT press.
Pardo, J. S. (2006). On phonetic convergence during
conversational interaction. The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 119(4), 2382-2393.
Pickering, M. J., & Garrod, S. (2004). Toward a mechanistic
psychology of dialogue. Behavioral and brain sciences,
27(02), 169-190.
Pickering, M. J., & Garrod, S. (2006). Alignment as the
basis for successful communication. Research on
Language and Computation, 4(2-3), 203-228.
R Core Team (2015). R: a language and environment for
statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical
Computing, Vienna, Austria. URL http://www.Rproject.org/.
Zwaan, R. A., & Radvansky, G. A. (1998). Situation models
in language comprehension and memory. Psychological
Bulletin, 123(2), 162.

1720

