UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Bayesian Antidote Against Strategy Sprawl

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6j18j0pm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Scheibehenne, Benjamin
Rieskamp, Jorg

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Bayesian Antidote Against Strategy Sprawl
Benjamin Scheibehenne (benjamin.scheibehenne@unibas.ch)
University of Basel, Missionsstrasse 62a
4055 Basel, Switzerland
&

Jörg Rieskamp (joerg.rieskamp@unibas.ch)
University of Basel, Missionsstrasse 62a
4055 Basel, Switzerland

Abstract
Many theories in cognitive science assume that people
possess a repertoire of strategies or a "toolbox" from which
they choose depending on the situation. This approach suffers
from the problem that the number of assumed strategies is
often not constrained and may be extended post-hoc to
improve the fit to the data. This makes it difficult to
rigorously test and compare strategy repertoire models. To
prevent this "strategy sprawl", a criterion is necessary to
decide how many strategies a toolbox should include. Here,
Bayesian statistics provide a powerful tool to evaluate
toolboxes of different sizes based on their marginal
likelihoods. The present work illustrates how such a Bayesian
approach can be implemented and demonstrates its
applicability by means of parameter recovery studies. Our
approach also makes the novel contribution of showing how
Bayesian statistics allow testing the strategy repertoire theory
against alternative decision theories.
Keywords: Strategy repertoire theories, Bayes factor, model
selection, simulation, Bugs.

but not necessarily to greater insight. For example, by
assuming a specific tool for each possible task, the toolbox
should provide a good description of observed behavior due
to its great flexibility. Along the same lines, Dougherty,
Thomas, and Franco-Watkins (2008) criticized that in a
situation in which no strategy out of a set is able to describe
a person’s choices, an unconstrained toolbox could be
enlarged by a new strategy to describe the data. On the other
hand, if the toolbox is restricted to only a few or to a single
strategy it would lose its ability to describe different
cognitive processes.
In the following, we outline a possible solution to the
question of how many tools a toolbox should contain based
on a Bayesian approach. Having a criterion for determining
how many strategies to include keeps strategy sprawl at bay
and is also a necessary pre-condition for rigorously
comparing different toolbox models with competing
cognitive theories that do not assume different strategies but
rely on the idea of an "all-purpose" process (Newell, 2005).

Example of a cognitive toolbox
The problem of strategy sprawl
A common assumption within many research areas in
cognitive science is that people possess a repertoire of
cognitive strategies to solve the problems they face. For
example, people use different strategies for making
consumer decisions (Payne, Bettman, and Johnson, 1993),
for organizational memory tasks (Coyle, Read, Gaultney, &
Bjorklund, 1998), for estimations of frequencies (Brown,
1995), for categorization problems (Patalano, Smith,
Jonides, & Koeppe, 2001), for the development of
mathematical skills (Siegler, 1991), or for inference
problems (Gigerenzer, Todd, and the ABC Research Group,
1999). The strategy repertoire approach provides a fruitful
way to explain intra- and inter-individual differences in
cognitive processes. This approach has also been described
by the metaphor of an adaptive toolbox according to which
individual decision makers select between different
cognitive strategies to solve specific tasks just as a
craftsman selects tools from a toolbox.
Despite its undisputed success in explaining a wide range
of human behavior, the idea of a toolbox raises the question
of how many different strategies the mental toolbox should
contain in the first place. A larger number of possible
strategies will always lead to a better description of the data

As an illustrative example of a cognitive toolbox, imagine a
situation in which a person tries to determine which of two
used cars is a better deal. To make this decision, a person
could use different pieces of information (i.e., cues) such as
mileage, number of previous owners, or accident history of
the cars. In such a situation, each single cue provides a hint
of which car might be better, but none of the cues provide
an indisputable prediction, because it could be that a car
with many previous owners still turns out to be superior
overall. In other words, the cues are probabilistically related
to the criterion, so that even an object with positive cue
values for all cues could sometimes be inferior compared to
an object with negative cue values. Probabilistic inferences
can be complicated because it is not always clear which
information is relevant and how and whether the different
pieces of information should be combined.
To make probabilistic inferences, such as choosing the
better of two cars, people may choose from a variety of
cognitive strategies, that is, from their adaptive toolbox
(Gigerenzer, Todd & the ABC Research Group, 1999). For
instance, when choosing between two options, people could
use a simple non-compensatory decision strategy called take
the best (TTB) that only focuses on the single most
important or valid cue that discriminates between the two

1910

options. If the most valid cue discriminates between the
alternatives, TTB chooses the object with the positive cue
value. Only in cases where the most valid cue does not
discriminate does TTB then consider the second most valid
cue, and so on. An alternative strategy in the toolbox could
be a weighted additive (WADD) rule. This model adds up
all available cue values weighted by their respective
validities and then selects the alternative with the largest
score. The WADD rule is compensatory because a highly
valid cue may be compensated for by a number of other
cues that point to the opposite choice.
This example illustrates that different decision strategies
can be applied to make a choice between two options that
are described by several attributes. Here, proponents of a
toolbox approach could argue that people use either TTB or
WADD depending on the decision situation and the
characteristics of the decision maker.

Preventing strategy sprawl
When examining how people solve an inference problem
researchers aim to identify the model that best describes the
cognitive processes, that is, the one that most likely
generated the observed data. Under the assumption that
people have a repertoire of strategies, the goal is to identify
the strategy that a person has selected. Possible strategies
are not known a priori. Therefore, a researcher may add
more and more strategies to the toolbox to increase chances
that one strategy provides a good fit to the data. From a
model comparison perspective, a given toolbox becomes
more flexible and complex when more strategies are added.
Accordingly, it is not surprising when it provides a better
description of the observed data. Therefore, the question of
how many strategies to include in the toolbox essentially
becomes a trade-off between the complexity of the toolbox
and its fit in describing observed data. Adding another
strategy is only justified if it increases the fit substantially.
Bayesian techniques offer a valuable theoretical framework
to make this trade-off and to identify a toolbox that fits the
data well. More precisely, the probability of a specific
dataset given a specific toolbox model (referred to as the
evidence or marginal likelihood of that model) can be used
as a criterion of how many tools to include.

Bayes’ theorem
In a Bayesian framework, the marginal likelihood p(D) is a
measure of how well a given model M describes the
observed data D across all possible parameter values of that
model (Kass & Raftery, 1995; Shiffrin, Lee, Kim, &
Wagenmakers, 2008):
p(D) = ∫ p(D|M) × p(M) | dM

(1)

where p(D|M) is the likelihood of the observed data given
the model and p(M) is the prior probability of the model.
The evidence provides a viable metric to compare different
models against each other. However, to eventually apply
this criterion the possible toolbox models and the strategies

within each toolbox need to be specified in a Bayesian
framework. In particular, this requires the specification of
prior distributions and likelihood functions.
In the following, we lay out the necessary specifications
in detail. To illustrate the basic principle behind this
approach, we start with the simple example of comparing
two toolboxes consisting of only one strategy each, before
proceeding to the more complex case of comparing
toolboxes of different sizes.

Model specification for a simple toolbox
As a first step, we compare two toolboxes that only consist
of one single strategy each. For illustrative purposes, we
assume that the first toolbox consists of TTB, described
above. In its basic form, TTB is a deterministic strategy that
assumes people make no errors. This is a rather unrealistic
assumption because if someone uses TTB but occasionally
makes an error, strictly speaking the resulting choice data
would contraindicate the application of the strategy.
Therefore we allow for the possibility of inconsistent
choices due to application errors or “unsystematic noise”.
We extended the deterministic model with a simple error
theory, so that a parameter αTTB indicates the probability that
a decision maker will chose the alternative that was not
predicted by TTB in a pairwise choice. In the following, we
refer to this probabilistic version of TTB as TTBα. Other
deterministic choice strategies such as WADD can be
extended by similar error terms, in an analogous manner.

Specifying the prior distribution
In the case of a toolbox that only consists of TTBα as a
single strategy, the only free model parameter is the
application error α'TTB. A reasonable prior on α'TTB may be
to assume an average application error of about 10%. Of
course, other values are also possible. In any case, the
application error will probably vary depending on the
situation and the type of experiment. Therefore, a moderate
degree of uncertainty concerning the prior distribution
seems justified. As α'TTB may fall within a range from 0 (no
implementation error) to 1 (100% implementation error), we
choose the prior to be beta distributed. For illustrative
purposes, we set the rate and shape parameters of this beta
distribution to 1 and 9, resulting in a mean of 0.1 and a
standard deviation of 0.09.
α'TTB ~ beta(1, 9)

(2)

Specifying the likelihood function
Next, a likelihood function needs to be defined that
indicates the probability of the observed data given the
model. The predictions of a deterministic choice model like
TTB are readily available as long as the attributes of options
in the experiment are known. In this case, the likelihood is
just a function of the implementation error α. If a single
choice between a pair of options is in line with the
deterministic predictions of the model for that pair, then
likelihood of that choice equals 1 − α, otherwise, the

1911

likelihood equals α. Hence, the likelihood of a series of N
choices in an experiment is the product of likelihood values
for all pairwise choices:
p(D|M) = П [dn × (1− α) + (1 − dn) × α]

(3)

where dn is 1 if the decision for the nth pair of options is in
line with the deterministic prediction of the model for that
pair and 0 otherwise.
For illustrative purposes, suppose a participant in an
experiment made z pairwise choices that were inconsistent
with TTB’s deterministic prediction and N − z choices that
were consistent with it. Following Equation 3, the likelihood
of this data can be expressed as a Bernoulli function:
p(D|TTBα) = α'TTB (z) × (1 − α'TTB)(N − z)

(4)

Deriving p(D) for a single strategy
Once the prior and the likelihood function of a model are
specified, the evidence for the observed data p(D) can be
estimated. In the present case of a single strategy with one
free parameter α, a closed-form solution exists:
p(D) = B(a + z, b + N – z) / B(a,b)

(5)

where B is the beta function, a and b are the rate and shape
parameter of the beta distribution that defines the prior, and
z quantifies how many out of a total of N choices are in line
with the prediction of the deterministic model.

Specification for WADD
The outlined approach for TTBα can be conveyed to other
deterministic strategies like WADD. Like TTB, WADD can
be extended with a similar beta-distributed error term
leading to WADDα. The prior distribution and likelihood
function for WADDα can be specified analogously to TTBα
with the only difference being different deterministic
predictions of WADD.

Comparison between two simple toolboxes
Now that two toolboxes are specified, they can be compared
with regard to a given set of data. This case is analogous to
a model selection task in which an individual decision
maker can be classified as a TTBα or WADDα user.
To lay out the approach in a concrete way, we assume a
hypothetical decision experiment in which a single
participant made 40 choices among pairs of options
described on a number of attributes, as in the used-car
example outlined in the introduction. We further assume
that the options were chosen to differentiate TTB from
WADD, such that both strategies would make opposing
predictions. In this example, a decision maker chooses
option A 30 times and B 10 times. If we set the prior as
beta(1,9) for both models, we can calculate the respective
marginal likelihoods according to Equation 2. For TTBα,
this yields p(D) = 2.8 × 10-11 for TTBα as compared to

p(D) = 2.5 × 10-14 for WADDα. The ratio of the marginal
likelihoods, also known as the Bayes factor (Kass &
Raftery, 1995), is 1118:1 in favor of TTBα. Therefore,
Bayes’ rule clearly indicates that the decision maker should
be classified as a TTBα user.
Next, we outline how this procedure can be extended to
toolbox comparisons that include more than one decision
strategy.

Specifying toolboxes with more than one
strategy
The concept of a cognitive toolbox relies on the idea that
decision makers have several decision strategies available to
them. To account for this assumption, we extend the
Bayesian approach to toolboxes that contain more than one
strategy. Again, precise model specifications are required so
that Bayesian techniques can be applied.

Model specification
For illustrative purposes, we assume toolbox TBTTB,WADD
contains two strategies, TTBα and WADDα. We further
assume that an individual decision maker who uses this
toolbox will choose according to TTBα with probability β
and according to WADDα with the complementary
probability (1 − β). Thus, TBTTB,WADD has three free
parameters: The implementation error for TTB in the
toolbox (αTTB), the implementation error for WADD in the
toolbox (αWADD), and the probability of selecting TTBα (β).
The likelihood function of this toolbox is simply a function
of the likelihood for each single strategy weighted by the
probability of selecting it:
p(D|TBTTB,WADD) = β×p(D|TTBα) + (1−β)×p(D|WADDα) (6)
Next, a prior distribution for each of the three parameters
needs to be specified. Without any prior knowledge about
the probability of selecting TTBα over WADDα all possible
values between 0 and 1 seem equally likely a priori.
Accordingly, we assume that the prior on β is uniformly
distributed:
β ~ uniform(min = 0, max = 1)

(7)

Likewise, in this example we do not make any a priori
assumptions about the probability of particular
implementation errors.Thus, we assume priors for αTTB and
αWADD are uniformly distributed. Based on these
specifications, the marginal likelihood of TBTTB,WADD can be
estimated by integrating out all three parameters in the
model analogous to Equation 1:
p(D) = ∫∫∫ p(D| αTTB, αWADD,, ß) × p(αTTB, αWADD,, ß)
| dαTTB, dαWADD,, dß

(8)

While this approach is conceptually similar to the case with
only one free parameter, it becomes more elaborate to

1912

estimate the integral of Equation 1 as the number of free
parameters increases.

MCMC methods to estimate the evidence
Fortunately, a closed-form mathematical solution, is not
mandatory to estimate marginal likelihood because all that
is needed is a representative sample from the integral of
Equation 1 that is large enough to draw reliable conclusions
on the shape of the distribution. Such a sample may be
obtained by means of Monte Carlo Markov Chain (MCMC)
methods for which statistical packages are readily available
(Gilks, Richardson, & Spiegelhalter, 1996). For the present
analysis, we utilized utilized the OpenBugs software
implemented in the BRugs package, version 0.51, that can
be integrated into the statistics software R.
Similar to the mathematical solution outlined above, the
implementation in BRugs requires the specification of prior
distributions and likelihood functions. Provided it is
properly implemented, the software returns the evidence as
well as a representative sample of the full posterior
distribution across all parameters.

Comparison between a small and a large
toolbox
To illustrate the principle of comparing toolboxes that differ
in the number of cognitive strategies they contain, we will
compare a simple toolbox TBTTB that only consists of TTBα
as a single strategy to a more complex toolbox TBTTB,WADD
that contains both TTBα and WADDα. Thus, TBTTB is nested
within TBTTB,WADD.

Transdimensional prior
Instead of calculating the evidence for both toolboxes
separately, we directly compared the two models by means
of a transdimensional prior θ. This prior acts like a model
indicator, controlling which of two models most likely
generated the observed data. Thus, θ immediately informs
us which of the two toolboxes best describes the choices of
an individual decision maker. The parameter θ is Bernoullidistributed with a prior that assigns equal probabilities to
both models (Han & Carlin, 2001; Shiffrin, et al., 2008).
Like any other estimated parameter in the model, θ is
updated during the course of MCMC simulation. The Bayes
factor (BF) is simply the odds ratio of this probability, that
is, BF = θ/(1 − θ). Figure 1 graphically depicts the model’s
implementation in OpenBugs. The graph follows the
notation used by Lee and Wagenmakers (2009) and Shiffrin
et al. (2008).

Figure 1: Graphical representation of the model
comparison. TTBi and WADDi depict the deterministic
predictions for each choice i out of N choices. The notation
c indicates the actual choice (A or B) and π depicts the
probability of choosing A over B as predicted by the
particular model.

Model recovery
To test this approach, we set up a model recovery simulation
based on 1,000 pairs of options described on 30 attributes to
ensure that the results would not be influenced by an
extreme constellation of binary attribute values that were
randomly drawn from a Bernoulli distribution with p = .5.
The importance weights for each attribute were set to
increase linearly from the least to the most important
attribute. Next, we simulated hypothetical decision makers
who repeatedly chose among the pairs of options according
to either TTBα or WADDα (i.e., ß was set to either 1 or 0).
The implementation error α for both decision strategies
varied from 0 to 0.5 in steps of 0.1 across decision makers.
For each value of α in the simulation, we estimated θ by
sampling from three separate MCMC chains in OpenBugs
that were run for 2,000 steps each with a thinning of 10.
For TBTTB,WADD the priors were set to uniform
distributions ranging from 0 to 0.5 for αTTB and αWADD and
from 0 to 1 for β. For TBTTB, the prior on α'TTB was set to a
uniform distribution ranging from 0 to 0.5.

Predictions
If a comparison based on Bayesian evidence is a feasible
way to solve the problem of strategy sprawl, the method
should assign more evidence to the model that generated the
data. Thus, if the data was generated by choices according
to TTBα, the evidence for a simple toolbox TBTTB should be
higher than that of a toolbox TBTTB,WADD even though the
latter one contains TTBα as a special case.

1913

Results

Parameter recovery

The samples from the three estimated chains in OpenBugs
provided representative samples as indicated by a visual
inspection of the trace plot, the autocorrelation and the
Gelman−Rubin statistic. The results clearly indicate that the
marginal likelihood for a smaller toolbox can indeed be
higher than that for a larger toolbox. Figure 2 plots the
actual implementation error αTTB for choices based on TTBα
(Figure 2a) and the actual implementation error αWADD for
choices based on WADDα (Figure 2b) against the estimated
θ. Here, θ indicates the probability of the more complex
TBTTB,WADD over TBTTB. As can be seen from Figure 2a, θ
increases as αTTB increases. This indicates that a decision
maker who uses TTBα with a small implementation error is
better described by TTBα as compared to TBTTB,WADD.
Likewise, a decision maker who chooses according to
WADDα is clearly better described by TBTTB,WADD even if
the implementation error αWADD is large. This relationship
seems plausible because the larger toolbox contains
WADDα whereas the smaller toolbox does not.
For an α of 0.5, which indicates random choice, Bayes’
rule tells us to favor TTBα, because in the case of very noisy
data a simpler model is favored over a more complex one.
Together, the results show that a small toolbox with only
one strategy should be preferred over a more complex one
provided that the small toolbox contains the appropriate tool
to describe the initial decision-making process.

The results so far show that Bayesian methods can be
fruitfully applied to solve the question of how many
strategies a toolbox should contain. However, we have
implicitly assumed that the estimation methods accurately
estimate the free parameters of the choice models within the
toolboxes. To test if this condition really holds, the actual
parameters used in the choice simulation can be compared
with their respective posterior estimates. Figure 3a shows
the marginal of the posterior distribution for αTTB in the
toolbox plotted against the actual parameters used in the
simulation. As can be inferred from Figure 3, the posterior
distributions of αTTB match the actual values of αTTB used in
the simulation quite well. The parameter recovery for the
αTTB parameter of the simple TTBα model appears similar.
Figure 3b shows the estimated β values plotted against
αTTB parameters used in the simulation. For low values of
αTTB, estimated β values are high. As β indicates the
probability of using TTBα over WADDα within the toolbox,
this relationship also seems plausible.
Figure 3 also shows the actual values for αWADD from the
choice simulation plotted against the posterior of αWADD
(Figure 3c) and β (Figure 3d) in the toolbox. Again, the
estimated values match up with the actual values, indicating
that the parameters were recovered across the whole
parameter space. For high values of αWADD the Bayesian
model slightly underestimates the implementation error.
Presumably this is the case because the prior distribution
constrains the parameter space between 0 and 0.5. If the
prior distribution is extended to range from 0 to 1, the
estimated parameters match more closely.

a

a

b

b
c

Figure 2: Plot of θ against the implementation error αTTB
(Figure 2a) and αWADD (Figure 2b) used in the simulation. θ
indicates the evidence in favor of TBTTB,WADD relative to
TBTTB.

d

Figure 3: Parameter recovery TBTTB,WADD for choices
according to TTBα (Figure 3, a & b) and WADDα (Figure 3,
c & d). Error bars indicate the 95% highest probability
density region of the posterior distribution.

1914

Discussion

Acknowledgments

Due to higher degrees of freedom, a cognitive toolbox that
includes many strategies will always provide a better fit to
the data, but it will not necessarily provide the highest
evidence or marginal likelihood. The results of our analyses
indicate that the marginal likelihood within a Bayesian
framework can be fruitfully used to determine the number of
tools to include in a toolbox. Thus, Bayesian statistics are
well suited to prevent strategy sprawl.
As outlined above, the marginal likelihood can only be
estimated with regard to a specific set of choice data and to
precisely defined cognitive strategies. Thus, the number of
tools to include may vary depending on cognitive strategies
included in the toolbox. Yet, within these boundaries, the
approach indicates that a small toolbox may be preferred
over a large toolbox if the small toolbox contains a tool that
describes the data well—even if the small toolbox is nested
within the larger one.
The reason why the marginal likelihood provides a
common comparison metric is because it implicitly accounts
for differences in model complexity. This happens because
the prior probability of each possible combination of
parameters decreases with an increase in parameters. This
carries over to the marginal likelihood that weights the
likelihood of the data by the probability of each combination
of possible parameter values. Thus, even though the
likelihood of the data can be expected to increase with more
free parameters, this increase is counteracted by a lower
prior probability for each possible combination of
parameters.
A comparison of the prior distributions of TBTTB and
TBTTB,WADD illustrates this mechanism. The prior probability
of TBTTB follows a beta-distribution around a single
parameter α. On the other hand, the prior probability of the
parameters in TBTTB,WADD embrace a total of three
parameters. As prior distributions are probability
distributions, they must integrate to 1. With more
parameters in the model, the probability of each specific
combination of parameter values should decrease because
parameter space is more spread out.

We would like to thank Eric-Jan Wagenmakers for helping
us implement the Bugs code.

Limitations and future research
Here we demonstrated that the Bayesian approach provides
a powerful statistical tool for comparing and evaluating
cognitive toolboxes that contain rather few strategies. In
principle, the same approach can also be used for more
complex scenarios. The only constraint of this methodology
lies in the potential difficulties of implementing efficient
MCMC sampling for vastly more complex models. As long
as these computational challenges are met, the approach is
not constrained to comparing toolboxes but can also be
extended to compare different toolboxes against alternative
cognitive models that do not conform to the notion of a
repertoire of strategies.

References
Brown, N. R. (1995). Estimation strategies and the
judgment of event frequency. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21, 1539–
1553.
Coyle, T. R., Read, L. E., Gaultney, J. F., & Bjorklund, D.
F. (1998). Giftedness and variability in strategic
processing on a multitrial memory task: Evidence for
stability in gifted cognition. Learning & Individual
Differences, 10, 273–290.
Dougherty, M. R., Thomas, R., Franco-Watkins, A. M.
(2008). Postscript: Vague Heuristics Revisited.
Psychological Review,115, 211-213.
Gigerenzer, G., Todd, P. M., & the ABC Research Group.
(1999). Simple Heuristics That Make Us Smart. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Gilks, W. R., Richardson, S. and Spiegelhalter, D. J. (1996)
Markov Chain Monte Carlo in Practice. Chapman and
Hall, London.
Han, C. & Carlin, P. (2001). Markov Chain Monte Carlo
methods for computing Bayes factors: a comparative
review. Journal of the American Statistical Association,
96, 1122-1132.
Kass, R. E. & Raftery, A. E. (1995). Bayes factors. Journal
of the American Statistical Association, 90, 773-795.
Lee, M. D. & Wagenmakers, E.J. (2009). A Course in
Bayesian Graphical Modeling for Cognitive Science.
Unpublished lecture notes. http://users.fmg.uva.nl/
ewagenmakers/BayesCourse/BayesBook.pdf.
Newell, B. R. (2005). Re-visions of rationality. TRENDS in
Cognitive Sciences, 9, 11-15.
Payne, J. W., Bettman, J. R., & Johnson E. J. (1993). The
Adaptive Decision Maker. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press
Patalano, A. L., Smith, E. E., Jonides, J., & Koeppe, R. A.
(2001). PET evidence for multiple strategies of
categorization. Cognitive, Affective & Behavioral
Neuroscience, 1, 360–370.
Shiffrin, R. M., Lee, M. D., Kim, W., & Wagenmakers, E.J. (2008). A survey of model evaluation approaches with a
tutorial on hierarchical Bayesian methods. Cognitive
Science, 32, 1248-1284.
Siegler, R. S. (1991). Strategy choice and strategy
discovery. Learning and Instruction, Volume 1, Issue 1,
1991, 89-102.

1915

