UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A computational model of cognitive interference without neural inhibitory mechanisms

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6hf0951g

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Thill, Serge
Lowe, Robert

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A computational model of cognitive interference without neural inhibitory
mechanisms
Serge Thill (serge.thill@his.se)
Informatics Research Centre, University of Skövde
PO BOX 401, Skövde, Sweden

Robert Lowe (robert.lowe@his.se)
Informatics Research Centre, University of Skövde
PO BOX 401, Skövde, Sweden
Abstract

dence has uncovered that areas of motor and premotor cortex that become active during physical movement overlap
with areas activated during the reading of the specific affected
movement, e.g. hand, foot (Hauk et al., 2004). Buccino et al.
(2005) for instance found an interference effect when human
subjects, required to produce hand or foot responses to particular verb forms, produced physical movements apt to the action described in the particular sentence. Latency of response
increasedin this case as compared to when a movement was
required that was inapt to the particular action described (see
Chersi et al., 2010, for a more detailed discussion).

Interference between one cognitive behavior or sensory stimulus and subsequent behaviors is a commonly observed effect
in the study of human cognition and Psychology. Traditional
connectionist approaches explain this phenomenon by mutually inhibiting neural populations underlying those behaviors.
Here, we present an alternative model, relying on a more detailed use of synaptic dynamics, in which populations of purely
excitatory neurons can nonetheless interfere with each other,
causing inhibition of activation for a varying amount of time.
The fundamental, biologically motivated, mechanism in the
model relies on current “spilling over” from an active neural population into another one, thereby depleting the latter
population’s synaptic resources. The principles underlying the
model may find applications even in the design of problemsolving artificial neural networks.
Keywords: Neural modeling; Synaptic dynamics; Cognitive
Interference.

Introduction
The effects on cognitive performance of interference in the
process of associating temporally contiguous behaviors or
events is a well studied phenomenon in the research disciplines of psychology and animal learning. Simply, it consists
of the effects on working memory or memory recall of the
presence of stimuli (or motor activations) that are non-critical
to the learning of particular response/event associations. In
the case of animal learning, it is best understood as entailing distractorstimuli introduced prior to (proactive) or after
(retroactive) a task stimulus designed to be reliably predictive of another (e.g. rewarding) stimulus. In human learning,
interference can manifest in learning deficits subsequent to
pairing either context relevant (Oliveri et al., 2004) or incongruent (Buccino et al., 2005) motor actions and verbal descriptions. In every day human activities, the interference effect has implications for recall of important events, e.g. eye
witness testimony (see Bouton, 2007).
Laboratory controlled studies of interference often utilize
the delayed matching-to-sample (DMTS) paradigm whereby
the subject is required to produce the desired behavioral response over a pre-determined delay period (or inter-stimulusinterval). In such cases, interference is a function of the
strength of a ‘distractor’ stimulus and may induce forgetting (cf. Roberts & Grant, 1978), impaired learning (Revusky,
1971) or memory retrieval deficits (Gordon et al., 1981).
Some forms of associative learning may be more or less
prone to the interference effect. Recent neuro-scientific evi-

Models exist that attempt to capture empirically demonstrated features of the interference phenomenon specified at
the level of both connectionist and more neurobiologically
motivated levels of abstraction. A seminal model of McGeoch (1932) proffered a connectionist account of interference whereby responses learned during a given time window would compete for retrieval by way of mutual inhibition. Essentially, this offered a classical account of ‘distractor’ stimuli inhibiting the influence of task-specific stimuli.
The learned associative strengths of the responses determined
the ‘winner’ which was, however, premised on the biological implausability of there being independence, as opposed
to overlap, between the available responses.
Mensink & Raaijmakers (1988) provided a stochastic
search model of retrieval that was able to describe behavioral data accounting for many of the effects of interference,
e.g. proactive inhibition, retroactive inhibition, spontaneous
recovery - where previously learned associations become behaviorally extinguished but, presumably still reside in memory.
More recently, neural models have been put forward to account for the ability of organisms to retain spatial information
about stimuli over delay periods in the face of distracting (interfering) stimuli. Spencer et al. (2009) have described how
the tuning of parameters of an interaction kernel on a dynamic
neural field representing spatial working memory permits the
development of activation peaks. These peaks are sustained
through the use of tuned local excitation and global inhibition parameters on the kernel that afford more or less robustness to noise and distractor stimuli presented to the spatial
field. Self-sustained activity can be achieved through bistable
unit dynamics (cf. Amari, 1977) such that input or noise in-

1607

duced supra-threshold individual unit activity may be maintained even following the withdrawal of the input. Neural
field and bistable dynamics through the effective coupling of
spatially mapped locally excited activation peaks in different
fields provide mechanisms for coping with interference effects over delays between events of motor sequences to be
associated.
The assumption in the above-mentioned models and theory is that interference (or distracting stimuli) induce inhibitory effects on the activity of applicable functional circuits or psycho-behavioral states whereas chaining of activations within populations of units entails excitatory activity.
In dynamic field theory, for example, distracting stimuli induce elevated levels of global inhibitory activity serving to
suppress existing continuous attractor states (i.e. activation
peaks) potentially below threshold levels thus serving as a
medium for forgetting.
Connectionist and population coding models seeking to enhance comprehension of the interference effect typically do
not concern themselves with the biophysical details of the
neuron units implied in the modeling approach, relying simply on ‘point-to-point’ synaptic transmission. However, considering that associations of activation may be somatotopically realized in the brain, i.e. via neighboring or overlapping populations of neurons (e.g. Chersi et al., 2010), and that
current in a given population typically overlaps with or may
otherwise ‘spill over’ into another population, it may be instructive to produce more detailed neural models taking into
account these effects in order to better understand neural substrates of behavior.
A precedent for modelling the effects of a non-synaptic
neuromodulatory process only recently thought to play a significant cognitive role exists. Nitric oxide (NO) gas is an
inter-cellular signalling mechanism found in various structures of the brain. NO emissions affect neighbouring cells
according to a slow diffusive dynamic different to standard
point-to-point synaptic transmission. NO diffusion has been
modelled (Philippides et al., 1998) and an analogue has been
applied in the domain of cognitive robotics (Husbands et al.,
1998). Recent evidence also suggests a functional role in
homeostatic regulation of essential metabolic variables (e.g.
Canabal et al. 2007).
The particular inter-cellular signalling mechanism we are
concerned with here involves current that affects neighbouring regions of cells through non-standard synaptic transmission. A complete discussion of the different mechanisms
that can cause current from one neural population to leak,
or “spill over” into another population is beyond the scope of
this paper. However, an interesting example of such a current spillover can for instance be observed when ionic neurotransmission at the synaptic cleft is not fully absorbed by
the post-synaptic receptors of the receiving cell. Ions spill
over the synaptic cleft and can thereby affect neighboring
neurons, possibly of other populations leading to slow-rising
increases in excitatory post-synaptic currents in the affected

1

2

Figure 1: Schematic of the neural model. Two connected
populations represent the neural substrate of a behavior. The
behavior is triggered if the second population fires after triggering current arrives at the first one (large arrow). Weak
spillover current, by itself insufficient to trigger the behavior,
can also arrive at the first population (small arrow)
cells. Spillover has recently been recognized as a modulatory
effect that may play a significant role in brain functioning,
e.g. in the communication between the brain stem and cerebellum (Nishiyama & Linden, 2007), illustrating that neural
communications do not necessarily rely solely on canonical
synaptic transmission.
Here, we propose a neural model of the interference effect based primarily on synaptic dynamics. We model a sequence of two neural connected populations and show that,
if spillover current from neural circuits external to the model
reach the first population, activation of the second population may be prevented. Since we are mainly interested in
the possible effects of the spillover current, we do not model
or make assumptions on the precise underlying mechanisms.
Nonetheless, we show that interference effects can be observed even though all currents are excitatory. Our model thus
departs from the classically conceived models focusing on
inhibitory inter-population inducement of interference. Our
aim is to demonstrate that neural or neural network models of
interference may be insufficient when focused solely on interpopulation ‘point-to-point’ synaptic transmission effects. Accounting for biophysical dynamics when designing computational models or artificial neural networks may provide valuable insights to the fields of animal learning and psychology.

Methods
Neural and synaptic dynamics
We model the neural and synaptic dynamics following a standard model. The synaptic dynamics in particular take into account the fact that synaptic transmitters (or simply resources)
are finite and both short term facilitation and depression can
result from their dynamics (See Tsodyks et al., 1998, for a
detailed discussion). Briefly, depression is caused by recognizing that synaptic resources may be “active” (in the synaptic
cleft or at the post-synaptic receptors), “inactive” (returning
to the pre-synaptic terminals and thus unavailable) or “recovered” (at the pre-synaptic terminals and available for release
into the synaptic cleft on arrival of pre-synaptic current) and
making the post-synaptic current dependent on the proportion

1608

of active resources. The corresponding mean field equations
are adapted from Tsodyks et al. (1998) with minor modifications to make the bounded nature of the resources explicit:

d hρi 1 − hρi
1
hρi E (t)
=
− min hρi , USE
dt
τrec

hαi
d hαi
1
hρi E (t)
=−
+ min hρi , USE
dt
τin

A

(1)

B

(2)

where ρ and α denote recovered and active resources respectively. Only recovered resources can generate post-synaptic
current (by becoming active) and active resources affect the
amplitude of post-synaptic current (Eqn. 5).The firing rate
1 is a time-varying and
E(t) is discussed further below. USE
firing-rate dependent parameter which models short term
synaptic facilitation believed to be caused by residual calcium in the synaptic cleft. It is governed by the following
equations:
−


d USE
U−
−
−
= SE + min 1 − USE
,USE 1 − USE
E (t)
dt
τ f acil
(3)
−
1
= USE
(1 −USE ) +USE
(4)
USE

Population dynamics
To model the effect one population of excitatory neurons may
have on another, we also follow the model by Tsodyks et al.
(1998). The mean firing rate of a given population r is thus
dependent on the incoming current from other populations r′
and external current Ir arriving directly at population r:
!
dEr
= −Er + g ∑ Jrr′ αr′ + Ir
(5)
τe
dt
r′

C

0

500

1000

1500

2000

2500

t (ms)

Figure 2: The effects of weak, moderate and strong
spillover current. Solid (broken) line represents firing rate
in first (second) population. Spillover current begins at t=0,
behavior triggering at t=1600ms. (A) Spill-over current is insufficient to prevent activation of second population during
behavior triggering. (B) Spill-over current causes significant
but sub-threshold activation in the first population and prevents triggering of the second population later on. (C) Spillover current is sufficient to prematurely trigger the behavior.

Results

where Jrr′ denotes the absolute strength of the connections
from r′ to r multiplied by the average number of such connections and αr′ is given by Eqn. 2. It can be noted here that
the original model is more complex since it also caters for inhibitory populations, but those aspects are not relevant to the
present work. g, finally, is a transfer function, for which we
use a standard sigmoid with a threshold:


2
g (x) = max 0,
−
1
(6)
1 + e(4−x)/3
Two or more populations governed by the above dynamics can then be seen to form the neural substrate of an observable behavior. In our model, the parameter choices are:
τrec = 1000ms, τin = 100ms, τ f acil = 530ms, USE = 10−6 and
J = 4. These parameters have been chosen to produce bellshaped activation curves in the neural populations (rather than
undesired firing patterns). They mostly (except where discussed below) affect the firing rates of the neural populations
but the precise choices are not critical for illustrating the effect described in the present work.

We model two connected populations of neurons (Fig. 1)
which are meant to represent the neural substrate (or part
thereof) of an observable cognitive behavior. Such an arrangement is for instance thought to underlie action execution in the motor cortex (Chersi et al., 2006). The behavior
is “triggered” if external current arriving at the first population is of sufficient amplitude to cause activation in the second population. In other words, a behavior is successfully
triggered if the second population fires after the first one was
stimulated (Fig. 2A, after 1500ms). We call triggering current any current that, in the absence of spillover current effects, is sufficient to trigger the behavior.
Conversely, we model spillover current as a type of external current arriving at the first population but of insufficient
amplitude to cause the activation of the second population
(Figs. 2A and B, the first 1000ms). For the present illustrative purposes, the spillover current is modeled as lasting
100ms and increasing linearly by a small amount Ispill during that time. After 100ms, the current dies away instantaneously. Ispill has a range of possible values, with the exact
choice affecting overall behavior, which is explored below. It
should be noted that the observation of the reported interference effect does not critically depend on this particular choice
for modeling the spillover current. Of importance is merely
the fact that supra-threshold activation is generated in the first
population in some way.
To illustrate the effect spillover current can have (Fig. 2),

1609

we first determine a sufficient triggering current for the behavior in a control case with no spillover current. We then
measure the post-triggering firing rate of the second population in situations where the triggering current was preceded
by a spillover current δt ms earlier. Any change in firing rate
compared to the control case is of interest.

Interference without inhibition

A

B

I

spill

(normalised)

1

0

0

1000

δt (ms)

2000

3000 0

1000

δt (ms)

2000

3000

Figure 3: Interference effect. Y-axes indicate spill-over current strength Ispill , normalised so that values of interest fall
between 0 and 1. Rectangle indicates this region of interest
(bounds of Ispill ). X-axes indicate values for δt. the waiting
time between end of spillover and start of behavior-triggering
current. Figures are grayscale ranging from black (0) to white
(maximal values of the plotted parameters). (A) Firing rate of
the second population determined by chosen values of Ispill
and δt. Black region indicates no firing (and therefore interference). Other regions show firing rates all at similar, close
to maximal levels. The interference effect thus either causes a
strong suppression of firing rate or no significant effect at all.
Further, the δt values for which the interference effect is observed depend on the value of Ispill (see text). (B) Time delay
between peak of activation in first population and corresponding peak in second population. If the second peak was inhibited, this information does not exist (solid gray area). Region
with Ispill > 1 shows premature activation (little to no time delay, dark colors) of second population due to excessively high
values of Ispill (see Fig. 2C). Region with Ispill < 0 shows normal separation between peaks (see Fig. 2A). Region within
rectangle (0 ≤ Ispill ≤ 1) shows separation similar to the normal case with Ispill < 0 but not to the premature activations
observed when Ispill > 1. Thus, if both populations fire, Ispill
does not significantly affect the timing between peaks in the
region of interest (rectangle).
Since spillover current that is too low (Fig. 2A) or too high
Fig. (2C) is not going to cause any interesting effects, we define lower and upper bounds of Ispill as follows: the spillover
current should be strong enough to cause some measurable

effect during an attempt at triggering the behavior but weak
enough not to cause this triggering by itself (e.g. Fig. 2B).
We define “measurable effect” simply as a difference in timecourse and/or peak values in the firing rate of the second population, thus not excluding the possibility of a facilitation effect.
We find, however, that any spillover current sufficient to
cause a measurable effect prevents activation of the second
population (Fig. 3). The duration of this interference can
vary and depends on the strength of the spillover current (Fig.
3A). For values near the lower boundary, the effect disappears
if the behavior is triggered around 460ms or later after termination of the spillover current. Near the upper boundary, the
interference window can last up to about 2800ms. For very
small values of the spillover current, it is possible to avoid
the interference effect if the behavior is triggered very shortly
after the end of the spillover current (up to 340ms in the best
case), since synaptic resources are depleting more slowly.
The maximal duration of the interference window is mostly
affected by the choice of τrec . Interestingly, however, it is not
reached monotonically. Rather, as can be seen in Fig. 3A, a
threshold value for spillover current exists below which the
interference effect disappears after a fraction of its maximal
effect. Above the threshold, the interference effect lasts for
its entire possible duration.
It would theoretically be possible for the spillover current
to cause a delayed activation in the second population, rather
than complete inhibition. This would be apparent if the time
between the peak activation of both populations was a function of the strength of the spillover current. However, at least
within the context of the work presented here, no such effect was found. Fig. 3B shows that, if the spillover current
is within its bounds, it will either cause complete interference or, with a sufficient waiting period between spillover
and behavior-triggering current, no effect at all. It should
be noted however, that on a behavioral level, delays can still
be observed. This would correspond to a control mechanism
which re-triggers the behavior after noticing that the initial attempt was not succesful. Modeling these control mechanisms
in detail is, however, beyond the scope of this work.

Fundamental cause
Since the behavior of the system described here is modulated
only by synaptic dynamics, the cause for the observed interference effect is also found therein and illustrated in Fig. 4.
Any activity within the first population will cause a reduction of recovered synaptic resources (as they become active).
Since the amount of synaptic resources activated by incoming current is proportional to the recovered resources, fewer
recovered resources mean smaller increase in current. If Ispill
is very small, recovered resources do not deplete drastically
during spillover current (Fig. 4A) and a following triggering
current can have normal effects. If Ispill is larger, the recovered resources do deplete drastically but over a relatively long
time-course (Fig. 4B). This slow depletion allows active resources to inactivate quickly enough to keep the proportion

1610

the 1500ms mark (as opposed to, e.g. self-sustaining, chaotic
or oscillatory behavior), spillover current always appears to
cause interference effect.

A

Discussion

B
1

C
0.5

0

0

500

1000

1500

2000

2500

Figure 4: Synaptic resources. Solid (broken) line represents
recovered (active) synaptic resources from the first population corresponding to the firing rates seen in Fig. 2. Spillover
current begins at t=0, behavior triggering at t=1600ms. (A)
Spill-over current causes a small decrease in recovered synaptic resources but the triggering current can activate sufficient
amounts to cause firing in the second population. (B) Spillover current causes complete but slow depletion of recovered
resources. Not enough resources can recover and the fraction
activated by the triggering current is insufficient to cause firing in the second population. (C) Spill-over current causes
complete and fast depletion of recovered resources. Consequently, the proportion of active resources becomes sufficiently high to trigger the behavior prematurely.
of active resources below the necessary threshold for triggering the second population. At the same time, the depletion is
significant enough that a later triggering current cannot activate a sufficient proportion of resources either - we observe
interference. Finally, a very large value of Ispill works just
like a triggering current: recovered resources activate quickly
enough to push the proportion of active resources over the
triggering threshold before it can decrease again due to inactivation.
Thus, the interference effect described here relies on a slow
but significant depletion of synaptic resources. In theory, the
effect of reduced available resources could be offset by the
synaptic facilitation mechanism implemented here. However,
since τ f acil is usually shorter than τrec , this is not observed in
the present model.

Effects of parameter choices
Naturally, the exact values, most notably for the lower and upper boundaries of the spillover current, depend on the values
chosen for the synaptic parameters in the model. The most
important ones are the synaptic strength and the proportion
of synaptic resources liberated. We do not address these effects in detail here but did find in a brief exploration that, as
long as parameters are kept within ranges that allow a bellshaped activation of both populations as seen in Fig. 2A after

The model presented in this paper departs from the more classical artificial neural network models in its use of more detailed biophysical dynamics. By taking into account the fact
that synaptic resources are finite, we have been able to inhibit
the execution of a behavior even though all currents within
the model are excitatory. While our model merely provides
an alternative account compared to those relying on inhibitory
dynamics, it does not necessarily replace them. However, it
does illustrate the power of more detailed biophysical dynamics in a model. There is therefore a necessity to move beyond
simple point-to-point artificial neural networks if the purpose
of such a network is to explain cognitive phenomena.
Although we do not provide an extensive parameter exploration here, the findings are rather robust. The parameters of
the synaptic model affect the firing behavior of the populations more than the effect of the spillover current (the main
exceptions to this are of course τrec and τ f acil ). Likewise, we
do not need to formulate any strong assumptions on the precise nature of the spillover current because the critical aspect
is merely the activation generated within the first population.
The effect is thus general but further work would be needed
to explore the effects of different values for τrec and τ f acil respectively. For instance, one could discover values for which
the spillover current causes both facilitation and interference
(or only facilitation). However, it should be noted that this
would mainly be interesting from a theoretical perspective,
since typical short term facilitation time-courses tend to be
faster than depletion ones (Tsodyks et al., 1998). In fact, related work (Chersi et al., 2010) which is concerned with modeling both interference and facilitation effects simultaneously
has found that in such cases, neural dynamics including inhibitory currents may provide a better explanation.
Besides their role as explanatory tools for cognitive phenomena, neural networks also find applications as computational problem-solving tools. By illustrating the effects
synaptic dynamics can have on the overall output of our
model, we show that moving beyond the traditional connectionist models of nodes simply connected by a signed weight
can be worth considering. While this will not extend the set of
computations that a neural network can perform, it may simplify the topology or facilitate training. Such benefits have
for instance been previously found in GasNets (Husbands et
al., 1998). These networks have proven particularly amenable
to efficient search of task solution space as cognitive robotics
controllers situated according to spatial and temporal environmental constraints. This adaptive potential is tapped using a diffusive, non-purely point-to-point synaptic modulatory network. Exploration of the interaction of classically
conceived synaptic transmission and less orthodox means of
inter-cellular communication may provide scope to investi-

1611

gate spatial and temporal interactions relevant to the study of
cognitive phenomena particularly in an embodied context (cf
Parisi, 2004). Again, these are possibilities that need to be
explored further in future work.

Conclusions
We have presented a model that can explain temporal interference effects without relying on inhibitory dynamics in the
underlying neural circuitry. Rather, the behavior is explained
solely by synaptic dynamics which are modeled in a simple
yet biologically plausible way. The contributions of this work
are twofold: (1) We provide an alternative explanation for a
range of interference effects which does not rely on explicit
inhibitory dynamics. (2) We highlight the benefits of modeling synaptic and biophysical dynamics in more detail, both
as a computational tool which may find applications even in
artificial neural networks and as an explanatory mechanism
as illustrated in the present paper.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the European Commission FP7
project ROSSI (www.rossiproject.eu), Grant agreement no.
216125,

References
Amari, S. (1977). Dynamics of pattern formation in lateralinhibition type neural fields. Biological Cybernetics, 27,
77-87.
Bouton, M. E. (2007). Learning and behavior: A contemporary synthesis. Sinauer Associates, Inc. Publishers.
Buccino, G., Riggio, L., Melli, G., Binkofski, F., Gallese, V.,
& Rizzolatti, G. (2005). Listening to action related sentences modulates the activity of the motor system: A combined tms and behavioral study. Cognitive Brain Research,
24, 355-63.
Chersi, F., Mukovskiy, A., Fogassi, L., Ferrari, P. F., & Erlhagen, W. (2006). A model of intention understanding based
on learned chains of motor acts in the parietal lobe. In Proceedings of the 15th annual computational neuroscience
meeting. Edinburgh, UK.
Chersi, F., Thill, S., Ziemke, T., & Borghi, A. M. (2010). Sentence processing: linking language to motor chains. Frontiers in Neurorobotics, doi:10.3389/fnbot.2010.00004.
Gordon, W. C., Taylor, J. R., & Mowrer, R. R. (1981). Enhancement of short-term retention in rats with pretest cues:
Effects of the training-cueing interval and the specific cueing treatment. American Journal of Psychology, 94, 309322.
Hauk, O., Johnsrude, I., & Pulvermüller, F. (2004). Somatotopic representation of action words in human motor and
premotor cortex. Neuron, 41, 201-307.
Husbands, P., Smith, T., Jakobi, N., & O’Shea, M. (1998).
Better living through chemistry: Evolving gasnets for robot
control. Connection Science, 10, 185-210.

McGeoch, J. A. (1932). Forgetting and the law of disuse.
Psychological Review, 39, 352-370.
Mensink, G. J.-M., & Raaijmakers, J. G. (1988). A model
for interference and forgetting. Psychological Review, 95,
434-455.
Nishiyama, H., & Linden, D. J. (2007). Pure spillover transmission between neurons. Nature Neuroscience, 10, 675677.
Oliveri, M., Finocchiaro, C., Shapiro, K., Gangitano, M.,
Caramazza, A., & Pascual-Leone, A. (2004). All talk
and no action: A transcranial magnetic stimulation study
of motor cortex activation during action word production.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 16, 374-381.
Parisi, D. (2004). Internal robotics. Connection Science, 16,
325-338.
Philippides, A., Husbands, P., & O’Shea, M. (1998). Neural
signaling - it’s a gas! In L. N. M. Boden & T. Ziemke
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 8th international conference on
artificial neural networks. London: Springer-Verlag.
Revusky, S. H. (1971). Animal memory. In W. K. Honig
& P. H. R. James (Eds.), (chap. The role of interference in
association over a delay). New York: Academic Press.
Roberts, W. A., & Grant, D. S. (1978). An analysis of lightinduced retroactive inhibition in pigeon short-term memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes, 14, 247-260.
Spencer, J. P., Perone, S., & Johnson, J. S. (2009). Toward a unified theory of development. In J. P. Spencer,
M. S. C. Thomas, & J. L. McClelland (Eds.), (p. 86-118).
Oxford.
Tsodyks, M., Pawelzik, K., & Markram, H. (1998). Neural
networks with dynamic synapses. Neural Computation, 10,
821-835.

1612

