UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A cognitive model of punishment

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7m84s6bq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Giardini, Francesca
Andighetto, Giulia
Conte, Rosaria

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A cognitive model of punishment
Francesca Giardini (francesca.giardini@istc.cnr.it)
Institute of Cognitive Sciences and Technologies, Via San Martino della Battaglia, 44
00185 Rome Italy

Giulia Andrighetto (giulia.andrighetto@istc.cnr.it)
Institute of Cognitive Sciences and Technologies, Via San Martino della Battaglia, 44
00185 Rome Italy

Rosaria Conte (rosaria.conte@istc.cnr.it)
Institute of Cognitive Sciences and Technologies, Via San Martino della Battaglia, 44
00185 Rome Italy
Abstract
People use sanctioning behaviours differently according
to what they believe and want to achieve, according to
the context and to the situation. We need to understand the motivations for different forms of punishment
in order to explain why sanctions and incentives have
different effects on human behaviour. Aim of this work
is to propose a cognitive model of three distinct kinds
of punishing behaviours, differentiated in terms of the
defining cognitive patterns.
Keywords: Cognitive modeling; Punishment; Cooperation.

Introduction
Punishment is a core mechanism to enforce and support social order, to promote cooperation and to prompt
group beneficial behaviours. Social scientists have long
debated on the nature and the effects of this mechanism,
but there are many questions still open, as for instance
the relationship between counter-punishment and cooperation. There is a growing body of evidence that altruistic punishment plays a crucial role in enforcing cooperation and in promoting group welfare (Fehr & Gachter,
2000, 2002), but some recent experimental results raised
the problem of antisocial punishment, that is sanctioning people who behave socially. Herrmann, Thoni, and
Gachter (2008) compared results on punishment and cooperation collected in sixteen different participant pools
around the world. They showed the emergence of antisocial punishment in repeated public goods experiments,
and proposed that differences can be explained in terms
of different societal background. Nikiforakis and Engelman (2008) used a public good game with multiple punishment stages aiming at investigating whether retaliatory behaviours would escalate into a feud. Interestingly, cooperation rates declined but feuds were avoided
by participants.
Although a number of accounts (for some representative work see (Bowles & Gintis, 2004; Henrich & Boyd,
2001; Henrich et al., 2006) have stressed the relevance of
punishment in human societies, they suffer the flaw that
they consider punishment as a unique behaviour. In our
view, punishing actually consists in a complex behavioral

repertoire in which it is useful to disentangle at least revenge (social-status punishment), retaliation (strategic
punishment) and sanction (normative punishment).
Treating punishment as a single behaviour without
caring for its cognitive foundations could be misleading
especially if one is interested in explaining cooperation
and its maintenance in evolutionary terms. There is neither a single form of punishment nor a single motive to
punish other people, and the question is: How can we
distinguish between punishment aimed at making the individual internalize the norm and pure revenge? How do
people choose between punishment and revenge?
Cognitive modelling allows us to disentangle apparently indistinguishable acts and to understand the motives and objectives that pave the way to distinct ways
of punishing. Taking revenge is not the same as punishing a wrongodoer or sanctioning a deviant behaviour,
and explaining these differences and the related motivations could effectively advance research on cooperation
and prosocial behaviours under several respects.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. Firstly,
we will introduce a general theory of cognitive social action, in order to provide some basic concepts. Secondly,
revenge will be analyzed, focusing on the explicit mental representations behind it. Therefore we will turn our
attention to punishment, showing what is inside the punisher’s mind. Finally, sanction will be described. Future
work and conclusions will follow.

The cognitive roots of social behaviour
In general, this work aims at unveiling the proximate
mechanisms of enforcement behaviours, in order to understand the mental mechanisms underlying revenge,
punishment and sanction.
Before these arguments are developed, some terminological issues need clarification. As stated elsewhere
(Conte & Castelfranchi, 1995), an agent is a goalgoverned system.

1282

By this, we mean an entity, not necessarily autonomous, that has the capacity to act upon the
external world in order to reduce the discrepancy

between the world itself and some regulatory state
that is somehow represented within the entity (p.1).
A cognitive agent is endowed with cognitive representations of the external world and of its internal states
as well. Agents have beliefs about themselves and the
world and they act on the basis of their goals to reduce
the discrepancy between the world and what they want.
There are several ways to influence agents, but here
we refer to cognitive influencing (Cialdini & Goldstein,
2004; Conte & Castelfranchi, 1995), a process by which
a given entity, say Ii, acts on another entity, mj, in such
a way that a given goal of mj ’ s be strengthened or generated anew. Notice that, since mj is an autonomous
intelligent system, Ii must act on her beliefs in order
to strengthen or generate new goals and modify her behaviours. We will address here the goal-generation process, as strengthening an existent goal is only a weaker
case of cognitive influencing. To strengthen or generate
a new goal, mj must acquire a new belief, say Bjp (Ii
will harm mj, if she does not apply his will). This belief
will activate a previous goal of mj ’s, Gjp (avoid harm),
and the interaction between Bjp and Gjp generates a
new instrumental goal in mj ’s, Gjq (adopt Ii ’s will)1 .
This is a social plan of action, which is based on a
complex variant of the theory of mind. In the classic theory of mind (Leslie, 1991; Baron-Cohen, 1991; Dennett,
1987; Premack & Woodruff, 1978), others’ mental states
are harboured in one’s mind, giving rise to social beliefs,
namely beliefs about others’ mental states (e.g. beliefs,
intentions, desires, emotions, etc). In cognitive influencing, instead, the influencing entity has social goals as
well, i.e. goals about others’ mental states.
As we will see in the following sections, the presence
and the type of cognitive influencing permits to discriminate between apparently similar enforcing mechanisms
that are actually very different.
The three punishing strategies can be arranged on two
axes: cognitive complexity and intentionality of deterrence. In this way, revenge easily appears to be the lowest in cognitive complexity and to pursue deterrence as
an emergent and unintended self-reinforcing effect. The
opposite is true for sanction (high cognitive complexity
and intentional deterrence), whereas punishment occupies an intermediate position.

Revenge
Revenge appears to be a common human trait,
widespread in human history and societies. According
to the Merriam-Webster dictionary, vengeance is punishment inflicted in retaliation for an injury or offense.
1
By means of the so called adoption rule (Conte & Castelfranchi, 1995), according to which an autonomous agent
(adopter) will have another agent’s (adoptee) goal as her
own, if she, the adopter, comes to believe that the adoptee’s
achievement of this goal will increase the chances that the
adopter will in turn achieve one of her previous goals.

The retaliatory aspect is the main feature of revenge and
is what makes this form of reaction differing from the two
forms of punishment described below. Vengeance is also
strongly characterized by the presence of emotional aspects that contribute to the common view of revenge as
a not fully rational behaviour.
This ”flavour of irrationality” could have contributed
to the paucity of interest in revenge, compared to punishment, among scholars. While justifications for punishing
and individual motives to punish have been widely investigated, research on retaliatory actions has considered
them either as tribal and archaic forms of norm enforcement (Boehm, 1986) or as genetic predispositions evolutionary evolved to react to aggressions (Elster, 1990).
Amegashie and Runkel (2008) present a differential
game model of revenge in conflicts. In their model,
revenge has a positive value in economic terms; this
means that, however destruction is costly, given what has
been suffered in the past, the victim derives satisfaction
and then utility from exacting revenge in the present.
Similarly, deQuervain et al. (2004) used neuroscientific
methodology to investigate how brain regions reacted to
defection in an interaction game. According to Knutson (2004) their results show that punishing a defector
activates brain regions related to the anticipation of a
reward, even when punishment was costly, thus explaining human preference for punishing violators. Interestingly, Nikiforakis and Engelman (2008) reported data on
revenge causing collaboration to decline in the lab but
without boosting a chain of reciprocal vengeance.
Broadly speaking, the term ’revenge’ refers to two diverse but connected phenomena. On one side, revenge is
a social ritual that requires and prescribes specific behaviors to group members to repair an offense. The
Kanun, a customary set of laws used mostly in northern Albania and Kosovo, disciplined people’s reactions
to murder (blood revenge or gjakmarrje) and other offenses (hakmarrje) according to the roles and degree of
kinship of all the people involved. Shirking revenge or
taking it without respecting what is stated in the Kanun
lead to the same result: honour can not be restored and
the whole family or clan is to blame. Shackleford (2005)
considers ”cultures of honor”, in which revenge is the
primary form of reaction to aggressions, likely to emerge
and be maintained where the state is weak and can not
prevent or punish theft.
It is worth noticing that in general retributive concepts of law and the creation of institutions are considered as advancements to replace vengeance and avoide
blood feuds2 , but the Kanun itself was a social institutions aimed at preserving social order (KLD, 1989).
On the other side, revenge is an individual behaviour
2
In this work we are not interested in analyzing the emergence and function of blood feud and we consider revenge in
isolation

1283

found both in human (Zaibert, 2006) and non-human
primates (Jensen, Call, & Tomasello, 2007), reacting to
personally harmful actions.
As Elster observes, revenge is ”the attempt at some
cost or risk to oneself, to impose suffering upon those
who made one suffer, because they have made one suffer
(emphasis added)”.
In our view, revenge serves a terminal goal, that of
making the aggressor suffer, and this excludes any other
concerns. Usually, vengeance occurs in groups of equals,
in which the offense is perceived also as an attempt to
reduce an individual’s prestige, to declass him or her
family. Repaying the offense becomes a way to reaffirm
one’s status in front of both the aggressor and the social
group and this behaviour is far from being extincted in
present societies.
It is worth noticing that revenge may act as a deterrent
from further aggressions, but this is an emergent function that can not be even represented in the avenger’s
mind. Revenge is not pursued to affect the likelihood
that the wrongdoer will repeat the aggression in the future, inducing her to cooperate next time or deterring
her from further aggressions. The avenger wants to repay the damage she suffered with an equal or greater
offense, no matter how much risky or dangerous this retaliation is. In a sense, we can say that the avenger is
a ”backward looker” that revolves around the past and
acts in the present to rebalance what happened, without
any concerns for his future.

Into the avenger’s mind
We claim that vengeance entails a specific configuration
of goals and beliefs and that this configuration differs
from those implied by terminal and instrumental punishment. This means that, although the punisher and
the avenger could perform the same action, their aims
and intentions were deeply different as well as the resulting state of the world.
In order to describe revenge, we need first to introduce
its actors. There are at least three roles agents play
in revenge. There is the avenger (A), the Target (T),
and the Onlookers (O). The avenger’s beliefs and goals
involve both the target (T) and the onlookers (O), whose
presence, as we shall see, is crucial.
Looking into the avenger’s mind, we find a set of beliefs
that are necessary to trigger the desire to take revenge3 .
The offended agent should, at least, believe that (1) the
offense he received was intentional, (2) T was the main
or the unique responsible and then liable for punishment,
(3) there is a material and/or symbolic dimension to be
restored in front of T and O.
The above set of belief should be paired with a set of
goals, also necessary to trigger the retaliatory response.
3

Here we are not concerned with the actual punishing behaviour chosen by the actor, but we are interested in investigating which behaviours he considers the most appropriate

We identify at least three distinct goals: one referred to
the material action, and the other two related to the influence the avenger wants to exert on the victim’s and
audience’s representations. In fact, revenge is not motivated only by the desire of making the target suffering, but achieving this goal is pivotal to the objective
of changing the target’s and audience’s beliefs about the
avenger. What matters is what the others believe about
the avenger and not what they are expected to do next
time they are required to cooperate, as it is in punishment. In this case, cognitive influencing is aimed at modifying only the beliefs of the target and the onlookers, as
depicted in Figure 2.

(Gx) −→ (By)
Figure 1: Cognitive Influencing in Revenge

The avenger’s action is driven by the following goals:
first, the goal of imposing a suffering on the target; second, the goal of changing the target’s beliefs, making her
aware that the avenger does not passively accept the aggression and is able and willing to strike back at the aggressor (influencing the target). Finally, there is the goal
of changing the beliefs of the onloookers (influencing the
onlookers). In revenge the audience plays a crucial role
because the damage suffered is not only material, but it
usually has a strong symbolic component. Honour, for
instance, is an intangible asset that can be threatened
by the aggressor and that can be restored only if there
is an audience in front of which the retaliatory action is
performed and that recognizes that action as an attempt
of restoring the initial situation.
This picture needs to be enriched by some additional
considerations. First, the avenger can strike back at
the aggressor’s family or closer relatives, because they
share some common traits. Posner (1980) views this issue the other way around: family obligation to retaliate
is needed to make the threat of revenge work as a deterrent.
Another relevant issue is the cost-benefit analysis the
avenger could carry out in order to choose the best conduct. According to Elster (1990), the retaliator does not
calculate pros and cons of her action, but simply react to
the offense. In our view, the avenger considers benefits
and costs, but in her utility function there is an element
that overrule any other consideration, that is the symbolic gain in terms of respect, honour, power, etc. the
revenge allows to take.
Kant, I. (1952). The science of right (W. Hastie,
Trans.). In R. Hutchins (Ed.), Great books of the Western world: Vol. 42. Kant (pp. 397 446).

1284

Punishment

at modifying the target and the audience’s minds in different ways: unlike the latter, the punisher has the explicit goal to interrupt the chain of aggressions, with the
further effect of preventing blood feuds and giving more
stability to the social order.

Punishment is a more controversial phenomenon, as
showe by the two following definitions explaining the
competing views on it:
Punishment is the practice of imposing something unpleasant or aversive on a person or animal, usually in response to disobedient or morally
wrong behavior (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Punishment).

Into the punisher’ mind

[. . . ] individuals (or groups) commonly respond
to action likely to lower their fitness with behaviour
that reduces the fitness of the instigator and discourages or prevents him or her from repeating the
same action (Clutton-Brock & Parker, 1995).
According to the first view, punishment is meant to
righting a wrong, while the second one stresses the influencing aim of punishment, that of discouraging or preventing an agent from repeating the same action.
The first one is a retributive approach to punishment:
a person deserves a punishment that is proportionate to
the moral wrong committed. Unlike revenge, punishment is proportionate to the offence. Immanuel Kant
(Kant, 1952) argued that punishment can never be administered merely as a means for promoting another
good and should be pronounced over all criminals proportionate to their internal wickedness (p. 397). Its
justification lies in righting a wrong, not in achieving
some future benefits. The punisher wants the victim to
perceive punishment as a natural consequence of offence:
the greater the offence, the greater the punishment. We
can find such a view either in the lex talionis of early
Roman law and in Old Testament and Koran.
In the second view, punishment is assigned a deterrent
effect: it reduces the frequency and likelihood of future
offences. This approach is referred to as utilitarian and
is most often attributed to Jeremy Bentham (Bentham,
1962). Based on the rational choice model, deterrence
theory works by modifying the costs and benefits allowed
within the circumstances so that the criminal activity
becomes an unattractive option4 .
According to these two views on punishment, we can
say that the punisher is either a backward-looker and a
forward-looker. The punisher aims to repay the damage
she or someone else suffered with an offence proportionate to the one suffered, and to minimize the chance that
the attacker will repeat the aggression in the future, thus
deterring him from further hostility.
This enforcing mechanism, controlling modern societies, is not at all easy to distinguish from revenge, but
we suggest that the punisher and the avenger are aimed
4
It has to be said that deterrence can also be achieved
through reinforcement learning, as suggested by behaviorism.

Here follows a description of the punisher mental configuration - in terms of beliefs and goals. In order to trigger the punishing response, the offended agent should
display the following beliefs (it is not necessary that he
has all of them): (1) the damage/offense had a locus of
responsibility then liable for punishment, (2) there is a
material and/or symbolic damage to be refund and finally (3) the offense/damage will repeated in the future,
so that punishment might be useful to avoid such a reiteration.
The above set of beliefs should be paired with a set
of goals in order to trigger the punishing response. We
identify the following set of distinct goals. More precisely, P aims at imposing an offence proportionate to
the one suffered (retributive goal ), and/or at establishing
or mantaining a dominance hierarchy, and at deterring T
(and possibly O) from further hostility (deterrence goal ).
In order for the latter goal to be satisfied, P can employ different means, here we will focus on cognitive influencing. In order to achieve it, P has to act in such
a way that the following belief is generated in T’s an
O’s minds ”P will harm me/will impose a cost to me,
if I do not apply his will that the aggression will not be
repeated in the future”. This belief, By, will possibly activate a previous goal of T and O, Gz (avoid harm/avoid
the costs of punishment), and the interaction between By
and Gz will generate a new instrumental goal in T and
O’s minds, Gy (abstaing from repeating the aggression
in the future). Social emotions - such as feeling of guilt
- play a crucial role in achieving deterrence.
Gx ((By) −→ (Gy))
Figure 2: Cognitive Influencing in Punishment

Sanction
A particular case of punishment is that intended to deter
future offences in observance no more of the punisher’s
will, but of a specific (social) norm. We refer to this
case as (informal) sanction. In our view, a sanction is
a particular case of cognitive influencing in which the
sanctioner wants to modify the future action of T, making him form two beliefs at once: (i) a normative belief
about the existence of a certain norm, and (ii) and the
belief that T did violate that norm. Such a plan, which is
incorporated to the act of sanctioning, is aimed at inducing the target to abstain from further offences not only

1285

in order to avoid the sanction, but in order to respect
the norm.
In our view, a norm - be it social, legal or moral is a two-sided, internal (mental) and external (social),
object, coming into existence only when it emerges, not
only through the minds of the agents involved, but also
within their minds (see (Conte & Castelfranchi, 2006;
“On the Immergence of Norms: a Normative Agent Architecture”, 2007). In other words, norms work as such
only when agents recognize them and take decisions upon
them as norms. Only when the normative, i.e. prescriptive, character of an input is recognized by the agent,
that input gives rise to a normative behaviour of that
agent. In order for the norm to be satisfied, it is not
sufficient that the prescribed action is performed, but
it is necessary to comply with the norm because of the
normative goal, that is, the goal deriving from the recognition and subsequent adoption of the norm. Thus, for
a norm-based behaviour to take place, a normative belief has to be generated into the minds of the norm addressees, and the corresponding normative goal has to
be formed and pursued.
Unlike the punisher, the sanctioner aims at drawing
the target’s and the audience’s attention on the existence and violation of the norm and on the fact that
there is an high rate of surveillance. Our hypothesis is
that sanctioning is characterized by a signalling function
that has the aim of making explicit the casual link between violation and sanction: ”you are being sanctioned
because you violated that specific norm”. Focusing T
attention on the fact that the sanction is a consequence
of a norm violation, possibly has the effect of encouraging the sanctionee to accept it as an entitled act, thus
avoiding reiterated aggression (like in revenge) (see also
(Bandura, 1991; Xiao & Hauser, 2009).
We also claim that sanction has the further effect, possibly aimed at by the sanctioner, to encourage the target
to ground future decisions on internal evaluative criteria,
established by the norm. This argument needs further
elaboration, of course, and in order to test our hypothesis, we plan to conduct a series of laboratory experiments
adopting a game-theoretical framework.
While imposing sanctions to them, we often request
our children, pupils, etc. to observe the norm for its
own sake. Isn’t this behaviour irremediably paradoxical? However, it is far from an exception: it appears to
be a pedagogic strategy rather frequent at least in Westernized societies. In sanction, the penalty is inflicted
with the aim to favour a full autonomous compliance
with the norm. How is this possible? A plausible explanation calls into question mechanisms of norm internalization (Durkheim, 1951; Scott, 1971; Gintis, 2004; Bicchieri, 2006; Bowles & Gintis, 2003). In particular, under conditions and by mechanisms that require specification (see also, (“On norm internalization”, 2009), agents

internalize external enforcement, converting it into selfenforcement, based on self-esteem and moral emotions,
like the feeling of guilt.

Into the sanctioner’s mind
In order to trigger the sanctioning response, the agent
(S) should believe that (1) a norm has been violated.
Regarding the motivations, there are at least two distinct
goals that S aims to achieve. The first one is that of
generating or reinforcing into the T’s and O’s minds a
normative belief (NB) about the existence of a certain
norm, and the belief that T did violate that norm. We
will call this goal, a pedagogic goal. The second goal of
S is that of making the norm be respected thus avoiding
that the violation would happen again (deterrence goal )
(Gx). In order for the latter goal to be satisfied, S has
to act in such a way that the normative goal (I want
to comply with the norm) will be activated. Once the
normative goal has been activated, the agent will decide
whether to adopt it or not. He can decide to obey a
norm for instrumenental and terminal reasons. In the
former case, the agent comply with the norm only to
avoid punishment. In terminal norm adoption, agents
decide to comply with the norm because ”noms must be
obeyed”.
Such a plan, which is incorporated to the act of sanctioning, is aimed at inducing the target to abstain from
further offences not only in order to avoid the sanction,
but ideally in order to respect the norm. This kind of
cognitive influence is the most complex, since it entails
not only goals and beliefs but also the Normative Goal.
Gx ((NBy) −→ (NGy))
Figure 3: Cognitive Influencing in Sanctioning
To some extent the advantages of sanctions are easily
identifiable: norm compliance is expected to be more
robust than is the case when conducts are ruled only
by external punishment: under ideal conditions agents
abstain from violating because they want to respect the
norm and not only in order to avoid punishment. Hence,
sanctioned agents are expected to be more consistent and
compliant than punished and endogenously motivated
agents. A further consequence is that agents come to be
much better at defending the norms: a consequence of
the latter prediction is that sanction is decisive, if not
indispensable, for distributed social control. A positive
desired effect of sanction is an overall lowering of the
costs associated to the social enforcement.

Conclusions and Future work
In this work we applied cognitive modelling to investigate the mental underpinnings of three different systems
of norm enforcement: revenge, punishment and sanction. We argue that these are distinct behaviours people

1286

choose in accordance with what they believe and want,
thus entailing specific mental configurations. We also
argue that without unraveling these cognitive bases, we
can not fully explain complex phenomena like cooperation and altruistic punishment. Moreover, we claim that
the transition from one to the other has been allowed
by specific cognitive patterns, and suggesting that these
mental mechanisms selected among given social structures, at the same time reinforcing and being reinforced
by them. This preliminary model will be enriched by a
simulation-based study of the different forms of enforcement.

References
(1989). New York: Gjonlekaj Publishing Company.
Amegashie, J. A., & Runkel, M. (2008). The desire for
revenge and the dynamics of conflicts. 1–18.
Bandura, A. (1991). Social cognitive theory of moral
thought and action. In W. M. Kurtines & J. L. Gewirtz
(Eds.), Handbook of moral behavior and development.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbauml.
Baron-Cohen, S. (1991). Precursors to a theory of mind:
Understanding attention in others. In A. Whiten
(Ed.), Natural theories of mind: Evolution, development and simulation of everyday mindreading. Oxford:
Basil Blackwell.
Bentham, J. (1962). Principles of penal law. In
J. Bowring (Ed.), The works of jeremy bentham. New
York: Russell and Russell.
Bicchieri, C. (2006). The grammar of society: The nature and dynamics of social norms. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Boehm, C. (1986). Blood revenge: The enactment and
management of conflict in montenegro and other tribal
societies. University of Pennsylvania Press.
Bowles, S., & Gintis, H. (2003). Origins of human cooperation. In P. Hammerstein (Ed.), Genetic and cultural
origins of cooperation. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Bowles, S., & Gintis, H. (2004). The evolution of
strong reciprocity: Cooperation in heterogeneous populations. Theoretical Population Biology, 61, 17–28.
Cialdini, R., & Goldstein, N. (2004). Social influence:
Compliance and conformity. Annual Review of Psychology, 55, 591– 621.
Clutton-Brock, T. H., & Parker, G. A. (1995). Punishment in animal societies. Nature, 373, 209–216.
Conte, R., & Castelfranchi, C. (1995). Cognitive and
social action. London: University College of London
Press.
Conte, R., & Castelfranchi, C. (2006). The mental path
of norms. Ratio Juris, 19(4).
Dennett, D. C. (1987). Reprint of intentional systems
in cognitive ethology: The panglossian paradigm defended. Brain and Behavioral Sciences, 6, 343–390.
deQuervain, D., Fischbacher, U., Treyer, V., Schellhammer, M., Schnyder, U., Buck, A., et al. (2004, August).

The neural basis of altruistic punishment. Science,
305, 1254–1258.
Durkheim, E. (1951). Suicide. New York: The Free
Press.
Elster, J. (1990, July). Norms of revenge. Ethics, 100 (4),
862–885.
Fehr, E., & Gachter, S. (2000). Cooperation and punishment in public goods experiments. American Economic Review, 90(4), 980–994.
Fehr, E., & Gachter, S. (2002). Altruistic punishment
in humans. Nature, 415, 137–140.
Gintis, H. (2004). The genetic side of gene-culture coevolution: internalization of norms and prosocial emotions. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 53, 57–67.
Henrich, J., & Boyd, R. (2001). Why people punish
defectors. weak conformist transmission can stabilize
costly enforcement of norms in cooperative dilemmas.
Journal of Theoretical Biology, 208), 79–89.
Henrich, J., McElreath, R., Barr, A., Ensminger, J., Barrett, C., Bolyanatz, A., et al. (2006). Costly punishment across human societies. Science, 312 (5781),
1767-1770.
Herrmann, B., Thoni, C., & Gachter, S. (2008). Antisocial punishment across societies. Science, 319 (5868),
1362–1367.
Jensen, K., Call, J., & Tomasello, M. (2007). Chimpanzees are vengeful but not spiteful. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences USA, 104, 13046–
13050.
Kant, I. (1952). The science of right (w. hastie, trans.).
In R. Hutchins (Ed.), Great books of the western world:
Vol. 42. kant (p. 397-446).
Knutson, B. (2004, August). Sweet revenge? Science,
305, 1246–1247.
Leslie, A. M. (1991). Theory of mind impairment
in autism. In A. Whiten (Ed.), Natural theories of
mind: Evolution, development and simulation of everyday mindreading. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Nikiforakis, N., & Engelman, D. (2008). Feuds in the
laboratory? a social dilemma experiment. Research
Paper University of Melbourne, 1058, 1–31.
On norm internalization. (2009). In Proceedings of the
6th european social simulation association conference.
On the immergence of norms: a normative agent architecture. (2007). In Emergent agents and socialities:
Social and organizational aspects of intelligence. papers from the aaai fall symposium.
Posner, R. A. (1980, January). Retribution and related
concepts of punishment. The Journal of Legal Studies,
9 (1), 71–92.
Premack, D. G., & Woodruff, G. (1978). Does the chimpanzee have a theory of mind? Brain and Behavioral
Sciences, 1, 515–526.
Scott, J. (1971). Internalization of norms: A sociological

1287

theory of moral commitment. Englewoods Cliffs, N.J.:
Prentice-Hall.
Shackleford, T. (2005). An evolutionary psychological
perspective on cultures of honor. Evolutionary psychology, 3, 381–391.
Xiao, E., & Hauser, D. (2009). Avoiding the sharp
tongue: Anticipated written messages promote fair
economic exchange. Journal of Economic Psychology,
30(3).
Zaibert, L. (2006). Punishment and revengel. Law and
Philosophy, 25, 81–118.

1288

