UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Cross-Cultural Study of Change Blindness in Turkish and American Students

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/53p7n438

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Terziyan, Treysi
Gilkey, Joan

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Cross-Cultural Study of Change Blindness in Turkish and American Students
Treysi Terziyan (Treysi.Terziyan@FandM.Edu)
Franklin & Marshall College, 415 Harrisburg Ave.
Lancaster, PA 17603 USA

Joan Gilkey (JoanGilkey@Alumni.FandM.Edu)
Franklin & Marshall College, 415 Harrisburg Ave.
Lancaster, PA 17603 USA
Abstract
Change blindness is a phenomenon that occurs when a person
fails to notice changes in their perceptual field. Previous
studies have shown that East Asians are sensitive to both
contextual and focal changes while Americans are sensitive to
focal but not contextual changes (Masuda & Nisbett, 2006).
This difference was attributed to the fact that Americans have
analytical and East Asians have holistic perceptions. This
study questions whether Turkish students’ attention to
changes in pictures is more like Americans or East Asians.
Half of the study was conducted in Turkey and the other half
in America. Participants looked at photographs that flickered
back and forth from an original picture and an edited
photograph. The photographs were Turkish, American, or
Neutral. Half were complex, half were simple, and half the
changes were made in the foreground and half in the
background. We found that both Turkish and American
students found the foreground changes a lot faster than the
background changes. These results suggested that Turkish
people’s perception is analytical like Americans’.
Keywords: Change blindness; cross-cultural research

Introduction
One reason that there are continuity errors in movies, which
go mostly unnoticed by the audience, is that resource limits
prevent us from attending to every element of a visual
scene. In one famous study (Simons & Chabris, 1999), 192
participants were shown a video of 6 people in two teams
passing a ball. The participants were asked to count and
report the number of passes occurring between players of
the same team. While they were doing this task, one of two
unexpected things happened in the video: either a woman
with an umbrella or a woman in a gorilla suit walked by.
Overall, only 54% of the participants reported seeing the
unexpected event. This means that 46% of them did not
“see” a very odd event, immediately obvious to anyone
watching the video unburdened by other task demands.
To systematically investigate the interrelation between
attention and visual awareness, Rensink et al. (1997) created
the “flicker paradigm”. In the flicker paradigm two versions
of a picture are shown one after another repeatedly with a
blank screen in between (for a review, see Simons &
Rensink, 2005). The two versions of the picture are
generally identical except for one small change. In a typical
application of this paradigm, participants are asked to find
the changes between the two versions. They almost always

find all the changes if they are given enough time, but
depending on the sort, size, and placement of the change, it
can take several minutes or more. This failure to quickly
notice changes in one’s perceptual field is called change
blindness.
Rensink, O’Regan and Clark (1997) ran a series of
experiments investigating change blindness. In their first
experiment they had their participants find the change in a
regular flicker task. They found out that the participants
took twice as long to find the changes in the background
than it took them to find the changes in the foreground. In
another experiment they gave the participants verbal cues
where the change was. When the participants’ attention was
directed, they were significantly faster at detecting the
changes. Moreover, there wasn’t a difference between the
time it took them to notice changes in the foreground and in
the background. They concluded from these experiments
that the “key factor” to notice a change is attention.
The facts that people need to pay attention to notice a
change and that we naturally notice changes in the
foreground, taken together, should mean that people pay
more attention to the foreground. Masuda and Nisbett
(2001) challenged this idea. They thought that since
Westerners and East Asians have different attributions
(Westerns attribute outcomes to individual factors, whereas
East Asians to situational factors), they could have
differences in perceptual orientations. They showed
Japanese and American participants clips of underwater
scenes and then asked to recount what they saw. Their
results showed that Japanese participants stated significantly
more information about the background than the Americans,
whereas there wasn’t a difference in their statements about
the foreground. Moreover, Japanese participants referred to
an object’s relationship to the background twice as much as
Americans.
Masuda and Nisbett (2006) extended these findings using
the flicker paradigm. They hypothesized that Japanese
would be more sensitive than Americans would be to
changes made in the backgrounds of the pictures. Their
results showed that Japanese participants were just as fast as
Americans to find the changes in the foreground and were a
lot faster than Americans to find the changes in the
background. When they asked their participants to recall as
many changes as possible in briefly shown flickering
scenes, Americans remembered marginally more number of

1547

changes in the foreground, whereas Japanese remembered
significantly more number of changes in the background.
Nisbett and Miyamoto (2005) have attributed these
differences in the attentional processes of Westerners and
East Asians to Westerners’ having analytical perceptions
and East Asians’ having holistic perceptions. Analytical
Westerners attend to salient objects and their category
memberships, whereas holistic East Asians attend to
contexts and relationships. The authors think the reason
behind this difference is the differences in social structures:
the East Asian social world is interdependent, while the
Western social world is individualistic.
While this proposal is compelling for two cultures that
vary quite considerably in their social make-up, the
predictions are less clear for cultures that may fall
somewhere between classic “East” and “West” mentalities.
In the present investigation, we seek to explore the
attentional processes of just such a group: the Turkish.
There have been very few studies done on Turkish people’s
perceptions. Hence, it is unclear whether Turkish perception
is holistic or analytic. Turkey is located between the
individualistic West and the collectivistic East. Moreover,
although Turkish history is quite collectivistic, current
trends and the growth of capitalism in Turkey suggest that
people are becoming rapidly more individualistic (Çileli,
2000). Çileli administered surveys to hundreds of collegeaged people in Ankara in 1989, in 1992, and in 1995. The
participants scaled 36 values according to how they thought
these values affected their lives. The values were divided
into terminal and instrumental values; terminal values were
about where one wanted their life to end up and
instrumental values were about one’s behaviors. The results
in 1989 showed that most important values for the
participants were self-respect, freedom, inner harmony,
equality, independence, honesty, broad-mindedness and
courage, whereas the least important values were having an
exciting life, pleasure, national security, salvation,
politeness, imagination, cleanliness and obedience. On the
other hand, in 1992 and 1995 the results showed that most
important values for the participants were inner harmony,
happiness, mature love, exciting life, ambition, cheerfulness
and capability, whereas the least important values were
freedom, social recognition, comfortable life, true
friendship, politeness, honesty, helpfulness and imagination.
Çileli concluded from these results that Turkish people were
becoming more hedonistic and competitive and hence more
individualistically oriented. In short, Turkish people have a
unique relationship with collectivistic and individualistic
orientations, making them a particularly interesting test case
for exploring how they perceive the world. The outcomes
have implications for helping us better understand the social
orientation of modern Turks and, furthermore, for providing
additional support for proposals about how attention is
involved in the visual perception of change.
In the current study we carried out a change blindness
experiment with the flicker paradigm in which Turkish and
American participants looked at some scenes which had

changes in the foreground or background. Our experiment
was intended to explore whether and how Turkish and
American perceptions differ. We recorded how long it took
for the participants to find the change. We expected
Americans to be quicker at detecting changes in the
foreground than the ones in the background and Turks to be
quicker at detecting changes in the background than the
ones in the foreground. In other words, we expected to find
that Turkish people had holistic perspective because we
assumed Turkish culture to be primarily collectivists since
the trend of individualism was fairly new, whereas Turks
have always been interdependent. We also looked into how
the culture of photographs affected the participants’ reaction
times. We used photographs that were taken in the USA or
in Turkey and some photographs were neutral, as in they
could belong to either country. We thought that Americans
would be quick at finding changes in American and neutral
pictures but slower at finding changes in Turkish pictures
and Turks would be quick at finding changes in Turkish and
neutral pictures but slower at finding changes in American
pictures.

Methods
Participants
Our participants included two groups: American and
Turkish. The American participants consisted of 15 Franklin
& Marshall College students who were only fluent in
English. A sign-up sheet was posted so students could sign
up independently to participate in our study. We stated the
requirements (being American and being fluent only in
English) in our sign up sheet and included questions about
nationality and language proficiency in our demographic
questionnaire. The Turkish participants were 15 college
students in Bilkent University in Ankara, Turkey. Again, a
sign-up sheet was posted for students to choose a time to
participate in our study. A requirement on the sign up sheet
to participate was that the participants should be Turkish
and speak only Turkish fluently. As we did with the
American participants, we double-checked this by including
questions about nationality and language proficiency in our
demographic questionnaire. The participants of both groups
received class credit for participating in this experiment. Of
all the participants we had to disregard 2 participants
because of failure to follow directions and 3 participants
because they were outliers (their reactions times were two or
more standard deviations above or below the mean). The
final number of participants was 12 American (8 women, 4
men, age range: 18-23, M = 19.8) and 13 Turkish students
(10 women, 3 men, age range: 18-23, M = 20.8).

Materials
The materials consisted of an iBook, various photos, and
two computer programs (Adobe Photoshop and a Change
Blindness application created at Franklin and Marshall
College). The pictures were edited to be the same size and
the focal/contextual changes were made with Adobe

1548

Photoshop. They became flickering movies using the
Change Blindness application. There were three categories
of pictures: American, Turkish and neutral. American
pictures were scenes only found in the United States and not
in Turkey. American participants would be familiar with
these scenes; whereas, Turkish participants would be
unaccustomed to them. These scenes were a Halloween
party, a street from Los Angeles, an intersection in the
Times Square, a baseball figure, a football game, a house
with Christmas lights, a statue of Abraham Lincoln, and a
Hollywood star. Turkish pictures were scenes that could
only be found in Turkey and not in the states. These scenes
were familiar for Turkish participants but not for
Americans. These scenes were people doing halay (a
traditional Turkish dance), a saz ekibi (an orchestra of
classical Turkish instruments), the blue mosque, a fancy evil
eye, a chestnut stand on the sidewalk, a women making
gozleme (big Turkish crepes), kina gecesi (the pre wedding
celebration where the women put henna on their hands), and
the kiz kulesi (a very known building in the middle of
Bosphorus). The neutral pictures were scenes that can be
found in both countries. All participants would be
accustomed to these scenes. These scenes were a family
dinner, a girl with a birthday cake, three people in skiing
outfits, a dorm room, a beach, girls eating dessert, a guy
playing electric guitar and a dining hall.
A control variable for all the scenes was complexity
because it has been suggested that complexity of a scene can
prime the viewer to perceive holistically or analytically
(Masuda & Nisbett, 2006). The photographs were all altered
so they were of equal size. Each category has an equal
number of simple and complex scenes. The simple scenes
were scenes either with a straightforward focal point or with
very few objects to focus on. The complex scenes had many
objects and the subject of the scene isn’t clear. In order to
assess whether others think the photographs are simple or
complex, we had non-participating students highlight the
area of each photograph that they thought was the focal
point. Simple scenes were defined has having only 1 area
highlighted by all the people who did this pre-test. Complex
scenes had 2 or more different areas of the picture
highlighted. Half of all the pictures got a focal change (one
that is in the area of the photograph that is the focus) and the
other half received a contextual change (one that is made
more in the background). We used the highlighted
photographs to help us decide where the focus of each
photograph was. In this way we were able to know where to
make focal and contextual changes. The changes that were
made to the photographs were taking an object away from
the photograph. Half of the photographs shown to the
participants started with the object in question and half
started without it.
Each picture was made into a movie using the Change
Blindness application with both versions going back and
forth and a gray scene between them (for the flicker effect).
The outline for a movie would be the original picture (560
msec), a gray scene (120 msec), the modified picture (560

msec) and a gray scene (120 msec). The movie played in a
loop until the change was found. The Change Blindness
application also recorded the reaction time of each
participants’ identification of the change in each picture.
Fifteen files were created, each containing all 24 movies in
different random orders. Based on their ID number,
participants viewed one of the fifteen files.

Procedure
Participants signed up in posted time slots. They came to the
study and sat at a table with the computer and a mouse in
front of them. All participants were informed of what will
be asked of them in the study. They signed an informed
consent form indicating their willingness to participate in
the experiment. They were assigned ID numbers that
correspond with their data and demographics so
confidentiality was preserved. Participants were given a
demographics questionnaire including questions on age,
gender, year in school, country of birth, and language
proficiency.
As soon as they were ready, the experimenter started the
Change Blindness application with the correct file of
photographs for that participant. The participant was asked
to click the provided mouse when they found the change.
The computer program would then pause and record how
long it took the participant to find the change in that
flickering picture. The recorded time would be the reaction
time of that participant to that picture. Then the
experimenter asked the participant to show the change. All
data in which the participant identified an incorrect change
was disregarded. The participant was shown the each
flickering picture (8 American, 8 Turkish and 8 neutral).
After the participant was done, the experimenter gave them
a copy of the informed consent, which included the
experimenters’ e-mail addresses. The American participants
did this study in Franklin and Marshall College’s Barshinger
Life Sciences Building. The Turkish participants did this
study in Bilkent University’s Psychology building. This part
was carried out in Turkish since the participants’ most fluent
language was Turkish. Therefore, the experimenter’s script
was in Turkish, as were all instructions, the demographics
questionnaire, and the consent form.
The dependent variable was the reaction time. The
independent variables were the place of the change, the
category of the picture and the nationality of the participant.
We analyzed the results with a 2 (Foreground/Background
change) X 3 (Turkish/American/Neutral photograph)
repeated
measures
ANOVA
with
nationality
(Turkish/American) as a between-subjects factor. Moreover,
we ran a 2 (Foreground/Background change) X 2
(Simple/Complex picture) repeated measures ANOVA with
nationality (Turkish/American) as a between-subjects factor.

Results
We did not expect to find similar results for American and
Turkish participants; however, our results showed that there
were not significant differences between them. In other

1549

words there was no main effect of nationality F(1, 23) =
.449, p = .510. There was not an interaction between
nationality and place of the change F(1, 23) = .134, p =
.717; however, there was a main effect of the place of the
change F(1, 23) = 10.3, p = .004. As can be seen in Figure 1
American participants found the foreground changes (M =
22.5, SD = 3.51) faster than they did the background
changes (M = 31.1, SD = 3.47) and Turkish participants also
found the foreground changes (M = 24.0, SD = 3.38) faster
than they did the background changes (M = 34.7, SD =
3.33).

Figure 2: Mean reaction times of American and Turkish
participants for finding the changes in the three picture
categories

Figure 1: Mean reaction times of American and Turkish
participants for finding the changes in the foreground and
the background.
There was a main effect of the category of the picture F(2,
22) = 15.1, p < .001 ; however, there was not an interaction
between nationality and category of picture F(2, 22) = 2.12,
p = .143. That is to say Americans and Turks had similar
reaction times within each category of picture. Americans
were fastest in finding the changes in neutral pictures (M =
16.4, SD = 2.83) and took about the same time to find the
changes in American pictures (M = 27.3, SD = 4.80) and
Turkish pictures (M = 36.8, SD = 4.70) just like Turks were
fastest in finding the changes in neutral pictures (M = 19.0,
SD = 2.72) and took about the same time to find the changes
in American pictures (M = 38.8, SD = 4.62) and Turkish
pictures (M = 30.3, SD = 4.52). The mean times for finding
the changes in the three categories of pictures for both
nationalities are presented in Figure 2.

There was a main effect for complexity of the picture F(1,
23) = 61.6, p < .001 as shown in Figure 3. As one can see
from Figure 3 the participants took significantly less amount
of time to find the changes in the simple pictures than they
did in the complex pictures. There was not an interaction
between nationality and complexity F(1, 23) = .315, p =
.580 which means that Americans’ and Turks’ reactions
time were similar for both complexity conditions. There was
not an interaction between complexity and location either
F(1, 23) = 4.02, p = .057. The participants found the
changes in the foreground fastest in both complexity
conditions. There was not a three-way interaction between
complexity, location and nationality F(1, 23) = .187, p =
.669.

Firgure 3: Mean reaction times of American and Turkish
participants for finding the changes in simple and complex
pictures.

1550

Discussion
As the past research suggested we found that Americans
find the foreground changes faster than background
changes. We also found that this pattern of results held for
the Turkish participants. These results did not support our
hypothesis that Turkish people have a holistic perspective.
These results suggest that Turkish people have an analytical
perspective.
This finding can perhaps be explained by the changes
Turkey has been going through. Capitalism is growing in
Turkey, which encourages people to be more individualistic
and hence more analytic. Every day Turkish people are
trying harder to be more like Westerners. American movies
influence what is shown in Turkish movie theaters and on
Turkish television. Traditional Turkish dances are being
regarded as lame, whereas hip-hop and break dances are
being regarded as cool. A lot of Turkish values are getting
lost and Western ideas are becoming more popular. In a
study a group of Turkish high school students were shown
the video clip of Rammstein’s “We are all living in
America” and were asked about their thoughts (Pehlivan,
2007). The general consensus of the students was that the
USA was more advanced than Turkey and also than various
African or East Asian countries. In other words they
associate that advancement with the West. One of the
students even called Turkey “an orphan” since he reasoned
the Western countries were so much better than Turkey.
These current individualist attitudes might account for our
results.
A reviewer has pointed out to us that our results also
might be taken to mean that people from collectivistic
cultures can have analytical perspectives, and that the
relativistic viewpoint of Masuda and Nisbett (2006) should
perhaps be questioned. We believe our reviewer’s concern is
a valid one since there has been some evidence found in the
favor of it. For example, de Fockert et al. (2007) have found
that people from a very traditional culture in South Africa
had extremely analytical perceptions. We do not agree with
this point of view for the following reason. Past research has
suggested that Turkish youth are becoming more and more
individualistic. We believe that is why our results suggest
that Turkish people have analytical perspective. To confirm
our hypothesis it might be useful to compare older Turkish
people to younger ones in this paradigm. We expect that
older adults might be more collectivistic and therefore show
a different pattern in a change blindness study. A clear-cut
difference between the patterns of older and younger
Turkish people would indicate two things. Firstly, it would
indicate that our results from the current study could be
explained by the transition Turkish culture is going through.
Secondly, it would indicate that the idea that holistic
cultures might have analytical perspectives did not hold true
in the case of Turkish people. The current study is only a
preliminary to further research on Turkish people’s
perceptions.
In fact, there is much more room for research in this area,
which has in general been under-explored. A comparison

experiment between Turkish people and East Asians could
be done in order to further investigate the possibility that
Turks have an analytical perspective. A study like Masuda
and Nisbett’s (2001) would uncover whether Turkish people
pay attention to background or the relationship between
objects similar to East Asians. Another way of taking this
research further would by doing a real-life change blindness
experiment like the study in which random people on the
campus of Vanderbilt University were asked to remember
the color of a binder the experimenter was holding, and the
word inside the binder (Varakin, Levin, & Collins, 2007).
The participants were unaware of many changes in their
environment like the font of the word in the experimenter’s
binder. The participants in this study were all Westerners.
The results could have been different if the participants were
East Asian and even if they were Turkish. Just because
Turkish people were similar to the Westerners at noticing
changes in flickering images on a laptop does not guarantee
that they would be similar to Westerners at noticing changes
in real life change blindness experiments.
In our experiment we tried to get rid of confounds by
having only American and Turkish participants so that the
groups would be more homogenous, unlike the study in
which different cultures of East Asia were grouped all these
different cultures (Chinese, Japanese and Korean) under one
group (Masuda & Nisbett, 2005). Furthermore, we tried to
control for differences in the photographs as much as
possible. We used half simple and half complex pictures in
each category of culture of the photograph (American,
Turkish, and neutral). Our purpose in controlling
complexity was that we did not want to end up with one of
our categories of pictures that consisted of only complex
pictures. A reviewer has suggested that American and
Turkish participants might have been affected differently by
the complexity of the picture. Our results did not support
this. We found that American and Turkish participants had
similar reaction times for both simple and complex pictures.
In our experiment were expecting the participants to be
fastest in the pictures they were familiar with. There was a
main effect of the category of the picture but it was not like
how we expected it to be. All participants found the changes
faster in the neutral pictures than the Turkish or American
pictures. This could be because the changes in the neutral
pictures might be slightly bigger than the changes in the
other categories since we only approximate the size of the
change. This difference could also be due to the subject of
the pictures. Only half of the Turkish and the American
pictures were about people but almost all of the neutral
pictures were of people. The changes were not always made
to the people but it could be that the participants were better
at detecting changes in pictures of people. This unexpected
effect emphasized that the pictures and the changes should
be even more controlled. More control on the changes could
be accomplished by having a constant change in all the
pictures. For example, a cup would be appearing and
disappearing in pictures. This cup could be in the

1551

foreground or the background; hence, keep the size of
change same no matter where it occurs.
The current study aimed to get some insight into Turkish
people’s perceptions. We ran a change blindness experiment
on Turks and Americans. We were expecting to find that
Turkish people have holistic perceptions like East Asians;
however, our results suggest that they have analytical
perceptions like Westerners. We believe that there needs to
be more research done in this area to understand how
exactly Turkish people perceive the world.

Acknowledgments
Prof. Michael Anderson served as scientific advisor for this
project; we would like to thank him for is unwavering
support and help. We would like to thank Bilkent
Univeristy, especially Emre Ozgen for all their help. We
would like to thank Prof. Krista Casler for her helpful
comments on an earlier draft.

References
Çileli, M. (2000). Change in value orientations of Turkish
youth from 1989 to 1995. The Journal of Psychology,
134(3), 297-305.
de Fockert, J., Davidoff, J., Fagot, J., Parron, C., &
Goldstein, J. (2007). More accurate size contrast
judgments in the Ebbinghaus Illusion by a remote culture.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 33(3), 738-742.
Masuda, T., & Nisbett R. E. (2001). Attending holistically
versus analytically: Comparing the context sensitivity of
Japanese and Americans. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 81(5), 922-934.
Masuda, T., & Nisbett R. E. (2006). Culture and change
blindness. Cognitive Science: A Multidisciplinary
Journal, 30(2), 381-399.
Nisbett, R. E., & Miyamoto, Y. (2005). The influence of
culture: Holistic versus analytic perception. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 9(10), 467-473.
Pehlivan, H. (2007). Are we all living in America?.
Elektronik Sosyal Bilimler Dergisi, 6(22), 270-282.
Retrieved April 26, 2008, from http://www.esosder.com/dergi/22270-282.pdf
Rensink, R. A., O’Regan, J. K., & Clark, J. J. (1997). To see
or not to see: The need for attention to perceive changes
in scenes. Psychological Science, 8(5), 368-373.
Simons, D. J., & Chabris, C. F. (1999). Gorillas in our
midst: Sustained inattentional blindness for dynamic
events. Perception, 28, 1059-1074.
Simons, D. J., & Rensink, R. A. (2005). Change blindness:
Past, present, and future. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
9(1), 16-20.
Varakin, D.A., Levin, D. T., & Collins, K. M. (2007).
Comparison and representation failures both cause realworld change blindness. Perception, 36(5), 737-749.

1552

