UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Double Causal Contrast Theory of Moral Intuitions in Trolley Dilemmas

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1vc6w370

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Waldmann, Michael R.
Wiegmann, Alex

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Double Causal Contrast Theory of Moral Intuitions in Trolley Dilemmas
Michael R. Waldmann (michael.waldmann@bio.uni-goettingen.de)
Alex Wiegmann (Alex.Wiegmann@psych.uni-goettingen.de)
Department of Psychology, University of Göttingen,
Gosslerstr. 14, 37073 Göttingen, Germany

ical theories of moral intuitions. Some have derided this
research as trolleyology because of the artificiality of the
task. It is certainly true that most people never will be in a
situation that mimics the trolley problem. However, we
would like to defend this paradigm as a valuable tool to
study the cognitive basis of moral intuitions. People care
about how society should deal with violent death, severe
illness, terrorism, or emergency, even though they may
never be involved in a dilemma involving these events.
Nevertheless, these intuitions influence how our society and
law functions. Thus, it is important to understand the mechanisms that underlie people’s moral intuitions.

Abstract
In trolley dilemmas a train is about to kill several victims who
could be saved if instead a different victim is harmed. A
number of theories have been proposed which assume that
permissibility judgments in these harm-based moral dilemmas
are mediated by an analysis of the underlying causal structure.
For example, it has been postulated that it is permissible to
harm people as a side effect but not as a means. We have developed a different causal theory which claims that moral
judgments are influenced by two contrasts, the global contrast
between the number of victims in the presence and absence of
the act, and an additional local contrast that compares the
fates of the morally relevant target (i.e., threats, victims) of
the proposed intervention in the presence versus absence of
the act. This double causal contrast theory explains intuitions
in various types of trolley dilemmas better than its competitors.

Threat vs. Victim Interventions

Keywords: moral reasoning; trolley dilemmas; causal reasoning; doctrine of double effect

Introduction
Trolley dilemmas have become the drosophila for testing
alternative philosophical and psychological theories of moral judgments in harm-based moral dilemmas (see Kamm,
2007). In the philosopher’s Judith Thomson’s (1986) version of the trolley dilemma, a situation is described in which
a trolley whose brakes fail is about to run over five workmen who work on the tracks. However, the trolley could be
redirected by a bystander on a side track where only one
worker would be killed (bystander problem). Is it morally
permissible for the bystander to throw the switch or is it
better not to act and let fate run its course? Most people
seem to have the intuition that throwing the switch is morally required or at least permissible. However, the intuitions
change in another of Thomson’s (1986) examples, in which
the train could be stopped by throwing a fat person from a
footbridge on the tracks, thus stopping the train with his
body (footbridge dilemma). Most people find this act outrageous, even though again one person is sacrificed to save
five. For philosophical theories these two intuitions present
a puzzle. The intuitions in the bystander dilemma seem to be
in line with utilitarian or consequentialist theories that focus
on the favorable outcome of the act in contrast to not acting
(1 vs. 5 dead people). However, the footbridge dilemma
yields the same outcomes. The intuitions in this dilemma
seem to be more consistent with non-consequentialist reasoning, which focuses on the impermissibility of the act of
killing a person.
Not only in philosophy but also in psychology the trolley
dilemmas have attracted interest as test cases for psycholog-

From a psychological point of view, the philosophical comparisons between bystander and footbridge trolley versions
are flawed because of the various confounds. The footbridge
dilemma differs in a number of relevant features from the
bystander problem, including the act (re-directing a train vs.
pushing a person), the physical distance between agent and
victim, the directness, and the saliency of the death, or the
degree of intentionality (see also Greene et al., 2009;
Waldmann & Dieterich, 2007, for evidence). Unfortunately,
in the early research on trolley dilemmas psychologists have
often adopted close variants of Thomson’s (1986) versions,
which makes it hard to interpret the results of these studies
(Greene et al., 2001; Mikhail, 2007). In our own research
we have therefore tried to create variants of trolley dilemmas, which are better controlled so that some of the already
well known factors affecting moral intuitions (e.g., distance,
violence of act) are kept constant (Waldmann & Dieterich,
2007). We will first present a new, better controlled experiment which highlights the structural differences between
different variants of trolley dilemmas. This experiment will
serve as the base example for presenting competing theories,
which then will be tested in additional experiments.
General Procedure Unless otherwise noted all experiments
were run in groups (including seminars and lectures) with
students from the University of Göttingen, Germany. Participants came from various fields, but we excluded philosophy and economics to avoid prior exposure to relevant philosophical positions. Subjects were handed booklets in
which they were told that they are going to read about a
situation which mentions two options of an agent in the
story. All dilemmas used a format in which a fictitious agent
in a remote control room of a train company is presented
with two alternatives with outcomes, which lie in the future.
The outcomes were clearly stated and characterized as cer-

2589

tain. In the instructions it was pointed out that participants
should carefully read the stories and attempt to empathize
with the situation of the agent. The story was presented in a
brief story that described the moral dilemma and the future
options. Additionally, images were shown that presented the
two options (acting vs. non acting)(see figures for examples). Subsequently, a rating scale was presented. Generally
participants were asked to rate whether the agent should act
or not in the described situation. The scale ranged from 1
(“not at all”) to 6 (“definitely”) with separated numbered
boxes.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1 we compared two parallel versions in
which we manipulated the locus of intervention, threat versus victim. In the threat intervention condition the threatening train is redirected, in the victim intervention condition
the train in which the single alternative victim is sitting is
targeted. In both variants of the trolley problems all trains
are moving and can only be redirected by employees of the
train company who are sitting in a remote control room. The
workers on the trains did not have any control over the
trains. In the threat intervention condition (n=15)(Condition
I), which corresponds to the bystander problem, five track
workers sit on train A and one on train B. The empty train
C, which represents the threat, is, due to a signaling defect,
running behind train A and cannot be stopped. Soon it
would hit train A with the five workers. However, the control room could throw the switch and redirect the train on
the parallel track where it would hit train B. In both cases
the victims would be seriously hurt (see Fig 1, I).
I
II

Fig. 1. Illustrations of the consequences of the proposed
interventions in the threat (I) versus victim (II) intervention
conditions in Experiment 1. In Condition I the threatening
train C has been redirected to the side track, in Condition II
train B with the victim has been redirected to the main track
where it stops train C.
In the victim intervention condition (n=14)(Condition II),
the first part of the story is identical. However, here the
option is to redirect train B by throwing the switch on the
parallel track. This way train B would go up to the track
where the other two trains are running and would end up in
between train C and train A (see Fig. 1, II). Now train C
would hit train B which would stop the threatening train C.
This would seriously hurt the one worker in train B, but
save the five in train A. Consistent with the findings about
bystander and footbridge dilemmas, the threat intervention
option was rated more acceptable (M=4.93, SD=0.79) than
the victim intervention option (M=2.57, SD=1.02), F(1,
27)=48.8, p=0.00.

Causal Theories of Moral Intuitions
How can the different moral assessments of threat and victim interventions be explained? We kept various familiar
factors constant so that some simple accounts are ruled out.
In both conditions the distance between the intervention and
harm is roughly the same, the initial act (re-directing a train
via remote control) is identical; in both cases the act only
indirectly affects the fate of the victim, and there is no physical closeness or personal force. Moreover, none of the
passengers has control over the train so that there are no
differences in responsibility. What are the structural differences that may account for the different intuitions? Given
that moral judgments are primarily about evaluating the
moral quality of acts or interventions which lead to outcomes, causal theories seem to be a prime candidate for an
analysis of such differences.
All theories that can be described as causal include the
contrast between the outcomes in the presence versus absence of the intervention, and predict that the size of the
contrast influences moral permissibility judgments. However, different theories postulate different representations of
the acts and focus on different causal features.
Consequentialism Consequentialism is primarily interested in the contrast between the outcomes. Thus, consequentialist approaches choose a fairly abstract level of describing the acts as acting versus not acting, which blurs the
differences between threat and victim interventions. This
level of representation in both conditions yields the global
outcome contrast between one dead person when the agent
acts and five dead people when she refrains from acting
(i.e., 1:5). Therefore, this theory predicts generally high
acceptability ratings for the act. This may be acceptable as a
normative principle (see Unger, 1996), but fails as a psychological account. The theory correctly predicts the intuitions
in the threat intervention condition but makes wrong predictions for the victim intervention condition.
Doctrine of Double Effect Traditional non-consequentialist
or deontological theories focus on moral rules permitting or
prohibiting acts. For example, harmful acts, such as killing,
are prohibited. However, simply prohibiting such acts also
does not explain the intuitions in trolley dilemmas because
apparently people find killing in the threat intervention
condition acceptable. A more promising variant of a nonconsequentialist theory accounting for trolley intuitions is
the doctrine of double effect (DDE), an old deontological
rule that is based on a causal analysis and also includes
contrasts. A number of psychologists have proposed this
rule as a moral heuristic (Royzman & Baron, 2002), or part
of an innate moral grammar (Hauser, 2006; Mikhail, 2007).
According to the dominant reading of the DDE it is permitted to do a neutral or good act as a means to a greater good,
although we foresee lesser harm as a side effect, assuming
that there are no better alternatives. However, it is impermissible to bring about lesser harm as an end in itself or as a
means to a greater good. Thus, the DDE contains two stages: First a global favorable contrast needs to be ascertained
(“greater good”)(i.e., 1:5 in the trolley dilemmas). We know

2590

already that this global contrast does not explain the effect,
although it is certainly the case that the size of this contrast
influences judgments (Nichols & Mallon, 2006). The main
focus of the DDE is on the causal processes entailed by the
proposed act. Here the doctrine distinguishes between two
types of causal processes involving the single victim. If the
victim is harmed as a side effect, as in the threat intervention condition, the act is permitted. However, if the victim is
used as a means to save the five, as in the victim intervention condition, the act is prohibited. Thus, this rule explains
the intuitions in the two conditions of Experiment 1. Importantly the DDE explains the different intuitions by analyzing
the causal processes in the presence of the proposed intervention, whereas a contrast with events in the absence of the
intervention does not play a role after the initial evaluation
stage.
A Double Contrast Theory We are going to propose and
test another variant of a causal contrast theory, our double
contrast theory, which is an extension of Waldmann and
Dieterich’s (2007) proposal. Our main assumption is that
subjects choose a level of abstraction of the act that brings
out the specific causal characteristics of the proposed intervention. Contrasting the two interventions on the abstract
level as presence or absence of acting or as killing and saving is too abstract because it does not reveal the differences
between the scenarios. Using a very low-level description,
such as button pressing on a remote control, also blurs the
differences. We believe the most natural basic level description in the scenarios refers to the kind of intervention and
the morally relevant target of the intervention. Morally
relevant targets in trolley dilemmas are threats or victims,
which can be stopped, redirected, derailed and so forth by
the interventions. This is also the level of description that is
used in the stories describing trolley dilemmas. For example, a natural description of the interventions in Experiment
1 might state that in Condition I the threatening train is
redirected, whereas in Condition II the train with the single
victim is set into motion towards the threatening train. Thus,
in Condition I the threatening train is the target of intervention, whereas in Condition II the train with the single victim
is the target of intervention.
Our main claim is that people will focus on the target of
intervention and assess the harm directly caused by intervening in this target in contrast to the harm the target would
cause in the absence of the intervention. This local contrast
which focuses on the target of intervention rather than the
global outcomes will, according to our theory, heavily influence the acceptability rating.
How does the double contrast theory explain the two
standard dilemmas? In general, the morally relevant targets
of intervention in our trolley dilemmas are either the trains
which pose a threat, or the trains which house a potential
victim. In the threat intervention condition (I) the proposed
act can be summarized as re-directing the threat. Thus, the
morally relevant target is the threatening trolley C. To assess the local contrast we need to focus on the direct harm
caused by the target of intervention, train C, which is one

seriously harmed person. This outcome is contrasted with
the direct harm caused by the target of intervention (i.e.,
train C) in the absence of the intervention, which in Condition I are five people who are harmed by train C in the absence of an intervention. Thus, the local and global contrasts
are the same in this case (1:5), both favoring the proposed
intervention.
In contrast, in the victim intervention condition (II) the
proposed act can be described as re-directing train B with its
potential victim towards the threatening train C. Thus, train
B with its potential victim is the target of intervention, and
the local contrast will therefore focus on train B with its
single potential victim. Setting this train into motion will
directly cause harm to this victim. The fact that five people
are saved further in the future is an indirect, more remote
consequence of the act and therefore not part of the local
contrast. To compute the local contrast the harm caused by
the target of intervention in the absence of the act also needs
to be considered. Train B with its single passenger, the target of intervention, would safely stay on the side track so
that its passenger would not be harmed. Thus, the local
contrast focusing on train B would amount to 1:0 (1 harmed
vs. 0 harmed). The local contrast implies that the act is
harmful, which predicts the lowered acceptability ratings.
As in the other theories we also believe that the global
contrast (1:5) additionally plays a role, which explains why
the ratings are not at a minimum. However, we assume that
these global contrasts are backgrounded. In this regard, the
double contrast theory makes similar assumptions as the
DDE. But whereas the DDE explains differences of intuitions by focusing on the causal structure entailed by the acts,
the double contrast theory focuses on the contrast of the fate
of the target of intervention. In sum, both the double contrast and the doctrine of double effect explain the patterns in
the standard trolley cases (e.g., Experiment 1).

Evidence for the Double Contrast Theory
In order to test our double contrast theory against its competitors we started to look for alternative versions of the
trolley problem that better distinguish between the theories.
In previous trolley research the target of intervention and the
location of the alternative victim were often confounded.
Whereas threat interventions typically redirect empty trains,
victim interventions more directly intervene in the alternative victim. Other variants of the trolley problem allow us to
disentangle these and other confounds, and provide informative tests for the alternative theories.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2 we ran four conditions with 20 participants
in each condition. Condition I is a standard threat intervention condition in which an empty threatening train can be
redirected away from five victims towards one. All victims
are sitting in trains, as in Experiment 1. As usual, this condition yielded relatively high mean ratings (M=4.6, SD=1.57),
which signals high acceptance for the act. Our theory predicts this pattern as a consequence of the 1:5 contrast (see

2591

above). Condition II is new (see Fig. 2): Here a passenger is
sitting in the threatening train C. According to the instructions this passenger has no control over the train. The train
is about to kill the five on the main track if nothing is done.
However, in our instructions we stated that the passenger on
the threatening train will be able to jump off the train before
it crashes into the train with the five, and save himself.
Thus, in the absence of an intervention five people would
die, as in Condition I. Alternatively the threatening train
could be redirected. Unfortunately, the train needs to be
redirected to a side track which traverses a bridge. This
bridge prevents the passenger on the threatening train from
jumping off so that he will be killed in the collision between
train C and the empty train B, which is parked on the side
track behind the bridge. This is a novel condition because
the intervention targets a threatening train which also transports a potential victim. Thus, this is a case of both a threat
and a victim intervention. Interestingly, this condition descriptively received slightly (although not significantly)
higher acceptability ratings (M=5.0, SD=1.3) than Condition I, which means that most subjects opted for sacrificing
the one. Although in this condition a train with a single
victim is the direct target of a harmful intervention, this
variant of victim intervention is not aversive.
How does our theory explain this finding? According to
the double contrast theory subjects will compute a local
contrast on the morally relevant target of intervention. In
both Conditions I and II the target is the threatening train C,
which in one condition is empty and in the other houses a
potential victim. In both conditions, train C directly harms
one person in the presence of the intervention but harms five
people in the absence of the intervention. Thus, both Conditions I and II yield the same 1:5 local (and simultaneously
global) contrast, which favors acting.

Fig. 2: Illustration of Condition II in Experiment 2 (see text
for details).
We ran two more conditions. The most interesting condition
of this experiment is Condition III. Here the threatening
train C again carries a passenger who has no control over
the train, and who is about to jump off (see Fig. 2). In the
absence of the intervention, the five in train A at the end of
the main track would be killed. On the side track an empty
train B is parked, which could be directed upward toward
the threatening train C. This empty train would stop the
threatening train C on the main track but would kill its single passenger, who, according to the instructions, would not
have sufficient time left to jump off. Note that killing the
one with the empty train is on the causal path of preventing
harm to the five. Thus, the train with its single passenger is

used as a means to prevent harm from the five. Harming
people and using them as means against their will should,
according to the DDE, be aversive (see Experiment 3 for
further discussions of the concept of means). In contrast to
the predictions of DDE, however, we got again high acceptability ratings (M=4.7, SD=1.69), which in fact are statistically equivalent to the ones in the standard threat intervention condition (I).
Condition IV is a standard victim intervention condition,
which serves as a control. An empty threatening train C is
heading toward a train (A) with five passengers. At the end
of a side track, which leads over a bridge, a train (B) with a
single passenger is parked. This train B with its passenger
can be set in motion in the direction of the main track where
it would arrive in time to stop the threatening train C, however with fatal consequences for the single passenger. This
condition yielded the expected low ratings (M=3.15,
SD=2.01). In fact, these ratings proved significantly lower
than the ratings in the three other conditions, F(1, 76)=16.2,
p=0.00, which were not significantly different from each
other.
How does our double contrast theory explain the difference between Condition III and the superficially similar
standard victim intervention, Condition IV? Note that in
both conditions the train that is parked on the side track is
set in motion, and directed towards the threatening train on
the main track. Thus, at first sight one might conclude that
this empty train is in both scenarios the target of intervention. However, this is wrong according to our theory. In the
victim intervention condition (III) the morally relevant target of intervention is indeed the train on the side track with
its potential victim, who would either be killed or would
stay alive. Thus, the local contrast favors inaction (1:0).
However, although the act seems superficially similar in
Condition IV, in this condition the train that is being moved
is empty. Thus, it neither represents a threat nor is a victim
located inside the train. This train is therefore not a morally
relevant target of the intervention; it rather plays the causal
role of an instrument to stop the threatening train. In this
regard the empty train is similar to other morally irrelevant
instruments, such as the remote control or button presses.
As a consequence, the threatening train C, not the empty
train B is the morally relevant target of the intervention in
Condition IV. Computing the local contrast over the harmful outcomes train C is causing in the presence versus absence of the intervention yields a 1:5 local (and global)
contrast, which favors the intervention. In sum, the results
of the experiment favor our double contrast theory over the
DDE and related principles (Kamm, 2007).

Experiment 3
In Experiment 3 we ran different variants of some of the
conditions in Experiment 2 along with new conditions. This
experiment provides further tests of the DDE and our double
contrast theory. Again we used the standard trolley instruction about a threatening train on a test site which, due to a
brake failure, is about to hit a train with five track workers

2592

at the end of the main track. These five workers would be
killed. As in Experiment 1 there is also a parallel side track,
which is connected to the main track via a connecting track
(see Fig. 3). We ran four conditions. As in the other experiments the passengers inside the trains had no control over
the trains and therefore were not responsible for the outcomes in all conditions. In both Conditions I and II we
placed the single victim inside the threatening train B in a
safe location in the rear of the train. Thus, unlike in the last
experiment the passenger does not need to jump off the train
to save himself. Doing nothing leads to the death of the five
in train A at the end of the main track, but would spare the
passenger in the safe location inside the threatening train B.
In Condition I (n=58) , the instructions propose as an alternative that the agents in the remote control station could
redirect an empty train C located on the parallel side track
up to the main track, thus hitting the threatening train in the
rear section and thereby leading to the death of the single
passenger (see Fig. 3). However, the threatening train B
would be derailed saving the five. This scenario led to fairly
high ratings (M=4.4, SD=1.28).

Fig. 3: Illustration of consequence of proposed act in Conditions I and II of Experiment 3 (see text for details).
Condition II was similar. However, to provide a clear cut
case against the DDE, we made the role of the victim as a
means more salient. Technically one could argue that in all
our experiments the means of saving the five were the redirected trains, not the bodies of the passengers, whose
deaths could be construed as side effects. However, such an
argument would not save the DDE because then the difference between the threat and victim intervention in Experiment 1, for example, would be a puzzle. Moreover, we
doubt that people would construe their harm as a side effect
if they were sitting in a vehicle that is being used without
their consent to save others (see also Kamm, 2007). Anyhow, in Condition II (n=54) we stated again that a single
passenger in train C, who is unfamiliar with the steering and
brake system, is sitting in the rear of the train in a safe location. Now employees in the control station, guided by a
camera inside the train, notice that by hitting the train, the
passenger would fortuitously be pushed against the brake
system, which would lead to a derailment of the train. The
passenger would be killed by this act but the five would be
saved. In this instruction the body of the victim is clearly
specified as a necessary means for the goal to derail the train
and save the five. Interestingly, similarly high ratings as in
Condition I were obtained (M=4.81, SD=1.04). In fact, descriptively these were the highest ratings in this experiment.
Clearly participants were not sensitive to whether the body

of the victim was causally necessary for saving the five or
not.
Both Conditions I and II refute the DDE as a theoretical
account. Although in both conditions the single victim was
used as a means to save the five, subjects found the intervention highly acceptable. This finding is explained by the
double contrast theory. As in Condition III in Experiment 2,
in Conditions I and II of Experiment 3 the empty train C
plays the role of an instrument, the morally relevant target
of intervention is train B, which both constitutes a threat and
houses a potential victim. In the presence of the intervention
train B, the target of intervention, is involved in the death of
one victim while in the absence of the intervention the five
passengers in train A die. Thus, this conditions leads to a
1:5 local and global contrast.
To ascertain that the high ratings in Conditions I and II
are indeed different from predictably aversive conditions,
we also ran Condition III as a control, which is the standard
victim intervention condition (n=49). In this condition train
C on the side track which transports a single passenger is
redirected through the connecting track to the main track
where the train would hit and derail the empty threatening
train B, thus leading to the death of the one in train C, but
saving the five in train A. As usual, this intervention was
given fairly low ratings (M=3.76, SD=1.64), which is predicted by our theory as a result of the 1:0 local contrast.
Finally, in Condition IV (n=51), a fourth train D in which
one worker is sitting was introduced which is parked on the
connecting track, thus blocking the way to the main track.
The proposed intervention was to send an empty train C
located on the parallel side track up the connecting train,
thus derailing train D on the connecting track, and thereby
killing its passenger. After stating this fact, the instruction
mentioned that this event will open up the way to the main
track where train C from the side track could derail the
empty threatening train B on the main track, thus saving the
five in train A. This intervention also yields fairly low ratings (M=3.88, SD=1.37). How does our theory explain the
finding in Condition IV? The initial morally relevant target
of intervention in this condition is train D, which is parked
with its potential victim on the connecting track. This victim
dies in the presence but would be alive in the absence of the
intervention, thus creating a 1:0 local contrast.
The general pattern is confirmed by an ANOVA: Conditions I and I, which are statistically equivalent, yielded significantly higher acceptability ratings than Conditions III
and IV, F(1, 208)=11.30, p<0.001.

General Discussion
The goal of our studies was to test theories of moral acceptability in harm-based moral dilemmas. Certainly there are
other types of moral problems which might require different
theories (Haidt, 2007). Trolley dilemmas represent interesting test cases for cognitive theories because they show that
our moral intuitions are influenced by structural factors
which go beyond simple comparisons between outcomes
(e.g., numbers of victims) or acts (e.g., killing, saving).

2593

Despite identical outcomes and the identical conflict between saving and harming, our moral intuitions differ depending on various factors including the kind of act, distance, intention, contact, legal responsibility, personal force,
or the framing of the outcomes (e.g., Greene et al., 2009;
Rai & Holyoak, 2010). In our studies we tried to control for
these already known factors in order to focus on the remaining structural causal differences between types of scenarios,
which pose a puzzle for both psychologists and philosophers.
A number of moral theories focus on causal structures and
are therefore candidates for explaining effects of such structural differences. These theories differ in the choice of the
level of description and in the postulated relevant causal
features. Consequentialism focuses on outcomes, and therefore uses abstract descriptions of acts. The moral analysis
contrasts global outcomes in the presence and absence of the
act. This theory fails as a psychological account.
A second causal account, the non-consequentialist doctrine of double effect also tests for a favorable global contrast first, but then focuses on the causal paths entailed by
the act under consideration. Here the distinction between
harming people as a means versus as a side effect carries
most of the weight in explaining differences in intuitions in
trolley dilemmas.
A third theory, our double contrast theory, also starts by
considering the global contrast. But then a local contrast is
computed using basic level descriptions of the interventions
targeting threats or victims. For example, in the victim intervention conditions people represent the intervention as redirecting the victim, and consider what will happen to this
victim in the presence versus absence of the proposed act.
Three experiments have shown that the double contrast
theory wins over the doctrine of double effect. People clearly find it acceptable to use people as means without their
consent when the local contrast favors the act.

Directions for Future Research
More research is needed on how people choose the level of
description in moral dilemmas. It would be interesting to
present subjects with still movies, and have them describe
the scenarios in moral and non-moral settings.
Another interesting goal would be to further explore the
factors influencing local contrasts. In our experiments we
have chosen interventions in which the acts were morally
innocuous (e.g., throwing a switch). In the contrast between
re-directing a victim and not re-directing the victim, the
morally relevant contrast is surely about what happens to the
victim. However, if the intervention was shooting a victim
versus not shooting her, the contrast between shooting and
not shooting would certainly impact on the moral evaluation
of the contrast. A clear example of this case is, for example,
the famous Jim and the Indians dilemma, in which Jim is
given the choice of watching twenty Indians be shot or
shoot one of these twenty Indians himself, thus saving the
rest (Williams, 1973). Although the local contrast for the
Indian, Jim could shoot, would be 1:1 (he is dead regardless

of the act), the act is certainly aversive because of the shooting component of the contrast shooting the Indian vs. not
shooting the Indian.
Finally it would be interesting to get a more quantitative
assessment of the relative weight between global and local
contrasts. Global contrasts surely affect moral assessments,
as can easily be seen if we consider a 1:1.000.000 contrast
in a disaster variant of a trolley problem (Nichols & Mallon,
2006). Note that none of the previous theories includes
assumptions about how global contrasts quantitatively affect
judgments because moral philosophers typically ask about
permissibility, not about degree of permissibility. Our experiments clearly suggest that local contrasts dominate judgments but they do not allow us to answer the question how
much weight these contrasts have relative to the global
contrast.

References
Greene, J. D., Sommerville, R. B., Nystrom, L. E., Darley,
J. M., & Cohen, J. D. (2001). An fMRI investigation of
emotional engagement in moral judgment. Science, 293,
2105-2108.
Greene, J. D., Cushman, F. A., Stewart, L. E., Lowenberg,
K., Nystrom, L. E., & Cohen, J. D. (2009). Pushing moral
buttons: The interaction between personal force and intention in moral judgment. Cognition, 111, 364-371.
Haidt, J. (2007). The new synthesis in moral psychology.
Science, 316, 998-1002.
Hauser, M. D. (2006). Moral minds: How nature designed
our universal sense of right and wrong. New York: Ecco
Press.
Kamm, F. M. (2007). Intricate ethics: Rights, responsibilities, and permissible harm. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Mikhail, J. (2007). Universal moral grammar: Theory, evidence, and the future. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 11,
143-152.
Nichols, S., & Mallon, R. (2006). Moral dilemmas and
moral rules. Cognition, 100, 530-542.
Rai, T. S., & Holyoak, K. J. (2010). Moral principles or
consumer preferences? Alternative framings of the trolley
problem. Cognitive Science, 34, 311-321.
Royzman, E. B., & Baron, J. (2002). The preference for
indirect harm. Social Justice Research, 15, 165-184.
Thomson, J. J. (1986). The trolley problem. In J. J. Thomson, Rights, restitution, and risk. Essays in moral theory
(pp. 94-116). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Unger, P. (1996). Living high and letting die. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Waldmann, M. R., & Dieterich, J. (2007). Throwing a bomb
on a person versus throwing a person on a bomb: Intervention myopia in moral intuitions. Psychological Science, 18, 247-253.
Williams, B. (1973). A critique of utilitarianism. In J. J. C.
Smart & B. Williams, Utilitarianism: For and against
(pp. 82-117). Cambridge: University Press.

2594

