UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Motivationally Based Computational Interpretation of Social Anxiety Induced Stereotype
Bias

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2vh041t6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Wilson, Nicholas
Sun, Ron
Mathews, Robert

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Motivationally Based Computational Interpretation of
Social Anxiety Induced Stereotype Bias
Nicholas R. Wilson (wilson3@rpi.edu)
Ron Sun (rsun@rpi.edu)
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Cognitive Science Department
110 Eighth Street, Troy, NY 12180 USA

Robert C. Mathews (psmath@lsu.edu)
Louisiana State University
210 Audubon Hall, Baton Rouge, LA 70803, USA
Abstract

Lambert et al.’s (2003) Experiment

Lambert et al. (2003) suggested that stereotyping could be
thought of as automatic (implicit) responses that may become
magnified in certain social settings through a loss of cognitive
control. This type of explanation seems reasonable; however,
to date, no attempts have been made to provide a more thorough, mechanistic (computational) explanation of the exact
processes underlying the phenomenon. This paper proposes
just such a detailed explanation using the CLARION cognitive architecture. Our CLARION-based theory takes into account motivational factors as well as the interaction between
explicit and implicit processes and is used to provide a plausible interpretation of data from an identification task in Lambert et al. (2003).
Keywords: CLARION; cognitive architecture; cognitive
modeling; motivation; social anxiety; stereotype.

Introduction
In line with existing studies of the effects of social anxiety
on stereotype bias (e.g., Lambert et al., 2003; Payne, 2001),
an explanation of such a phenomenon can be made within a
computational framework, specifically the CLARION cognitive architecture (Sun, 2002, 2003). According to our interpretation, increases in anxiety related motivational drives
(Sun, 2007, 2009) have a causal effect on the ability to make
controlled (explicit) responses. The reduced capability can
lead an individual to revert to a reliance on more “automatic” (implicit) systems.
In the remainder of this paper, we develop a motivationally based, mechanistic theory within the CLARION
framework. This CLARION-based theory will then be used
to simulate the Lambert et al. (2003) stereotype-inducing
identification task and the simulation results will be
matched to their human data. The next two sections will
examine the task as well as the empirical findings from
Lambert et al. (2003). The section following these will present the CLARION-based theory for capturing the phenomenon. The section after that will examine the simulation
results and compare them to the human data. The final section will discuss how our theory relates broadly to the phenomenon of cognitive distracters and their impact on cognitive control.

Participants were instructed that they were to identify target objects being presented on a screen as belonging to either the “tool” category or the “gun” category. They were
also told that the task required both speed and accuracy.
Participants then completed a 48-trial “practice” phase allowing them to become familiar with the requirements of
the experiment as well as the target objects (i.e., the tools
and guns). After completing the practice trials, participants
were told either that all of their responses would be kept
confidential (i.e., they were in the private group) or that they
would be asked to share and discuss their responses with the
other participants in the testing room (i.e., they belonged to
the anticipated public group).
For the test phase, an additional element was added to the
identification task: the prime, a picture of a person’s face,
was presented briefly (for 200 ms.) before being replaced by
the target object (which was presented for 100 ms.). Participants were given a total of 550 ms. to make a response (by
pressing a button associated with the target’s category).
Participants completed a total of three blocks of trials. In
each block, each of the eight primes (4 black, 4 white) was
randomly paired with each of the eight targets (4 tools, 4
guns) twice. This yielded 128 trials per block, and a total of
384 trials overall.
After completing the identification task, participants also
completed a measure of social anxiety and the Dunton and
Fazio (1997) Motivation to Control Prejudicial Reactions
Scale. These scales attempted to measure the individual
differences in social anxiety and motivations to control
prejudicial reactions.

Experimental Results and Discussion
The results from Lambert et al. (2003) showed that participants tended to make stereotypic errors (i.e. misclassifying a tool as a gun when primed with a black face or a gun
as a tool when primed with a white face) on tool trials regardless of context (F = 20.03, p < .001 for the anticipated
public group, F = 3.74, p = .058 for the private group). In
other words, when the results were collapsed over context,
people who were presented with a tool were significantly
more likely to mistake it for a gun when it was coupled with
a black prime (M = .24) than a white prime (M = .22). In

1750

addition, people who were presented with a gun were significantly less likely to mistake it for a tool if it was coupled
with a black (M = .19) rather than a white (M = .21) face.
This finding was evidenced by a significant Prime X Object
interaction (F = 22.13, p < .001).
The results further indicated that people in anxietyinducing situations (e.g. the anticipated public group) made
significantly more stereotypic errors than those people who
were not distracted by an anxiety-inducing context (e.g., the
private group). This was confirmed by a significantly
stronger Prime X Object interaction in the anticipated public
condition compared to the private condition (F = 20.03, p <
.001 vs. F = 3.74, p = .058, as mentioned before).
Further, the presence of the black prime had an enhanced
effect on participants’ responses than the white prime. In
other words, on black prime trials, participants were significantly more inclined to make stereotypic errors (F = 11.52,
p < .001 for the main effect of object). This tendency was
not evidenced when primed with a white face (p > .20).
Based on the process dissociation procedure (Jacoby,
1991), it was found that participants in the private group had
higher estimates of cognitive control (.60) than participants
in the anticipated public group (.53). These numbers were
essentially the same regardless of prime as confirmed by a
Prime x Context ANOVA, which revealed a significant
main effect for context (F = 4.54, p < .05), no significant
effect of prime (F = .67, p > .05), and no evidence of a significant Prime x Context interaction (F = .01, p > .05).
Additionally, Lambert et al. (2003) hypothesized that accessibility bias (i.e., the likelihood of making a stereotyped
response when control failed) was a separate (dissociated)
process from cognitive control. The results on accessibility
bias estimates showed that when participants were primed
with a black face, estimates were significantly higher (.56)
than when they were primed with a white face (≈ .50). To
confirm this, a Prime x Context ANOVA was performed
revealing a significant interaction (F = 20.39, p < .001).
Beyond this, no other significant effects emerged from these
analyses. Of particular importance, accessibility bias was
not affected by manipulating context (F < 1.00, p > .05).
Lambert et al. (2003) also posited that accessibility bias
estimates could be used to roughly capture individual variation in stereotypic associations about blacks (i.e., how
strongly a person associates guns with this group). Taking
into account that control is particularly low for high-anxiety
participants in the anticipated public group, Lambert et al.
(2003) predicted that, for the aforementioned group, a correlation exists between estimates of accessibility bias and performance. To test this, they constructed an overall index of
stereotypic errors: Higher error indices indicated a greater
propensity toward making stereotypic errors over counterstereotypic errors when presented with a black prime.
A few important points resulted from that analysis. First,
in the private group context, the relationship between accessibility bias and gun responses was moderate and about the
same regardless of anxiety. However, the relationship was
especially strong in the anticipated public group, but this

was only among participants who were high in state anxiety.
Those participants with higher accessibility bias scores and
high anxiety made more stereotyped errors on black primed
trials, whereas participants with lower accessibility bias
scores made less stereotyped errors on those same trials.
Of additional pertinence to the present work is the effect
that context had on reported levels of state anxiety. Recall
that at the end of the experiment, participants completed a
questionnaire aimed at measuring a person’s reported level
of anxiety. Analysis of the anxiety measure indicated that,
consistent with expectations, participants reported significantly higher levels of (task-specific, i.e., state) anxiety in
the anticipated public (M = 1.89) compared with the private
condition (M = 1.32) [F = 10.03, p < .01].

A CLARION-based Theory
CLARION is a well-established cognitive architecture
(Sun, 2002, 2003; Sun et al., 2005). It consists of a number
of subsystems. The following three subsystems were used
for simulating the task in Lambert et al. (2003): the actioncentered subsystem (ACS), the motivational subsystem
(MS), and the meta-cognitive subsystem (MCS). Each subsystem is divided into two levels of representation: the explicit (top) and implicit (bottom) levels (see Reber, 1989;
Sun, 2002 for justifications).
One of the fundamental theoretical assumptions in
CLARION is the distinction between implicit and explicit
processing. What we term explicit processing is also known
as ‘‘controlled’’ processing (Lambert et al., 2003). Explicit
processes are often rule-based, require more time to obtain
results, and sometimes require more than one step to reach a
conclusion (Sun, 2002). Similarly, implicit processes are
often referred to as ‘‘automatic’’ processes. Further, when
researchers refer to ‘‘a loss in cognitive control’’, what they
are referring to, in CLARION terms, is an inability to adequately rely on explicit processes over (or in addition to)
implicit processes. A loss of cognitive control, therefore, is
equivalent to using more implicit processes.
Moving now to the representations within the two levels,
in the bottom level, CLARION takes note of the fact that the
inaccessible nature of implicit knowledge is best captured
by subsymbolic, distributed representations (such as in a
backpropagation network). It has been extensively argued
that the characteristics of distributed representations accord
well with the relative inaccessibility of implicit knowledge
(Sun, 2002). In contrast, explicit knowledge can be best
captured in computational modeling by symbolic or localist
representations (Sun, 2002; Sun et al., 2005), in which each
unit is more easily interpretable and has a clearer conceptual
meaning. This characteristic of symbolic or localist representations captures the characteristic of explicit knowledge
being more accessible (Sun, 2002). Accessibility here refers
to the direct and immediate availability of mental content
for the major operations that are responsible for, or concomitant with, consciousness, such as introspection, forming higher-order thoughts, and verbal reporting, as well as
meta-level control and manipulation.

1751

The dichotomous difference in the representations of the
two different types of knowledge led to a two-level architecture, whereby each level uses one kind of representation and
captures one corresponding type of process (this paper focuses specifically on the interaction between implicit and
explicit processing within the action-centered subsystem).
The Action-Centered Subsystem (ACS)
The Action-Centered Subsystem (ACS) consists of implicit processing (in the bottom level of the two-level structure, in the form of a backpropagation network) and explicit
processing (in the top level, through explicit action rules;
Sun, 2002). When both implicit and explicit knowledge is
available in the ACS for determining appropriate actions,
the two types of knowledge are ‘‘integrated’’, for example,
through stochastic selection of one type or the other. For
further details related to the ACS, see Sun (2002, 2003).
For our simulation, the ACS was responsible for generating responses to a set of featurized inputs (created based on
the actual pictures from Payne, 2001, to make the inputs as
accurate as possible; see table 1).
The bottom level of the ACS took the featurized descriptions of a prime and target as inputs and output the specification of whether the target item was a tool or gun. The
backpropagation network had 25 input nodes (13 describing
a person in 6 dimensions, 12 describing an object in 5 dimensions; see table 1), 10 hidden nodes, 2 output nodes (the
classification of tool or gun), and the default parameter settings (Sun, 2003). Also, since this task required quick responding, it should be especially prone to noise. We captured this effect by setting the temperature (to .4) involved
in stochastic selection of the output.
The bottom level was trained to focus on skin color, because it represents the stereotyping in its simplest form. According to Payne (2001), the primes were designed to filter
the characteristics of the faces until race was the only distinguishing feature. We also chose to exclude specific target
characteristics during training, because we felt that the link
between race and guns was likely a connection between skin
color and the concept of a gun (which is the output of the
ACS), not any particular gun or tool feature.
Table 1. Featurized inputs as dimension/value pairs.
Primes (people)
Dim.
Val.
Skin Color
Black,
White, Gray
Nose Shape Thin, Wide

Targets (guns/tools)
Dim.
Val.
Handle
Black,
Color
White, Gray
Shape

Bent,
Straight
Long, Short

Nose
Length

Short, Long

Eyebrow
Shape
Eye Size

Thick, Thin

Handle
Length
Head
Length

Long, Short

Big, Small

Sex

Male,
Female

Head
Color

Black,
White, Gray

Furthermore, we posit that stereotype bias is developed
slowly through subtle, cumulative experiences within a society. These biases have evolved from a fundamental need
to easily “classify” other members of society for the purpose
of ensuring survival. It has been argued that, in general,
people have developed “classification” systems to provide
help in making reasonable responses quickly to unexpected
or unclear circumstances (Sun, 2002). People are not necessarily cognizant of these response mechanisms. In fact, research suggests that tasks requiring quick reactions are often
performed implicitly (Reber, 1989; Sun, 2002; Sun et al.,
2005). Taking these arguments together, we feel that it is
reasonable to think of stereotyping as a form of “classification” that is often best explained as an implicit process.1
The bottom level was given 500,000 training trials presenting the black and white characteristic in such a fashion
that was consistent with the accessibility bias estimates from
Lambert et al. (2003). The accessibility bias estimate is the
probability that a stereotyped response will be made if control fails, and in our simulation control failing means that
only the bottom level of the ACS is used. Hence, it seemed
appropriate to use this measure to help guide the training.
On about 56% (plus or minus 3.5% for individual differences) of trials where a black face was presented to the network, it was coupled with a gun (on about 44% it was coupled with a tool). Tools and guns were paired at an equal
rate (plus or minus 3.5%) when coupled with a white face.
The top level of the ACS learned appropriate response
rules mapping inputs concerning specific tool/gun characteristics to the proper tool/gun classification output. The assumption is that these rules represent explicit knowledge
learned during the 48 practice trials as well as prior experiences by the human participants.
The Motivational Subsystem (MS)
In addition to the ACS, the motivational subsystem (MS)
is another major component in CLARION. The MS is responsible for motivational states (comprised of ‘‘drives’’
and ‘‘goals’’; Sun, 2007, 2009). In CLARION, drives are
fundamental motivational forces behind decision-making (as
well as other processes). Anxiety can be thought of as the
biological/physiological consequence of heightened (avoidance-oriented) drive strengths (see the discussion of drives
in Sun, 2009). Thus, in the simulation, an agent’s drive
strengths are set in the MS based on the experimental contexts (e.g., the existence of an anxiety-inducing situation).
Considering the specific aspects of this task, it was determined that a single drive, “honor” (i.e., obeying social
norms and codes), best encapsulated the motivating factors
involved with the contexts (groups). Based on an agent’s
context, its “honor” drive strength level was set in the MS.
The drive strength was obtained using a backpropagation
network with 2 input nodes, 4 hidden nodes, 1 output node,
and the default parameter settings (Sun, 2003). The first
input specified the context (group) to which the agent be1

Note that our interpretation is in line with the arguments made
by Lambert et al. (2003).

1752

longed. The second input represented the agent’s predisposition toward anxiety in social settings. While more generalized drive-strength equations exist, for the purposes of this
simulation, it was determined that a hyperbolic tangent
function provided a reasonable approximation for translating “stimulus” (i.e. context) and “deficit” (i.e. the individual
predisposition toward anxiety) into a drive strength.
Making the drive sensitive to both the context as well as
the predisposition to anxiety is justified by analysis performed by Lambert et al (2003), which found the existence
of a significant Context x Anxiety interaction using a hierarchical regression analysis.
Further analysis of the data of Lambert et al. showed that,
among participants above the group median in state anxiety,
there was a significant effect of context on estimates of control (β = .25, p < .05), reflecting lower control in the anticipated public context compared with the private context (Ms
= .51 vs. .60, respectively). However, context had no significant effect on control for the participants reporting low
levels of anxiety (β = .08, p = .52), reflecting the fact that
control was relatively high and about equal across the anticipated public and private contexts (Ms = .57 vs. .60). This
effect led to the two different values used for the parameter
of the hyperbolic tangent curve for the drive strength in the
MS. As a result of the two different parameter values, an
agent’s drive strength increased more rapidly and reached a
higher level in the public group than in the private group.
Figure 1 gives a graphical representation of the drive.
The Meta-Cognitive Subsystem (MCS)
Finally, in conjunction with the MS, the meta-cognitive
subsystem (MCS) may be used for setting parameters in the
ACS. The MCS performs a number of backend actions (including the setting of parameters for action selection, reasoning, and learning, etc.) based on drive states and so on
(see Sun, 2007, 2009). In the simulation, (avoidanceoriented) drive strengths (levels of anxiety) from the MS are
used as the basis by the MCS to determine the likelihood of
making decisions in a more or less explicit (i.e., controlled)
way by the ACS.
The MCS contains a module for determining the mode of
action decision making (i.e., the proportion of implicit vs.
explicit processing in the ACS). A backpropogation network

with 1 input node, 4 hidden nodes, 1 output node, and the
default parameter settings (Sun, 2003) was used. The network was used to produce outputs based on an inverted U
curve (see Yerkes & Dobson, 1908) that mapped drive
strengths (the input) to the probability of being explicit (i.e.,
using the top level of the ACS) during action decision making (see figure 2). The working hypothesis in this regard is
that when anxiety is at a relatively low level, it has little (or
possibly even a positive) effect on the ability to be controlled (explicit) in making action decisions. However, when
anxiety reaches a certain higher level, it can begin impairing
control, creating a need to revert to faster, more automatic,
implicit processes (Sun, 2007, 2009; Wilson et al., 2009;
Yerkes & Dobson, 1908)

Figure 1. Graphical representation of the “honor” drive.
The x-axis represents the predisposition toward anxiety (0
≤ x ≤ 5); the y-axis represents drive strength (0 ≤ y ≤ 1).
The bottom curve represents the private group [y =
tanh(.12x)]; the top curve represents the anticipated public
group [y = tanh(.36x)].

Figure 2. Inverted U-Curve. The x-axis represents the drive
strength (0 ≤ x ≤ 1); the y-axis represents the level of cognitive control (0 ≤ y ≤ 1) [y = -.38x2 + .2x + .58].

Simulation Results
In exact correspondence with experiment 2 of Lambert et
al. (2003), simulated agents were placed in either a simulated private group or a simulated anticipated public group.
Like the human experiment, the test phase was run using
384 trials where each face/tool pairing was observed six
times at intervals of 2 times per 128 trials. A total of 128
agents were used (as opposed to 127 human participants in
Lambert et al., 2003) and 64 agents were placed into each
group.
The results of the simulation were recorded as error rates
for the four different possible pairings of prime and target.
Consistent with the findings from Lambert et al. (2003),
agents in the simulated private group made significantly
fewer errors on gun trials than on tool trials when paired
with a black prime (.174 vs. .224) [F = 42.62, p < .001].
Additionally, on trials containing a white prime, in the
simulated private group, error rates on gun and tool trials
were essentially the same (.202 vs. .199) [F = .17, p > .05].
In the simulated public group, when a black prime was
paired with a gun, error rates were significantly lower than
when paired with a tool (.214 vs. .27) [F = 45.37, p < .001].
Also, when a white prime was paired with either a gun or a
tool, error rates were not significantly different (.244 vs.
.238) [F = .491, p > .05] for the simulated public group.
These findings were consistent with Lambert et al. (2003).
Further analysis of the simulation data revealed a signifi-

1753

cant Prime X Object interaction (F = 48.4, p < .001). Collapsed over situational context, agents were significantly
more likely to mistakenly identify a tool as a gun if they
were primed with a black face (M = .247) than a white face
(M = .219) [F = 30.991, p < .001]. Conversely, agents were
significantly less likely to mistakenly identify a gun as a
tool if they were primed with a black face (M = .194) than a
white face (M = .223) [F = 26.546, p < .001]. Looking at it
another way, agents showed a significantly stronger tendency toward mistaking a tool for a gun when primed with a
black face, as opposed to mistaking a gun for a tool, when
primed with a black face (F = 88.42, p < .001 for the main
effect of object). When agents were primed with white
faces, error rates did not vary significantly across object
types (F = .649, p > .05). These findings were, again, consistent with Lambert et al. (2003).
Moreover, agents in the simulated public group made significantly more errors in general than agents in the simulated private group. This was confirmed statistically by
comparing the mean error rates between the simulated public group (M = .24) and the simulated private group (M =
.20) [F = 56.64, p < .001 for the main effect of context]. In a
related statistic, the Object X Prime interaction was stronger
in the simulated public group (F = 28.01, p < .001) compared with the simulated private group (F = 22.26, p <
.001). Figure 3 graphically illustrates the above pattern of
data and gives a comparison to Lambert et al. (2003).
Turning to analyses based on process dissociation, inferences into some of the mechanisms within CLARION can
be made. First, the cognitive control estimate (Lambert et
al., 2003) can be thought of as the probability that a person
will be able to use their explicit processes (the top level of
the ACS) when making a response (Sun et al., 2005). Second, the accessibility bias estimate (Lambert et al., 2003)
can be thought of as the probability of making a gun response when cognitive control fails. According to our interpretation, a failure of control is tantamount to using implicit
processing (see Sun, 2002; Sun et al., 2005).
Given this interpretation, there were two methods to report the cognitive control estimate from the simulation: by
looking at the probability of using the top level of the ACS
(as determined by the MCS), and by the process dissociation
procedure (Jacoby, 1991; Lambert et al., 2003). Table 2
shows the MCS determined levels of cognitive control, the
cognitive control estimates calculated using process dissociation, as well as the cognitive control estimates reported
by Lambert et al. (2003). The cognitive control estimates
from the simulation clearly correspond to Lambert et al.’s
findings. A Prime X Context ANOVA on cognitive control

estimates, calculated using the process dissociation equation
(Lambert et. al., 2003), from the simulation data revealed
the expected significant main effect for context (F = 56.635,
p < .001), no significant effect for prime (F = .861, p > .05),
and no significant Prime X Context interaction (F = .683, p
> .05). This analysis provides support to the notion that
cognitive control estimates are affected by context but not
by prime.
Additionally, as per our interpretation, two methods for
reporting accessibility bias estimates from simulation existed as well: process dissociation and actual levels of accessibility bias that were calculated by simply keeping track of
the number of times the bottom level chose a gun classification when the bottom level was used. Table 3 shows the
actual accessibility bias, the accessibility bias estimates calculated using process dissociation, as well as the accessibility bias estimates from Lambert et al. (2003). As expected,
the accessibility bias estimates from the simulation, calculated using the process dissociation equation (Lambert et.
al., 2003), were significantly higher for a black prime than a
white prime and did not vary significantly by context. A
Prime X Context ANOVA on accessibility bias estimates
confirmed a significant main effect of prime (F = 37.92, p <
.001), no significant effect of context (F = .039, p > .05),
and no significant interaction (F = .179, p > .05).
Finally, a comparison between a standardized error index,
which measured the agent’s tendency toward making stereotypic vs. counter-stereotypic errors and the accessibility bias
estimates, was calculated. Consistent with the findings from
Lambert et al. (2003), the relationship between accessibility
bias estimates and gun responses, as specified by the standardized error index, was moderate in the simulated private
group, regardless of anxiety. However, this relationship became stronger in the simulated public group, but only when
anxiety was high. A graphical representation of this analy-

Table 2. Cognitive control estimates.

Table 3. Accessibility Bias Estimates.

Lambert et al. (2003)
Black White
Group Prime Prime
Private
.61
.60
Public
.53
.53

Figure 3. The graph on the left shows the human data from
Lambert et al. (2003). The graph on the right is the simulation results.

Simulation
Black White
Group MCS Prime Prime
Private .599
.602
.598
Public .528
.518
.517

Lambert et al. (2003)
Simulation
Black White
ACS ACS Black White
Group Prime Prime Group Black White Prime Prime
Private
.56
.53 Private .57 .508 .565 .504
Public
.56
.49 Public .562 .505 .559 .506

1754

broader phenomenon (i.e., the effects that cognitive distracters have on performance in a variety of contexts) is explainable in a quantitative, process-based way. In this regard, CLARION provides a useful framework, which has
been derived from our prior studies and simulations of human experimental data (e.g., Sun et al., 2005; Sun, 2002;
Wilson et al., 2009). Our ability to explore such tasks in a
more detailed, more unified fashion should be useful in better understanding the interaction between motivation, metacognition, and implicit and explicit performance.

Acknowledgments
This work is supported (in part) by the ARI contract
W74V8H-05-K-0002 and the ONR grant N00014-08-10068. We would like to thank Sebastien Helie for his help.

References
Figure 4. The top graph is the human data from Lambert et
al. (2003). The bottom graph is the simulation results.
sis, along with a comparison to the findings from Lambert et
al. (2003), can be seen in figure 4. Our finding of the correlation between accessibility bias estimates and error rates, as
specified by the standardized error index, lend further support to the implicit nature of stereotyping. In addition, similar to the findings by Lambert et al. (2003), the connection
between state anxiety and an agent’s ability to make controlled (i.e., explicit) responses is characterized by the lack
of a strong correlation between accessibility bias estimates
and gun responses in both groups when agents were not
highly effected by the anxiety-inducing cues. In other
words, agents with lower levels of anxiety made more controlled responses and therefore had less chances of making
stereotyped (implicit) responses.

General Discussion and Conclusion
Our CLARION-based theory appears to be capable of
modeling the cognitive processes associated with the induction of stereotype biases in a social anxiety context, as illustrated by the successful simulation of Lambert et al. (2003).
Moreover, our model captures the essence of the analysis of
the empirical data by Lambert et al. (2003) (in a manor consistent with their interpretations).
Of related interest, our simulation supports the argument
that stereotyping can be seen as mostly being an automatic
(i.e., implicit) response that likely manifests itself as a result
of a lessening in the ability to use more controlled (i.e., explicit) processes, as opposed to a strengthening of stereotyping habits (see Lambert et al., 2003 for further details related to this argument).
In conclusion, this article has laid out preliminary foundations that can later be applied to developing a more detailed
theory of the mechanistic processes underlying the effects
that anxiety and other cognitive distracters, in general, have
on the control of cognition. Our theory suggests that the

Dunton, B. C., Fazio, R. H. (1997). An individual difference
measure of motivation to control prejudiced reactions.
Personality & Social Psychology Bulletin, 23, 316–326.
Jacoby, L.L. (1991). A process dissociation framework:
Separating automatic from intentional uses of memory.
Journal of Memory & Language, 30, 513-541.
Lambert, A., Payne, B., Jacoby, L., Shaffer, L., Chasteen,
A., Khan, S. (2003). Stereotypes as dominant responses:
On the “social facilitation” of prejudice in anticipated
public contexts. Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 84, 277-295.
Payne, K. (2001). Prejudice and perception: The role of
automatic and controlled processes in misperceiving a
weapon. Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 81,
181-192.
Reber, A. (1989). Implicit learning and tacit knowledge.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 118, 219235.
Sun, R. (2002). Duality of the Mind. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Sun, R. (2003). A Tutorial on CLARION 5.0. Technical Report, Cognitive Science Department, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.
Sun, R. (2007). Motivation and metacognitive control of
CLARION. In: W. Gray (ed.). Modeling Integrated Cognitive Systems. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Sun, R. (2009). Motivational representations within a computational cognitive architecture. Cognitive Computation,
1, 91-103.
Sun, R., Slusarz, P., Terry, C. (2005). The interaction of the
explicit and the implicit in skill learning: A dual-process
approach. Psychological Review, 112, 159-192.
Wilson, N., Sun, R., Mathews, R. (2009). A Motivationallybased Simulation of Performance Degradation Under
Pressure. Neural Networks, 22, 502-508.
Yerkes, R.M., Dodson, J.D. (1908). The relation of strength
of stimulus to rapidity of habit-formation. Journal of
Comparative Neurology & Psychology, 18, 459-482.

1755

