UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Abstract and Belief-Based Language Differentiate Joking, Pretending, and Literal ToddlerDirected Speech

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9fq6h7zr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Hoicka, Elena
Campbell, Ruth

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Abstract and Belief-Based Language Differentiate Joking, Pretending, and Literal
Toddler-Directed Speech
Elena Hoicka (elena.hoicka@stir.ac.uk)
Psychology Department, University of Stirling, Stirling, FK9 4LA, UK

Ruth Campbell (rec00001@students.stir.ac.uk)
Psychology Department, University of Stirling, Stirling, FK9 4LA, UK

Abstract
Twenty-two parents read a book containing joking, pretense,
and literal pages to their 15- to 21-month-old toddlers. Parents
differentiated joking from pretense book pages by using (1)
more disbelief statements and humor-specific words, (2)
fewer belief statements, and pretense-specific words. Parents
differentiated joking from literal book pages by using more
(1) high-level abstract language, (2) disbelief statements, and
(3) humor-specific words. This study extends findings that
abstract language cues non-literal concepts in general (e.g.,
metaphor, irony). This is also the first study to discover
differences in cues to joking and pretense.
Keywords: Humor, Pretense, Abstract language, Beliefs,
Parent-child interaction

Introduction
Human life is permeated with social institutions with
conventional and normative structures. In order to
participate in collective activities, children must learn how
to act within these settings. One interesting question is how
children respond to violations of normative rules.
Sometimes, the appropriate response may be to protest (e.g.,
Rakoczy, Warneken, & Tomasello, 2008), but sometimes
the appropriate response may be to treat the violation as a
joke (and laugh), or as pretend (and maybe join in). This
involves not only understanding that people have intentions,
but also that they have intentions to do the wrong thing.
This is an important, yet difficult concept required to
understand humor, pretense, lying, false belief, and
metaphor (Hoicka, Jutsum, & Gattis, 2008, Leekam, 1991).
While some accounts suggest that children possess an
innate capacity to understand others’ pretense and false
beliefs (e.g. Leslie, 1987), such accounts do not explain how
children might distinguish when someone is pretending
versus joking, or even doing the right thing. For example,
how do we use a telephone? We could speak into it when
someone is on the other end (literal). We could speak into it
when no one is listening (pretending). We could put the
receiver on our foot and speak (joking). To an adult, the act
in and of itself may distinguish whether a person intends to
joke, pretend, or be literal. However for a toddler still
learning about new objects, it may not be clear which act
follows which intention. If they have had little experience
with telephones, any act could be seen as the literal act.
Even with experience of telephones, the pretend act could
be seen as a joke (it’s silly to talk to no one) and the

humorous act could be seen as pretending (she's pretending
that her foot is her ear). In order for toddlers to distinguish
amongst various types of communicative intentions, it is
thus plausible that parents give additional cues in order to
help them in this task.
The goal of the current study was to determine whether
parents differentiate joking, pretense, and literal speech with
linguistic cues. Parents use more abstract language when
reading humorous versus non-humorous book pages
(Hoicka, et al., 2008). Similarly children use past and future
tenses when pretending (e.g. Lodge, 1979; Musatti, 1993;
Sawyer, 1997). Since references to past and future are forms
of abstract language (Hoicka, et al., 2008), parents might
also use abstract language to cue pretending. When irony
and metaphor, two other concepts involving intentional
wrongness, are couched in abstract language, adults are
more likely to judge them as ironic or metaphorical
respectively (Hoicka, 2010; Torreano, Cacciari, &
Glucksberg, 2005). Theoretically, infants and toddlers could
use abstract language in the same way to determine that
joking or pretense was intended.
Belief-based language may serve to highlight differences
between joking and pretense. When parents read a
humorous versus non-humorous book, they used more
disbelief statements, i.e., statements that conveyed that they
did not believe what they had said (Hoicka, et al., 2008). For
example, when making the joke, “Ducks say moo”, parents
made statements such as, “What are ducks supposed to
say?” Thus parents cued their toddlers to humorous
intentions by contrasting the jokes to the parents’ true
knowledge and beliefs. In contrast, utterances referring to
pretend play have “at best weak correspondence in the
immediate situation” (Veneziano, 2001, p. 331), for
example, saying “here is a drink” whilst referring to an
empty cup. Parents refer to absent references when
pretending (Lillard & Witherington, 2004). For example,
when pretending to eat, versus really eating, parents utter
more words referring to the act of eating, or the objects
involved in eating. Parents may use disbelief statements
when joking because they (1) have said something to
express disbelief about, and (2) by highlighting wrongness,
parents may help toddlers understand the punch line of the
joke. Parents may create absent references, a.k.a., belief
statements, when pretending because (1) parents must
convey what their wrong action was meant to be, e.g.,
putting a cup to one’s mouth is not actually drinking, and so

1040

making statements such as “I’m drinking” could help
toddlers understand what the action represents, and (2) the
purpose of pretense, unlike joking, is to represent a wrong
action as something right in a possible world (Nichols &
Stich, 2003), thus belief statements could emphasize the
truth-values of the representational state. However the
Hoicka et al. (2008) study did not measure belief statements,
nor did the Lillard and Witherington (2004) study measure
disbelief statements. This study aimed to determine whether
parents use belief-based language to differentiate joking and
pretense.
A second way in which parents might differentiate joking
from pretense is by using humor- and pretense-specific
words. Parents used humor-specific words such as “funny”
or “silly” more often when reading a humorous versus nonhumorous book to their toddlers (Hoicka, et al., 2008).
Similarly, parents used the word “pretend” more often when
pretending versus being literal (Lillard, et al., 2007). Such
words could assist children in linking past and present
experiences, and determine whether they are acts of joking
or pretense. Indeed, preschoolers are more likely to
understand pretend intentions when words such as “pretend”
are used (Rakoczy, Tomasello, & Striano, 2006).
In the current study, parents read a book to their toddler
which contained two joking, two pretense, and two literal
pages. We designed the book in this way so that we could
compare (1) cues to joking versus pretending, and (2) cues
to literal versus joking speech.

Method
Participants
Twenty-two parents (20 mothers, 2 fathers) and their
toddlers (age M = 18 months, 19 days, SD = 2 months, 16
days, range = 15 months, 5 days to 21 months 26 days; 9
boys) participated. One additional participant was not
included due to fussiness. Participants were recruited from
playgroups, toddler classes, and a press release in the local
news paper. Parents and children were primarily Scottish.

Materials
Four illustrated versions of a book, “James’ Big Day” were
created. See Figure 1 for an example of pages. A Shure
head-mounted microphone was fit into an Olympus MP3
recorder to record the parents’ speech. A Sony digital
camcorder was used to record the visual aspects of the
reading session, and as a backup for speech recordings.

Design
This was a within-subjects design. The independent
variable was the type of utterance each page conveyed:
joking, pretense, or literal. There were a total of six target
sentences per book; two conveyed joking, two conveyed
pretense, and two conveyed something literal. The books
were designed such that the same target sentence conveyed
either joking, pretense, or was literal, depending on the

sentences prior to the target sentence, as well as the
accompanying images in the books. See Figure 1 for an
example. Four different books matched different page types
to eight target sentences, and this was counterbalanced.
Parents read only one book each. The dependent variables
included parents’ use of abstract language, belief-based
language, and humor- and pretense-specific language.

Coding
Parents’ utterances were transcribed from the MP3 files. For
parents’ use of abstract language, each extra-textual
utterance (ETU) was coded for levels of abstraction
following Hoicka, et al. (2008), and Van Kleeck, et al.
(1997). These included:
Level 1 (perceptual identification, concrete): The
utterance refers solely to one object in the event. This level
includes object labelling either at the basic, subordinate, or
superordinate levels. It also includes stating an intrinsic
property of the object (e.g., color) or drawing attention to
the object or one of its properties. Examples are “What’s
that?" and “It’s a bowl.”
Level 2 (perceptual relationship, concrete): The utterance
links two objects or events. The link may involve an
intrinsic property (same color), spatial relation (left of,
above), a common action (X and Y produce something, or X
acts on Y), or a common feeling. Examples are “This car is
like the other car.” and "The cake is in his hand."
Level 3 (displaced reference, abstract): The utterance
links an object or event with an object or event that is absent
either in space (spatially displaced reference) or time (past
talk), typically including subjective experiences with the
object. Examples are “Do you remember seeing a duck in
the pond?” and “You have a car at home.”
Level 4 (inference, abstract): The utterance conveys one
of several inferences, including logical reasoning and
imaginary description, or states some social knowledge.
Examples are "If he eats that with his hands, he'll make a
mess", and "It’s like the boy is flying through the air".
Transcripts were separately coded for belief-based
language, following Hoicka, et al. (2008) for disbelief
statements. All ETUs which followed the target sentences
were coded as either a belief statement, a disbelief
statement, or neither.
To be coded as a belief statement, the ETU should suggest
that the parent believed the assertion of the target sentence.
This can be coded in three ways:
General belief statements: statements which express belief
that can be applied to any statement, e.g., “That’s right”, or
“It’s true”
Sentence-specific belief statements: statements which
express belief specifically in relation to the target sentence.
This could include a repetition or re-phrasing of the target
sentence.
Build-on belief statements: statements which show belief
through building on the target sentence. E.g., if the context
is that a child is pretending that a basket is a pram, or the
child is really sitting in a pram, and the target sentence is

1041

“He’s sitting in the pram”, the parent might add to this by
saying something like “There’s the wheel”
To be coded as a disbelief statement, the ETU should
suggest that the parent does not believe the assertion of the
target sentence. This can be coded in three ways:
General disbelief statements: statements or questions
which express disbelief that can be applied to any statement,
e.g., “That’s wrong”, or “That’s not true”.
Sentence-specific disbelief statements: statements and
questions which express disbelief specifically in relation to
the target sentence, e.g., for the target utterance, “He’s
sitting in the pram”, the parent might say, “That’s not a
pram”, or “Is that a pram?”
Build-on disbelief statements: statements which show
disbelief through building on the target sentence. E.g., for
the target sentence, “He’s sitting in the pram”, parents might
say, “Prams should have wheels.” or, “What is he really
sitting in?”
ETUs were coded for humor-specific words such as jok*,
funn*, hilarious, and sill*, and for pretense-specific words
such as preten*, imagin*, and make-believe.

Results
No effects of child age were found, so child age was
dropped from final analyses. Linear mixed models were
used with participant code and target sentence as random
variables. Simple contrasts were used to compare Joking to
both Pretense and Literal pages.

Abstract Language
Means for Page Type by Abstraction Level can be found
in Figure 2. No effects of child gender were found, so child
gender was not included in the final analyses. A 3 (Page
Type: Pretense, Joking, Literal) X 4 (Level of Abstraction 14) mixed model found an effect of Level of Abstraction,
t(503) = 2.87, p = .0043, and an interaction between Level
of Abstraction and Page Type, t(503) = 2.41, p = .0165.
Additional models were run to examine interactions.
3 (Page Type) mixed models on Levels 1, 2, and 3
Abstraction using simple contrasts found no effects (Level
1: Pretense M = 0.70, SD = 1.19; Joking M = 0.75, SD =
1.45; Literal M = 0.93, SD = 1.53; Level 2: Pretense M =
0.34, SD = 0.71; Joking M = 0.55, SD = 1.09; Literal M =
0.23, SD = 0.60; Level 3: Pretense M = 0.18, SD = 0.50;
Joking M = 0.32, SD = 0.83; Literal M = 0.23, SD = 0.60). A
3 (Page Type) mixed model on Level 4 Abstraction using a
simple contrast found that parents uttered significantly more
Level 4 ETUs when reading Joking (M = 1.34, SD = 1.58)
versus Literal pages (M = 0.61, SD = 1.22), t(108) = 2.64, p
= .0094. There was no difference between Joking and
Pretense (M = 1.30, SD = 1.72) pages.

Belief-Based Language
Means for Page Type by Belief-based Language can be
found in Figure 3. A 3 (Page Type: Pretense, Joking,
Literal) X 2 (Statement Type: Belief, Disbelief) X 2(Child
Gender) mixed model found effects of Page Type (Pretend

vs. Joking), t(232) = 5.07, p < .0001; Page Type (Joking vs.
Literal), t(232) = 2.17, p = .0309; an interaction between
Statement Type and Page Type (Pretend vs. Joking), t(232)
= 5.04, p < .0001; an interaction between Statement Type
and Page Type (Joking vs. Literal), t(232) = 3.27, p = .0012;
and an interaction between Statement Type, Page Type
(Joking vs. Literal), and Child Gender, t(232) = 2.35, p =
.0197. Additional models were run to examine interactions.
No effects of child gender were found for disbelief
statements, so were dropped from the following analysis. A
3 (Page Type: Pretense, Joking, Literal) mixed model for
disbelief statements with a simple contrast found that
parents used significantly more disbelief statements when
expressing Joking (M = 1.45, SD = 1.70) versus Pretense (M
= 0.39, SD = 0.92), t(108) = 2.42, p = .0173, and when
expressing Joking versus Literal (M = 0.18, SD = 0.45)
speech, t(108) = 4.03, p < .0001.
A 3 (Page Type: Pretense, Joking, Literal) X 2 (Child
Gender) mixed model for belief statements with a simple
contrast found that parents used significantly more belief
statements when expressing Pretense (M = 0.66, SD = 1.35)
versus Joking (M = 0.36, SD = 0.75), t(108) = 2.70, p =
.0080. An interaction between Child Gender and Page Type
(Pretense, Joking), was found, t(108) = 2.90, p = .0045, such
that parents used more belief statements when expressing
Pretense to boys versus girls, but more belief statements
when expressing Joking to girls versus boys. There was no
difference between Joking and Literal (M = 0.68, SD = 0.88)
speech.

Humor- and Pretense-Specific Words
Means for Page Type by use of humor- and pretensespecific words can be found in Figure 4. No effects of child
gender were found, so child gender was not included in the
final analyses. A 3 (Page Type: Pretense, Joking, Literal) X
2 (Word Type: Humor, Pretense) mixed model found effects
of Page Type (Pretense vs. Joking), t(237) = 2.40, p = .0173;
Page Type (Joking vs. Literal), t(237) = 2.40, p = .0173; and
an interaction between Word Type and Page Type (Pretense
vs. Joking), t(237) = 2.87, p = .0045. Additional models
were run to examine interactions.
A 3 (Page Type: Joking, Pretense, Literal) mixed model
for humor-specific words using a simple contrast found that
parents used significantly more humor-specific words when
expressing Joking (M = 0.32, SD = 0.64) versus Pretense (M
= 0.02, SD = 0.15), t(108) = 2.12, p = .0366, and when
expressing Joking versus Literal speech (M = 0.02, SD =
0.15), t(108) = 2.12, p = .0366.
A 3 (Page Type: Pretense, Joking, Literal) mixed model
for pretense-specific words using a simple contrast found
that parents used significantly more pretense-specific words
in the Pretense (M = 0.11, SD = 0.44) versus Joking (M =
0.02, SD = 0.15) conditions, t(108) = 2.05, p = .0427.
There was no difference between the Joking and Literal (M
= 0, SD = 0) conditions.

Discussion

1042

The current study investigated whether parents use
linguistic cues to differentiate (1) joking from pretense, and
(2) joking from literal speech

Joking vs. Pretense
This research provides the first evidence that parents use
belief-based language to differentially cue toddlers to joking
and pretense. Parents used significantly more disbelief
statements and significantly fewer belief statements when
reading joking versus pretense pages. Parents also used
significantly more humor-specific words when reading
joking versus pretense pages, and significantly more
pretense-specific words when reading pretense versus
joking pages.
While intentionality research typically focuses on whether
or not children understand intentions (e.g., Carpenter,
Akhtar, & Tomasello, 1998; Gergely, Bekkering, & Király,
2002; Meltzoff, 1995) little research has examined how
children come to understand intentions to do the wrong
thing, and how children come to distinguish amongst
various types of intentions. The current study demonstrates
that parents offer toddlers linguistic cues to distinguish
between joking and pretense. Thus it may be the case that
children learn to distinguish amongst abstract, non-literal
concepts such as jokes and pretense. In particular, hearing
proportionally more disbelief statements and proportionally
fewer belief statements when encountering joking could
allow a child to identify the reference to the wrong act, and
to identify that the act was meant only as a wrong act and
nothing else. In contrast, by hearing a more even mixture of
belief and disbelief statements when encountering pretense,
children could identify the reference to the wrong act
through disbelief statements, and could also identify the
representation of the wrong act through belief statements.
Additionally, humor-specific words could help toddlers link
past and present humorous situations, while pretensespecific words could help toddler link past and present
pretense situations.

humor-specific words such as “funny” and “silly” when
reading joking versus literal pages. This replicates and
extends past research which found that parents use disbelief
statements, as well as humor-specific words to cue humor
(Hoicka, et al., 2008).
The present findings suggest that parents may bootstrap
non-literal concepts, such as joking and pretending, by
helping their toddlers to think in an abstract way, and by
identifying that what was said is not literally true. These
linguistic cues could also help toddlers identify what exactly
made the situation false. Additionally, given that toddlers do
not understand that others can intend to joke until they are 2
years old (Hoicka & Gattis, 2008), and do not understand
that others can intend to pretend until they are 3 years old
(Rakoczy, Tomasello, & Striano, 2004), abstract and beliefbased language may help toddlers realize that others can
intend to do or say the wrong thing in the first place.

Future Research
Future Research will examine whether mothers and
fathers give the same or different types of linguistic cues to
differentiate joking and pretense, and to differentiate literal
from non-literal speech. Additionally, we will examine
whether parents use the same types of linguistic cues when
engaging in acts of joking and pretense with their toddlers,
as compared to when they read about these concepts.
Finally, future research should also consider whether
toddlers can use these cues to adequately differentiate
joking from pretense, and literal versus non-literal events.

Figures
Pretense:
James and his big sister Katie are
playing make-believe. Katie crawls
around and meows. Meow meow.
Mummy asks, “What was that?”
James knows…
It was a cat.
Joking:
James and his big sister Katie go
in the yard. They hear some
barking. Ruff ruff. Mummy says,
“What was that?” James wants to
make a funny joke…
It was a cat.

Literal vs. Non-literal Speech
The current study found that parents used more high-level
abstract language when reading joking versus literal pages.
This replicates findings that parents use high-level abstract
language to cue humor (Hoicka, et al., 2008). This also
converges with findings that abstract language cues adults to
both metaphor and irony (Hoicka, 2010; Torreano, et al.,
2005), two other non-literal abstract concepts. Interestingly,
there was no difference between the amount of high-level
abstract language that parents used to cue joking versus
pretense. Thus parents may use abstract language in order to
cue their children to both joking and pretense. This may
allow toddlers to think in an abstract way in order to resolve
the joke, or understand the representation underlying the
pretense.
The current study also found that parents used more
disbelief statements when expressing joking versus literal
concepts. Additionally, parents used significantly more

Literal:
James and his big sister Katie are
really excited because Mummy
brought home a new pet. They
hear something go meow meow.
What was the pet?
It was a cat.
Figure 1: Examples of Page Types for same target sentence.
Original images were in color.

1043

Acknowledgments

3.5

Literal
Pretense

Mean Number of ETUs

3

We would like to thank parents and toddlers for
participating in our research. We would also like to thank
Felicity Malla, Jennifer Dent, and Sarah McAllister for help
with creating stimuli and data collection. This research was
supported by a British Academy Small Research Grant SG54221 and an ESRC Small Research Grant RES-000-223888, both awarded to Elena Hoicka.

Joking

2.5
2
1.5
1

References

0.5
0
Level 1

Level 2

Level 3

Level 4

Abstraction

Figure 2: Mean number of ETUs for each Level of
Abstraction
2.5

Belief
Disbelief

Mean Number of ETUs

2

1.5

1

0.5

0
Pretense

Joking

Literal

Figure 3: Mean number of ETUs expressing Belief and
Disbelief.
0.6
Humor-Specific

Mean Number of ETUs

0.5

Pretense-Specif c

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
Pretense

Joking

Literal

Figure 4: Mean numbers of ETUs using humor- and
pretense-specific words.

Carpenter, M., Akhtar, N., & Tomasello, M. (1998).
Fourteen through 18 month old infants differentially
imitate intentional and accidental actions. Infant Behavior
and Development, 21. 315-330.
Gergely, G., Bekkering, H., & Király, I. (2002). Rational
imitation in preverbal infants. Nature, 415, 755.
Hoicka, E. (2010). Abstract Language as a Cue to Irony.
Submitted Manuscript.
Hoicka, E. & Gattis, M. (2008). Do the wrong thing: how
toddlers tell a joke from a mistake.
Cognitive
Development, 23, 180-190.
Hoicka, E., Jutsum, S., & Gattis, M. (2008). Humor,
abstraction, and disbelief. Cognitive Science, 32, 9851002.
Leekam, S. (1991). Jokes and lies: Children’s
understanding of intentional falsehood. In A. Whiten
(Ed.) Natural Theories of Mind. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Lillard, A. S., Nishida, T., Massaro, D., Vaish, A., Ma, L.,
& McRoberts, G. (2007). Signs of pretense across age
and scenario. Infancy, 11, 1-30.
Lillard, A. S., & Witherington, D. (2004). Mothers'
behavior modifications during pretense snacks and their
possible signal value for toddlers. Developmental
Psychology, 40, 95-113.
Lodge, K. R. (1979). The use of the past tense in games of
pretend. Journal of Child Language, 6, 365-369.
Meltzoff, A. (1995). Understanding the intentions of others:
Re-enactment of intended acts by 18-month-old children.
Developmental Psychology, 31, 838-850.
Musatti , T., & Orsolini, M. (1993). Uses of past forms in
the social pretend play of Italian children. Journal of
Child Language, 20, 619-639.
Nichols, S., & Stich, S. P. (2003). Mindreading: An
integrated account of pretense, self-awareness, and
understanding other minds. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Rakoczy, H., Tomasello, M., & Striano, T. (2004). Young
children know that trying is not pretending: A test of the
“behaving-as-if” construal of children’s early concept of
pretense. Developmental Psychology, 40, 388–399.
Rakoczy, H., Tomasello, M., & Striano, T. (2006). The role
of experience and discourse in children's developing
understanding of pretend play actions. British Journal of
Developmental Psychology, 24, 305-335
Rakoczy, H., Warneken, F., & Tomasello, M. (2008). The
sources of normativity: Young children’s awareness of

1044

the normative structure of games. Developmental
Psychology, 44, 875-881.
Sawyer, R. K. (1997). Pretend play as improvisation:
Conversation in the preschool classroom. London:
Routledge.
Torreano, L. A., Cacciari, C., & Glucksberg, S. (2005).
When dogs can fly: Level of abstraction as a cue to
metaphorical use of verbs. Metaphor and Symbol, 20,
259–274.
Van Kleeck, A., Gillam, R. B., Hamilton, L., & McGrath,
C. (1997). The relationship between middle-class parents’
book-sharing discussion and their preschoolers’ abstract
language development. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research, 40, 1261–1271.
Veneziano, E. (2001). Displacement and informativeness in
child-directed talk. First Language, 21, 323-356.

1045

