UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Adaptive Constraints and Inference in Cross-Situational Word Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7r8890wd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Kachergis, George
Yu, Chen
Shiffrin, Richard

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Adaptive Constraints and Inference in Cross-Situational Word Learning
George Kachergis, Chen Yu, and Richard M. Shiffrin
{gkacherg, chenyu, shiffrin}@indiana.edu
Department of Psychological & Brain Science / Cognitive Science Program
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
Abstract
Previous research shows that human learners can acquire
word-referent pairs over a short series of individually
ambiguous situations each containing multiple words and
referents (Yu & Smith, 2007). In this kind of cross-situational
statistical learning based on the repeated co-occurrence of
words with their intended referents, the application of
principles such as mutual exclusivity and contrast can
leverage prior experience to reduce the complexity in
situations with multiple words and multiple referents.
However, these principles can also block the learning of oneto-many mappings. In a study analogous those done in
traditional associative learning, we manipulate the early and
late evidence for particular pairings in the cross-situational
learning paradigm, and examine the effects on learning of
both one-to-one and many-to-many mappings. Two major
findings are: 1) participants use mutual exclusivity and
contrast to facilitate learning; and 2) given sufficient
evidence, learners can adaptively disregard these principles
and learn many-to-many mappings.
Keywords: statistical learning; language acquisition; crosssituational associative learning; blocking; highlighting

Introduction
Human infants and adults can acquire word-object pairings
after experiencing a small number of individually
ambiguous situations, each of which consists of several
words and referents. The abilities required in crosssituational learning are to remember at least some of the cooccurrence statistics of nouns and their objects and to
integrate statistical information across multiple learning
situations, if one assumes that these words often occur when
their referents are present, and that words and their referents
will appear together in different situations. This idea, crosssituational learning, has been proposed as an essential
means by which infants acquire language (Pinker, 1989;
Gleitman, 1990). Recently, Smith & Yu (2008) empirically
demonstrated that young infants can learn nouns through
cross-situational learning.
In the more complex adult cross-situational word learning
paradigm (Yu & Smith, 2007), participants were instructed
to learn which word goes with each object and were then
shown a sequence of training trials. Each trial consisted of a
display of a few novel objects and a few successively
spoken pseudowords. Each word referred to a particular onscreen object, but the correct referent for each word was not
indicated, thus making meanings ambiguous on individual
trials. In one learning condition with four words and four
objects on each trial, participants attempted to learn 18
word-object pairings from 27 12-second trials. Thus, each
stimulus—and each correct pairing—appeared six times.

Learning was assessed by a 4AFC test of each pseudoword
after training, and showed that participants on average
acquired slightly more than 9 of the 18 pairs.
How might participants learn so many pairings from such
a short series of trials, each of which contains 16 possible
word-referent pairings? Some reasonable principles that
learners may apply during training can significantly restrict
the space of possible pairings. Among others, the mutual
exclusivity (ME) constraint, which holds that learners will
try to map words to referents in a 1-to-1 way (Markman,
1990), has been demonstrated in various word learning
tasks. In the context of cross-situational learning, for
example, suppose a learner hears words A B C D and sees
referents b a c d on some trial. However, she realizes that
she has heard A and B on some prior trial, and seen objects a
and b, but the other stimuli are novel. Even if she does not
know that A-a and B-b are the correct pairings (they may not
even be unambiguous at this point), employing ME she may
assume that {A, B} map to {a, b}, and that {C, D} map to
{c, d}. Thus, by applying the ME constraint with some
minimal previous experience the learner can whittle the 16
possible pairings down to four. This sort of mechanism was
used to model cross-situational learning of pairs that
appeared in consecutive trials, as well as the pairs that were
not temporally contiguous, both of which were learned
better than in conditions with no temporal contiguity
(Kachergis, Yu, & Shiffrin, 2009b).
The role of prior knowledge has also been investigated
(Klein, Yu, & Shiffrin, 2008), and it was found that
participants can use pre-studied pairs to facilitate subsequent
learning. Their experimental conditions were the same with
that of (Yu & Smith, 2007) described above (27 trials, four
pairs per trial) except that three pairs were unambiguously
pre-trained, learners acquired a mean of 13.7/18 pairs (10.8
of the un-pretrained pairs). Presumably, pre-training helped
participants learn more un-pretrained pairs (compared to 9.5
pairs in Yu & Smith) by reducing the number of possible
pairings in trials containing any pre-trained pairs. Further
evidence of bootstrapping made possible by the assumption
of ME was found in a study that varied pair frequency and
contextual diversity (which other pairs a given appears with
during training). Kachergis, Yu, and Shiffrin (2008a) found
that pairs appearing only thrice during training were learned
significantly better when they were allowed to co-occur
with pairs appearing nine times than when all pairs appeared
solely with pairs of the same frequency.
All of these results indirectly imply that learners assume
mutual exclusivity during training, and demonstrate the
added power it can yield when pairings are 1-to-1.
Yurovsky and Yu (2008) gave participants a cross-

2464

situational task with some non-mutually exclusive pairings:
halfway through training, half of the referents ceased
appearing (e.g., A-a1), and each was replaced by a second
referent (e.g., A-a2) which henceforth always co-occurred
with the original referent’s word (e.g., A). Thus, by the end
of training half the words had both a primacy referent (a1)
and a recency referent (a2). In separate 4AFC tests of
primacy and recency referents, participants learned more
than 50% of both the primacy and the recency referents. By
the law of the excluded middle, some participants must have
learned both pairings (e.g., A-a1 and A-a2), and thus built
lexicons that violated ME. In another condition, the trials
with primacy and recency referents were randomly
interleaved, and learners still acquired nearly as many nonME pairings as ME pairings (and above 50%, on average).
Ichinco, Frank, and Saxe (2009) studied ME using a
different modification of the cross-situational word learning
paradigm: Halfway through training, instead of replacing
primacy referents with recency referents, they added an
extra referent that always co-occurred with a particular old
word-referent pair. That is, halfway through training, trials
began to contain one more referent (i.e., 4) than words (3).
Examining conjoint probability of learning ME-violating
associations for each word, Ichinco et al. found that most
learned pairings respected ME. Similar behavior was found
in a condition with an added word instead of an added
referent. Thus, although some participants learned some
ME-violating pairings, the majority of learning behavior
seems to follow a mutual exclusivity bias. This is
unsurprising if one views cross-situational learning as a
more complex form of traditional associative learning.
In a typical associative learning task, participants are
given some subset of cues on each trial, asked to predict an
outcome, and then shown the actual outcome. The subject’s
learning of associations between particular cues and
outcomes is tracked over time. In cross-situational learning,
the words can be construed as cues, and the objects as
outcomes (or vice-versa). No trial-to-trial feedback is given,
but the learner may generate it on the basis of the preceding
training trials. Blocking is an associative learning effect
often observed in experiments with two training stages: in
the first stage, cue A is repeatedly paired with outcome X,
and in the next stage A and B are jointly paired with X. The
association between B and X is found to be weaker than
when only the second stage training occurs: thus, B has been
blocked by A’s pretraining. Ichinco et al.’s design closely
matches a blocking design (see Table 1), and their results—
weak learning of the old word (or referent) to new referent
(or word) association—are indeed a blocking effect.
Training
Yurovsky
& Ichinco, et present
Stage
Yu, 2008
al., 2009
study
w1-o1
w1-o1
Early
w1-o1
{w1, w2}{o1, o2}
Table 1: Comparison of three cross-situational ME designs.
N.b.: these examples suppress other concurrent trained pairs.
Late

w1-o2

w1-{o1, o2}

The goal of the present paper is to systematically investigate
how statistical learners accumulate and use current
statistical evidence in subsequent learning. In the present
study, for the first time we set up a strong test of inference,
akin to associative learning’s highlighting: will participants
use knowledge of pairs acquired early in training, in
addition to the principle of ME, to quickly learn pairs
introduced late in training? If so, will this mechanism block
the learning of many-to-many mappings? With two wordreferent pairs sharing the same referent, one mapping
appears in the early part of training and the other appears in
the late training, will subjects prefer one over the other if we
vary the amount of evidence (i.e., co-occurrence statistics)
given during the early and late stages of training? Will they
learn both pairs eventually? The set of experiments in the
present paper allows us to answer those questions and
examine how learners may adaptively incorporate evidence
to potentially overwhelm biases.

Experiment 1
Participants are tasked with learning many word-referent
pairs from a series of individually ambiguous training trials
according to the cross-situational word learning paradigm
(Yu & Smith, 2007). In the present study, each training trial
is composed of two objects and two spoken pseudowords.
On any given trial, participants can only guess which word
refers to which object, since the order of presentation of the
words is randomized, and there is no indication of which
word refers to which object. However, since words only
occur on trials with their intended referents, the correct
pairings are disambiguated over the series of trials.
In the present cross-situational study, we divide each set
of learning experiences into an early stage and a late stage,
and systematically vary the number of times pairs appear in
each stage. Half of the pairs appear in both the early training
stage and the late stage, and the remaining half the pairs
only appear in the late stage. As shown in Table 2, when a
pair w1-o1 from the early stage appears in the late stage,
another specific pair only appearing in the late stage (w7o7) always co-occurs with w1-o1. Thus, in the late stage,
{w1,o1,w7,o7} always co-occur, therefore, all of the four
possible associations are reasonable (w1-o1, w1-o7, w7-o1,
w7-o7). In fact, there is no additional information in the late
stage that can be used to identify which ones are better than
others. However, the key manipulation in this experiment is
to vary the strength of w1-o1 in the early stage. More
specifically, the early pairs co-occur 0 (no early training), 3,
6 and 9 times before they appear together with the late pairs.
Given that we already know that people can effectively
extract co-occurrence statistics in cross-situational learning,
it is reasonable to assume that participants in this study
would form some form of knowledge about w1-o1 when
they enter the late stage trials. The research questions are: 1)
whether they would prefer w7-o7 by applying the ME
constraint; 2) whether they still learn w1-o7 and w7-o1 – a
violation of ME; 3) how the amount of evidence about w1-

2465

o1 may influence how they process the otherwiseambiguous information in late trials with {w1,o1,w7,o7}.
Training Stage
Early [pairs 1-6]

Repetitions
0, 3, 6, or 9

Example Trials
{w1, w2, o1, o2}, …,
{w1, w5, o5, o1},

3 (Exp. 1)
{w1, w7, o7, o1}, …,
6 (Exp. 2)
{w1, w7, o7, o1}
9 (Exp. 3)
Table 2: Experiment design, with example trials. Early pairs
are indexed 1-6, and late-only pairs are 7-12. Pairs 1-6 also
appear in the late stage, and thus occur more than pairs 7-12.

corresponding late referent as one of 11 choices to test its
association with the early referent (‘early-early’ and ‘lateearly’). In this way, we tested their knowledge of all of the
four possible associations showing in Figure 1 (two
associations for each word), and we access their knowledge
of each of four possible associations individually in this test.

Late [pairs 1-12]

Subjects
33 undergraduates at Indiana University participated to
receive course credit. None had participated in other crosssituational experiments.

Stimuli
On each training trial, two unusual objects (e.g., sculptures)
are simultaneously shown while two pseudowords were
sequentially heard. The 48 computer-generated words are
phonotactically-probable in English (e.g., “bosa”), and were
spoken by a monotone, synthetic female voice. These 48
objects and 48 words were randomly assigned to four sets of
12 word-object pairings, one set for each learning condition.
Within each set, 6 pairings only appear in the late training
and the other 6 appear in both the early and late trainings.
Each 8-second training trial began with the appearance of
two objects, which remained visible for the entire trial. After
2 s of initial silence, each word was heard (randomly
ordered, duration of 1 s) followed by 2 s of silence.
There were four learning conditions in this study. The late
training was the same in those four conditions, and was
composed of 18 trials. Each pair appeared 3 times late in
training. Therefore, the same trial {w1,o1,w7,o7} also
appeared 3 times. Four conditions varied in the early
training. There was no early training in condition 1. In
condition 2, each of 6 early pairs appeared 3 times, forming
9 early trials before the late training. In conditions 3 and 4,
each early pair appeared 6 or 9 times. Accordingly, there
were 18 and 27 early training trials in those two conditions.

Procedure
Learners were instructed that they would see a series of
trials with two objects and two alien words, and that they
should try to figure out what each word means for a test at
the end. Participants were not told there were training
stages, and there was no perceptible break. After training,
their knowledge was assessed using 11-alternative forced
choice (11AFC) testing: on each test trial a single word was
played, and the participant was instructed to choose the
appropriate object from a display of 11 of the 12 trained
referents. Participants were instructed to click on the best
referent for the word. Each word was tested twice in 11AFC
trials: once without its corresponding early referent as one
of 11 choices to test its association with the late referent
(‘early-late’ and ‘late-late’), and once without its

Figure 1: Example of associations tested by 11AFC.
Training condition order was counterbalanced, and each
learner participated in all four conditions.

Results & Discussion
Fig. 2 displays the learning performance1 in the training
conditions with 3, 6, and 9 repetitions of early pairs. A
3x2x2 ANOVA with factors of early repetitions (3, 6, or 9),
pair stage (early or late), and pairing type (within-stage or
across-stage) showed only a significant main effect of
pairing type (F(1,30) = 8.62, p<.01)2. As shown in Fig. 2,
learning of within-stage (i.e., early-early and late-late wordobject) pairs was much greater than learning of across-stage
pairs (within-stage M = .71, across-stage M = .15). Even this
small proportion of mean between-stage pair learning was
significantly above chance, by subject (11AFC chance =
.091; paired t(30) = 2.29, p<.05). Thus, although withinstage pairings—those consistent with ME—were clearly
favored, participants also learned some ME-violating
across-stage pairings. However, the indistinguishable, high
level of performance on both early-early and late-late
pairings is evidence of strong, ME-based inference: a given
late pair could only be unambiguously learned by filtering
out the consistently co-occurring early pair.
It is surprising that the number of early pair repetitions
did not have a consistent effect on performance (F(2,30) =
.90, p>.05). That is, even three repetitions of each early pair
was enough prior experience to allow participants to infer
the correct late pairs, thus achieving performance equal to
the proportion of early pairs learned—no benefit was
conferred by additional repetitions of early pairs (i.e., 6 or
9). In the condition with no early stage (0 early repetitions),
participants learned 32% of the 2-to-2 pairings, on
average—well above chance (paired t(30) = 8.83, p<.001).
Experiment 1 demonstrated that participants can
efficiently leverage the ME constraint to learn lateappearing pairs that always co-occur with early pairs, and
would thus be ambiguous, if not for prior experience.
Indeed, performance on pairs learned using this filtering
inference technique was no less than the performance on the
1
Data from two subjects were excluded because their average
performance in all four conditions was at chance (11AFC chance =
.091). The outcomes of statistical tests were unaffected.
2
We will report the results of the 0-early-training condition
later as those results can be used to compare the data across
experiments.

2466

early pairs, which were learned by ambiguous crosssituational training, and which appeared more times, overall.
Moreover, in tests of across-stage pairings, participants
showed some learning of ME-violating associations.

Subjects
29 undergraduates at Indiana University received course
credit for participating. None had participated in previous
cross-situational experiments.

Stimuli & Procedure
The sets of pseudowords and referents used in Experiment 2
are identical to those used in Experiment 1. In each
condition, the late stage of training was simply doubled
from 18 trials to 36 trials wherein each {w1,o1,w7,o7}
appears six times (instead of three times in Experiment 1),
yielding three more repetitions of late and early pairs.

Results & Discussion

Figure 2: Mean accuracy by condition for the four types of
associations (within and between early and late pairs). Error
bars show +/-SE and the dotted line shows chance (.091).
In the next experiment, we increase the amount of late
evidence, which we expect will cause participants to
adaptively relax the ME constraint and learn more acrossstage pairings (e.g. w7-o1). If they do relax ME, will they
also learn fewer late-late pairings, or can they learn both?

Experiment 2
Experiment 1 showed that participants tend to utilize the
principle of mutual exclusivity in combination with prior
cross-situational training to quickly infer the referents of
late-appearing words. In fact, performance on late and early
pairs was undifferentiated, even when early pairings
appeared more frequently (in both the early and late stages)
than the late pairs (only the late stage). It appears that three
more repetitions of early pairs grants enough knowledge to
highlight the late-late pairs—which appear only three
times—and bring performance up to the same level as the
early-early pairs.
Thus, to some degree, Exp. 1 is analogous to blocking
studies in associative learning literature, but with multiple
co-occurring cues and outcomes on each trial. We show that
just three repetitions of early pairs dramatically changed
how they processed statistical information later and they
apparently applied ME-based learning as evident by very
few across-stage pairs learned later (i.e., early- late or lateearly). In Experiment 2, we provide learners with more
evidence for across-pair associations via additional
repetitions of late stage pairs. Will participants adapt to this
change, evaluate the statistical evidence in a different way
and begin to count more on statistical information in the late
part? Will they learn more ME-violating pairings?

Figure 3 displays the average3 levels of learning achieved in
Exp. 2. Once again, a 3x2x2 ANOVA with factors of early
repetitions (3, 6, or 9), pair stage (early or late), and pairing
type (within-stage or across-stage) showed only a significant
main effect of pairing type (F(1,24) = 5.45, p<.05). As in
Exp. 1, learning of within-stage (i.e., early-early and latelate) pairs was much greater than learning of across-stage
pairs (within-stage M = .74, across-stage M = .28). Thus, the
increase of statistical evidence in the late stage with three
more repetitions of both early and late pairs, didn’t improve
the learning of within-stage pairs (Welch t(51.8) = .55,
p>.05). Nonetheless, learning of across-stage pairings
increased—as predicted—due to increased late stage
pairings (Welch t(37.5) = 2.35, p<.05). That is, having six
rather than three repetitions of each late pair with its
matched early pair in the late stage increased the learning of
early word to late object (and vice-versa) pairings; the
pairings that violate ME. Thus, although people are initially
inclined to assume mutual exclusivity, and are able to use it
to quickly infer the meaning of novel words, people will
also adaptively relax ME in the face of greater evidence that
words are being mapped to additional objects. As in Exp. 1,
there was no significant effect of the number of early
repetitions on learning (F(2,24) = .06, p>.05).
In summary, this experiment demonstrates that learners
react to increased evidence that late and early pairs go
together by learning more pairings. By doing so, they
exhibit the ability to violate ME in order to learn 1-to-many
mappings without reduced learning of ME-compliant
pairings. In Experiment 3, we increase the late stage
evidence once more to determine whether learners will
continue to adaptively relax the ME constraint and learn
more across-stage pairings.

3

Data from four subjects were excluded because their average
performance in all four conditions was at chance (11AFC chance =
.091). The outcomes of statistical tests were unaffected.

2467

Figure 3: Accuracy by number of early pair repetitions and
association type. Error bars show +/-SE.

Figure 4: Accuracy by number of early pair repetitions and
association type. Error bars show +/-SE.

Experiment 3
Experiment 2 provided six repetitions of late pairs with
matched early pairs in comparison to Experiment 1’s three
repetitions, and learners indeed began to learn more lateearly/early-late (i.e., across-stage, ME-violating) pairings. In
Experiment 3, we once again increase the late stage by three
repetitions (to nine), providing further evidence for crossassociation of the matched early and late pairs.

Subjects
34 undergraduates at Indiana University received course
credit for participating. None had participated in earlier
cross-situational experiments.

Stimuli & Procedure
The same sets of pseudowords and referents were used in
Experiment 3 as were used in Experiments 1 and 2. In each
condition, there were 54 late-stage training trials, yielding
three more repetitions of each late and early pair.

Results & Discussion
Figure 4 shows the mean4 learning level by condition and
pair type in Experiment 3. A mixed ANOVA (3, 6, or 9 late
repetitions [between-subjects] x 3, 6, or 9 early repetitions x
early or late pair stage x across- or within-stage pairing
type) showed a main effect of pairing type (F(1,101) =
161.76, p<.001) and an interaction between pairing type and
the number of late repetitions (F(2,101) = 10.89, p<.01). In
brief, the patterns in Exp. 3 were consistent with what we
observed in Exp. 2: participants learned within-stage pairs
(e.g. w1-o1, w7-o7) quite well and also learned across-state
pairs (e.g. w7-o1, w1-o7) with the additional evidence
provided in late training.
4

Data from three subjects were excluded because their average
performance in all four conditions was at chance. The outcomes of
statistical tests were unaffected.

General Discussion
When attempting to learn word meanings from a series of
individually ambiguous trials, applying the mutual
exclusivity constraint on each trial can significantly reduce
the number of pairings a learner must consider, and even
allow learner to quickly infer the meanings of novel words
and referents. In the cross-situational experiments presented
here, participants used such filtering—akin to highlighting
in the associative learning literature—to quickly learn the
same proportion of late-late pairings as early-early pairings.
Thus, learners can use ME to infer the late-late pairings,
even though each late-late pairing always co-occurred with
one early pairing.
However, if pairings are not in fact mutually exclusive, or
if word-referent mappings may change over time, assuming
ME would be maladaptive. Across experiments, we
increased the number of repetitions of late pairs, each of
which always appeared with a particular early pair (e.g., w1
and o1 always appeared with w7 and o7, which had never
appeared before the late stage). As an early stage pair
appears more often with a particular late pair, a flexible
learner would relax the assumption of ME.
Exp. 1, with three late pair repetitions, demonstrated that
participants learn early-early pairs very well with only three
early repetitions, and use this knowledge, in combination
with ME, to learn the late-late pairs at a similar rate.
However, even in this experiment, participants showed
evidence of learning some ME-violating pairings (i.e., lateearly and early-late pairings). Results from Experiment 2,
with six late pair repetitions, looked very similar, but with
slightly higher learning of ME-violating pairings. With nine
late pair repetitions, Experiment 3 provided further evidence
that participants should disregard ME, and indeed they
learned more cross-stage pairings.

2468

Viewing cross-situational statistical word learning as a
complex form of associative learning in which there are
multiple cues and outcomes on each training trial, it is
unsurprising to find evidence for ME in cross-situational
experiments, for ME may be responsible for well-known
associative learning phenomena such as highlighting and
blocking. However, our results demonstrate that participants
do not merely use the ME constraint for logical inference.
Instead, they utilize an adaptable learning strategy: as
statistical evidence for violation of ME increases, they learn
more ME-violating pairs. A comparison of the results from
the 0-early-stage condition in three experiments in which
each early pair (e.g., w1-o1) always co-occurred with a
particular late pair (e.g., w7-o7). Figure 5 shows the mean
proportion of learned ME-respecting pairings (i.e., only
pairings involving each stimulus once) and ME-violating
pairings (i.e., pairings that involve a stimulus twice) that
participants learned by the number of late repetitions (i.e.,
experiment), which increases as more late repetitions give
evidence that the ME constraint should be relaxed.

Figure 5: The mean proportion of pairings that each
participant learned that violate ME and that comply with
ME (across all experiments). Chance for ME-respecting
pairings is the dotted line (2/11). Chance for ME-violating
pairings is (1/11)2 = ~.01.
In summary, the results from the present study provide a
complete picture of how participants use the ME constraint
and how they accumulate statistical evidence over the
course of learning. By varying the strengths of word-object
associations in both the early and late training stages, we
were able to demonstrate various learning behaviors that
have been shown in previous studies. In fact, some of those
studies have produced incompatible results. Therefore, the
contribution of our work is to unify different views inferred
from previous results. We argue that human statistical
learning is adaptable: learners are able to adjust their
learning strategy over the course of learning in response to
changing amounts of evidence for particular types of

pairings. One possible reason that previous results are not
compatible is because each study took a snapshot of a
continuous learning process. For example, many ME studies
are conducted with one or two simple trials. We observe that
learners’ cross-situational learning strategies are dynamic
and adaptable, and thus cannot be adequately portrayed by
one snapshot. Rather, we need to examine learning
trajectories by varying the amounts (repetitions) and types
(ME-violating or –respecting) of evidence. We believe that
the data presented here will quite useful in constraining
models of cross-situational language acquisition. Future
studies use real-time behavioral data (e.g., eye movements)
to provide access online learning strategies.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by National Institute of Health Grant
R01HD056029 and National Science Foundation Grant BCS
0544995. Special thanks to Tarun Gangwani for data collection.

References
Frank, M. C., Goodman, N. D., Tenenbaum, J. B. (2008). A
Bayesian framework for cross-situational word-learning.
NIPS 20 (pp. 457-464). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gleitman, L. (1990). The structural sources of verb
meanings. Language Acquisition, 1(1), 1-55.
Ichinco, D., Frank, M. C., & Saxe, R. (2009). Crosssituational word learning respects mutual exclusivity. In
N. Taatgen, H. van Rijn, J. Nerbonne, & L. Schomaker
(Eds.) Proceedings of CogSci 31.
Kachergis, G., Yu, C., & Shiffrin, R. M. (2009a). Frequency
and contextual diversity effects in cross-situational word
learning. In N. Taatgen, H. van Rijn, J. Nerbonne, & L.
Schomaker (Eds.) Proceedings of CogSci 31.
Kachergis, G., Yu, C., & Shiffrin, R. M. (2009b). Temporal
contiguity in cross-situational statistical learning. In N.
Taatgen, H. van Rijn, J. Nerbonne, & L. Schomaker
(Eds.) Proceedings of CogSci 31. Austin, TX: Cognitive
Science Society.
Klein, K. A., Yu, C., & Shiffrin, R. M. (2008). Prior
knowledge bootstraps cross-situational learning. Proceedings
CogSci 30, Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Markman, E. M. (1990). Constraints Children Place on
Word Learning. Cognitive Science, 14, 57-77.
Pinker, S. (1989). Learnability and cognition. Cambridge,
MA: The MIT Press.
Smith, L. & Yu, C. (2008). Infants rapidly learn wordreferent mappings via cross-situational statistics.
Cognition, 106, 1558-1568.
Yu, C. & Smith, L. B. (2007). Rapid word learning under
uncertainty via cross-situational statistics. Psych. Sci., 18,
414-420.
Yurovsky, D. & Yu, C. (2008). Mutual exclusivity in crosssituational statistical learning. Proceedings of CogSci 30.
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.

2469

