UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
An acquired taste: How reading literature affects sensitivity to word distributions when
judging literary texts

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6zn0928k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Kao, Justine
Ryan, Robert
Dye, Melody
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

An acquired taste:
How reading literature affects sensitivity to word distributions
when judging literary texts
Justine Kao, Robert Ryan, Melody Dye & Michael Ramscar
Department of Psychology, Stanford University,
Jordan Hall, Stanford, CA 94305

Abstract

reading comprehension and vocabulary tests (Anderson et
al., 1988; Cipielwski & Stanovich, 1992), suggesting a
relationship between reading enjoyment and competence.
Still another study shows that frequent readers of literary
writing have higher empathy and social measures than
readers of non-literary writing (Mar et al., 2006). These
results suggest that certain effects on our social, reasoning,
and linguistic skills may be closely connected to the kinds
of reading we engage in.
While these studies focus on higher-order social and
cognitive effects of reading, we are interested here in
examining how reading shapes readers’ sensitivity to
distributions of words. More specifically, we seek to explore
whether readers’ experience reading literary or non-literary
writing shapes their sensitivities to word and chunk
frequencies, and further, whether these fine-tuned
sensitivities affect their judgments of quality when rating
texts from different genres.

This study examines how reading habits affect people’s
sensitivity to word distributions in literary and non-literary
writing. We manipulated eight literary and non-literary
passages, creating modified versions that had lower word
chunk frequencies but higher individual word frequencies
than the originals. Subjects were then asked to rate the
passages’ quality of writing. Results showed that subjects
with more experience reading literary writing (literary
readers) gave higher ratings to original literary passages,
while subjects with less literary reading experience (nonliterary readers) preferred modified versions. Subjects with
both types of reading habits rated original versions of nonliterary passages higher. This indicates that literary readers
are sensitive to frequencies of word chunks containing
words that appear more frequently in the literary genre,
while non-literary readers are not. We suggest that, over
time, people can acquire slightly different representations of
the probabilistic structure of language through their specific
linguistic exposure.
Keywords: Psycholinguistics, Corpus linguistics, Word
distributions, Genre differences, Reading habits, Discourse
processes, Literary studies

The Probabilistic Nature of Natural Languages
A slew of recent studies have shown that language users
are sensitive to the distributional patterns of sounds, words,
and even larger linguistic structures such as word sequences,
or word ‘chunks,’ in the language they speak (see e.g.,
Altmann & Steedman, 1988; Bell et al., 2009; Bod et al.,
2003; Bybee, 2002, 2006; Bybee & Hopper, 2001; De Long
et al., 2005; Hale, 2003; Levy, 2008; Otten & Van Berkum,
2008; Pierrehumbert 2001, 2003; Ramscar et al., in press;
Perruchet & Pacteau, 1990; Servan-Schreiber & Anderson,
1990). In many ways, the idea that we pay attention to how
words are used is hardly surprising. It seems obvious, for
example, that “a daunting task” sounds more “right,” or
more familiar, than “a daunting job.” In fact, although job is
a much higher frequency word than task, “a daunting task”
appears 191 times on the Corpus of Contemporary
American English (COCA), while “a daunting job” occurs
only 6 times. We are sensitive to the different frequencies of
the two chunks and prefer the one with the higher
frequency. Since there is no real reason why it is less
appropriate to describe a job as daunting, the preference for
“a daunting task” over “a daunting job” does not seem to be
driven by the appropriateness of the phrases’ inherent
meanings, but rather how the words are usually used.
The reason why we can sense these subtle mismatches is
because words do not co-occur with each other with equal
frequency. Indeed, the distribution of words in languages is

Introduction
With one careful, calculated sip, a wine connoisseur can
detect the subtle differences of quality between wines, and
may even note the year and vineyard in which the grapes
were grown. We, on the other hand, may stumble upon a
thirty-year-old Bordeaux and not be able to tell it apart from
a ten-dollar bottle. Appreciation for wine, like appreciation
for high fashion or opera, is an acquired skill. Many fine
things in life require years of experience to generate true
appreciation. In what follows, we ask whether or not this
“connoisseur phenomenon” translates to appreciation for
literature as well. Is the ability to detect skill and beauty in
literature also an acquired taste? If so, what is being
acquired through the act of reading? Will avid readers have
a stronger appreciation for good-quality writing, or be more
sensitive to subtle changes of word choice?
As writing becomes an increasingly important form of
communication and a central aspect of our lives, many
studies have been conducted on the ways in which we are
affected by what we read. Previous research shows that
frequent readers are more sensitive to ambiguities in literary
texts and are more likely to provide nuanced interpretations
of them than infrequent readers (Dixon et al., 1993).
Further, students who read recreationally perform better on

990

highly systematic (Baayen, 2001), and listeners are clearly
sensitive to how words co-occur in sensible, and less
sensible ways (see e.g., Wicha, Bates, Moreno, & Kutas,
2003). These kinds of co-occurrence patterns offer a rich
and readily available source of information for anyone
learning to understand the way that language relates to the
world, and there is considerable evidence to support the idea
that people are sensitive to this information.
However, it is critical to note that every person’s internal
model of his or her language is trained on a slightly
different corpus. In other words, each person hears and
reads different things throughout his or her life, and over
time these differences in the input may result in different
representations of the language. In written language, for
example, genres of writing have been observed to differ on a
number of linguistic dimensions. Research on corpus
comparison and genre detection makes use of the idea that
word distributions – how words are used and which words
are used – differ across genres (Biber 1988, 1993; Eisenbeis
& Avery, 1972; Karlgren & Cutting, 1994; Lee & Myaeng,
2002, Xiao & McEnery, 2005). Work in literary theory has
also suggested that literary texts often use low-frequency
words to foreground certain elements of writing (Miall &
Kuiken, 1994, Mukarovský, 1964), while non-literary texts
tend to use more conventional words to convey meaning
clearly. Given that there is marked variation in the
distributions of words that people will be exposed to over
the course of their lives, it seems likely that people will have
different sensitivities to word distributions depending on
their “training sets.” We examine this possibility through
the lens of writing genres.

This has implications for how people may be affected by
their reading practices. Given that some people’s reading
habits may make them more familiar with one “corpus” than
another (i.e., they may be more widely read newspapers and
journal articles than fiction and poetry), this difference in
exposure should translate into a corresponding difference in
their probabilistic representation of the distributions of
words within their language. In other words, readers within
different genres will have learned somewhat different
distributional patterns, and these differences should be
similar to the ones that we can actually research and
quantify by analyzing different corpora.
This leads to testable predictions. For example, we
would expect that literary readers would be more sensitive
to the probabilistic distributions of literary words than nonliterary readers, and we would also expect them to have a
better understanding of the environment – or linguistic
context – in which such words are likely to occur. Thus,
they should show higher sensitivity than non-literary readers
to the frequencies of chunks of words in literary texts.

Reading Habits and Judgment: Experiment
In order to test the predictions detailed above, we
selected four excerpts of choice contemporary fiction
writing and four excerpts of non-literary writing. We then
systematically manipulated the frequencies of several
chunks (short sequences of words) within each passage,
creating modified versions of each of the eight passages.
Our method of modification is detailed in the section
“Manipulation of passages.” After creating the 8 modified
versions, we had16 testing passages total: 4 literary and 4
non-literary original passages, which contain higher overall
chunk frequencies but lower overall word frequencies, and 4
literary and 4 non-literary modified passages, which contain
lover overall chunk frequencies but higher overall word
frequencies. We hope to examine whether subjects’
evaluations of writing quality differ for the original and
modified versions, and further whether literary and nonliterary readers’ evaluation of literary and non-literary texts
also diverge.
We hypothesize that for literary texts, literary readers
will give higher ratings to literary passages containing
chunks that have higher frequencies, because these chunks
will be more familiar in the corpus they have been trained
on, and thus more representative of their internal models of
language (e.g., they should recognize “adamantine luster” as
a frequent literary pairing and prefer it over “adamantine
milk,” which is not a frequent literary pairing). By contrast,
we hypothesize that non-literary readers, who lack the same
levels of exposure to ‘literary’ words and their contexts, will
only be sensitive to individual word frequencies, and will
prefer more highly frequent words even when they are used
in contexts (e.g., “adamantine milk”) that would seem
anomalous or even jarring to a literary reader. In terms of
quality ratings, this suggests that literary readers will prefer
the original literary passages with higher chunk frequencies,

‘Literary’ and ‘Non-literary’ Words
For our purposes here, we class writing into two primary
domains: literary and non-literary. Much of what people
read can be identified as one of the two, with fiction and
poetry belonging to the former category, and newspaper
articles and textbooks to the latter. Based on whether a word
occurs more frequently in literary writing or non-literary
writing, we can refer to it as a ‘literary’ word or a ‘nonliterary’ word. For example, “abruptly” is a literary word
(37 per million in the fiction corpus and 6.7 per million in
the newspaper corpus), while “actively” is a non-literary
word (2.54 per million in fiction and 9.97 in newspapers)
(Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA)).
As we will illustrate in a later section, literary texts tend
to contain more literary words, while non-literary texts tend
to contain more non-literary words. Since literary and nonliterary words are defined by how often they occur overall in
literary and non-literary writing, this may not seem entirely
surprising. However, it sheds light on the deeper point that
the words in a given piece of writing will have different
distributions depending on the corpus you examine (e.g., the
frequency and usage of “abruptly” will differ sharply
between a “non-literary” newspaper corpus and a “literary”
fiction corpus).

991

whereas non-literary readers will prefer the modified literary
passages with higher individual word frequencies.
With regards to the non-literary texts, the picture is less
clear. It may be that we should expect the opposite effect:
that literary readers will prefer modified passages while
non-literary readers will prefer the originals. However, it
also seems likely that our literary readers, who read for
pleasure, may read more widely than our non-literary
readers, and be sensitive to our non-literary manipulations
as well.

(t(627)=2.2786; p<0.05). Together these findings suggest
that literary texts make specialized use of a specific subset
of the overall corpus, rather than employ a markedly
different vocabulary. Consistent with this idea, a 2 (literary
versus non-literary text) x 2 (fiction versus newspaper
corpus) ANOVA of the average frequencies of the texts
revealed an interaction between text type and corpus type
(F(1, 627)=13.324, p<0.001), and a main effect of text type
(F(1,627)=121.926, p<0.001).
A more fine-grained analysis of the texts further
supported the idea that the distribution of vocabulary items
is specialized in different kinds of writing. When we
compared the pair-wise frequency of each word in each
specific corpus, we found (unsurprisingly) that the pair-wise
frequencies of the words in the literary passages were
significantly higher in the corpus for fiction writing than in
the corpus for newspaper writing (t(335)=11.4987;
p<0.001), but also that the reverse was true for each of the
words in non-fiction passages (t(292)=-4.7295; p <0.001).
In other words, what appears to set literary and non-literary
writing apart is not that they make use of specialized sets of
words, but rather that words are used in specialized ways in
different kinds of writing, and, at least in this sample, the
distribution of vocabulary within literary writing in English
appears to be particularly distinctive.

Participants
Participants were 31 Stanford University undergraduates
recruited for credit for an introductory psychology course.
All subjects were monolingual English speakers.

Materials
Four excerpts from literary writing and four excerpts
from non-literary writing, each ranging from 80 to 130
words in length, were selected as materials. The literary
passages were selected from four separate stories in “The
Vintage Book of Contemporary American Short Stories,” a
collection of short stories featuring distinctive short fiction
in American English published within the last 25 years.
Three journalistic, or non-literary, English passages were
selected from articles in the New York Times during the
past year, and one non-literary passage was chosen from a
reading comprehension article in a 2009 GRE prep book.
Passages from each genre varied in style and content. We
chose materials from these sources because they reflect high
quality of writing, offer a variety of styles and themes, and
are not famous or widely enough read to be likely to be
recognized by our subjects during the survey.

Methods
Assessment of Passages
To explore the degree to which literary texts tend to
contain more literary words and non-literary texts tend to
contain more non-literary words, we examined the 400
million word COCA corpus (Davies, 2009) recording the
frequency of each word in each passage in the fiction
corpus, the newspaper corpus, and the corpus as a whole.
The average log frequencies of the passages in the three
corpora are shown in figure 1. This analysis revealed that
within the specific corpora, the literary passages had
significantly higher average frequencies in the fiction corpus
than in the newspaper corpus (t(670)=2.3148; p < 0.05)
whereas the average frequencies of the non-literary texts in
the fiction and newspaper corpora were not significantly
different (t(584)=-1.0288; p>0.05). This suggests that
words occurring in literary texts are more frequent in
literary than non-literary texts, while words in non-literary
texts are more evenly distributed across literary and nonliterary texts. This idea is supported by an analysis of the
overall corpus, which revealed the literary passages to have
higher average frequencies than the non-literary passages

Figure 1. Average log frequencies of passages in different
corpora
Manipulation of Passages
After analyzing the passages, we then manipulated the
frequencies of three to seven chunks (strings of words)
within each literary and non-literary passage, lowering
chunk frequency while simultaneously retaining (or even
raising) average individual word frequency. Measures of
individual word frequency were taken form COCA, while
chunk frequency was based on the number of ‘hits’ a chunk
returned on Google. The reason why we used Google to
measure chunk frequencies is because its magnitude allows
us to find ‘hits’ for word sequences that are several words
long, while many longer word sequences would return 0
counts even in large corpora like COCA, and thus fail to

992

measure the differences in frequencies of longer word
chunks.
In the following example, (a) is the original chunk, and
(b) is the modified chunk.
(a) On the further side of the field1
(b) On the further part of the field
While side and part have highly similar meanings in this
context, side has an average frequency of 317/ million in
COCA, while part has frequency of 479/ million, suggesting
that part is a more frequent word in English than side.
In terms of chunk frequencies, “further side” returns
259,000 hits on Google, whereas “further part” returns
374,000 hits, suggesting that in English, “part” is more
likely than “side” given “further” (Miller & Chomsky’s2
famous point about the lack of evidence for specific strings
in English can be illustrated by considering that there are
insufficient instances of “part of” and “side of” in the 400
million words of COCA to facilitate an analysis). Finally,
the highly frequent “of” is the most likely word to follow
both “side” and “part” in English, and by both our COCA
and Google measures, the likelihood of “of” given “part” is
three times that of “side”(“part of” has 132176 Google hits
compared to 40446 for “side of,” and “part of” occurs on
average 330 times per million words in COCA, as compared
to 101/million for “side of”).
Thus, the “average probabilities” of English suggest that,
as a string of words, (b) is much more likely than (a).
However, the original chunk (a) returned 898 hits on
Google, while the modified chunk (b) returned 0 hits. Thus,
although and both (a) and (b) appear to be similar in
meaning and equally “grammatical,” and although the
average frequency of all words, and the average transitional
probabilities between them in English as a whole are higher
in (b), given that its chunk frequency is considerably lower,
it appears that the likelihood of actually encountering (b) in
English is lower than it is for (a).
Since we wished to manipulate word and chunk
frequencies while keeping the meaning of the passages
relatively constant, chunks were selected for modification in
the manner just described based on whether or not they
contained a word that could be replaced with a synonym
that had a similar or higher frequency.

Participants were surveyed individually on a computer.
They were asked to read the instructions in the survey
carefully, and the time it took each subject to complete the
survey was recorded to make sure they spent enough time
reading the passages and answering questions.
Participants were presented with each passage in the
same order and asked to read carefully. While each
participant read the passages in the same order, the order of
the passages was counterbalanced with respect to passage
type. For example, in the version of the survey in which the
odd-numbered passages were modified, the passages
appeared in the order of: modified literary, original nonliterary, modified literary, original literary, modified nonliterary, original non-literary, modified non-literary, original
literary. This design should weaken the effects of passage
type ordering on subjects’ preferences.
After subjects finished reading the passage as a whole,
the same passage appeared again, but this time with a
selection highlighted. They were asked to rate the quality of
the highlighted section on a 7-point scale, with 7 being
“Very well-written,” and 1 being “Very poorly written.”
Each passage was equally divided into three sections,
separately highlighted and presented to the subjects for
rating.
After participants finished reading and rating all eight
passages, they were asked to provide an estimate of how
many hours a week they usually spent reading literary texts
(including poetry, magazine stories, creative non-fiction,
and novels) and non-literary texts (including text books,
newspaper articles, and academic papers). In order to arrive
at a score of how much more experience each subject had
reading literary writing compared to reading non-literary
writing, the hours reading literary texts was divided by the
hours reading non-literary texts, a ration we will refer to as
the ‘literary reading bias.’ We use this as our measure for
subjects’ reading habits because it reflects the relative
amount of time they read literary texts versus non-literary
texts, which for our purposes is the salient feature of their
reading habits.

Results
A repeated measures ANCOVA of participant ratings of
the modified and non-modified passages with literary
reading bias as a continuous covariate revealed a significant
interaction between literary reading scores and within-genre
preference (F(1, 21) = 3.095; p < 0.05; see figure 2). To
facilitate further analysis, subjects were divided equally into
two groups based on their literary reading bias, with
subjects whose scores were above the median placed in one
group, and subjects whose scores were below the median
placed in the other. The within-genre preference of each
subject was measured using the difference between his or
her average ratings for original and modified passages of
each genre. The two groups’ average preferences within
each genre are shown in figure 2.
Further, participants who read more fiction relative to
non-fiction writing showed a stronger preference for the

Procedure and design
All surveys were designed and distributed using the
Qualtrics online survey software. Each survey had four
literary and four non-literary passages, half of which were
original excerpts, and half of which were modified as
described in the section above. Two versions of the survey
were distributed: either the odd-numbered passages were
modified and the even-numbered passages were kept as the
original, or vice versa. Participants were randomly assigned
one of the two versions.
1
2

Taken from “Emergency,” by Denis Johnson
Miller & Chomsky, (1963)

993

unmodified literary texts compared to participants who read
more non-fiction (t(29) =1.7377; p<0.05), and a one-sample
t-test revealed that participants who read more fiction
showed an overall preference for the original literary
passages (t(14)=1.856; p<0.05. For non-literary passages,
there was no significant difference between the within-genre
preferences of subjects in the two groups (t (29)=0.6556;
p>0.5), and while both groups showed a preference for the
original non-literary passages, these preferences were not
significant.

ratio between reported literary and non-literary reading
hours as a means of comparing our subjects. This ratio
should, at the very least, reflect the subject’s subjective
sense of how much time he or she devoted to reading
literary writing relative to non-literary writing, and
hopefully separates out fiction and poetry readers from
magazine and front-page readers.
In future studies, it may be possible to use more
“objective” measures of reading habits— for instance, by
examining the number of literary and non-literary authors
each subject can identify (Mar et al., 2006), or by having
subjects track their reading habits over time. Alternatively,
we might conduct a study in which we ask a certain group
of subjects to exclusively read literary texts for an extended
period, while having another group read exclusively nonliterary texts, and then measure the effect.
Our preliminary findings on the subject suggest that
each person’s model of the language they speak may be
affected and “trained” over time by the specific linguistic
samples they encounter. Intriguingly, differences in these
individual language models appear to correspond with
differences in “subjective” perceptions and judgment. Here,
we examined how prior reading exposure may affect our
perception and judgments of reading new texts. If our
findings generalize to different genres of writing, spoken
language, or even other modes of art and communication,
we may be able to begin to explain individual differences in
judgment and perception, and also how one can acquire
taste through experience.

Figure 2. Literary and non-literary readers’ preference for
original passages in the two genres

Discussion

Acknowledgments

As predicted, there was a significant interaction
between subjects’ reading habits and their reading
preferences. How might one explain these results?
Only people who are exposed to the distributional
properties of those words in literary contexts appear be
sensitive to our manipulations, which is consistent with our
assessment of the passages, where we found that literary
writing uses words in ways that are literary specific. On the
other hand, both literary and non-literary readers were
sensitive to the manipulation of non-literary passages. One
reason may be that non-literary writing makes use of less
specialized distributions, as shown in our corpus analysis.
Literary writing can be thought of as a specialized form of
writing that re-employs and expands upon distributional
information also present in non-literary writing, which
makes literary readers still reasonably familiar with the
distributions of words in non-literary texts, whereas the
same cannot necessarily be said for non-literary readers and
literary texts. Another reason may be that our social and
cultural lives naturally enforce a non-literary expertise on all
readers, while literary expertise is more a matter of
individual practice.
One potential weakness for our study was that we
relied on self-report to measure our subjects’ reading habits.
There may be issues of accuracy in recall, given that
subjects were trying to judge the exact number of hours they
spent reading in a given week. For this reason, we used the

This material is based on work supported by the National
Science Foundation under Grant Nos. 0547775 and 0624345
to Michael Ramscar, and by the Stanford University
Undergraduate Advising and Research under Small Grant
No. 4174 to Justine Kao.

References
Altmann, G.T.M. & Steedman, M. (1988) Interaction with
context during human sentence processing. Cognition
Anderson, R., Wilson, P., & Fielding, L. (1988). Growth in
reading and how children spend their time outside of
school. Reading Research Quarterly
Baayen, R. H. (2001). Quantitative aspects of morphological
productivity. In G. E. Booij and J. van Marle (eds),
Yearbook of Morphology 1991, Kluwer Academic
Publishers, Dordrecht
Bell, A., Brenier, J., Gregory, M., Girand, C., & Jurafsky,
D. (2009). Predictability effects on durations of content
and function words in conversational English. Journal
of Memory and Language 60(1)
Biber, D. (1988). Variation across Speech and Writing.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Biber, D. (1993). Representativeness in Corpus Design.
Literary and Linguistic Computing 8 (4)
Bod, R., J. Hay, & Jannedy, S. Eds. (2003). Probabilistic
linguistics. Cambridge, MA, MIT Press

994

Bybee, J. and P. Hopper, Eds. (2001). Frequency and the
emergence of linguistic structure. Typological studies
in language, vol. 45. Amsterdam, Netherlands, John
Benjamins Publishing Company.
Bybee, J. (2002). Phonological evidence for exemplar
storage of multiword sequences. Studies in Second
Language Acquisition 24(2)
Bybee, J. (2006). From usage to grammar: the mind's
response to repetition. Language
Cipielewski, J., & Stanovich, K.E. (1992). Predicting
growth in reading ability from children's exposure to
print. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
Cover, T.M. & King, R.C. (1978). A Convergent Gambling
Estimate of the Entropy of English. IEEE Transactions
on Information Theory
Davies, Mark. (2008-) The Corpus of Contemporary
American English (COCA): 400+ million words, 1990present.
Available
online
at
http://www.americancorpus.org.
DeLong K. A., Urbach,T.P., Kutas, M. (2005) Probabilistic
word pre-activation during language comprehension
inferred from electrical brain activity. Nature
Neuroscience
Dixon, P., Bortolussi, M., Twilley, L. C. and Leung, A.
(1993) ‘Literary Processing and Interpretation: Towards
Empirical Foundations’, Poetics
Eisenbeis, R., and R. Avery (1972). Discriminant Analysis
and
Classification
Procedures:
Theory
and
Applications. Lexington, Mass.: D.C. Health and Co.
Hale, J. (2003). The Information Conveyed by Words in
Sentences. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research
Karlgren, J., and D. Cutting (1994). Recognizing text
Genres with Simple Metrics Using Discriminant
Analysis. In Proc. of the 15 '1' International
Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING
'94).
Lee, Y.B. & Mayeng, S.H. (2002). Text Genre
Classification with Genre-Revealing and SubjectRevealing Features. Proceedings of the 25th ACM
SIGIR Conference.
Levy,
R
(2008).
Expectation-based
syntactic
comprehension. Cognition
Mar, R.A., Oatley, K., Hirsh, J., dela Paz, J., & Peterson,
J.B. (2006). Bookworms versus nerds: Exposure to
fiction versus non-fiction, divergent associations with
social ability, and the simulation of fictional social
worlds. Journal of Research in Personality
Miall, D.S. & Kuiken, D. (1994). Beyond Text Theory:
Understanding Literary Response. Discourse Processes
Mukarovský, J. (1964). Standard language and poetic
language. In P. L. Garvin (Ed.), A Prague School
reader on esthetics, literary structure, and style
Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.
(Original work published 1932.)
Otten, M., & Van Berkum, J. J. A. (2008). Discourse-based
word anticipation during language processing:
Prediction of priming? Discourse Processes

Pierrehumbert, J. (2001) Exemplar dynamics: Word
frequency, lenition, and contrast. In J. Bybee and P.
Hopper (eds.) Frequency effects and the emergence of
lexical structure. John Benjamins, Amsterdam.
Pierrehumbert, J. (2003) Probabilistic Phonology:
Discrimination and Robustness. In R. Bod, J. Hay and
S. Jannedy (eds.) Probability Theory in Linguistics. The
MIT Press, Cambridge MA
Ramscar, M., Matlock, T., & Dye, M. (in press) Running
down the clock: the role of expectation in our
understanding of time and motion. Language and
Cognitive Processes
Servan-Schreiber, E., & Anderson, J.R. (1990). Learning
artificial grammars with competitive chunking. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition
Wicha, N. Y., Bates, E. A., Moreno, E. M., & Kutas, M.
(2003). Potato not pope: Human brain potentials to
gender expectation and agreement in Spanish spoken
sentences. Neuroscience Letters
Xiao, Z.H. & McEnery, A. (2005). Two Approaches to
Genre Analysis: Three Genres in Modern American
English. Journal of English Linguistics

995

