UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
An Interactive Environment for Explanatory Biological Modeling

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5md1d9c9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Author
Langley, Pat

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

An Interactive Environment for
Explanatory Biological Modeling
Pat Langley (langley@asu.edu)
Computing Science and Engineering
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287 USA
Abstract
In this paper, we describe an interactive environment
for the representation, interpretation, and revision of explanatory biological models. We illustrate our approach
on the systems biology of aging, a complex topic that
involves many interacting components. We also report
initial experiences with using this environment to codify an informal model of aging. We close by discussing
related efforts and directions for future research.
Keywords: scientific models, qualitative reasoning,
applied cognitive science

Introduction and Overview
There is general agreement that the explosive growth in
biological data offers great opportunities but also poses
major challenges. Although less widely recognized, the
growing complexity of biological models that aim to account for these observations raises a host of other issues.
Computational techniques hold promise for mitigating
this complexity, but most responses have been driven by
algorithmic concerns rather than the cognitive needs of
scientists who must develop, interpret, and understand
complex models. Biologists would benefit from new computational tools designed with scientific users in mind.
Many efforts in modern science aim to understand
complex phenomena from a systems perspective. One
important example comes from research on aging, with
recent studies suggesting that senescence results from
the interaction of many distinct but interconnected processes (Vijg & Campisi, 2008). Individual laboratories
report experiments and propose hypotheses to explain
them, but there has been little work on how they fit together. The systems biology movement has championed
integrative science, but it has emphasized topics like gene
regulation and left phenomena like aging understudied.
In this paper, we report an interactive computational
framework designed to support modeling of this variety.
Our approach relies on three distinct but mutually supportive ideas:
• formal representations of scientific knowledge that
make contact with specific fields’ terms and concepts;
• methods for reasoning over models cast in these formalisms that provide the same flexibility and draw
the same conclusions as scientists;
• techniques that let researchers analyze and update
these models in an incremental, cumulative manner.
In the next section, we discuss three computational challenges that these capabilities raise, after which we describe an interactive software environment that embod-

ies our responses. We illustrate the system’s abilities
with examples from the domain of aging, then report
initial experiences with the environment. We conclude
with a discussion of related work on scientific modeling,
along with directions for additional research.
Some readers may question the relevance of our work
to cognitive science. Of course, scientific reasoning has
long been a topic of study within this community, but we
will not claim our system reasons in precisely the same
way as biologists. However, our approach is informed
by results from cognitive science that constrain it in important ways. In particular, it borrows from research
on qualitative mental models, which has proposed representations and reasoning methods that are consistent
with knowledge about human cognition. A good analog
comes from work on intelligent tutoring systems (e.g.,
VanLehn, 2006), which does not model the details of human tutors but takes lessons from them. We view our
work on computational aids for biological modeling as
another important instance of applied cognitive science.

Challenges in Scientific Modeling
As we have noted, the construction of complex scientific
models raises three separate but interrelated challenges.
Here we expand upon each of them in turn, placing constraints on the form our responses should take in developing an environment for biological modeling.
The overall aim of science is to produce knowledge,
but the social nature of science requires the use of communicable formalisms that researchers can exchange and
understand (Džeroski, Langley, & Todorovski, 2007).
Thus, our first computational challenge involves selecting a communicable formalism for biological models.
Over the past decade, computational researchers have
proposed many notations for such models, but most utilize notations borrowed from other fields that have questionable relevance to traditional biological thinking. Research in biology generally, and on aging in particular,
imposes two constraints on modeling formalism. One is
that most accounts of phenomena are qualitative, not because researchers prefer them intrinsically, but because
they enable useful claims even when lacking more precise information. A second feature is that biologists often
move beyond simple predictive models to posit causal hypotheses or processes that underlie known phenomena.
Science also differs from some areas of inquiry by its
concern with observations. However, biologists typically

2368

desire more from their models than simple predictions;
they prefer explanations that account for observations
in terms of concepts and mechanisms they find familiar
and plausible. Such explanatory reasoning is common
in biology (Darden, 2006), but the growing complexity
of models suggests that, without assistance, researchers
will otherwise overlook important implications. Thus, a
second computational challenge involves supporting reasoning over the communicable scientific formalisms just
described. Methods for calculating results from numeric
equations are well established, but automated reasoning
over the qualitative models that dominate biology requires a different approach. One complication that arises
in qualitative models is that two or more causal pathways can predict different relationships between variables. Another is that it can be difficult to reason qualitatively about how a system changes over time.
A third important feature of science is its cumulative
character. Historians often focus on conceptual breakthroughs by individuals like Darwin, Pasteur, and Morgan, but the great majority of research involves filling in
technical details rather than changing paradigms. This is
especially true for biology and medicine, in which scientists devote considerable effort to piecing together complicated models with many interacting parts. Thus, our
final computational challenge involves supporting the cumulative improvement of system-level models by biological researchers. A common response is to develop curated knowledge bases (e.g., Karp et al., 2000; Vastrik
et al., 2007) that rely on centralized control by a few experts, but the field has also explored community-based
approaches. Both require ways to update models incrementally as new knowledge becomes available.

An Interactive Modeling Environment
We have incorporated our responses to the above issues into an interactive software environment for biological modeling. We have implemented the initial system in Lisp and we have used it to formalize four compartments of Furber’s (2009) network diagram of aging,
which depicts in a graphical but informal way some wellsupported hypotheses and phenomena from biogerontology. In this section, we report the environment’s response to each of the challenges just described, using
examples from aging to clarify its operation.

Representing Biological Models
Recall that our first computational challenge involves encoding explanatory models and presenting them in ways
that biologists will understand. Let us review some key
features of aging that hold implications for modeling
these phenomena:
• Different effects of aging and age-related disease are
localized in different portions of body. For instance,
some age-linked changes occur in specific parts of the
cell, such as the lysosome or the mitochondria.

• Some hypotheses about aging involve transient substances, such as enzymes and reactive oxygen species
(ROS), whereas others involve far more stable entities like lipofuscin and mitochondrial mutations that
accumulate over time.
• Empirical results generally take the form of qualitative relations between continuous variables. For instance, one robust finding involves a negative influence of caloric intake on lifespan in model organisms.
• Aging takes place over time, but its effects are primarily monotonic in character, with the values of variables
increasing or decreasing consistently. For example,
lipofuscin in the lysosome is generally observed to increase with chronological age.
• Empirical findings about aging come in two distinct
varieties: uncontrolled observations about changes
over time and results of controlled experiments that
measure the effect of one variable on another.
Taken together, these observations provide both constraints on our approach to modeling aging processes
and avenues for making the task more tractable.
Table 1 presents our reformulation of the lysomone
compartment of Furber’s network diagram. The initial 12 statements in (a) and (b) reflect the first two
points above. They declare specific locations – the lysosome, the cytoplasm, and the cell that contains them –
along with quantities that are measurable (at least in
principle) in those locations. Some quantities refer to
stable substances, such as junk protein, oxidized protein, and lipofuscin, which accumulate over time unless
actively broken down, whereas others denote transient
substances, like Fe, ROS, and lytic enzyme, which are
reactive enough to be very short lived.
The table also includes a set of hypotheses (c) about
how these quantities influence each other. One claim is
that transient ROS increases with transient Fe within
the lysosome, whereas another is that stable oxidized
protein increases with transient ROS in the same location. Hypotheses may also relate quantities in distinct
locations (e.g., that lipofuscin in the cytoplasm increases
with damaged membrane in the lysosome). These hypotheses have a clear causal interpretation, in that they
state how one variable will change when one alters another. However, although they link continuous quantities, the relations themselves are qualitative in character.
Of course, we should remember the purpose of hypotheses like those in Table 1 (c), which is to explain
known empirical results and predict new ones. This in
turn requires not only that we represent these empirical findings formally, but also that we distinguish them
clearly from the hypotheses themselves. Table 1 (d)
shows four facts about aging in the lysosome that illustrate our earlier point about two forms of empirical
findings. The first two items clarify both the observational, nonexperimental character of many facts about

2369

Table 1: Formalization of Furber’s (2009) lysosome
model, including (a) locations, (b) stable and transient
quantities in these locations, (c) hypothetical claims
about causal influences between these quantities, and
(d) empirical facts about relations between quantities.
(a) location cell
location lysosome in the cell
location cytoplasm in the cell
(b) stable junk protein in the lysosome and cytoplasm
transient degradation rate in the lysosome
transient Fe in the lysosome
transient ROS in the lysosome
stable oxidized protein in the lysosome
stable lipofuscin in the lysosome and cytoplasm
transient lytic enzyme in the lysosome
stable damaged membrane in the lysosome
transient H2O2 in the lysosome and cytoplasm

Figure 1: A graphical visualization of the qualitative
lysosome model from Table 1, with plus (+) on an arrow
denoting that one quantity increases with another and
with minus (−) denoting a decreasing relationship.

(c) hypothesis junk protein decreases with degradation
rate in the lysosome
hypothesis junk protein in the lysosome increases
with junk protein in the cytoplasm
hypothesis Fe increases with junk protein in the
lysosome
hypothesis ROS increases with Fe in the lysosome
hypothesis oxidized protein increases with ROS in
the lysosome
hypothesis lipofuscin increases with oxidized protein
in the lysosome
hypothesis degradation rate decreases with lipofuscin
in the lysosome
hypothesis lytic enzyme decreases with lipofuscin in
the lysosome
hypothesis ROS increases with lipofuscin in the
lysosome
hypothesis damaged membrane increases with ROS
in the lysosome
hypothesis lipofuscin in the cytoplasm increases with
damaged membrane in the lysosome
hypothesis H2O2 in the lysosome increases with H2O2
in the cytoplasm

have a clear causal interpretation. The formalism also
lends itself to graphical display, with quantities shown in
locations where they occur and with arrows depicting direct causal influences between these variables. Figure 1
shows a graphical version of the lysosome model from Table 1, with the empirical facts omitted. Our implemented
system does not yet generate such graphs automatically,
but adding this ability should not be difficult.
In addition, our notation lets users specify places,
quantities, hypotheses, and empirical facts in constrained English, which we believe will make it more
accessible to biologists who are uncomfortable with traditional computer languages. Yet models stated in this
notation are well defined and unambiguous about their
claims, making them just as formal as ones stated in
the more arcane languages typically proposed in computational biology. This also distinguishes our approach
from work on qualitative reasoning in cognitive science
and AI (e.g., Bredeweg et al., 2007; Forbus, 1984), which
has influenced our approach to biological modeling.

(d) fact lipofuscin in the lysosome increases with time
fact membrane damage in the lysosome increases
with time
fact lytic enzyme decreases with ROS in the lysosome
fact H2O2 does not change with ROS in the lysosome

Reasoning over Biological Models
aging and also their monotonic nature. These explicitly
mention time as a variable, which the model hypotheses
do not. The other two facts reflect (plausible) results of
experimental studies that measure the effect of one quantity’s variation on another. The first states that lytic
enzyme decreases with ROS in the lysosome. The second states that H2O2 does not vary with of ROS. Such
negative results place constraints on models, although
hypotheses may contain only positive causal relations.
This notation meets two of the criteria given earlier.
It supports qualitative models that nevertheless relate
quantitative variables of the type that biologists typically measure, and the hypotheses that make up models

Our second computational challenge involves interpreting a given model to account for known phenomena. Scientists regularly engage in such reasoning, but with complex models they can easily overlook some conclusions
and incorrectly infer others (e.g., Feldman et al., 1989).
Thus, automatically determining a model’s implications
should be a key part of our scientific modeling environment. Good models should explain known phenomena
and predict new ones accurately, while phenomena place
constraints on model content. Our framework’s formal
statement of hypotheses and empirical results has another advantage: it lets one answer questions about how
one quantity should affect another and predict the outcomes of thought experiments.

2370

We can clarify this ability by introducing the notion of
a query about how two quantities are related. This takes
the same form as an empirical finding except that it does
not state the direction in which one variable influences
another or indeed whether an influence occurs at all.
Thus, given the hypotheses in Table 1, we might ask
“Does lipofuscin in the cytoplasm vary with Fe in the
lysosome?” or “Does ROS in the lysosome vary with
time?” The first asks a question about how changes to
one quantity in a controlled experiment affect another;
the second asks how a given quantity changes over time.
The reasoning task is simplified by our assumption that
effects are monotonic in character, giving behavior that
one can describe in terms of a single qualitative state.
This differs from much work on qualitative reasoning,
which deals with trajectories of such states over time
(e.g., Bredeweg et al., 2007; Forbus, 1984).
Because hypotheses take a form similar to facts, we
can utilize a relatively straightforward chaining procedure to answer queries. To handle a question about how
dependent variable Y varies with independent variable
X, other things being equal, one simply finds a causal
pathway, typically through other quantities, that starts
with Y and ends with X. If no such path exists, then one
can conclude that changes to X do not produce changes
in Y. If there is such path, then one must still predict
the direction of the effect. Briefly, if the path contains
an even number of ‘decreases’ links, then one predicts
that Y increases with X; otherwise one predicts that it
decreases. For example, the model in Figure 1 lets one
conclude that lytic enzyme will decrease with ROS. The
justification for this strategy is simple: each ‘decreases’
link reverses the direction or sign of the path’s overall
influence, so that an even number of them cancel out.
One complication arises when multiple paths from
Y to X make different predictions. Without knowing
the functional forms and parameters that produce each
causal link, one cannot determine the exact effects of alternative pathways. Given the modeling framework as
we have described it, in such cases one can only state that
the hypotheses make contradictory predictions. However, we can extend the formalism in a simple way that
lets it express another type of hypothesis that biologists
regularly make: that the effect of one causal pathway
dominates that of another. This requires a way to specify paths between two quantities and note which has
the greater or dominating effect. Once included, such
dominance relations let a qualitative causal model make
unambiguous predictions about how one quantity varies
with another, despite its abstract character.
Reasoning about how quantities change over time requires a slightly different approach. We assume that any
exogenous variables not influenced by other quantities
take on constant positive values. One can then infer the
effect of such an exogenous quantity on another variable

downstream by finding pathways that connect them and
combining the influences on their causal links. One can
conclude that ‘stable’ quantities occurring downstream
will increase or decrease over time, depending on their relation to the exogenous term. We can treat causal loops
between two variables as special cases of conflicting paths
in which a variable influences itself, again provided we
specify which path is dominant.
Taken together, these computational mechanisms respond to a number of the issues raised above. They let
our biological models move beyond inert structures to
become interpretable ‘programs’ one can use to answer
directed queries and make predictions about empirical
relations. They also support reasoning about the effects of both controlled manipulation and the passage
of time. As we will see shortly, the system can also explain the reasons for its conclusions. Computational aids
of this sort should let biologists derive the implications
of system-level models of aging that are more complex
than ones they can handle without assistance.

Interactive Aids for Model Improvement
Our third computational challenge involves the incremental revision of models to bring them into closer alignment with known phenomena. This depends on the ability to represent such models and reason over them, but
it must go beyond to identify portions of models that
are problematic and modify them in response. Although
there has been some research on automated model revision (e.g., Mahidadia & Compton, 2001), we have chosen
to rely on interactive revision under user control. To this
end, the system includes a number of commands through
which users can update the knowledge base. These are
currently available only through a textual interface, but
we also plan to embed them in a graphical environment.
Naturally, the most basic commands includes ones for
adding new model elements. The user can introduce new
locations, quantities, hypotheses, and empirical facts by
entering this content in the same format as shown in
Table 1. The modularity of the modeling formalism, and
its constrained English syntax, make these steps simple
to carry out. The environment also includes a display
command that presents the user with all elements in the
current model or only those of a specified type. These
commands provide the basic functionality needed for the
cumulative improvement of causal biological models.
However, the system also provides users with additional details about the model’s behavior that can inform
their revisions. In addition to answering specific queries
like “Does ROS in the lysosome vary with time?”, users
can also ask the environment to compare the current
model’s predictions to known phenomena. When these
predictions disagree with the empirical facts, the user
can also ask the system to explain its reasoning. For
each explanation, it presents the causal chain between
two quantities that, taken together, predicted a partic-

2371

ular outcome. Exceptions occur when the model incorrectly predicts no effect because no causal chain exists or
makes an ambiguous prediction when two paths conflict
and the user has not specified one as dominant.
The ability to inspect not only predictions but the reasoning behind them provides important insights about a
model’s strengths and weaknesses. If the model fails to
match one or more empirical facts, explanations may reveal the source of the problem and ways to fix it. The
user can remedy such situations in two basic ways – by
adding new hypotheses, as described above, and by removing existing hypotheses. However, because the impact of deleting an element may be unclear in advance,
the environment also lets users disable a model element
without removing it entirely, as well as enable it later if
that seems desirable. Taken together, these commands
provide basic support for the incremental improvement
of models, which will continue to be needed as new phenomena become available and demand explanation.

Initial Experiences with the Environment
We selected the systems biology of aging as our initial
application domain because it was gaining increased attention within biology and because John Furber (2009)
had already developed a network diagram that summarized many hypotheses and phenomena in this complex
field. Repeated discussions with Furber let us convert
his informal statements into our modeling notation.
We have focused our efforts on four compartments of
Furber’s diagram. These involve the dysfunction of lysosomes due to the accumulation of indigestible aggregates
known as lipofuscin, the degeneration of mitochondrial
energy production in the cell as the result of mutations,
the shortening of telomeres and decline in Lon protease
mRNA over time in the cell nucleus, and the crosslinking of proteins in the extracellular matrix. The lysosomal model, already seen in Table 1 and Figure 1, incorporated three places, nine quantities, and 12 hypotheses. The mitochondrial model included three places, nine
quantities, and ten hypotheses, while the nuclear and extracellular models have similar complexities.
Naturally, translation of content from the informal diagram into our logical notation required some care and
effort, with certain representational issues becoming apparent only along the way. Interactions with Furber
clarified his intentions and usually determined how to
proceed. Once we had the initial translation complete,
we used the environment to detect and correct problems
with these models, much as we intend its use by scientists. Running the reasoning mechanism over these
models revealed a number of errors, some in our encoding of Furber’s chart but also a few ambiguities in the
original aging diagram itself. Formalization of the aging model, combined with the environment’s reasoning
methods, led to repair of these problems.

Related Work on Scientific Modeling
Our approach to interactive biological modeling borrows
ideas from three distinct traditions, but combines them
in new ways to produce novel capabilities. The computational biology community has pursued a number
of projects that support Web-based access to biological
knowledge. For instance, KEGG (Kanehisa, 1997), Reactome (Vastrik et al., 2007), and Metacyc (Karp et al.,
2000) let their users explore biological content that curators have extracted from the literature, but they have
only limited abilities to reason over their knowledge.
Some other biological modeling efforts come closer to
our framework. For example, Genepath (Zupan et al.,
2003) offers a Web-based environment that lets users
enter qualitative results from genetics experiments and
knowledge about gene regulation, but the model construction process is entirely automated. JustAid (Mahidadia & Compton, 2001) supports iterative revision
of qualitative causal models, with the system proposing changes but the user selecting which to implement.
Racunas et al.’s (2004) HyBrow supports interactive creation of qualitative models and checks their consistency
with logical reasoning, but our system provides a more
general treatment of explanatory biological models.
Of course, we have also been strongly influenced by research on mental models in cognitive science, especially
work on qualitative reasoning and simulation (e.g., Forbus, 1984). Our approach shares some key ideas, especially that models involve qualitative causal relations
among continuous variables. One difference is our assumption that behavior is monotonic over time, which
simplifies reasoning considerably. Another distinction is
our willingness to resolve ambiguity by specifying that
one path dominates another. A third lies in our emphasis on predicting relations between pairs of quantities,
rather than on model simulation. Our incorporation of
qualitative models into an interactive modeling environment is not new. Bredeweg et al.’s (2007) GARP lets
users construct qualitative models manually and simulate their behavior, although it focuses on ecology rather
than biology, it uses a more complex process ontology,
and it does not emphasize incremental revision.

Directions for Future Research
Although our modeling environment shows considerable
promise, we need to extend the framework along a number of fronts. Clearly, our first step should be to embed
the existing abilities in a graphical interface. This would
let users visualize models in a manner similar to Figure 1, but it would also use this display to support query
answering, prediction, and explanation, each of which
have natural visual analogs. The environment would include templates for creating new locations, quantities,
hypotheses, and empirical facts, for disabling and enabling model elements, and for copying and editing entire

2372

models. These features would not change the environment’s basic functionality, but they would make it more
accessible to many biologists.
We should also expand the representational abilities
of the modeling framework. One extension would enable
grouping a set of causal links into a process, much as in
Forbus’ (1984) qualitative process theory. This would let
a graphical interface hide model details until a user asks
to see individual connections. Another augmentation
would allow contextual conditions on causal links that
specify the tissues and organisms in which they occur.
If queries included similar conditions, then the reasoning system would collect relevant connections to create
query-specific models for use in drawing conclusions. Finally, we should explore ways to move beyond the framework’s strict assumption of monotonic behavior. One response would involve adding quantitative conditions to
causal links and dominance relations that specify when
they hold, with the reasoner collecting relevant model
elements to make predictions for a specific situation.

Concluding Remarks
In this paper, we reported an interactive approach to the
representation, interpretation, and revision of scientific
models. Our environment encodes models as sets of qualitative causal influences that relates quantities in particular location, and its reasoning methods answer queries,
make predictions, and explain its conclusions. Users can
interactively invoke these abilities, which should help
them understand a model’s behavior and improve it over
time. We have carried out initial tests on cellular models
of aging, using the environment’s interactive character to
identify problems in these models and repair them.
Although our approach draws on ideas developed in
earlier work, it combines them in novel ways to support three key facets of the scientific enterprise: the
formal representation of knowledge and hypotheses, relating that knowledge to observations through explicit
reasoning, and the incremental development of knowledge over time. Many projects that formalize biological knowledge have focused on inert structures, rather
than offering aids for reasoning over complex models,
and most techniques for codifying knowledge rely on curators, rather than giving scientists tools to make their
own changes. We believe our interactive environment offers a promising approach that addresses these issues in
ways that biologists will find accessible and useful.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported in part by Grant CAA 011307 from Science Foundation Arizona and in part by Arizona State University. We thank John Furber for providing feedback about his aging network diagram, along
with Durga Bidaye, Rick Chimera, Juraj Dzifcak, Seungchan Kim, Stephen Racunas, David Stracuzzi, and
Michael Verdicchio for early contributions to the project.

References
Bredeweg, B., Bouwer, A., Jellema, J., Bertels, D., Linnebank, F., & Liem, J. (2007). Garp3 - A new workbench for qualitative reasoning and modelling. Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on
Knowledge Capture (pp. 183–184), Whistler, BC.
Bridewell, W. & Langley, P. (2010). Two kinds of knowledge in scientific discovery. Topics in Cognitive Science, 2 , 36–52.
Darden, L. (2006). Reasoning in biological discoveries.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Džeroski, S., Langley, P., & Todorovski, L. (2007). Computational discovery of scientific knowledge. In S.
Džeroski & L. Todorovski (Eds.), Computational discovery of communicable scientific knowledge. Berlin.
Feldman, B. Z., Compton, P. J., & Smythe, G. A.
(1989). Hypothesis testing: An appropriate task for
knowledge-based systems. Proceedings of the Fourth
Knowledge Acquisition for Knowledge-based Systems
Workshop. Banff, Canada, October 1989.
Forbus, K. D. (1984). Qualitative process theory. Artificial Intelligence, 24 , 85–168.
Furber, J. (2009). Systems biology of human aging: Network model of biochemical and physiological interactions in human senescence.
http://www.legendarypharma.com/chartbg.html.
Kanehisa, M. (1997). A database for post-genome analysis. Trends in Genetics, 13 , 375–376.
Karp, P., Riley, M., Saier, M., Paulsen, I., Paley, S., &
Pellegrini-Toole, A. (2000). The EcoCyc and MetaCyc
databases. Nucleic Acids Research, 28 , 56–59.
Mahidadia, A., & Compton, P. (2001). Assisting modeldiscovery in neuroendocrinology. Proceedings of the
Fourth International Conference on Discovery Science
(pp. 214–227). Washington, DC: Springer.
Racunas, S., Shah, N., Albert, I., & Fedoroff, N. (2004).
HyBrow: A prototype system for computer-aided hypothesis evaluation. Bioinformatics, 20 , i257–264.
VanLehn, K. (2006). The behavior of tutoring systems.
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 16 , 227–265.
Vastrik, I., D’Eustachio, P., Schmidt, E., Joshi-Tope, G.,
Gopinath, G., Croft, D., de Bono, B., Gillespie, M.,
Jassal, B., Lewis, S., Matthews, L., Wu, G., Birney,
E., & Stein, L. (2007). Reactome: A knowledge base
of biologic pathways and processes. Genome Biology,
8 , R39.
Vijg, J., & Campisi, J. (2008). Puzzles, promises and a
cure for ageing. Nature, 454 , 1065–1071.
Zupan, B., Bratko, I., Demsar, J., Juvan, P., Halter, J.
A., Kuspa, A., & Shaulsky, G. (2003). GenePath: A
system for automated construction of genetic networks
from mutant data. Bioinformatics, 19 , 383–389.

2373

