UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Analogue Magnitudes and Knower-Levels: Re-Visiting the Variability Argument

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9bc4x8t2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Negen, James
Sarnecka, Barbara

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Analogue Magnitudes and Knower-Levels: Re-Visiting the Variability Argument
James Negen and Barbara W. Sarnecka ({jnegen,sarnecka}@uci.edu)
Department of Cognitive Sciences, 2201 Social & Behavioral Sciences Gateway Building
Irvine, CA, 92697-5100 USA

Abstract
What cognitive system(s) initially provide the numerical
content that defines the cardinal number words for young
children? Le Corre and Carey (2007) argued that the answer
cannot be the analogue magnitude system. Here we reexamine the most powerful of their arguments, which
concerned the system’s signature scalar variability (the
standard deviation of answers grows linearly with the mean).
Using adult data, we explore a nuance of this signature: that
while it is certainly true of the continuous, underlying
activation in the brain, it may not always be true of the
number-word responses that people produce. With this in
mind, we re-examine the aforementioned variability
argument; contrary to Le Corre and Carey, we conclude that
young children’s estimates of small set sizes (up to and
including their number-knower-level) do show scalar
variability.
Keywords: Cognitive Science, Psychology, Cognitive
Development,
Perception,
Bayesian
Modeling,
Developmental Experimentation, Human Experimentation

How children acquire the meaning of number words is a
question of great interest in cognitive development. In
infancy, the child can create exact representations only of
very small sets (up to 3 items) and can create only
approximate representations of larger sets (for review, see
Feigenson, Dehaene, & Spelke, 2004). It is from these
foundations that the child must build an understanding of
integers.
There are at least two families of theories about the role
that the analogue magnitude number system plays in
number-word learning. One says that (a) the numerical
content of number words initially comes from the analogue
magnitude system (i.e., the representations of numerosity
are only approximate) and (b) number-word meanings are
learned in the same way as any other words for antecedently
available percepts (e.g., Dehaene, 1997; Gelman &
Galistell, 1978; 2004). On this view, the child essentially
understands the logic of numbers from the beginning, but
must learn the exactness of number words. That is, the child
must learn that “seven” means exactly 7 – not
approximately 5 to 9.
The other family of theories contend that (a) the
numerical content initially comes from enriched parallel
individuation representations, (which are exact, but cannot
go higher than 3 or 4) and (b) number-word meanings are
learned one at a time, and in order (e.g., Carey, 2009; Le
Corre & Carey, 2007; Sarnecka & Lee, 2009; Lee &
Sarnecka 2010). On this view, the child figures out the
principle of cardinality and the logic of the integer system

by extrapolating from the first three or four exemplars—the
words one, two, three and possibly four.
Our proposal takes something from both views. We
consider it adequately demonstrated that children do learn
the first few cardinal number-word-meanings one at a time,
and in order (Carey, 2009; Le Corre, Van de Walle,
Brannon & Carey, 2006; Lee & Sarnecka, 2010; Sarnecka &
Lee, 2009; Wynn, 1990, 1992). Thus, in this paper we will
use the knower-levels framework, wherein a one-knower is
a child who just knows “one”, a two-knower knows “one”
and “two”, etc., and a CP-knower understands how counting
works and what it is used for. Though this view has
historically been paired with the view that the numerical
content of these words comes exclusively from enriched
parallel-individuation representations, that linkage is not
logically necessary.
This issue has been examined before by Le Corre and
Carey (2007), who made a forceful argument against the
analogue magnitude system being involved in number-word
learning. The argument was based on variability signatures:
Noise in analogue magnitude representations grows at the
same rate as the number of objects being estimated. In other
words, if you briefly show people 10 dots, and ask them
how many are there, they will respond with variability σ. If
you then show them 20 dots, they will respond with
variability 2σ. More formally, the standard deviation of a
person’s responses, divided by the mean of their responses,
will be a constant (the ‘coefficeint of variance’, hereafter
COV). This scalar variability is a defining characteristic of
the analogue magnitude system throughout the lifespan.
Le Corre and Carey (2007) argued that children’s
estimates of the number of items in a picture did not show
scalar variability. Le Corre and Carey used a Give-N task
(where children give a certain number of items to the
experimenter) as well as a Cards task (where children
quickly estimate the number of items on a card). Le Corre
and Carey first identified children who were one-, two-,
three-, or four-knowers as measured by the Give-N task.
Then they analyzed the variability of children’s estimates
(on the Cards task) for sets of 1, 2, 3 and 4 items. The mean
COV grew from 0 (for estimates of 1 item) to 0.4 (for
estimates of 4 items), leading Le Corre and Carey to
conclude that early on, the cardinal meanings of these words
are not defined in terms of the analogue magnitude system.
However, there is a problem with this argument.
Logically, scalar variability could be found in two places: in
the underlying activations in the brain, or in the distribution
of number-word responses. Most studies of the analogue
magnitude system in adults treat these as the same. That is,
they assume that number-word responses transparently

1252

Scalar Variability of Activations versus Responses
Creating and using an analogue magnitude representation is
a multi-step process. One place that scalar variability might
be found is in the actual number-word responses that people
produce. For example, if you show someone 10 and 20 dots
in alternation, over and over again, and they say something
like: 9, 22, 11, 18, … their responses could show scalar
variability. That is, the standard deviation of the responses
could grow linearly with the number of items to be
estimated.
Another place you could look for scalar variability would
be in a latent, real-valued variable – possibly the logarithm
of activation in certain ‘number neurons’ – that describes
the person’s perception of how many dots are present. Thus,
when shown 10 and 20 dots, the person may experience
something like 8.82, 21.58, 11.21 and 18.44 units of
activation. But of course, participants do not say that there
are 11.21 dots on the screen – they just say “eleven” 1 .
Scalar variability of the activations means that the standard
deviation of this latent variable (as opposed to the
responses) grows linearly with the number of dots shown.
For large numbers, these two ideas make almost exactly
the same predictions. However, the predictions differ for
smaller numbers. Imagine that a person says “four” when
shown four dots, on a large number of trials. The variability
in responses is zero, but the variability in activations could
be much larger. The person might be experiencing anywhere
from 3.5 to 4.5 units of activation on each trial. If we add
the constraint that activation must be normally distributed,
then the continuous standard deviation could be as large as
0.1 while the discrete standard deviation stays very near
zero (out to several decimal places).
An analogy may be helpful: Imagine you are about to play
a game with a friend. You will see a number of dots on a
screen. Your friend has to say how many there are, but can’t
see the screen. You have to tell your friend how many dots
there are, but you’re not allowed to speak – only to draw a
single line on a piece of paper. Your partner can then
measure the line accurately with a ruler. Before the game
starts, you agree on a simple code: 1 inch = 1 item. It’s easy
to see that the average amount of error in your line length
will be proportional to the number of items.
Let’s imagine that, when you see 2 items, all of your lines
fall between 1.25 and 2.75 inches; you are accurate to ± .75
inches. Now cut that in half for when you see 1 item, and

you are accurate to ± .375 inches. As such, your line lengths
show scalar variability. But what about the answers your
partner gives? There will be some variation at 2 (when she
rounds 2.75 inches to 3, for example) but none at 1 (where
all lines fall between .625 and 1.375 inches, and so are
rounded to 1). The zero variation in her responses for trials
of 1 cannot be half of the above-zero variation for trials of 2.
Thus, the length of your lines can show scalar variability
while the number-word answers after measuring do not.
This happens whenever the variation is small compared to
the minimum distance between values after rounding. In
more traditional statistical language, the variation is very
fine-grained and the rounding is very coarse-grained,
leading to the phenomenon of heaping: all of the data gets
heaped onto one point.
Le Corre and Carey (2007) argued that one could expect
to see scalar variability in the verbal responses all the way
down to cards with 1 item. This claim was based on work
by Cordes, Gelman, Galistell, and Whalen (2001). In that
paper, the experimenters had instructed participants to tap a
space bar a certain number of times in a steady rhythm,
while saying “the” with each press to suppress counting.
Cordes et al. found that participants’ verbal responses
showed scalar variability for numbers down to 2. However,
they did not test on the number 1, and participants showed a
relatively high amount of noise in their answers (a standard
deviation of around .4 at minimum). As such, Cordes et al’s
data don’t tell us where the variability was located: at such
high levels of noise, the two sources of variability make
much the same predictions.

The Present Study
In experiment 1, we examine the two sources of variability
by extending the experiment by Cordes et al. (2001). Like
them, we showed adult participants a numeral on a screen,
and the participants’ task was to tap the space bar that
number of times. They had to do this in a steady rhythm
while repeating “the” with each tap. We made one
modification to reduce the amount of noise in the data:
participants' responses were slowed to 2 Hz by having them
tap along with a metronome.

1
It may be more satisfying to imagine that this is the center of a
confidence distribution. In other words, the participant would
experience 11.21 units of activation, and be most confident in the
integer 11 (which is closest), followed by 12, then 10, then 13, etc.

1253

SV in Activations
SV in Responses
0.12

COV in Responses

reveal the underlying activations. This is a reasonable
assumption when the numbers involved are large. But with
small numbers, the available words (i.e., one, two, three and
four) may not be sufficient to express the variation in the
underlying activations. Below, we describe these ideas in
more detail, then support our argument with some new data
from adults.

0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

Stimulus

Figure 1: Different behavioral predictions for scalar
variability in activations vs. responses.

16

The two predictions from the two sources of scalar
variability are illustrated in Figure 1. Conveniently, the
pattern predicted by scalar variability in the responses is
identical to the null hypothesis for a repeated-measures
ANOVA.
In Experiment 1, we show that small-number estimation
data from adults is consistent with the assumption of scalar
variability in the activations. In experiment 2, we develop a
simple model that incorporates number-knower-levels and
the analogue magnitude system, and we test it using data
from children’s performance on the Give-N and Cards tasks.
We find that the model provides a good fit to these child
data, with no problems of variability.

1, but this variability comes from only 2 of the participants,
representing 3 errors out of 440 trials, and still appears to be
lower than the section with full observed variance. It is clear
that these data are better explained by scalar variability in
the activations than in the responses.

Experiment 1
Methods
Participants Eleven undergraduates were recruited from the
University of California, Irvine and successfully completed
the task. Two additional participants were excluded because
they could not keep a steady rhythm during training trials.
Participants were each given a half point of extra credit in
an introductory Psychology course.
Procedure On each trial, participants saw a numeral on the
screen. They were asked to tap the space bar that many
times, along with a 2Hz metronome, saying “the” with each
tap to suppress counting. Participants were asked to avoid
trying alternate strategies, like chunking, and to just keep
tapping until they felt the number had been reached. The
numerals used were 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 12, and 15. For
training, there were two trials with each number, and all
participants declined the offer to go through training again.
For data recording, there were 40 trials with the number 1,
and 20 trials with each of the other numbers, for a total of
200 trials. Participants were allowed as many brief breaks as
they wanted, though none took more than two. All
participants finished the testing session in under 20 minutes.

Results and Discussion
All but two participants were able to keep a steady rhythm
throughout the experiment (the two who couldn’t were
excluded). The mean coefficient of variance (COV) for each
stimulus is shown in Figure 2. A repeated-measures
ANOVA with the Greenhouse-Geisser correction suggests
that the mean COV across stimuli is not constant, F(2.8,
28.2) = 8.16, p = .001. This discredits the idea of scalar
variability in responses: if such variability were true of adult
performance, then we should expect the mean COV in
responses to be the same for all the numbers we tested.
On the other hand, these data are very consistent with the
assumption of scalar variability of activations, with a
correlation between prediction and observation of over r =
.8. There appears to be a section where the rounding-off
occurs (numbers 1 to 3), and a section with full observed
variance (numbers 5 to 15), as predicted. It’s a little
surprising that there was so much variability in responses to

Figure 2: Observed COVs (standard deviation divided by
mean) in the responses were lower on average for lower
numbers of requested taps, consistent with scalar variability
in the activations (but not in the responses).
The amount of variability at numbers 1 to 4 suggests that
we were successful in repressing subitization, replicating
Cordes et al., 2001. Also, subitizing is usually characterized
by a hard limit at 4, but the lowest number where each
participant made a mistake ranged from 1 to 6. In addition,
if the effect was due to subitizing, we would be able to
eliminate it by subtracting out all of the jumps from 4 to 5
(across the limit of what people can subitize). However, this
is not the case, F(7,4) = 7.546, p = .035. Finally, all
participants reported that they found it impossible to track
individual taps during the task. (Tracking individual taps
would show that participants were using the parallel
individuation system). All of these facts point away from
subitizing as an explanation.
Next, we test these predictions against a corpus of child
behavioral data, to re-examine the question of whether the
analogue magnitude number system may be involved in
early number-word learning.

Experiment 2
We made a simple model of how children would solve the
Cards task using the analogue magnitude system. In this
task, children are shown a certain number of items on a card
and are asked to guess the number of items. This is the same
as Le Corre and Carey’s (2007) Cards task, but without the
time limit. (The purpose of the time limit is to prevent
counting, but children who do not yet understand the
cardinality principle do not use counting to answer anyway.)
This is how the model works: the child looks at the card
once and forms an analogue magnitude representation of the
number of items present. This representation could be
measured in units of activation. The child then rounds off

1254

this activation level to the nearest positive (non-zero) whole
number. If the child knows this number word, she says it. If
the child does not know the word for that number, she says
a number from among the number words whose meanings
she does not know. (For a discussion of how the child
chooses which undefined number to guess, see Sarnecka &
Lee, 2009; Lee & Sarnecka 2010.)
For example, suppose we show a two-knower 2 items on
several trials. On the first, she experiences 2.3 units of
activation, rounds it to 2, and says “two”. On the second,
she experiences .38 units, rounds it to 1, and says “one”. On
the third, she experiences 3.3 units, rounds to 3, and picks
“six” from among the words that she does not know (“three”
and up). These activation levels are being drawn from a
normal distribution with a mean of 2.
The computations involved are based on the normal
cumulative density function. Say that this child has a COV
of α when shown a card with 2 items on it. The chances of
saying “one” are Ф((1.5-2)/α). The chances of saying “two”
are Ф((2.5-2)/α)-Ф((1.5-2)/α). The chances of saying
“three” and up (beyond the knower-level) are proportional
to 1-Ф((2.5-2)/α). The lower α is, the more often the child
will be correct.

Methods
These data were taken from a longitudinal study testing
children on both the Give-N task and the Cards task. The
dataset thus offers a way of independently assessing the
child’s knower-level (using Give-N) and then estimating δ
(using the Cards task).
Participants A total of 97 monolingual English-speaking
children participated. Children were tested once every two
weeks for twenty weeks, resulting in a total of 454 sessions.
Because little is known about the week-to-week consistency
of children’s knower-levels and/or analogue magnitude
acuity, each session was modeled as a new child. We
included all children who were two-, three-, or four-knowers
(as determined by Give-N), and who completed at least 15
trials of both the Give-N and the Cards task. This resulted in
a total of 161 sessions (45 sessions with two-knowers, 51
with three-knowers, and 65 with four-knowers).

0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0

However, there is no empirical argument against this–
assuming the participant knows to round to the nearest
positive whole number. A log-normal distribution may be
substituted, which would limit the outputs to positive
numbers, but this generally has little effect; having low
outputs rounded to 1 accomplishes the same basic goal as
making the distribution of outputs stay above zero. Since a
normal distribution is symmetric, we assume that the
variation to the higher side is sufficient to estimate total
variation, e.g., the variation around 1 item is wellrepresented by the number of times the child says “two” or
“three”. Put another way, a two-knower has an equal
probability of saying “two” as experiencing between -.5
and .5 units of activation, when shown 1 item. In any case,
the probability of negative activation is often very small.

0

1

2

Says “one”
Says “two”

3

4

5

6

Says any undefined
number word (three,
four, five, six, etc.)

Figure 3: An example of the model: a two-knower, shown 2
items, draws an activation level from a normal distribution
N(2,1) and responds accordingly.
Furthermore, we assume that for each stimulus γ (each
number of items shown on the card, up to 4) and knowerlevel τ, a particular child’s COV is drawn from a normal
distribution with mean μγ,τ and standard deviation σ. A
variable δ describes the constant difference between each μγ
and the next one up. So μ2,2 = μ1,2 + δ, etc. We planned to
use Bayesian inference on these latent variables: if δ ≠ 0,
then this method of describing variation does not show
scalar variability – i.e., a constant COV – and our model is
wrong.
It may bother the reader that this model allows for the
analogue magnitude system to output a negative number.

Give-N The purpose of this task was to determine what
number-word meanings each child knew (i.e., to determine
the child’s number-knower-level.) The experimenter began
the game by bringing out a stuffed animal (e.g., a lion), a
plate, and 3 bowls, each containing 15 small identical rubber
toys (e.g., toy bananas, approx. 3 cm long). The
experimenter said to the child, “In this game, you’re going
to give something to the lion, like this [experimenter
pantomimes putting an item on the plate and sliding it over
to the lion]. I'm going to tell you what to give him.”
Instructions were of the form, “Can you give the lion TWO
bananas?”
Trials were in pseudorandom order, always starting with a
request for one item. There were a total of eighteen trials:
six trials each asking for one, two, three, four, six, and eight
items. Children were given generalized positive feedback
after each trial (e.g., “Thank you!”), regardless of their
responses.
The child’s knower-level was estimated using Lee &
Sarnecka’s (2010) model. In this model, the child has a prior
probability of giving each number of objects: small handfuls
are very likely, as is giving the entire bucket. When the

1255

child is asked for a specific number, the response
probabilities are updated according to her knower-level.
Every child is given a uniform prior chance to be each
knower-level, and a posterior distribution is calculated
based on the data. We sampled over this posterior
distribution with 3 independent chains, 2,000 burn-in
samples and 10,000 data collection samples. We then
assigned each child’s knower-level based on the expected
value 2 from this posterior distribution.

Lientz, 1970), the Bayes factor is 5.72/.39 = 14.34, meaning
that the data were 14.34 times more likely to be generated
by the null hypothesis than the alternate. This is very strong
evidence in support of the null hypothesis. In other words,
Children do show scalar variability in at least one task that
taps number-word knowledge – but it is scalar variability of
activations, not of responses.
7
6

Results and Discussion
There were a total of 1,903 usable trials from the Cards
Task. We decided to give the model a unit normal prior on
effect size δ/σ, as a way to make the prior dimensionless and
reasonably vague (Jeffreys, 1961; Rouder, Speckman, Sun,
Morey & Iverson, 2009; Wetzels, Raaijmakers, Jakab, &
Wagenmakers, in press). We then ran the model with
MATLAB and WinBUGS, which uses a form of Gibbs
sampling to describe the posterior distribution. We ran five
independent chains, with 10,000 burn-in samples and
25,000 collection samples. The within-chain variability
matched the between-chain variability, even though the
chains were initialized with different effect sizes, which is a
good indication of proper convergence.
At the point of the null hypothesis (δ = 0; i.e., the average
COV is the same for every number of items shown), there
was a prior density of .39. At the same point, there was a
posterior density of 5.72, estimated with a normal kernel
density method. By the Savage-Dickey Theorem (Dickey &
2

Another reasonable method would be to take the mode instead
of the expected value. This method has high agreement in this
case, r = .992.

5
Density

Cards Task This was our comparison task, which provides
a set of responses independent from Give-N, so that one can
be used to determine knower-level and the other to model
the analogue magnitude response. The stimuli were
photographs of the same stimuli used in Give-N, on a white
background. The difference is that children were asked to
label the numerosity instead of generating it. For example, if
a child was asked for three red trains in Give-N, she was
later shown a picture of three red trains and asked the
number on it. As a check that the child was paying attention,
trials were thrown out if the child did not produce the
correct object name (e.g., trains) along with the number
word. Before the first trial, there was a check that the
children knew the words for the objects being used, which
did not seem to pose a problem for our participants.
Again there were eighteen trials: three trials each for one,
two, three, four, six and eight items, in pseudorandom order.
We asked children the question “What’s on this card?”
because questions that start with “How many …” are often
interpreted as commands to count (Sarnecka & Carey,
2008). Children were given generalized positive feedback
after every trial. Order of tasks was counterbalanced across
sessions.

Posterior
Prior N(0,1)

BF = 14.34

4
3
2
1
0
-3

-2

-1

0
Effect Size

1

2

3

Figure 4: Prior and posterior distributions of δ/σ. There is a
great deal of support for the null hypothesis (δ = 0; i.e., the
mean COV for every stimulus is the same within each
knower-level) in the child data.

General Discussion
In Experiment 1, we showed that scalar variability of adult
small-number estimates may be located in the activations,
but not in the responses. Our analysis suggests that scalar
variability is not always present in the answers that people
give when you ask them to estimate a number of items.
Instead, scalar variability is present in the latent continuous
variable that serves as input, and which gets rounded off in
people’s answers. In Experiment 2, we modeled how
children respond when asked how many items are on a card.
Our model included (a) the use of analogue magnitudes
assuming scalar variability in the activations and (b)
knower-levels, which are stages of number-word knowledge
(e.g., Sarnecka & Lee, 2009). We showed that, contrary to
previous reports, there is no problem fitting the well-known
signature of scalar variability to real child data. In fact, we
found strong evidence that children‘s responses do show
scalar variability, with a Bayes factor of 14.34.
This reverses one of the most powerful arguments against
the involvement of the analogue magnitude system in early
number-word learning. Scalar variability is a very reliable
feature of the analogue magnitude system. We have
presented evidence that this signature is found in children’s
verbal responses to a small-number estimation task, even
before the children have figured out the cardinal principle of
counting. The statistical method we used has a very useful
feature: it can quantify support for the null hypothesis,
rather than simply rejecting or failing to reject it. Thus, we
can report positive evidence that children’s responses do
show scalar variability. This suggests that children do imbue
the first few number words (up to and including their

1256

knower-level) with numerical content from the analoguemagnitude system.
Of course, evidence for the involvement of analogue
magnitudes is not evidence against the involvement of
enriched parallel individuation; it’s possible that a parallelindividuation-based model could also be fit sensibly to these
data. There are still many reasons to think that parallel
individuation is involved. In particular, we do not dispute
Le Corre and Carey’s finding that new CP-knowers do not
connect numbers above 5 to the analogue magnitude system
(Le Corre & Carey, 2007; see Sarnecka & Lee, 2009 for a
convergent finding). In addition, children seem to become
three-knowers or four-knowers, but not five-knowers or sixknowers. The limit after 4 coincides with the set-size limit
on the parallel individuation system (e.g., Feigenson &
Carey, 2003).
Moving forward, we think tasks that tap more than just
the child’s number-word knowledge should be part of the
debate. For example, there is new interest in the question of
whether number-word knowledge is related to estimation
acuity, after it was shown that acuity at age 14 retroactively
predicts math grades back to first grade (Halberda,
Mazzocco & Feigenson, 2008). In particular, the present
model predicts that estimation acuity should correlate with
the number of within-knower-level errors on the Cards task.
This kind of argument could be very useful in determining
which systems are important to number-word learning and
how they contribute.
We hope that this line of work will lead to increasingly
accurate descriptions of how children acquire integers, and
will help to, resolve debates over the roles of various
cognitive systems in number-word learning. The test case of
number may then inform more general theories of how new
representational resources are acquired.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by NIH grant R03HD054654
to Barbara W. Sarnecka. We thank the children and
familiews who participated in the study, as well as the
teachers and administrators of the following Irvine,
California preschools: Jenny Hart Early Education Center,
Temple Bat Yahm Preschool, Turtle Rock Preschool, UCI
Children's Center, UCI Early Childhood Education Center,
UCI Infant and Toddler Center, and University Montessori.

References
Carey, S. (2009). The Origin of Concepts. Boston: MIT
Press.
Cordes, S., Gelman, R., Gallistel, C. R., & Whalen, J.
(2001). Variability signatures distinguish verbal and
nonverbal counting for both large and small numbers.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 8(4), 698-707.
Dehaene, S. (1997). The Number Sense. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Dickey, J. M., & Lientz, B. P. (1970). The weighted
likelihood ratio, sharp hypotheses about chances, the

order of a Markov chain. The Annals of Mathematical
Statistics, 42, 204-223.
Feigenson, L., & Carey, S. (2003). Tracking individuals via
object files: Evidence from infants’ manual search.
Developmental Science, 6(5), 568-584.
Feigenson, L., Dehaene, S. & Spelke, E. (2004). Core
systems of number. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8(7),
307-314.
Gelman, R. & Gallistel, C. R. (1978). The Child’s
Understanding of Number. Oxford: Harvard University
Press.
Gelman, R. & Gallistel, C. R. (2004) Language and the
origin of numerical concepts. Science, 306(5695), 441443.
Halberda, J., Mazzocco, M.M.M., & Feigenson, L. (2008).
Individual differences in non-verbal number acuity
correlate with maths achievement. Nature, 455(2), 665669.
Jeffreys, H. (1961). Theory of probability. Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.
Le Corre, M., Van de Walle, G., Brannon, E. M., Carey, S.
(2006). Re-visiting the competence/performance debate in
the acquisition of the counting principles. Cognitive
Psychology, 52(2), 130-169.
Le Corre, M. & Carey, S. (2007). One, two, three, four,
nothing more: An investigation of the conceptual sources
of the verbal counting principles. Cognition, 105, 395438.
Lee, M.D., & Sarnecka, B.W. (2010). A model of knowerlevel behavior in number-concept development. Cognitive
Science, 34, 51-67
Rouder, J. N., Speckman, P. L., Sun, D., Morey, R. D., &
Iverson, G. (2009). Bayesian t-tests for accepting and
rejecting the null hypothesis. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 16, 225-237.
Sarnecka, B. W. & Carey, S. (2008). How counting
represents number: What children must learn and when
they learn it. Cognition, 108, 662-674.
Sarnecka, B. W. & Lee, M. D. (2009). Levels of Number
Knowledge in Early Childhood. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 103(3), 325-337.
Wetzels, R., Raaijmakers, J. G. W., Jakab, E., &
Wagenmakers, E.-J. (in press). How to quantify support
for and against the null hypothesis: A fexible WinBUGS
implementation of a default Bayesian t-test. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review.
Wynn, K. (1990). Children’s understanding of counting.
Cognition, 36(2), 155-193.
Wynn, K. (1992). Children’s acquisition of number words
and the counting system. Cognitive Psychology, 24(2),
220-251.

1257

