UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Anaphora and Local Coherences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/089498ws

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Konieczny, Lars
Weldle, Helmut
Wolfer, Sascha
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Anaphora and Local Coherences
Lars Konieczny (lars@cognition.uni-freiburg.de)
Helmut Weldle (helmut@cognition.uni-freiburg.de)
Sascha Wolfer (sascha@cognition.uni-freiburg.de)
Daniel Müller (daniel@cognition.uni-freiburg.de)
Peter Baumann (peter@cognition.uni-freiburg.de)
Center for Cognitive Science, University of Freiburg, Friedrichstr. 50
D-79098 Freiburg i. Br., Germany
Abstract

sensitivity towards different sources of information for pronouns and reflexives.
Sturt (2003) on the other hand showed that the constraining principle for reflexives operates at the very earliest stages
of processing. In eye-tracking-while-reading experiments, he
found early effects of binding preferences. He concludes that
the responsible binding principle is an early filter for the processing of referring expressions.

We present two visual world studies indicating that local syntactic coherences interact with binding constraints (Chomsky,
1981) of both reflexives and pronouns. Gazes to depicted referents or events suggest that when sentences containing a local
coherence with a pronoun or reflexive are presented, locally
coherent antecedents become activated. Our results strengthen
the assumption that local syntactic coherences are interpreted
and extend the effect to online anaphora resolution and complementary binding constraints.
Keywords: anaphora, anaphora resolution, local syntactic coherences

Interpretation of locally syntactic coherences

Introduction
To arrive at a coherent interpretation of a sentence, we need
to bind referring expressions to their correct referent. Binding theory (Chomsky, 1981) provides a syntax-driven structural account for the dependencies of co-reference within sentences. Principles based on c-command are assumed to constrain the possible co-referents of anaphoric expressions on a
global level. Reflexives and pronouns have complementary
structural binding domains, i.e. within sentence boundaries,
the accessible antecedents for both anaphora types are mutually exclusive. In sentences like (1-a) and (1-b) determining the referent of the anaphoric expression himself or him is
straightforward.1
(1) a. Keni who likes John j saw himselfi/∗ j in the mirror.
b. Ken j who likes Johni saw himi/∗ j in the mirror.
Recent findings question strictly structure-driven accounts
of anaphora resolution. Runner, Sussman, and Tanenhaus
(2006), for instance, report violations of the binding domain
complementarity assumption. They examined preferences for
pronoun and reflexive binding in picture noun phrases in a
series of visual-world studies. Fixation probabilities on depicted referents revealed violations of the binding theory assumption. They concluded that reflexives should rather be
explained in terms of logophors, deposing reflexives beyond
the scope of Binding theory explanations.
Converging evidence was found by Kaiser, Runner, Sussman, and Tanenhaus (2009), suggesting that the interpretation
of reflexives is not only sensitive to structural but also semantic information. Moreover, they found differing degrees of
1 Subscripted

indices mark coreference. A star * indicates that
coreference with the indexed referent is not acceptable considering
the global parse but suggested considering the local parse.

Local syntactic coherences (LSCs) have been shown to interfere with the global sentence interpretation. Tabor, Galantucci, and Richardson (2004) found increased reading times
on the spill-over of tossed in sentences like The coach chided
the player tossed a frisbee by the opposing team. Moreover,
Konieczny, Müller, Baumann, Hachmann, and Wolfer (2009)
have shown that LSCs temporarily affect the interpretation of
globally unambiguous sentences.
Interestingly, there are locally coherent substrings in (1),
leading to the opposite binding of the reflexive or the pronoun: In Sentence (1-a), himself is restricted t bound to John
if only the local subparse John saw himself is taken into account. In the global parse however, himself is bound to Ken.
In Sentence (1-b), him is bound to Ken or any other (unmentioned) referent if the LSC John saw him is interpreted.
It is still an open question though, whether or not LSCs can
affect anaphora resolution, and if pronouns and reflexives are
affected equally.
In the remainder of the paper, two experiments will be reported providing insight into the time-course of binding and
its interaction with local syntactic coherences. We chose the
visual-world paradigm (Cooper, 1974; Tanenhaus, SpiveyKnowlton, Eberhard, & Sedivy, 1995) over reading times, as
fixations on visual objects can indicate binding preferences in
a much more direct way, without inferencing over processing
difficulty. The results suggest that LSCs indeed have an effect
on the binding of reflexives and pronouns in a way that strong
constraints like Principle A are also applied to the local parse,
temporarily overriding the globally correct binding.

Experiment 1: Depicted referents in the visual
world
In the first experiment, the visual stimuli showed the depictions of three persons, two of which were depictions of
the referents introduced in the spoken sentence. When the

1204

antecedents get reactivated when a pronoun or reflexive is
processed, we should see inreased gaze proportions on the
corresponding referent. Following this logic, the gaze pattern should indicate how local syntactic coherences affect
anaphora resolution.

c. Pronoun, LSC
Während der Vateri , den der Sohn j kämmte,
While the fatheri , who the son j combed,
ihn j/∗i im Wohnzimmer anzog, . . .
himi/∗ j in the living room dressed, . . .
While the father who the son combed dressed him in
the living room, . . .
d. Pronoun, no LSC
Während der Vater, den der Sohn j gründlich
While the father, who the son j thoroughly
kämmt, ihn j im Wohnzimmer anzieht, . . .
combs, him j in the living room dresses, . . .
While the father who the son combed thoroughly
dresses him in the living room, . . .

Materials and design
We tracked participant’s gaze on depictions of three referents
(cf. Figure 1) while they listened to sentences like (2). Materials were constructed according to a 2x2-design crossing
the factors anaphor type (reflexive vs. pronoun) and presence
of LSC (present vs. prevented), leading to four experimental conditions: reflexive with LSC (Sentence (2-a)), reflexive without LSC (Sentence (2-b)), pronoun with LSC (Sentence (2-c)), and pronoun without LSC (Sentence (2-d)). We
prevented the LSC by inserting an adverb before the verb
of the relative clause. Each participant was presented with
48 experimental sentences and an equal amount of sentencepicture pairs of comparable complexity. The task was to look
at the pictures while listening to the sentences. Immediately
after the sentence, participants had to click on the agent they
considered to be most important in the scene. 25 participants
took part in Experiment 1.

Visual stimuli The visual stimuli of Experiment 1 consisted of three referents. The globally suggested agent, the
agent contained in the LSC and a third, non-mentioned referent (see Figure 1).The positions of the referents was crossbalanced over all trials and participants.

Auditory stimuli
We recorded 48 sentences with normal speech tempo. Locally coherent sequences were recorded separately – as main
clauses (Der Sohn kämmte sich im Wohnzimmer . . . ) – and
spliced into surrounding sentences (without the starting determiner of the LSC to prevent sentence-initial prosody). By
doing so, we wanted to minimize prosodic cues induced by
the relative clause boundary and thereby destroying the local coherence. To minimize prosodic differences between
conditions, control conditions were produced by splicing the
adverbs (gründlich/thoroughly) into the first two conditions.
This method was necessary since earlier findings indicated
strong sensitivity to prosodic cues (Konieczny et al., 2009).
These effects are outside the scope of this study. The resulting experimental stimuli still sounded natural, as was established in a pre-test with native speakers who where naı̈ve with
respect to the research questions at hand.
(2) a. Reflexive, LSC
Während der Vateri , den der Sohn j kämmte,
While the fatheri , who the son j combed,
im Wohnzimmer anzog, . . .
sichi/∗ j
himselfi/∗ j in the living room dressed, . . .
While the father who the son combed dressed himself
in the living room, . . .
b. Reflexive, no LSC
Während der Vateri , den der Sohn gründlich
While the fatheri , who the son combed,
kämmte, sichi
im Wohnzimmer anzog, . . .
thoroughly himselfi in the living room dressed, . . .
While the father who the son combed thoroughly
dressed himself in the living room, . . .

Figure 1: A picture of three referents from Experiment 1. The
father (top), the son (right), and a clown (left).

Hypotheses
We expect the LSC to have an influence on fixation probabilities when the anaphor is heard or shortly after. If the
LSC has an effect, we expect fixation probabilities on the
referent denoted by the LSC to be increased, compared to
sentences where no LSC is present. Therefore, when sentences like (2-a) are heard, fixation probabilities on the son
should increase compared to sentences like (2-b) because
the son is the only possible referent of the local interpretation of sich/himself. Accordingly when sentences like (2-c)
are heard, we expect fixation probabilites on the father to
increase compared to sentences like (2-d) because the father is one possible referent of the local interpretation of
ihn/him. We expect the effect for the reflexive condition
to be stronger than for the pronoun, because the reflexive

1205

sich/himself corefers in its local interpretation with the agent
of the LSC (the son) whereas the pronoun ihn/him corefers
in its local interpretation with the first-mentioned agent (the
father) but also with every other referent except the son.

0.7

Experiment 1 Condition 2 x 4 (N = 25 )

0.6

Pic: 'father' (MatrixC antecedent) − Sen: 'ihn' LC
Pic: 'father' (MatrixC antecedent) − Sen: 'ihn' + adverb

Pic: 'son' (RelC antecedent) − Sen: 'ihn' LC
Pic: 'son' (RelC antecedent) − Sen: 'ihn' + adverb

Pic: 'clown' (not mentioned) − Sen: 'ihn' LC
Pic: 'clown' (not mentioned) − Sen: 'ihn' + adverb

Pic: 'son' (RelC antecedent) − Sen: 'sich' LC
Pic: 'son' (RelC antecedent) − Sen: 'sich' + adverb

Pic: 'clown' (not mentioned) − Sen: 'sich' LC
Pic: 'clown' (not mentioned) − Sen: 'sich' + adverb

Relative clause antecedent (son)

0.4

0.3
0.1

0.2

Unmentioned referent (clown)

−1000

0

1000

2000

3000

4000

Time(ms)

Figure 3: Results for pronouns: Proportion of fixations on
the globally correct referent (blue lines), the local referent
(red), and on an unmentioned person (green). Zero marks the
onset of the pronoun in the spoken stimulus. There was no
reliable difference in fixations to the local referent (red lines),
when a LSC was present (solid) than in the control condition
(dashed).

actual local coherence. Another possibility is that participants
might have looked at both of the two actors (the agent and
the patient) in transitive events, such that the gazes are not as
informative for the pronoun cases as for the reflexive cases,
where there is only one actor (the agent) in each event. These,
and other potential problems of Experiment 1 were dealt with
in Experiment 2.

Matrix clause
antecedent (father)

0.3

Experiment 2: Depicted events in the visual
world

Unmentioned referent (clown)

0.0

0.1

0.2

fixation probability

0.5

0.6

0.7

Experiment 1 Condition 1 x 3 (N = 25 )
Pic: 'father' (MatrixC antecedent) − Sen: 'sich' LC
Pic: 'father' (MatrixC antecedent) − Sen: 'sich' + adverb

Matrix clause
antecedent (father)

0.0

For reflexives (Figure 2), there are significantly more fixations on the referent denoted by the LSC, when the LSC was
present than when it was absent. Fixation probabilities differ
significantly in the range from 500 ms to about 1600 ms after
the onset of the reflexive in the spoken stimulus. The referent denoted by the global meaning of the sentence is fixated
the most after about 1200 ms after the synchronization point,
indicating that the participants understood the spoken stimuli. The non-overlapping standard errors indicate significant
differences of mean fixation probabilities in the different conditions. This was further validated by fitting a linear mixed
effects model using the statistical software R (R Development Core Team, 2010) with the package lme4 (Bates, 2007).
Analyses of fixation patterns for the relevant sections revealed
significant differences, as tested with MCMC-sampling (all
ps < .05). However, for the pronoun condition, we found
no reliable difference in fixations on the referent denoted by
the LSC when a LSC was present compared to when it was
absent (Figure 3).

fixation probability

Results

0.4

0.5

Relative clause antecedent (son)

−1000

0

1000

2000

3000

4000

Time(ms)

Figure 2: Results for reflexives: Proportion of fixations on the
globally correct referent (blue lines), the local referent (red),
and on an unmentioned person (green). Zero marks the onset
of the reflexive in the spoken stimulus. There are significantly
more fixations to the local referent (red lines), when a LSC
was present (solid) than in the control condition (dashed), in
the range of about 500 ms to 1600 ms.

Discussion
The results clearly indicate that binding can be disturbed by a
local syntactic coherence, at least for reflexives. The lack of a
local coherence effect for pronouns in this experiment might
have several reasons: Due to their complementary binding
domains, pronouns would have their antecedent outside the

In Experiment 2, we used depicted events instead of referents.
By doing so, we were able to provide a unique depiction even
for the transitive (i.e. pronoun) cases. We also used a different
control condition (i.e. locally non-coherent condition), which
is more effective than inserting an adverb before the verb, as
in Experiment 1. We used particle verbs, such as an-ziehen,
in the non-local conditions. In main clauses, the particle an
would have to be seperated and placed at the end of the clause,
as in: der Sohn zieht sich an.

Materials and design
Again, we used a 2x2-design crossing the type of anaphora
(reflexive vs. pronoun) and the presence of the LSC (present
vs. absent). Note, that the type of scene (depiction of transitive or reflexive actions) was always presented with the corresponding type of anaphor. So, reflexive scenes like those in
Figure 4 were always presented with sentences like (3-a) and
(3-b), transitive scenes (Figure 5) were presented with sentences like (3-c) and (3-d). The task was to click on (one of
the) correct scenes after hearing the sentence. 36 participants
took part in Experiment 2.

1206

Auditory stimuli We recorded 24 sentences and used the
double amount of sentence-picture pairs as fillers. Again, the
local coherent substring was spliced into the surrounding sentence. To create the control conditions, we swapped the verb
of the relative clause (kämmte/combed) with the second verb
of the sentences (3-a) and (3-c) (anzog/dressed), which was
always a particle verb. When a particle verb is placed inside
the relative clause, the LSC is no longer valid (* Der Sohn
anzog sich/ihn im Wohnzimmer . . . ).
(3) a. Reflexive, LSC
Während der Vateri , den der Sohn j kämmte,
While the fatheri , who the son j combed,
sichi/∗ j
im Wohnzimmer anzog, . . .
himselfi/∗ j in the living room dressed, . . .
While the father who the son combed dressed himself
in the living room, . . .
b. Reflexive, no LSC
Während der Vateri , den der Sohn anzog, sichi
While the fatheri , who the son dressed, himselfi
im Wohnzimmer kämmte, . . .
in the living room combed, . . .
While the father who the son dressed combed himself
in the living room, . . .
c. Pronoun, LSC
Während der Vateri , den der Sohn j kämmte,
While the fatheri , who the son j combed,
ihn j/∗i im Wohnzimmer anzog, . . .
himi/∗ j in the living room dressed, . . .
While the father who the son combed dressed him in
the living room, . . .
d. Pronoun, no LSC
Während der Vater, den der Sohn j anzog, ihn j
While the father, who the son j dressed, him j
im Wohnzimmer kämmte, . . .
in the living room combed, . . .
While the father who the son dressed combed him in
the living room, . . .

4), whereas for the non-coherent controls, the corresponding
scene was the son dressing himself (the upper right scene in
Figure 4). Accordingly, the globally correct scene for Sentence (3-b) changes from the father dressing himself (the
lower left scene in Figure 4) to the father combing himself
(the lower right scene in Figure 4).

Figure 4: A picture of four scenes depicting reflexive actions
from Experiment 2. The son combing himself (upper left), the
son dressing himself (upper right), the father dressing himself
(lower left), and the father combing himself (lower right).

Visual stimuli We used scene depictions instead of referents. Sentences with reflexives were always presented with
scenes depicting reflexive actions (Figure 4), whereas sentences with pronouns were always presented with scenes depicting transitive actions (Figure 5). This procedure lead to a
total of 192 scenes. The positions of the scenes were crossbalanced over all trials and participants.
In the reflexive conditions (Sentences (3-a) and (3-b)) the
global interpretation of Sentence (3-a) refers to the scene
where the father is dressing himself (the lower left scene in
Figure 4). The LSC is referring to the son combing himself
(the upper left scene in Figure 4).
Because we generated the control conditions by swapping
the verbs, the depicted target and control events were different. That is, for locally coherent sentences the target scene
was the son combing himself (the upper left scene in Figure

In the pronoun condition with an LSC (Sentence (3-c)) the
global sentence meaning refers to the scene where the son is
combing the father (the upper left scene in Figure 5) as well
as to the scene where the father is dressing the son (the lower
right scene in Figure 5). The meaning of the LSC is also referring to the scene where the son is combing the father. Importantly, in the pronoun condition with an LSC, both global
and local meanings are referring to the same scene.
Again, the control condition was generated by swapping
the verbs, therefore the depicted target control events were
also different. For locally coherent sentences the target scene
was the the son combing the father (the upper left scene in
Figure 5), whereas for the non-coherent controls, the corresponding scene was the son dressing the father (the upper
right scene in Figure 5). Accordingly, the globally correct
scene for Sentence (3-d) changes from the father dressing the
son (the lower right scene in Figure 5) to the father combing
the son (lower left scene in Figure 5).

Hypotheses
Reflexive condition We again expect a contrast in fixation
probabilities between sentences with LSC (Sentence (3-a))
and sentences without LSC (Sentence (3-b), such that the
picture depicting the event expressed by the LSC (Der Sohn
kämmt sich im Wohnzimmer) is fixated more often when the
LSC is present than when it is not (* Der Sohn anzog sich im
Wohnzimmer). This effect should show up shortly after the
offset of the reflexive. The other event, which is described
by the main clause (the father dressing (LSC) or combing (no

1207

about 2200 ms). Again, the indication of significant differences by non-overlapping standard errors were further validated by fitting a linear mixed effects model (all ps < .05).

0.7

Condition 1 vs. 3; N= 36; bins 100 ms
local − S kaemmte, sich(LC)
local − S anzog, sich

0.3

0.4

Scene denoted
by the LSC

0.2

fixation probability

0.5

0.6

global(MC) − S kaemmte, sich(LC)
global(MC) − S anzog, sich

0.1

Scene denoted
by the matrix clause

0.0

Figure 5: A picture of four scenes depicting transitive actions from Experiment 2. The son combing the father (upper left), the son dressing the father (upper right), the father
combing the son (lower left) and the father dressing the son
(lower right).

−1000

Pronoun condition In the pronoun condition both the
global and the local meaning of the sentence refer to the
same scene (the son combing the father), therefore we expect a ”boost effect” on fixation probabilities on this scene,
i.e. we expect fixation probabilities to be high in the control condition (Sentence (3-d)), but even higher in the local
coherent condition (Sentence (3-c)). Furthermore, fixation
probabilities on the event described in the main clause should
rise as soon as the corresponding event is mentioned, i.e. in
the LSC condition, the fixations on the main verb action depiction should be delayed until after the offset of the local
coherence.
For reflexives (Figure 6)2 , there are significantly more fixations to the scene denoted by the LSC when the LSC was
present than when the LSC was absent. This effect ranges
from about 800 ms to after 2000 ms from the onset of the reflexive. Of course, during the matrix clause at the end of the
sentence, the highest proportion of fixations is on the scene
denoted by the matrix clause (after about 2200 ms from the
onset of the reflexive).
For pronouns (Figure 7), the meaning of the LSC coincides with the globally correct meaning of the relative clause,
which are therefore depicted by the same scene. The significant difference between the LSC and the non-LSC condition
demonstrates the expected ”boost effect”. This effect lasts
from 200 ms to about 1000 ms after the onset of the pronoun.
When the event denoted by the matrix clause is described,
there are the most fixations on the corresponding scene (after
2 For expository reasons only fixation probabilities on the locally
and globally denoted scenes were plotted.

1000

2000

3000

4000

Time(ms)

LSC) himself ) should be fixated later as soon as the event is
mentioned.

Results

0

Figure 6: Results for reflexives: Proportion of fixations on the
depicted event with the globally correct binding (blue lines),
the local binding (red). Fixations on the other depictions are
not plotted. Zero marks the onset of the reflexive in the spoken stimulus. There are significantly more fixations to the
local binding depiction (red lines), when a LSC was present
(solid) than in the control condition (dashed), in the range of
about 800 ms to after 2000 ms.

Discussion
Experiment 2 replicates the results for reflexives in Experiment 1. Ignoring for a minute the period where the effect
seems to be reversed, about 800 ms after the reflexive we see
the local coherence effect, i.e. more looks to the locally coherent, or the control scene, respectively, when there is a local
coherence in the speech input, than when there is none. Different from experiment 1, we also found a local coherence
effect with pronouns. As discussed above, this might be due
to the fact that the target picture in Experiment 2 is a single
scene including the directionality of the action, whereas there
are two depicted target actors involved in transitive actions in
Experiment 1. Most notably, interpreting the pronoun within
the local coherence overlaps with the meaning of the relative
clause itself, so that the effect amounts to boosting the correct
interpretation. The short inverse effect for reflexives starting
even before the reflexive and lasting to about 200 ms after
the onset of the reflexive might seem worrying at first glance.
Note however that this effect is likely due to the fact that different target scenes where used for the target and the control
condition (due to swapping the verbs). This difference could
hence be attributed to differences in visual saliency between
the two depictions. Moreover, the swapped verbs themselves
might have added to the effect: particle verbs clearly morphologically indicate a clause boundary, whereas the verbs used
for local coherences do not. Detection of a clause boundary
might have triggered a short-lived attention-shift towards pic-

1208

0.7

Condition 2 vs. 4; N= 36; bins: 100 ms
global(MC) − S kaemmte, ihn(LC)
global(MC) − S anzog, ihn

ways. They could be seen as an indicator that binding principles for pronouns and – especially – for reflexives are too restrictive because they only capture the by nature global structural characteristics of sentences. On the other hand our results speak for the validity of Binding Theory, because it is
even applicable in non-global structures like the local syntactic coherences presented here.
What seems quite clear considering our results, is that
LSCs are processed and interpreted in such a profound way
that they exert a clear influence, even on the binding of
anaphoric expressions.

local/RC − S kaemmte, ihn(LC)
local/RC − S anzog, ihn

0.4
0.3
0.1

0.2

fixation probability

0.5

0.6

Scene denoted by the LSC
and the global meaning of the relative clause

Scene denoted by
the matrix clause

Acknowledgments

0.0
−1000

0

1000

2000

3000

4000

Time(ms)

Figure 7: Results for pronouns: Proportion of fixations on the
globally correct scene described by the matrix clause (blue
lines) and the scene described by the LSC and the global
meaning of the relative clause (red). Fixations on the other
depictions are not plotted. Zero marks the onset of the pronoun in the spoken stimulus. There are significantly more fixations to the local binding depiction (red lines), when a LSC
was present (solid) than in the control condition (dashed), in
the range of about 200 ms to after 1000 ms.

tures depicting the verb’s action. Note that the same holds
for the pronoun cases, where we also see an early and shortlived advantage for the ”local” picture in the non-local condition. The early appearance of the effect however, as in the
reflexives, renders it unlikely that the effect is due to the local
coherence itself.

Conclusions
Both experiments have shown that local syntactic coherences
can influence the binding of pronouns and reflexives. The
results suggest that LSCs open a short-lived window, during
which binding constaints can work both locally and globally.
With respect to the time course, shortly after an anaphoric expression is heard, potential referents or scenes corresponding
to the binding of the anaphor are fixated. This argues for very
early constraints (from both global and local interpretations)
exerting their influence on co-reference assignment. This result is in line with Sturt (2003) who showed that Principle A
operates at the very earliest stages of processing. However,
we could also show that globally correct binding can be delayed when a local syntactic coherence interferes.
Furthermore, our findings suggest that the effects for pronouns are more fragile than those for reflexives, replicating
similar findings by Kaiser et al. (2009) and Runner et al.
(2006) who found that binding constraints for reflexives are
harder than those for pronouns. Different to their findings,
our results are not dependent on the specific semantic nature
of the stimuli, as is the case with picture noun phrases.
On a larger scale, our results can be interpreted in two

We would like to thank Anne Karina Feldmeth, David Kühner
and Minkus Teske for their detail work on the auditory and
visual stimuli. We also want to thank Sarah Schwarzkopf for
her voice and for recording the auditory stimuli. This work
was supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG,
grant KO 1932/3-1).

References
Bates, D. M. (2007). Linear mixed model implementation in
lme4. Manuscript, University of Wisconsin - Madison.
Chomsky, N. (1981). Lectures on government and binding.
Dordrecht: Foris.
Cooper, R. M. (1974). The control of eye fixation by the
meaning of spoken language: A new methodology for the
real time investigation of speech perception, memory and
language processing. Cognitive Psychology, 6, 84-107.
Kaiser, E., Runner, J. T., Sussman, R. S., & Tanenhaus, M. K.
(2009). Structural and semantic constraints on the resolution of pronouns and reflexives. Cognition, 112(1), 55-80.
Konieczny, L., Müller, D., Baumann, P., Hachmann, W., &
Wolfer, S. A. (2009). Local syntactic coherence interpretation, and how prosody modulates it. In Proceedings of
the 22nd annual meeting of the cuny conference on human
sentence processing. Davis, CA.
R Development Core Team. (2010). R: A language and
environment for statistical computing [Computer software
manual]. Vienna, Austria.
Runner, J. T., Sussman, R. S., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2006).
Assigning referents to reflexives and pronouns in picture
noun phrases: Experimental tests of binding theory. Cognitive Science, 30, 1-49.
Sturt, P. (2003). The time-course of the application of binding
constraints in reference resolution. Journal of Memory and
Language, 48, 542-562.
Tabor, W., Galantucci, B., & Richardson, D. (2004). Effects
of merely local syntactic coherence on sentence processing.
Journal of Memory and Language, 50, 355-370.
Tanenhaus, M. K., Spivey-Knowlton, M. J., Eberhard, K. M.,
& Sedivy, J. C. (1995). Integration of visual and linguistic
information in spoken language comprehension. Science,
268, 1632-1634.

1209

