UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Are grunters cheaters? The effects of grunting when judging the direction of a tennis shot

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7268w89h

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Sinnett, Scott
Kingstone, Alan

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Are grunters cheaters? The effects of grunting when judging the direction of a
tennis shot
Scott Sinnett (ssinnett@hawaii.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Hawaii at Manoa,
2530 Dole Street
Sakamaki C400
Honolulu, HI 96822
USA

Alan Kingstone (alan.kingstone@ubc.ca)
Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia,
2136 West Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4
Canada

Abstract
There is a chorus of complaints that many professional tennis
players who grunt when striking the ball gain an unfair
advantage because the sound of the grunt distracts their
opponent. However, scientific investigations of human
attention and performance, specifically with regard to soundvision interactions, would seem to predict that a grunting
sound should help because it will draw attention to the visual
event of a ball being struck. We tested the argument that a
grunt has a negative impact by requiring participants to view
videos of a professional hitting a ball to either side of a tennis
court with or without a grunt. The task was to respond as
quickly as possible to the ball’s direction. Grunting interfered
with performance making responses slower and less accurate.
The competitive advantage afforded to the grunting player is
potentially profound. The findings will be discussed in
relation to current theory on multisensory integration.
Keywords: Attention; multisensory integration; distraction;
tennis; action perception.

Introduction
Last year, for the first time, a Portuguese women’s tennis
player, Michelle Larcher de Brito, made it to the third round
of the 2009 French Open. Unfortunately for Michelle she
lost to Frenchwoman Aravane Rezai in a match where
Michelle was heavily criticized for executing a loud and
long grunt each time she hit the ball. The complaint is that
Michelle, and many of the best players in tennis like her,
such as Maria Sharapova (who grunts at over 100 decibels)
and the Williams sisters, gain an unfair advantage by
distracting their opponents with their grunts. Indeed, there is
a growing chorus of critics who complain that many of the
top-ranked professional women tennis players are cheating
when they grunt. This complaint has been voiced not only
by the media and fans, but also by the athletes themselves

(Flatman, 2009; Navratilova, 2009). Indeed, further
exemplifying the notion that grunting might distract an
opponent, the governing body of the rules of tennis
(International Tennis Federation, ITF) explicitly states (rule
26) that purposeful and excessive grunting is a hindrance
and reason for a point penalty (International Tennis
Federation, 2009).
Unfortunately, the scientific evidence to support these
complaints and rules is less than compelling. While there is
evidence that performance on a visually based task can be
interfered with when a rare and unexpected distracting
sound occurs, such as a phone ringing during an exam
(Shelton, Elliott, Eaves, & Exner, 2009), a predominant
complaint is that tennis players grunt too frequently (i.e., on
every shot), so the grunts can hardly be unexpected.
Furthermore, there is also evidence that when a sound and
visual event occur at different moments and/or locations,
attention may be drawn to the sound and away from the
visual event (Morein-Zamir, Soto-Faraco, & Kingstone,
2003; Sekuler & Sekuler, 1997). However, that situation
does not apply to tennis, as the sound of a grunt and the
visual of a ball being struck share a common place in time
and space. Accordingly, laboratory research indicates that
when audio-visual events share a common origin, they are
often integrated, thereby helping to focus attention on the
visual event (Calvert & Thesen, 2004; Stein, London,
Wilkinson, & Price, 1996). In fact, in some situations a
certain degree of temporal and spatial disparity in the
multimodal signals can actually be tolerated (Jones &
Jarick, 2006). The science therefore suggests that a player
who grunts while making a shot may help their opponent
focus attention on the shot. This notion can be further
bolstered by evidence that having a sudden, short sound can
increase one's general level of alertness (Nickerson, 1973).
Thus past research does not support the complaint that
grunting puts an opponent at a competitive disadvantage.

1489

Nevertheless, it would be the height of arrogance to
dismiss the complaints from opponents and experts alike
that the grunts have a negative impact. Indeed, past audiovisual studies have generally been limited to detecting
flashes of light, and may not apply to the more complex
situation of perceiving a tennis ball being struck. To take an
initial step toward studying the effect of grunting in tennis
we presented videos of a tennis player executing a forehand
or backhand groundstroke to the left of right side of the
court. Critically, half of the videos included a grunt whereas
the other half did not. If the sound of the grunt is indeed
distracting, longer response latencies and higher error rates
would be expected when participants judged the direction of
the tennis shot when a grunt was included.

Method
Participants

with their right hand if they thought that the shot was going
to their right, and the X on a keyboard with their left hand if
they thought that the shot was going to their left. Each trial
began with a fixation cross (1250 ms), followed by the
video. The experiment lasted approximately 25 minutes.

Results
Clips that ended at contact (Hard decision) were analyzed
separately from clips ending 100 ms after contact (Easy
decision). The data were analyzed for reaction time (RT)
and accuracy. When the grunt was present and the video
stopped at the time of contact, the participants were
consistently 33 ms slower to respond to the direction of the
ball (496 ms versus 463 ms; t(32) = 3.7, p = .001), and they
made 4% more decision errors (39% vs. 35%; t(32) = 2.7, p
= .012; see Figure).

A.

Thirty-three undergraduate students from the University of
British Columbia participated in exchange for course credit.
All reported normal hearing and normal or corrected-tonormal vision.

Materials
Participants sat approximately 60 cm from a computer
screen in a dimly lit and sound attenuated testing room. The
experiment was programmed and presented using DMDX
software (http://www.u.arizona.edu/~jforster/dmdx.htm).
A total of 384 video clips were made of a professional
tennis player hitting the ball (either forehand or backhand)
to either the left or right of a video camera (Canon ZR10
digital video (DV) camera; 10x optical zoom, 200x digital
zoom, image stabilizer, and 460K CCD pixel level) set up
on the baseline of the court opposite the player. To be
included as a video clip, the player had to hit the ball in a 2
X 2 meter target extending from the sideline and the
baseline. The video clips were edited so as to include
forehands hit crosscourt and down the line, and backhands
hit crosscourt and down the line. There was a total of four
clips for each shot type that were then edited such that each
clip was played with or without a grunt and ended either at
contact or 100 ms after contact. Each clip type (i.e., 32 total
for each shot type, total of 128 video clips ranging in length
from 1230 ms – 1666 ms) was repeated three times for a
total of 384 trials. To mimic the sound of the grunt, while at
the same time controlling for individual grunt types, white
noise (500 ms; a very conservative and uniform grunt) was
played for the last portion of the clips that included the
‘grunt’.

Procedure
Participants were required to respond as quickly and
accurately as possible indicating the direction of the shot in
each video clip (3 blocks of 128 separated by breaks for
rest). They were required to use the M key on a keyboard

B.

Figure: Dark grey bars represent when the grunt was present
and clear bars when the grunt was absent for easy- and hardshot decisions (A – response time in ms; B – total
percentage of decision errors). All differences are
significant.
When the video ended 100 ms after contact the exact same
pattern was observed. If the grunt was present, participants

1490

were 21 ms slower to respond to the direction of the ball
(403 ms vs. 382 ms; t(32) = 3.7, p = .001), and they made
3% more errors (8% vs. 5%; t(32) = 3.5, p = .001). That a
grunt had the same effect for hard and easy judgements was
confirmed by analyses of variance of the overall RT and
error data, which directly compared Grunt (Present vs.
Absent) and Decision (Hard vs. Easy). The RT results
revealed main effects of Grunt and Decision, reflecting the
fact that participants were slower to respond when a grunt
was present, F(1,32) = 31.1, p < .001, and the decision was
hard, F(1,32) = 21.8, p < .001, but there was no interaction
between grunt and decision, F(1,32) = 1.74, p = .196.
Similarly, for response accuracy, there were more errors for
grunts F(1,32) = 16.0, p <.001, and hard decisions, F(1,32)
= 525.8, p < .001, but no interaction, F < 1.

Discussion
The findings are clear-cut. When a grunt occurs
opponents are significantly slower (21-33ms) and make
significantly more decision errors (3-4%) regarding the
direction of the ball both for easy and hard decisions alike.
Despite serve speeds now frequently exceeding 100mph
(Miller, 2006), if a very conservative estimate that a
professional tennis shot travels at 50mph during a rally, a
21-33ms response delay equates to a ball travelling two
extra feet on every shot before an opponent can respond.
This is a tremendous advantage given that rallies on average
last five to seven seconds, with opponents executing
generally four directional changes per point with
approximately three strokes per rally (the precise values will
of course vary with factors like game strategy and court
surface; Fernandez, Mendez-Villanueva, & Pluim, 2006).
Furthermore, based on data focusing exclusively on 481
matches played at Wimbledon from 1992-1995, an average
of 6.4 points played per game can be calculated (Magnus, &
Klaasen, 1999). Therefore, between the average number of
points played per game and the average number of strokes
per point, the additional 3-4% errors observed here could be
equivalent to an opponent being wrong footed by a
grunting-shot nearly once every game. Given that only four
points are required to win a game, this is a definite
advantage.
One can only speculate at present as to why a grunt
affects the speed and accuracy of responding to a tennis
shot. Because a tennis shot and grunt originate from the
same location (i.e., the same person), contemporary
evidence suggests that visual perception of the shot should
be enhanced (see for example Calvert & Thesen, 2004;
Sekuler & Sekuler, 1997). Yet we found the opposite. One
possibility, suggested by past and present players, is that the
sound of a ball making contact with a racket helps to
indicate where a shot is going, and a grunt masks this
crucial audio-visual integration. We are currently pursuing
this issue by manipulating systematically the time of a grunt
and the moment that a ball strikes a racket; benchmarking
the data against past studies of audio-visual integration. An

additional avenue for future research is to manipulate the
sound of the grunt and the expertise of the observer. The
latter idea is of particular interest, as it might be possible
that tennis experts may attempt unique strategies to
circumvent the negative impact of a grunt that we have
demonstrated here. However, given the self-reports from the
tennis players that an opponent’s grunting interferes with
their play, and our data showing that negative effects of
grunting arise for both response latency and accuracy
measures regardless of decision difficulty, it is likely that
the negative effect of grunting persists for expert tennis
players. Indeed, current research suggests that many
multisensory phenomena are highly resistant to top-down
processes (Driver, & Noesselt, 2008).
It is difficult to ascertain whether many of the most
prolific grunters intentionally grunt to distract their
opponent. There is little doubt, however, that they are
cheating their opponents. Grunting not only decreases their
opponent's ability to judge the direction of a shot, it also
reduces the amount of time they have to respond to every
shot. These consequences on faster tennis surfaces, such as
the grass courts of Wimbledon, or the hard courts of the
Australian and US Open, are likely to be profound.

References
Calvert, G.A., Thesen, T. (2004). Multisensory integration:
methodological approaches and emerging principles in the
human brain. Journal of Physiology, 98, 191-205.
Driver, J., & Noesselt, T. (2008). Multisensory interplay
reveals crossmodal influences on ‘sensory-specific’ brain
regions, neural responses, and judgments. Neuron, 57, 1123.
Fernandez, J., Mendez-Villanueva, A., & Pluim, B.M.
(2006). Intensity of tennis match play. British Journal of
Sports Medicine, 40, 387-391.
Flatman, B. (2009, June 14). One more grunt and you’re
out: Wimbledon to crack down after complaints. Times
Online. Retrieved from
http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/sport/tennis/article6493
899.ece
Jones, J.A., & Jarick, M. (2006). Multisensory integration of
speech signals: The relationship between space and time.
Experimental Brain Research, 174, 588-594.
International Tennis Federation (ITF). Rules of tennis 2009.
Retrieved from
http://www.itftennis.com/abouttheitf/rulesregs/rules.asp.
Magnus, J.R., & Klaasen, J.G.M. (1999). On the advantage
of serving first in a tennis set: Four years at Wimbledon.
The Statistician, 58, 247-256.
Miller. S. (2006). Modern rackets, balls, and surfaces.
British Journal of Sports Medicine, 40, 401-405
Morein-Zamir, S., Soto-Faraco, S., & Kingstone, A. (2003).
Auditory capture of vision: examining temporal
ventriloquism. Cognitive Brain Research, 17, 154-63.
Navratilova, M. (2009, June 7). Martina Navratilova: The

1491

grunting has to stop. The Times Online. Retrieved from
http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/sport/tennis/article644
6197.ece
Nickerson, R.S. (1973). Intersensory facilitation of reaction
time: Energy summation or preparation enhancement.
Psychological Review, 80,489–509.
Sekuler, R., Sekuler, A.B., & Lau, R. (1997). Sound alters
visual motion perception. Nature, 385,308.
Shelton, J.T., Elliott, E.M., Eaves, S.D., & Exner, A.L.
(2009). The distracting effects of a ringing cell phone: An
investigation of the laboratory and the classroom setting.
Journal of Environmental Psychology, 29, 513-521.
Stein, B.E., London, N., Wilkinson, L.K., & Price, D.D.
(1996). Enhancement of perceived visual intensity by
auditory stimuli: A psychophysical analysis. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 8, 497-506.

1492

