UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Arithmetic Notation…now in 3D!

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6z35301q

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Landy, David
Linkenauger, Sally

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Arithmetic Notation…now in 3D!
David Landy (dlandy@richmond.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Richmond
Richmond, VA 23173

Sally Linkenauger (sal3g@virginia.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22904
Abstract

partially described by the order of operations. In any
equation, operations bind in the following order:
parentheses, exponents, multiplications and divisions,
additions and subtractions. This apparently arbitrary system
appears to require explicit memorization, but in fact can be
computed using basic perceptual-motor mechanisms such as
grouping (Landy & Goldstone, 2007) and automatic
attentional biases (Landy, Jones, & Goldstone, 2008). On
this account, computing the answer to a math problem
involves taking physical actions to transform abstract forms.
If notations really are fundamentally abstract, then their
implied physical structure is entirely given by their surface
form: there is no sense in which any of the symbols are
‘close’ or ‘far away.’ However, if people indeed often
reason by treating symbols as pictures of objects in space,
then these objects must be laid out in some threedimensional arrangement. Thus, it is at least possible that
different symbols would be seen as closer or further away
than others. In the next section, we outline some reasons to
expect such differences.

When people reason formally, they often make use of special
notations—algebra and arithmetic are familiar examples.
These notations are often treated as mere shorthand—a
concise way of referring to meaningful mathematical
concepts. Other authors have argued that people treat
notations as pictures—literal diagrams of an imagined set of
objects (Dörfler, 2003; Landy & Goldstone, 2009). If
notations depict objects that exist in space, then it makes
sense to wonder how they are arranged not just in the two
visible dimensions, but in depth. In four experiments, we find
a consistent pattern: properties that increase mathematical
precedence also tend to make objects appear closer in space.
This alignment of formal pressures and informal pressures
suggests that perceived depth may play a role in supporting
computational reasoning processes. Although our primary
focus is documenting the existence of depth illusions in
notations, we also evaluate several sources of information that
might guide depth judgments: availability of an object for
computational actions, formal syntactic structure, relative
symbol salience and voluntary attention shifts. We consider
relationships between these nonexclusive possible sources of
information in guiding how people judge depth in
mathematics.

Reasons to Expect Illusions of Differential Depth

Keywords: Mathematical cognition, embodied cognition,
depth perception

Introduction
Special notations are ubiquitous markers of mathematical
thinking. Often, these notations are treated as mere
conventional patterns, which serve as the target of rulelearning systems such as generic production systems (e.g.,
(Koedinger, Alibali, & Nathan, 2008; Anderson, 2005;
Koedinger & MacLaren, 2002). From this perspective, the
exact format and layout of the expression doesn’t much
affect how reasoning happens—what makes learning
difficult is the rules, not the layout. However, growing
evidence suggests a different account. It seems formal
operations—from reasoning to logic to simple
mathematics—are not always computed through the action
of an abstract reasoning system, but instead make use of
perceptual-motor systems typically involved in real-world
perception and action.
In the case of mathematics in particular, reasoning that on
the surface appears to require formal operations can be
simplified if reasoners treat notations as pictures of a
physical scene (Dörfler, 2003; Landy & Goldstone, 2009).
For instance, algebraic syntax has a hierarchical structure

Actual equations and expressions are of course purely
two-dimensional; thus actual depth experience should not
directly inform perceived depth judgments with
mathematical forms. Furthermore, accounts that treat
notation as basically abstract predict no particular
differences in apparent depth of different symbols.
However, several factors might affect the perceived depth of
symbols seen as objects that exist in space, which can be
acted on in particular kinds of ways.
One clear prediction is that symbols that afford action
appear proximal relative to those that do not. Several studies
have found that depth perception can be affected by the
action capabilities of the observer (Linkenauger, Witt,
Stefanucci, Bakdash, & Proffitt, 2009; Witt, Linkenauger,
Bakdash, & Proffitt, 2008; Witt & Proffitt, 2005; Witt,
Proffitt, & Epstein, 2005). Therefore, if solving a
mathematical equation requires actions on the part of the
solver, high precedence terms—those most available for
actions—should generally seem most proximal in arithmetic
expressions. Put simply, years of experience acting first on
multiplications in expressions like
will lead
the multiplication to appear closer than the addition.
We hypothesized, more generally, that terms and
operation signs that were most immediately available for

2164

action would be seen as more proximal. In some cases,
general syntactic factors do not align with action. That is,
unlike in the stimuli in Figure 1, in some cases lowprecedence operations afford more immediate action than
high-precedence operations. This issue is taken up again in
Experiment 3.
Another reason to expect systematic biases in perceived
depth of arithmetic signs comes from the salience structure
of those signs. As mentioned above, typical multiplication
signs (the dot and the cross) are more salient and readily
attended than addition signs. Salience and attention present
conflicting pressures in the paradigm employed here.
Voluntary attention has been shown to influence the
perceived depth of ambiguous figures (Kawabata, 1986). In
the case of arithmetic expressions, attention shifts
systematically from high-precedence operations to lowprecedence over the course of problem solution. Since
participants made depth judgments after solving the
problem, attention would most recently have been primarily
allocated to additions, potentially causing addition signs to
seem closer immediately after computation.
Salience also affects perception of figure and ground such
that highly salient parts tend to be interpreted as parts of
figures (Hoffman & Singh, 1997). Generally speaking, this
may imply that salient objects will tend to be seen as
proximal (though see Huang & Pashler 2009). The higher
salience of multiplications should then also cause them to be
perceived as proximal.
In three of the experiments reported below, participants
were asked to solve simple mathematical problems,
superimposed over two views of a baseball (see Figure 1).
After solving the problem, they judged the relative distance
of the two baseballs. If the relative availability of
computational action affects perceived depth, the baseball
associated with the high-precedence sign (the multiplication
sign) should appear closer than the baseball under the lowprecedence sign. The baseballs were used to ground the
participants’ judgments and make clear the nature of the
task; our assumption is that judged distance of the baseball
reflects primarily the relative perceived depth of the symbol
superimposed on it.

Figure 1: Sample stimuli used in Experiment 1.

Figure 2: Results of Experiments. Errors represent 95%
confidence intervals on proportions.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants Forty-eight students from the University of
Richmond received partial course credit for participation.
All participants had normal or corrected to normal vision.
Materials Participants viewed simple two-operation
arithmetic expressions superimposed over images of a
baseball (see Figure 1). The same image that appeared
under the plus sign appeared under the multiplication sign,
rotated 90°. Instructions informed participants that one
baseball was close, and approaching, while the other
baseball was farther away, and receding.
Procedure Participants were asked to solve the arithmetic
problem. After doing so, they were asked to decide the
relative distance of the two baseballs.
Half of the
participants were asked to circle the baseball that was
closer; the other half to circle the baseball that was farther.
Each participant responded to two expressions; one was in
, the other
. The order of
the format
presentation of the problems was counterbalanced across
participants, as was which image orientation appeared on
the left (thus image orientation and operation sign were
independent). The task was performed as part of a distracter,
between two phases of an unrelated experiment. Several
other short problems appeared in between the two baseball
judgments.
Results On each trial, the participant circled either the
multiplication sign or the addition sign (see Figure 2).
These choices were analyzed using two repeated measures
logistic regressions: one included just an intercept, while the
other also included judgment type (closer vs. farther) as a
between-participants factor. Including judgment type

2165

significantly improved the quality of the fit over the
baseline model, (χ2(1) = 10.2, p<.01).
Discussion The primary purpose of Experiment 1 was to
evaluate whether there was consistency in how depth would
be judged in a simple arithmetic expression. The results
demonstrated that there is. In a simple two operation
problem, multiplications are seen as closer than additions. In
simple arithmetic processes, the higher precedence
operation is perceived as more proximal to the reasoner than
is the lower precedence operation.
Though predicted by the idea that multiplication is more
available than addition in this expression, these results could
be produced by any combination of an effect of the higher
salience of cross signs over plus signs, the syntactic order of
operations, and the relative availability of multiplication in
this expression. The prediction that voluntary attention
toward the plus sign at the end of solving the problem
would dominate proximity judgment was not borne out.

Experiment 2a
In this experiment, we tested whether the bias in perceived
depth revealed in Experiment 1 was due to particular
salience differences between the addition and multiplication
sign rather than order of operations. In Experiment 2a, we
used the same stimuli and design as in Experiment 1, except
that we used parentheses to make the plus sign the first
operation rather than the multiplication. If the result in
Experiment 1 was due simply to perceptual differences
between the multiplication and addition signs, then we
should expect to replicate Experiment 1. However, if the
result is due to order of operations, adding the parentheses
should result in either a null effect or the opposite effect.

Including judgment type did not improve the fit by a
likelihood ratio test over the null model (χ2(1) = .12, p~.68).
Unlike Experiment 1, there was no sign of a consistent
relationship between perceived relative depth and operation
sign in simple expressions with parentheses. One plausible
interpretation of the disparity is that the higher precedence
of multiplication sign interacts with a pressure to see
parenthesized terms as closer. There are (at least) two
plausible reasons why this would occur: first, as
hypothesized, terms that can be computed early may appear
closer than they otherwise would. Second, visual factors
intrinsic to parentheses may make them things inside
parentheses appear differentially closer.
Consider Figure 3. In the top part, the circle on the left
appears to be in front of (and consequently partially
occluding) the illusory oval induced by the curved lines.
This, in turn, causes it to appear closer than the circle on the
right. In a similar manner, it may well be that the
parentheses create a (relatively weak) illusory oval. If the
symbols are interpreted by the visual system as being in
front of that oval, then they may be perceived as being
closer than the symbols not inside the parentheses.

Experiment 2b
One difference between Experiment 1 and 2a is that the
populations differed, one being drawn from University of
Richmond students and the other from the University of
Virginia. Therefore, to eliminate the possibility that the null
results in Experiment 2a were due to differences between
the student populations, a second experiment was run at the
University of Virginia to ensure that similar perceptual
effects as in Experiment 1 could be

Method
Participants Forty-eight students from the University of
Virginia received partial course credit for participation. All
participants had normal or corrected to normal vision.
Materials Packets were created using the same stimuli as in
Experiment 1, except the stimuli were modified so that the
two numbers adjacent to the plus sign were enclosed by
parentheses.
Procedure The procedure was the same as in Experiment 1
except that rather than serving as a distracter in an unrelated
task, these judgments served as the primary experiment. In
between the two trials, participants completed a distracter
task which involved solving a maze.

Figure 3: Visual factors could influence the relative
perceived proximity of terms inside parentheses. Just as the
circle on the left appears to be closer than the circle on the
right, so apparent occlusion may cause the 5 on the left to be
in closer than the 5 on the right.

Results and Discussion Participant choices were analyzed
using a repeated measures logistic regression (see Figure 2).

2166

Figure 4. Example Stimuli from Experiment 2b.
found in this population. In addition, this experiment offers
a more indirect judgment of relative proximity.

Method
Participants Twenty-two students from the University of
Virginia received partial course credit for participation. All
participants had normal or corrected to normal vision.
Stimuli and Apparatus Mathematical equations were
superimposed onto an illustration of the vase-face illusion
so that either the multiplication sign was on the vase and the
plus on the face or vice versa (see Figure 4). Instructions
printed above the picture directed participants to solve the
equation and then indicate whether or not they saw a vase or
faces. The equation was either on the right side of the
illustration, as in Figure 4, or on the left.
Packets were created which consisted of two face-vase
trials. A maze was inserted in between the vase-face trials,
which acted as a distracter task. Half of the packets
contained vase-face illusions in which equations were
located on the right; the other half had the equations located
on the left. Within each packet, one illusion had the
multiplication sign on the vase, and the other had the
multiplication sign on the face. Order was counter-balanced
across packets.
Procedure Participants were given a packet and told to
complete it in full. They were asked to follow the
instructions written on each sheet, and not to look at the
subsequent sheets until they had completed their task on the
current sheet.
Results and Discussion Arbitrarily, each trial was coded as
positive if the participant chose the faces as the foreground.
A significantly better fit was found for a logistical
regression including position of the multiplication sign as a
factor, than for the null model (χ2(1) = 5.1, p<0.05). Overall,
when the multiplication sign was over the vases, participants
chose the face interpretation less often (M=.5, CI=0.280.71) than when the multiplication sign was over the faces
(M=.82, CI=0.60-0.95).
These results show that the effect in Experiment 1 can
generalize across populations and across tasks. This finding
is also a less direct manipulation of perceived depth and is
less likely to be affected by demand characteristics.
Whether the face or vase is seen in the foreground is

indicative of the depth relationship between the vase and the
face. Therefore, participants determined which figure they
saw instead of directly specifying the depth relationship
between the mathematical operators. Interestingly, order of
operations influenced the figure-ground and therefore, the
depth relationship in an ambiguous figure illusion.
Prior results have shown that fixations (Gibson &
Peterson, 1994) and exogenous cues (Vecera, Flevaris, &
Filapek, 2004) guide figure-ground segmentation, as long as
the cues appear inside figures (as was done here). Thus,
these results could result from the greater salience of
multiplication signs. However, once again, voluntary
attention shifts are unlikely to account for these effects, as
voluntary attention is most likely directed toward the
addition at the end of computation (when participants were
instructed to make their judgments).
The first two experiments indicated that syntactic
precedence, available formal actions (computations), and
perceived proximity tend to go together. Experiment 3
distinguishes between syntactic precedence and action
structure by repeating the structure of Experiments 1 and 2A
in the context of an algebraic rather than an arithmetic task.
Because linear equations are solved starting from the lowest,
rather than the highest precedence operations, in Experiment
3 the two theories make opposite predictions. If availability
of formal actions guides perceived depth, then lower
precedence items should be seen as proximal in Experiment
3; if syntactic precedence predicts or guides depth, then high
precedence operations should appear proximal, as in
Experiments 1 and 2B.

Experiment 3: Linear Equations
Method
Participants Twenty students from the University of
Virginia received partial course credit for participation. All
participants had normal or corrected to normal vision.
Materials Packets were created using a format identical to
Experiment 2A. Similar stimuli were used, except the
stimuli were modified from an arithmetic computation to the
solution of a linear equation (see Figure 5). Participants
were instructed to solve the equation before deciding which
ball was closer (further).

2167

Figure 5. Example Stimulus from Experiment 3.

Two other changes were made to the stimuli: first, the dot
notation was used for multiplication in place of the cross.
This sign is much more typical in algebraic contexts, and is
less likely to be confused for a variable than the cross.
Furthermore, crosses and dots have similar salience
advantages in mathematical contexts (Landy et al., 2008).
Second, the baseballs were moved from behind the
operations to behind the operands. This was done because,
in an equation solution context, the operands are more
relevant units of action. That is, one solves the problem
illustrated by cancelling the b, and then the a. Thus, the
effect of perceived action was predicted to be strongest in
this configuration.
Procedure The procedure was identical to Experiment 2A.
Results and Discussion Participant choices were analyzed
using a repeated measures logistic regression (see Figure 2).
Including judgment type significantly improved the fit over
the baseline model (χ2(1) = 6.0, p<0.05). Participants were
more likely to judge the baseball under the multiplicative
term as closer than the baseball under the additive term.
The results of Experiment 3 contradicted our original
hypothesis that perceived depth would align with available
actions, instead supporting the idea that syntactically central
symbols appear to be closer than syntactically peripheral
symbols in mathematical expressions.
The results of Experiment 3 are to some degree
compatible with the interpretation that low-level visual
features guide perceived proximity. In this case, perceived
depth of the baseball images would be affected by the terms
adjacent to the judged baseballs, rather than those directly
behind it. In a pre-cuing task, Baylis and Driver (1995)
reported that exogenous cues to attention did not affect
figure-ground segregation (which tends to align with depth
perception in most cases, though see Huang & Pashler,
2009), when the cue appeared outside the area in which the
figure appeared (see also Vecera et al., 2004). Nonetheless,
in this case, it is possible that the highly salient dot adjacent
to the baseball increases its apparent proximity. It is also
possible that the multiplicative terms and the multiplication
sign are visually grouped and therefore that the salience of
one part of the group (the multiplication sign) causes the
entire group to appear closer.

General Discussion
Although mathematical notation is a formal language, and
is inherently two dimensional, readers of these notations
come to quite consistent judgments about the relative
proximity of terms in formal expressions. Three
experiments demonstrated that factors that determine formal
precedence (operation sign and parentheses) also
systematically influence perceived depth.
Variations in perceived depth aligned in our stimuli with
formal precedence. The current results do not distinguish
between the possibilities that syntactic precedence directly
affects perceived depth, and that the low-level visual

features of typical mathematical notation determine
apparent depth. Although future work should distinguish
these two possibilities, we think it notable that mathematical
notation is structured in such a way that there is a systematic
relationship between low-level visual features affecting and
mathematical syntax. This alignment raises the possibility
that perceived three-dimensional structure may be used as a
cue to mathematical ordering.
As long as episodes of formal reasoning are indeed
typically organized by attention-based interactions with
external environments (Landy et al., 2008; Patsenko &
Altmann), the alignment of perceptual factors such as visual
grouping, salience, and depth may be significant factors in
making symbolic mathematical notation such a powerful
and successful system for supporting reasoning.
Three limitations of the current work are worth noting:
one is that it does not indicate the strength of the judgment.
Although judgments were significant and consistent in
Experiments 1, 2A, and 3, participants made forced choice
binary judgments. Thus, while we can conclude that people
generally perceive multiplications as closer than additions,
the current experiments give no indication of the magnitude
of the perceived difference.
Another limitation is that there is no indication in the
current studies of whether this perceived difference in depth
has any effect on mathematical judgments. Future work
should explore whether explicit manipulations of apparent
depth disrupt mathematical reasoning processes. Finally,
there is a possibly important confound in Experiment 1. In
these stimuli, the laces on the baseballs overlap, and are
obscured by, the addition sign slightly more than the
multiplication sign. This might provide a stronger depth
cue, causing subjects to see the baseball under the addition
sign as farther away. This confound could not explain the
difference between Experiment 1 and 2a, nor could it
explain the effect in Experiment 3. In Experiment 3, the
baseballs appeared under the letters.
These were
counterbalanced across condition, and so could not have led
to differences in judgment.
Recognizing these limitations, nevertheless the existence
of consistent depth cues in mathematical notations bolsters
interpretations that treat mathematical reasoning as
(sometimes) a form of spatial reasoning over symbolic
objects. Accounts that treat symbolic reasoning as abstract
rule learning cannot make systematic predictions about
depth, such as those seen here. Understanding how and
when such factors matter for reasoning promises to further
illuminate our understanding of general formal reasoning
processes.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Dennis Proffitt, Lydia Nichols, and Ryan Smout
for valuable comments on the development of this project.
Thanks to Ryan Smout for data collection.

2168

References
Anderson, J. R. (2005). Human symbol manipulation within
an integrated cognitive architecture. Cognitive
Science, 29(3), 313–341.
Baylis, G. C., & Driver, J. (1995). One-sided edge
assignment
in
vision:
1.
Figure-ground segmentation and attention to
objects. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 4, 140-146.
Dörfler, W. (2003). Diagrams as means and objects of
mathematical reasoning. In Developments in
mathematics education in German-speaking
countries. Selected papers from the annual
conference on didactics of mathematics.
Hoffman, D. D., & Singh, M. (1997). Salience of visual
parts. Cognition, 63(1), 29–78.
Huang, L., & Pashler, H. (2009). Reversing the attention
effect in figure-ground perception. Psychological
Science, 20(10), 1199-1201.
Kawabata, N. (1986). Attention and depth perception.
Perception, 15(5), 563-572.
Koedinger, K. R., Alibali, M. W., & Nathan, M. J. (2008).
Trade-offs between Grounded and Abstract
Representations: Evidence from Algebra Problem
Solving. Cognitive Science, 32(2), 366-397.
Koedinger, K. R., & MacLaren, B. A. (2002). Developing a
pedagogical domain theory of early algebra
problem solving. Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie Mellon
University.
Landy, D., & Goldstone, R. L. (2007). How abstract is
symbolic thought? Journals of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
33(4), 720-733.
Landy, D., & Goldstone, R. L. (2009). Pushing Symbols. In
N.A. Taatgen & H. van Rijn (Eds.), Proceedings of
the 31st Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society. Amsterdam: Cognitive Science
Society.
Landy, D., Jones, M. N., & Goldstone, R. L. (2008). How
the appearance of an operator affects its formal
precedence. In B. C. Love, K. McRae, & V. M.
Sloutsky (Eds.), Proceedings of the 30th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
2109-2114). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Linkenauger, S. A., Witt, J. K., Stefanucci, J. K., Bakdash,
J. Z., & Proffitt, D. R. (2009). The Effects of
Handedness and Reachability on Perceived
Distance. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 35(6), 16491660.
Patsenko, E. G., & Altmann, A. M. (2010). How planful is
routine behavior? A selective-attention model of
performance in the Tower of Hanoi. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 139, 95-116.
Vecera, S. P., Flevaris, A. V., & Filapek, J. C. (2004).
Exogenous spatial attention influences figure-

ground assignment. Psychological Science, 15(1),
20–26.
Witt, J. K., Linkenauger, S. A., Bakdash, J. Z., & Proffitt,
D. R. (2008). Putting to a bigger hole: Golf
performance
relates
to
perceived
size.
Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 15(3), 581.
Witt, J. K., & Proffitt, D. R. (2005). See the ball, hit the
ball: apparent ball size is correlated with batting
average. Psychological Science, 16(12), 937-938.
Witt, J. K., Proffitt, D. R., & Epstein, W. (2005). Tool use
affects perceived distance, but only when you
intend to use it. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance,
31, 880–888.

2169

