UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Can grammar influence voting?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6v34w3nv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Fausey, Caitlin
Matlock, Teenie

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Can grammar influence voting?
Caitlin M. Fausey (cmfausey@stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology, 450 Serra Mall, Building 420, Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305 USA

Teenie Matlock (tmatlock@ucmerced.edu)
Cognitive and Information Sciences Program, University of California, Merced
Merced, CA 95344 USA
Abstract
The wording of political messages is known to affect voting
behavior, including judgments about the electability of candidates.
Yet the question remains whether voting behavior also depends on
fine-grained grammatical details of political messages. Results
from two studies suggest that the grammatical forms used in
describing political candidates’ past actions can affect attitudes
about electability under certain conditions. The findings provide
novel insights on how language can shape thought in the political
realm.

Introduction
Millions of dollars are spent on campaign ads each year.
Yet little is known about how linguistic details in these
messages influence people’s attitudes about political
candidates and ultimately whether they are elected. Here
we offer new results to show that altering grammatical
information can lead to different opinions about electability.
We know that the linguistic content of political messages
can influence attitudes about candidates running for office
(e.g., Lau & Redlawsk, 2006). People base their voting
decisions on criteria emphasized by news coverage (e.g.,
Druckman, 2004), and their votes can be biased by the
editorial slant of the newspaper they read (e.g., Druckman &
Parkin, 2005). People reject incumbent candidates if times
are portrayed as bad (e.g., Quattrone & Tversky, 1988).
They turn away from candidates or vote for no one at all if
presented with an excess of negative language (e.g.,
Ansolabehere & Iyengar, 1995; Garramone, 1984). Their
candidate preferences are more entrenched when opposition
is emphasized (e.g., Bizer & Petty, 2005). They reject
candidates who contradict their metaphorical conceptions of
politics and government (e.g., Lakoff, 1996). What we do
not know is how fine-grained linguistic details in political
messages influence voters. Can grammatical information
affect attitudes about candidates and whether they are
electable, and if so, how?
In English and many other languages, information about
the temporal organization of events is provided by aspectual
markers that accompany verbs. For past events, imperfective
aspectual markers (was VERB+ing) emphasize the ongoing
nature of actions, and perfective aspectual markers
(VERB+ed) emphasize the completion of actions (e.g.,
Comrie, 1976; Frawley, 1992; Madden & Zwaan, 2003;
Magliano & Schleich, 2000). These grammatical markers
can influence how people think about past events. In

interpreting imperfective descriptions of past events, people
take an internal perspective (e.g., Ferretti & Katz, 2010). In
interpreting descriptions of motion events, for example,
people tend to situate a moving character in the middle
range of a trajectory toward a destination with imperfective
information (Morrow, 1985; 1990). Also, details such as the
individuals, objects and locations of the events are more
accessible after imperfective event descriptions (e.g.,
Carreiras, Carriedo, Alonso, & Fernández, 1997; Ferretti,
Kutas, & McRae, 2007; Madden & Therriault, 2009; Truitt
& Zwaan, 1997).
In addition, when processing event descriptions people
infer that more action occurs with imperfective descriptions
than with perfective descriptions. For instance, people
estimate that more houses were painted after reading “John
was painting houses last summer” than after reading “John
painted houses last summer” (Matlock, in press). People
also remember past actions more easily, and are more likely
to continue them in future behavior, after imperfective
descriptions than perfective descriptions (e.g., Hart &
Albarracín, 2009; Magliano & Schleich, 2000).
In the current work, we investigated the role of
grammatical information in the interpretation of political
messages, precisely, whether and how imperfective “was
VERB + ing” and perfective “VERB + ed” would influence
attitudes about the electability of political candidates.
Would the imperfective form, which draws attention to
details and the ongoing process of actions, lead to different
attitudes about electability than would the perfective form?
And might this effect be more pronounced for political
messages that are negative versus positive, especially
because negative information arouses emotions (e.g.,
Westen, 2007), captures attention (e.g., Baumeister,
Bratslavsky, Finkenhauer, & Vohs, 2001; Rozin &
Royzman, 2001), and affects perceptions of political
candidates (e.g., Basil, Schooler, & Reeves, 1991; Lau,
1982; see Lau, Sigelman, & Brown Rovner, 2007, for a
broad perspective)? Finally, can grammatical information
ever influence inferences about actions themselves? Would,
for instance, a phrase such as was taking hush money lead
people to believe that more dollars were taken than a phrase
such as took hush money? These questions are important
because voters rely on information about the past to infer
what politicians will do in future elected positions (e.g.,
Fiorina, 1981).

1330

Two studies were designed to investigate these issues. In
each, participants read about the past actions of a senator
who was seeking re-election. Then they decided whether he
would be re-elected. Next they provided a confidence rating
for the decision. Last, participants provided a numeric
estimate about the actions (e.g., amount of hush money in
Study 1).

Study 1
Participants read a short passage about a fictitious
politician who did (perfective) or was doing (imperfective)
past actions that were either negative or positive. Based on
previous research showing that an increment toward a
negative pole may carry more weight in decision-making
than “the same” increment toward a positive pole (e.g.,
Kahneman & Tversky, 1979), we hypothesized that
grammatical form may more strongly influence people’s
judgments about negative past actions than about positive
past actions. Further, people may pay closer attention to
negative events than to positive events (e.g., Baumeister et
al., 2001; Rozin & Royzman, 2001), perhaps heightening
the effect of any particular linguistic construal of the past
event. Thus, our main prediction was that the politician
would be evaluated more negatively when negative past
actions were described with imperfective rather than
perfective grammatical markers.

Table 1: Stimuli for Study 1
Grammatical form
Action
valence
Negative

Positive

Method
Participants. A total of 369 undergraduate students at
the University of California, Merced, received partial course
credit in an introductory cognitive science course or an
introductory psychology course. Fifteen of the individuals
provided illegible responses or did not finish the task,
leaving 354 participants.
Materials, Design and Procedure. Participants
completed a questionnaire that appeared on a single page in
a booklet that contained a set of unrelated tasks. Participants
had five days to complete and return the booklet, and were
told not to discuss the task with others.
Participants first read a short description of a fictitious
senator who was up for re-election. The senator did or was
doing negative or positive actions (see Table 1 for the four
description versions). For example, he was taking hush
money or took hush money, and for positive actions, he was
collecting donations or collected donations.
Then these participants answered two questions, “Will
this candidate be re-elected?” (circled Yes or No) and “How
confident are you about your decision regarding reelection” (used a seven point scale, ranging from “Not at all
confident” (1) to “Very confident” (7)).
Next participants answered a question about the financial
dealings of the senator, either “Please estimate the total
amount of hush money (in dollars)” (in the negative valence
condition) or “Please estimate the total amount of donation
money (in dollars)” (in the positive valence condition). The
senator was fictitious to avoid bias about actual political
candidates.

Perfective

Imperfective

(verb+ed)
Mark Johnson is a
Senator in the United
States Senate. He is up
for
re-election.
He
graduated
from
the
University of Texas,
Austin with a degree in
political science. Mark’s
first term as a United
States Senator is almost
complete. Last year,
Mark had an affair with
his assistant and took
hush money from a
prominent
constituent.
(N=92)
Mark Johnson is a
Senator in the United
States Senate. He is up
for
re-election.
He
graduated
from
the
University of Texas,
Austin with a degree in
political science. Mark’s
first term as a United
States Senator is almost
complete. Last year,
Mark
rekindled
his
relationship with his wife
and collected donation
money for the American
Cancer Society.
(N=85)

(was verb+ing)
Mark Johnson is a
Senator in the United
States Senate. He is up
for
re-election.
He
graduated
from
the
University of Texas,
Austin with a degree in
political science. Mark’s
first term as a United
States Senator is almost
complete. Last year,
Mark was having an
affair with his assistant
and was taking hush
money from a prominent
constituent. (N=96)
Mark Johnson is a
Senator in the United
States Senate. He is up
for
re-election.
He
graduated
from
the
University of Texas,
Austin with a degree in
political science. Mark’s
first term as a United
States Senator is almost
complete. Last year,
Mark was rekindling his
relationship with his wife
and
was
collecting
donation money for the
American
Cancer
Society. (N=81)

Results
First, we examined the valence of past actions and
electability. Not surprisingly, participants viewed the
senator as more electable when his past actions were
positive (80%) versus negative (22%), χ2(1, N=354) =
119.94, p < .001. Twenty-one percent of the participants did
not conform to this pattern, and indicated that the candidate
would be re-elected if he had done negative actions (N =
41), or not be re-elected if he had done positive actions (N =
33).
Second, we analyzed people’s confidence about their
electability decision. Electability decisions were weighted
by confidence, resulting in a scale ranging from -7 (Strongly
Confident “No” vote) to +7 (Strongly Confident “Yes”
vote). Histograms of this weighted decision are shown in
Figure 1a (negative actions) and Figure 1b (positive
actions).

1331

*

*

Figure 2: Grammatical aspect changes how people view a
politician’s negative actions. Voter confidence in deciding
not to re-elect a politician. Proportion of sample is plotted
on the y-axis.

Figure 3: Grammatical aspect changes how people view a
politician’s negative actions. Median split judgments of
hush money taken. Proportion of sample is plotted on the yaxis.

The subgroups that are evident in these data correspond
to participants whose decision did, and did not, align with
the action valence. This distinction may be analogous to the
common distinction of correct versus incorrect responses in
reaction time analyses. Only those responses that are clearly
interpretable are submitted to further analyses. In this study,
subsequent analyses were therefore restricted to those
participants whose decision aligned with the action valence.

Confidence ratings were divided into “Weak confidence”
(rating of 3 or less extreme), “Middle confidence” (rating of
4), and “Strong confidence” (rating of 5 or more extreme)
groups. As shown in Figure 2, participants’ confidence
about electability varied depending on the grammatical
markers used to describe the senator’s past actions.
Participants were more strongly confident about their “no”
decisions when the senator was doing negative actions
(77%) than when he did negative actions (47%), χ2(2, N =
147) = 18.27, p < .001. They were about equally confident
for their “yes” decisions when the senator was doing (45%)
and when he did (39%) positive actions, χ2(2, N = 133) =
.65, n.s.
Third, we analyzed estimates for money taken (hush
money) or collected (donations) by the senator.
Unsurprisingly, these distributions were highly skewed. We
again took a conservative analysis approach, and
conclusions remain the same using parametric analyses.
We divided responses into “Low” and “High” money
groups based on the median estimate value of the respective
decisions. The median estimate for hush money ($100,000)
structured the two groups for negative financial actions, and
the median estimate for donations ($50,000) structured the
two groups for positive financial actions.
Grammatical form influenced the inferences that people
made about money. Dollar estimates were higher when the
senator was taking hush money (58% were above overall
median) versus took hush money (37% were above overall
median), χ2(1, N = 147) = 6.74, p = .009 (Figure 3). For
positive actions, there was no difference (47% versus 53%,
χ2(1, N = 133) = .36, n.s.).

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Confidence weighted electability decisions:
(a) Negative Events, (b) Positive Events.

Data bearing on whether grammatical aspect influences
electability were the confidence weighted scores for
decisions that were consistent with the action valence.
Because some of these data were skewed, and also showed
some heteroskedasticity across conditions, we took a
conservative approach and did a non-parametric analysis.
Conclusions remain the same using parametric analyses.

1332

Finally, using independent participants in a separate
manipulation check, we confirmed that our “negative” and
“positive” stories differed in valence. Forty-six participants
who were among the English speakers who use Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk Service (mturk.amazon.com) read one
story selected randomly from the four versions used in the
main study (Negative perfective, Negative imperfective,
Positive perfective, Positive imperfective). After reading the
story, participants answered the question “Please use the
scale below to indicate what you think of the senator’s
actions” using a 15-point scale ranging from “Very
Negative” (1) to “Very Positive” (15).
As expected, participants judged the negative stories (M
= 3.48, SE = .64) to be more negative than the positive
stories (M = 11.91, SE = .52), t(44) = 10.21, p < .001.
Further, grammatical aspect itself (perfective versus
imperfective) did not influence participants’ judgments of
negativity, overall or within each kind of story (all p’s >
.18).
In sum, people were more confident in voting not to reelect a senator who was doing negative actions than a
senator who did negative actions. They also inferred that
more negative action was involved when the past event was
described using imperfective aspect compared to perfective
aspect.

Study 2
In everyday life, politicians do good and bad things. Here
we were interested in cases involving both a positive and
negative outcome. In this study, the senator was responsible
for an eminent domain policy with a negative and a positive
outcome. All participants read about both outcomes, but
some read about an imperfective negative outcome and a
perfective positive outcome (was removing homes and
extended roads) and others, about a perfective negative
outcome and an imperfective positive outcome (removed
homes and was extending roads) (see Table 2). We
hypothesized that the overall eminent domain policy would
be interpreted more negatively when the negative action was
in the imperfective than when the negative action was in the
perfective.

Table 2: Stimuli for Study 2
Negative
Imperfective

Mark Johnson is a Senator in the United
States Senate. He is up for re-election. Last
year, his district faced rush hour traffic
problems. Under eminent domain Mark was
removing homes and extended roads in his
district. Traffic conditions improved.
(N = 58)

Negative
Perfective

Mark Johnson is a Senator in the United
States Senate. He is up for re-election. Last
year, his district faced rush hour traffic
problems. Under eminent domain Mark
removed homes and was extending roads in
his district. Traffic conditions improved.
(N = 62)

Results
As shown in Figure 4, participants who read about
“removing homes” were more likely to respond that the
candidate would not be re-elected (60%) than participants
who read about “removed homes” (44%). The pattern was
reliable, p = .049 (Fisher’s exact test, one-tailed, was used
given our directed prediction). Participants were about
equally confident in their decisions in the two conditions.
There were no reliable differences in estimates about the
number of roads extended or homes removed. Thus, again,
grammatical information influenced attitudes about
electability. In this case, despite having read about both
components of an eminent domain policy, participants were
biased by the use of the imperfective: They judged a
politician to be less electable when the negative outcome of
his policy was highlighted using imperfective aspect
compared to when it was described using perfective aspect.
*

Method
Participants. A total of 127 members of the Stanford
University community were paid to participate. Most were
students. Data from participants whose age was greater than
3 SDs above the mean age (N = 5) and from individuals who
returned incomplete surveys (N = 2) were excluded, leaving
120 participants.
Materials and Procedure. Participants read a passage
about a fictitious senator who was seeking re-election and
who had implemented an eminent domain policy with a
negative and a positive outcome (home removal and road
extension, respectively), and then answered the same
questions as in Study 1. The task appeared on a single page
in a booklet of unrelated materials. Participants had a week
to complete the task.

Removed,
Extending

Removing,
Extended

Figure 4: Grammatical aspect influences electability.
Proportion of sample is plotted on the y-axis.

1333

As in Study 1, we again queried independent participants
(N = 22) about the valence of the senator’s actions, using the
same procedure and valence scale as Study 1. In this case,
participants judged each version of the story to be about
equally negative (“removed” M = 6.18, SE = .50; “was
removing” M = 8.00, SE = 1.21, t(13.32(assuming unequal
variances)) = 1.39, n.s.). It appears that the effect of
grammatical aspect on electability may be somewhat
insidious when reasoning is based on scenarios with mixed
outcomes. When making explicit valence judgments, people
see both the good and the bad, but grammatical aspect may
implicitly color judgments about the political candidate
himself.

General Discussion
Our studies suggest that grammar can influence
electability. In Study 1, a change in the grammatical form of
negative action descriptions resulted in a change in
reasoning about a political candidate. People were more
confident in their “no” vote, and provided higher dollar
estimates for hush money when negative actions were
described using imperfective than perfective. They were not
sensitive to grammar when reasoning about a candidate’s
past positive actions. In Study 2, grammar again influenced
electability, such that people reasoned about electability in
line with whatever action was highlighted by imperfective
aspect. Over 50% of people judged a candidate who
“removed homes and was extending roads” to be electable
while under 50% did so when the verb markers –ed and –ing
were reversed.
Why did the imperfective form result in higher
confidence ratings and larger money estimates than did the
perfective form, for negative actions in particular? Several
explanations are worth considering. First, people may pay
more attention to negative events than to positive events
(e.g., Baumeister et al., 2001; Rozin & Royzman, 2001),
making any mental representation driven by a linguistic
construal relatively more robust for negative events. Further,
the contrast between two negative alternatives is often
perceived to be larger than the contrast between two
“equally spaced” positive alternatives (e.g., Kahneman &
Tversky, 1979), and so any contrast due to grammatical
form may have been amplified for negative events.
The effects of negative information and imperfective
information on decision-making may be additive. The
combination of negative information and imperfective
information could have made for strong attitudes, including
pronounced confidence about “no” votes. This is plausible
given that negative information arouses emotions and
captures attention (e.g., Baumeister et al., 2001; Rozin &
Royzman, 2001; Westen, 2007) and the imperfective form
widens scope (Frawley, 1992) and draws attention to details
of actions (e.g., Carreiras et al., 1997; Ferretti, Kutas, &
McRae, 2007; Madden & Therriault, 2009; Truitt & Zwaan,
1997). With heightened attention to negative details, it may
be especially easy for voters to confidently reject a
candidate.

Another possible explanation may simply be that people
generally prefer to avoid losses when there are unknown
outcomes (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979). More negative
actions could be construed as risky, and lead to stronger
confidence that a “no” vote was the right choice. In the
same vein, the imperfective form may have prompted a
sense of “ongoingness” of the politician’s negative actions
while the perfective form may have provided closure on
negative actions. If a political candidate did negative events
in the past, those actions could have been perceived as over
and done with, and less likely to influence the future. With
positive information, there are no risks or adverse
consequences and thus no reason to have a strong opinion
about a “yes” vote.
These mechanisms – heightened attention to negative
details and risk aversion – may also operate when voters
reason about mixed outcome scenarios as in Study 2. Here,
the combination of imperfective and negative information
(“removing”) appeared to shift attention away from
beneficial policy outcomes and lead to more decisions that
the candidate would not be elected.
Further research on the fine-grained linguistic details of
political messages must be conducted for a full
understanding of how language influences everyday thought
in the political realm. Our novel results are an initial attempt
to detail these important effects of language, and suggest
that under certain conditions grammatical information
affects whether a political candidate is electable. Future
research should examine a wider range of actions, including
future actions and policy proposals, as well as other finegrained grammatical features of political messages.
Investigations of grammar using linguistic data from real
political campaigns will also be informative.
Voters appear to be sensitive to fine-grained linguistic
details when judging political candidates. When the past
actions of a candidate were negative, descriptions using
imperfective aspect damaged the candidate’s electability
more than descriptions using perfective aspect. Because
‘scandals’ involving political candidates are a hot topic in
media coverage and campaign ads, insight into the power of
the grammar used to communicate negative information will
likely improve our understanding about how linguistic
media shapes voting patterns. The current findings are
consistent with previous psycholinguistic results and extend
our understanding of the role of grammar in political
decision-making.

Acknowledgments
Each author contributed equally to this research. We thank
Michael Leon and Nilofaur Tahery for assistance with data
collection, and the following individuals for sharing
insights: Lera Boroditsky, Herbert Clark, Tom Hansford,
Christopher Kello, Paul Maglio, Arthur Markman, Justin
Matthews, Steve Nicholson, Daniel Oppenheimer, and Sally
Rice.

1334

References
Ansolabehere, A., & Iyengar, S. (1995). Going negative: How
political advertisements shrink and polarize the electorate. New
York, NY: Free Press.
Basil, M., Schooler, C., & Reeves, B.R. (1991). Positive and
negative political advertising: Effectiveness of ads and
perceptions of candidates. In F. Biocca (Ed.), Television and
political advertising, Volume 1: Psychological processes (pp.
245-262). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Baumeister, R.F., Bratslavsky, E., Finkenhauer, C., & Vohs, K.D.
(2001). Bad is stronger than good. Review of General
Psychology, 5, 323-370.
Bizer, G.Y., & Petty, R.E. (2005). How we conceptualize our
attitudes matters: the effects of valence framing on the resistance
of political attitudes. Political Psychology, 26, 553-568.
Carreiras, M., Carriedo, N., Alonso, M. A., & Fernández, A.
(1997). The role of verb tense and verb aspect in the
foregrounding of information during reading. Memory &
Cognition, 25, 438-446.
Comrie, B. (1976). Aspect. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Druckman, J.N. (2004). Priming the vote: Campaign effects in a
U.S. Senate election. Political Psychology, 25, 577-594.
Druckman, J.N., & Parkin, M. (2005). The impact of media bias:
How editorial slant affects voters. The Journal of Politics, 67,
1030 – 1049.
Ferretti, T.R., & Katz, A.N. (2010). Verb aspect and the retrieval
of events from autobiographical memory. In A. Columbus (Ed.),
Advances in Psychology Research, Nova Science.
Ferretti, T.R., Kutas, M., & McRae, K. (2007). Verb aspect and the
activation of event knowledge. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 33, 182-196.
Fiorina, M.P. (1981). Retrospective Voting in American Elections.
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Frawley, W. (1992). Linguistic semantics. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Garramone, G. (1984). Voter response to negative political ads.
Journalism Quarterly, 61, 250-259.
Hart, W., & Albarracín, D. (2009). What I was doing vs. what I
did: Verb aspect influences memory and future actions.
Psychological Science, 20(2), 238-244.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: an analysis
of decision under risk. Econometrica, 47, 263-291.
Lakoff, G. (1996). Moral politics: How liberals and conservatives
think. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press.
Lau, R.R. (1982). Negativity in political perception. Political
Behavior, 4, 353-377.
Lau, R.R., & Redlawsk, D.P. (2006). How voters decide:
Information processing during elections campaigns. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Lau, R.R., Sigelman, L., & Brown Rovner, I. (2007). The effects
of negative political campaigns: A meta-analytic reassessment.
The Journal of Politics, 69, 1176-1209.
Madden, C.J., & Therriault, D.J. (2009). Verb aspect and
perceptual simulations. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 62(7), 1294-1302.
Madden, C.J., & Zwaan, R.A. (2003). How does verb aspect
constrain event representations. Memory & Cognition, 31, 663672.
Magliano, J.P., & Schleich, M.C. (2000). Verb aspect and situation
models. Discourse Processes, 29, 83 – 112.
Matlock, T. (in press). The conceptual motivation of aspect. In
G. Radden, P. Koch, & K. Panther (Eds.), Motivation in lexicon,
grammar, and discourse. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Morrow, Daniel G. 1985. Prominent characters and events

organize narrative understanding. Journal of Memory and
Language 24: 304-319.
Morrow, Daniel G. 1990. Spatial models, prepositions, and verb
aspect markers. Discourse Processes 13: 41-469.
Quattrone, G.A., & Tversky, A. (1988). Contrasting rational and
psychological analyses of political choice. The American
Political Science Review, 82, 719-736.
Rozin, P., & Royzman, E. (2001). Negativity bias, negativity
dominance, and contagion. Personality and Social Psychology
Review, 5, 296-320.
Truitt, T.P., & Zwaan, R.A. (1997, November). Verb aspect
affects the generation of instrumental inferences. Paper
presented at the 38th Annual Meeting of the Psychonomic
Society, Philadelphia.
Westen, D. (2007). The political brain: The role of emotion in
deciding the fate of the nation. New York, NY: Public Affairs.

1335

