UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Causal stream location effects in preschoolers

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2mz9z094

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Buchanan, David
Sobel, David

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Causal stream location effects in preschoolers
David W. Buchanan (david buchanan@brown.edu) and David M. Sobel (dave sobel@brown.edu)
Department of Cognitive and Linguistic Sciences
Box 1978, Brown University, Providence, RI, 02912
Abstract
Based on the predictions of a computational model, we test
preschoolers’ ability to reason about stream location effects:
reasoning that interventions that occur on a common part of
a causal process should be more likely to affect multiple relations, than interventions which occur on independent parts of
a causal process. In two experiments, we show that 3- and 4year-olds both show a stream location effect. Children show
this effect for both familiar and unfamiliar interventions.
Keywords: causal reasoning, cognitive development, models
of causal reasoning.

Introduction
Even when we do not explicitly understand the details of how
a causal system works, we often have strong intuitions about
the effects of different interventions on that system. Consider
a phenomenon that is a mystery to most adults – the way that
a remote turns on a television. Even though most of us could
not verbally describe the mechanism, we know that removing the batteries from the remote would make it fail. We also
know that the television must be plugged in. We even know
about correlations between relations: Say you have two remotes that both turn on your television – for instance, the one
that came with your television, and a universal remote you
bought to control all your devices. One day, both fail to turn
on the television. You replace the batteries in remote A, and
it now succeeds in turning on the television. You would not
expect this intervention to change the efficacy of remote B –
it would be odd if replacing the batteries in one remote made
both effective. On the other hand, if you had noticed that the
television was unplugged, and plugging it in had restored the
efficacy of remote A, you would not be surprised if remote
B started working as well. These inferences seem obvious,
even to a person who knows nothing about how these devices
operate. Interventions in one place in a causal system are expected to have wide-ranging effects, while interventions in
other locations are not. Why is this?
To explain this intuition, we will use the metaphor of a
causal stream. For instance, imagine we introduce pollution
into a river that has several branches. The further upstream
the pollution occurs, the more branches of the stream will
be polluted. When we think of causation as flowing down
a branching path, we can start to formalize these intuitions.
Elsewhere (Buchanan, Tenenbaum, & Sobel, 2010) we have
proposed a computational model that generates causal structures that have a branching, stream-like character. We call
it the causal edge replacement process, or CERP. While the
details are beyond the scope of this paper, we will outline its
main implications.
CERP makes use of causal graphical models, a way of representing causal relations using graphs (Gopnik et al., 2004;

Figure 1: Examples of causal graphical models. Nodes represent events, and edges represent causal relations. Dashed
edges indicate inhibitory relations. On the left, the simplest
graph that captures a common effect relation: A and B both
cause C. On the right, a graph generated by CERP, which
allows us to make predictions about stream location effects.
Intervening on X disables both relations, but intervening on
Y or Z disables only one.

Pearl, 2000; Spirtes, Glymour, & Scheines, 2001). Nodes
represent events, and directed edges represent causal relations. Figure 1a shows an example, the simplest way of representing the common effect relation of the television (C) and
the two remotes, A and B. There are other ways of representing this relation; CERP tends to generate graphs that are more
complex, like Figure 1b. In this graph, we have enough detail
to represent interventions on the mechanism that relates cause
and effect. For instance, X is such an intervention, which disables both relations, preventing causation from flowing down
the edge on which it falls. (The dashed edge indicates an inhibitory relation.) CERP implies that when causal relations
share a node, they always share part of the path from cause
to effect. In a common cause relation such as the television
example, interventions (like X) that occur late in the causal
stream (close to the common effect) are more likely to fall
on this shared path, changing both relations. Interventions
(like Y and Z) that occur early in the causal stream, are more
likely to fall on the independent path, changing only one relation. We call this difference a stream location effect. Note
that these implications are general and structural, and do not
depend on the specific causal system involved.
The stream location hypothesis is that human beings
should expect stream location effects even about systems for
which we have little or no knowledge of the causal mechanism involved (like the television remote, for most of us).
While this hypothesis was inspired by CERP, it is not the
only model which is consistent with these predictions. For instance, evidence that supports the stream location hypothesis

1786

is not inconsistent with a general approach to causal graphical
models. But only models (like CERP) that have a branching
character directly and specifically predict stream location effects.
There is already some empirical evidence that suggests
that stream location effects may exist in adults. Mayrhofer,
Hagmayer, and Waldmann (2008) told participants a cover
story involving mind-reading aliens: When the “cause” alien
thought of food, he often caused the three “effect” aliens to
think of food as well. The experimenters manipulated the
number of other aliens that thought of food, and asked subjects to judge the probability that a given alien would also
think of food, given that the cause alien was thinking of food.
For instance, when the cause alien and two other effect aliens
were thinking of food, participants judged it highly likely that
the third alien was thinking of food. When the cause alien
was thinking of food, but the two other effect aliens were not,
subjects judged it less likely that the third effect alien was
thinking of food.
This difference is known as a nonindependence effect,
which CERP fits well in general1 : Adults predict that collateral effects of a common cause should be correlated, even
given their common cause. Crucially for the stream location
hypothesis, the strength of nonindependence could be manipulated by changing the cover story. In the “sending” condition, participants were told that the cause alien sometimes had
trouble concentrating; there was a strong nonindependence
effect in this condition. In the “receive” condition, the effect
aliens sometimes had trouble concentrating; there was a significantly weaker nonindependence effect in this condition.
Mayrhofer et al. succeeded in showing that by changing the
description of the mechanism, they could change the degree
of nonindependence observed. We hypothesize that a stream
location effect was responsible for this difference: the location of the described inhibitor (trouble concentrating) in the
causal stream was different between conditions. Of course,
we are only explaining their data in hindsight. The experiments in this paper present a more direct predictive test of the
stream location hypothesis.
Because CERP makes such strong predictions about situations in which we have little or no knowledge, the best
tests of the stream location hypothesis will be in children’s
causal reasoning. This is because children often have little
specific causal knowledge about individual causal systems;
we can see their reasoning as revealing the expected form
of causation more than the expected content of causation.
For instance, infants seem to initially expect that novel abstract objects need to make physical contact in order to interact causally (Leslie & Keeble, 1987). Among preschoolers,
Bullock, Gelman, and Baillargeon (1982) found that even 3year-olds expect that causes must precede their effects. They
also found that 3-year-olds could reason appropriately about
interventions on causal systems: They could recognize that
some interventions would change a relation, whereas some
1 For

details of this fit, see Buchanan et al. (2010)

would not. Buchanan and Sobel (submitted) showed that this
ability depended on the specific causal system involved. For
instance, 3-year-olds could not reason correctly about interventions on electrical connection, but they could reason correctly about interventions on batteries. On the other hand, 4year-olds could reason appropriately about both connection
and batteries. Because of these developmental differences,
and numerous other studies on preschoolers’ causal reasoning, we chose to test 3- and 4-year-olds in these experiments.
Our overarching hypothesis, which we test in two experiments, is that preschool-aged children will show stream location effects, expecting different changes to arise from interventions at different locations in the causal stream. Further,
we predict that these differences will continue to hold regardless of the familiarity of the intervention involved, as long
as that unfamiliar intervention appears to change the causal
relation in the same way.

Experiment 1
In this experiment, we tested the hypothesis that children
would reason differently about interventions to a causal system, depending on the location of the intervention in a causal
stream. We presented children with a novel common effect
relation in which both relations failed. Then we made a
change, either early or late in the causal stream, which apparently enabled one of the relations. We asked children whether
this change would enable the other relation as well. Our hypothesis was that in accordance with CERP, children would
judge the late intervention as more likely to affect both relations than the early intervention.

Methods
Participants We tested 16 three-year-olds, (8 girls, mean
age = 40.3 months, range = 36-45 months) and 16 fouryear-olds (2 girls, mean age = 52.25 months, range = 48-59
months). Three additional children were tested, but were excluded due to experimenter error or equipment failure. About
half the children were recruited from birth records, and the
other half were recruited and tested either at a children’s museum or at a local preschool. Children were randomly assigned to either the “early inhibitor” (n = 16) or “late inhibitor” (n = 16) condition. There were an equal number of
3- and 4-year-olds in each condition.
Materials Materials consisted of two sets of commercially
available closet lights, modified for the experiment. In one
set (the “cause lights”) there were 8 lights, each 10 cm in diameter, with a large white button that illuminated only when
actively depressed. These lights had a battery compartment
on the underside that could hold two batteries; they required
the presence of both batteries, inserted properly, in order to
illuminate when pressed. It was possible to insert one battery
backwards, in order to be able to show the presence of two
batteries, without the light illuminating when pressed. The
compartment also had a cover, which could be left on or off.
The casing of each light was painted a different color, so that

1787

make the big light go?” Most children (26 out of 32) correctly
answered “yes” to this question. The remaining children answered “yes” after one instance of corrective feedback. Excluding children who required feedback on this or any other
training question did not change the statistical significance of
the results we report.

Figure 2: The push lights environment used in the present
experiments, shown from the point of view of the child.

children could easily differentiate the lights.
Another set (the “effect” lights) consisted of four similar but larger lights, each about 14 cm in diameter. The effect lights were rendered distinguishable from one another by
placing pipe cleaners of different colors around their casing.
These lights each held four batteries. One of these lights was
modified using radio-controlled car components, such that it
illuminated only when a hidden remote was activated – depressing the light was not the actual cause of its illumination.
It was possible to give adults and children the impression that
they were causing the light to activate by depressing it, by
activating the remote only when they pressed the light. The
experimenter (a trained magician) practiced this effect until a
convincing causal impression was achieved. The remote allowed the experimenter freedom to control which actions, if
any, appeared to cause the effect light to illuminate. In posttests, the experimenter was often able to use the remote to
convince children that pressing their nose activated the effect
light. All such children were subsequently debriefed, and allowed to play with the remote.
The lights were mounted on a piece of cardboard, together
with wires that appeared to connect the lights. The cardboard was used so that the experimenter could easily retract
the whole setup, controlling when and if children could intervene on the lights. The setup is shown in Figure 2. We refer
to this setup as the “push lights environment.”
Procedure The experimenter began by showing children all
the lights to be used in the procedure, in order to establish
that there were a large number of them. Then he showed
them the push lights environment, arranged as shown in Figure 2: There were two small “cause” lights, connected to one
large “effect” light using the wires. This began the training
phase. The experimenter said: “I have some of these lights.
When you push on them, they light up. See: [pushes on effect light, and it illuminates.] Here, you try.” Children pushed
the effect light, which illuminated. “Sometimes, when I push
on these little lights, they’ll make the big light go. Watch.”
He then pushed each cause light, both of which appeared to
cause the large light to illuminate simultaneously. He then
pointed to each of the cause lights and asked: “Does this one

The experimenter then removed the three initial lights, and
arranged three visibly different lights in the same configuration. This began the first of three test phases. In the “late
inhibitor” condition, the effect light in each test phase light
was missing one battery. In the “early inhibitor” condition,
the cause lights in each test phase were each missing one battery, and thus did not illuminate when pressed. The battery
covers were left off so that the absence of batteries was visible, but only when the lights were flipped over. These new
lights failed to activate the effect light. Children were asked
about the efficacy of the relations. Most children (26 out of
32) correctly answered “no” to these questions on all three
trials. Five responded correctly after one round of feedback,
and one child required two rounds. Excluding these children
did not change the significance of reported results. Note that
at this point in the procedure, children had correctly answered
“no” to two questions with feedback, and “yes” to two questions with feedback. Thus children were not coached on a
strategy that would allow them to answer the test questions
correctly.
At this point in the test phase, the experimenter made a
modification to the causal system, which depended on the
condition. In the “late inhibitor” condition, the experimenter
flipped over the large light, exposing the fact that there was a
battery missing. He said: “Look, this light has room for a battery, but there’s no battery in there. Let’s put a battery in.” He
then inserted a battery into the space, and replaced the light
in its original position. In the “early inhibitor” condition, he
instead flipped over and added a battery to one of the cause
lights. Then he said “Let’s try this light now.” He pressed one
cause light (side counterbalanced, and in the early inhibitor
condition, always the effect light that had been intervened
on), which made the effect light illuminate.2 The experimenter then asked, pointing to this light: “Does this one make
the big light go now?” All children answered “yes.” He then
pointed to the other light: “What about this one? Will this
one make the big light go now?” Children’s responses to this
test question were recorded and analyzed. The experimenter
repeated the test phase three times with three visibly different
sets of lights, for a total of three answers from each participant. This meant that we collected three yes/no answers from
each child, making 24 for each age group/ condition combination.
2 In the “early inhibitor” condition, the cause light did not illuminate even when it was effective. Otherwise the illumination of the
cause light would be diagnostic of its efficacy in causing the effect
light to illuminate. That is, in the “early inhibitor” condition, when
the experimenter pressed on an effective cause light, only the effect
light illuminated.

1788

Experiment 2

Results
No effects were found for the age or gender of the children,
or whether the question was initially asked about a light that
was on the left or on the right. Results are shown in Table 1.
In the “early inhibitor” condition, only 2 out of 24 responses
from 3-year-olds, and 1 out of 24 responses from 4-year-olds
were “yes.” Both of these patterns were significantly below
the proportion of “yes” responses predicted by chance, Binomial test, p < 0.01 in both cases. In the “late inhibitor” condition, all 3- and 4-year olds answered “yes” to every question,
meaning that both age groups answered “yes” to 24 out of
24 questions. This was significantly above chance, Binomial
test, p < 0.01 for both conditions.

The goal of this experiment was to show a stream location
effect in a similar environment, but using an intervention that
was not usually associated with a change in causal relations.
In this experiment, instead of adding batteries, we added a
battery cover. Since the presence of battery covers is not actually causally related to the efficacy of toys, children could not
base their inferences on previous causal learning. We hypothesized that we would find the same effect in this experiment
as in Experiment 1. We were agnostic as to whether children
would be more uncertain in this experiment, generating a significantly more variable pattern of responses.

Table 1: Mean number of “yes” answers in Experiment 1.
Age Group
3-year-olds
4-year-olds

Condition
Early(n = 8)
Late (n = 8)
Early (n = 8)
Late (n = 8)

“yes”/trials
2/24
24/24
1/24
24/24

Mean
0.25
3.00
0.12
3.00

SD
0.46
0.00
0.35
0.00

Children of both ages were significantly more likely to answer “yes” in the late inhibitor than in the early inhibitor
condition. For 3-year-olds, the average number of “yes” responses out of three was 0.25 in the early inhibitor condition
and 3.00 in the late inhibitor condition. Among 4-year-olds,
the means were 0.12 and 3.00, respectively. We ran a 2(age
group) x 2(condition) ANOVA, which revealed a main effect
of condition, F = 746.05, p < 0.01, partial η2 = 0.96, but no
main effect of age, F = 0.37, p = 0.55, partial η2 = 0.01 or
interaction, F = 0.37, p = 0.55, partial η2 = 0.01. Because
of the apparent difference in the variances, we supplemented
this analysis using a Mann-Whitney U test: We found a significant difference between conditions, U = 0.00, Z = 5.37,
p < 0.01, but not in the number of correct answers (“yes” in
the late condition, and “no” in the early condition) between
age groups, U = 20.00, Z = 0.60, p = 0.78.

Discussion
Children were significantly more likely to predict a change
in both relations in the “early inhibitor” than in the “late inhibitor” condition. These results indicate that both 3- and
4-year-olds are sensitive to the location of an intervention in
a causal stream. An open question is whether this is due primarily to structural inferences that apply to causal streams in
general, or acquired knowledge about this specific intervention. Previous research (i.e. Buchanan & Sobel, submitted;
Gottfried & Gelman, 2005) indicates that even 3-year-olds
understand enough about batteries to make appropriate inferences about relevant and irrelevant modifications to a causal
system when batteries are involved. To support stream location as a general structural principle, we needed to show a
stream location effect for an unfamiliar intervention.

Participants As in Experiment 1, we tested 16 three-yearolds, (3 girls, mean age = 40.67 months, range= 36-46
months) and 16 four-year-olds (5 girls, mean age = 52.18
months, range = 48-57 months). One additional child was
tested, but was excluded due to experimenter error. About
half the children were recruited from birth records, and the
other half were recruited at a children’s museum or local
preschool. Again, children were randomly assigned to either
the “early inhibitor” (n = 16) or “late inhibitor” (n = 16) condition, with an equal number of 3- and 4-year-olds in each
condition.
Methods Experiment 2 was identical to Experiment 1, using the same materials and procedure, except for two changes:
First, all battery slots were filled, but as in Experiment 1 the
battery covers were left off initially. Second, during the procedure, the experimenter did not add batteries; instead, he
pointed out that each light was missing a cover, and added
one. Thus, he said: “Look, this one does not have a cover.
Let’s put a cover on there.” Just as in Experiment 1, in the
early inhibitor condition, the cause lights did not illuminate.
This was done in order to maintain similarity between experiments. Also as in Experiment 1, intervening on the light (the
cause light in the late inhibitor condition, and the effect light
in the early inhibitor condition) apparently changed the efficacy of one of the cause lights. Children were asked to verify
this. Most children (22 out of 32) required no corrective feedback during this procedure. Six children required one round
of feedback, two children required two rounds of feedback,
one child required three rounds, and another four. Excluding
all children who required any feedback does not change the
statistical significance of the results reported below. In the
test question (for which no feedback was provided), children
were asked to predict the efficacy of the other cause light.
To avoid negative effects on children’s causal learning, all
children were debriefed on the deception at the end of the
procedure: They were allowed to play with the remote, and
observed that replacing the covers did not in reality make the
lights effective.

Results
Results are shown in Table 2. Again, no effects were found
for gender, or the location of the intervened-on light. As in

1789

Experiment 1, chance analyses showed that in all four condition/age group combinations, the proportion of “yes” responses was significantly different from what would be expected by chance, Binomial test, p < 0.01 in each case. In
the “early inhibitor” condition, children were below chance,
and in the “late inhibitor” condition, they were above chance.

the other causal relation would be unaffected, but when the
unfamiliar intervention was late in the causal stream, they
predicted that both relations would be affected. The data are
inconclusive about whether there is an effect of familiarity,
possibly making children’s responses more variable. Even if
this effect exists, it is probably small, and manifestly not large
enough to eliminate the stream location effect we observed.

Table 2: Number of “yes” answers in Experiment 2.

General Discussion

Age Group
3-year-olds
4-year-olds

Condition
Early (n = 8)
Late (n = 8)
Early (n = 8)
Late (n = 8)

“yes”/trials
4/24
23/24
3/24
21/24

Mean
0.5/3
2.87/3
0.37/3
2.62/3

SD
0.27
0.12
0.74
1.06

For 3-year-olds, the average number of “yes” responses out
of three was 0.25 in the early inhibitor condition and 3.00 in
the late inhibitor condition. Among 4-year-olds, the means
were 0.12 and 3.00, respectively. As in Experiment 1, we
ran a 2(age group) x 2(condition) ANOVA, which revealed a
main effect of condition, F = 72.05, p < 0.01, partial η2 =
0.72, but no main effect of age, F = 0.47, p = 0.497, partial
η2 = 0.017 or interaction, F = 0.05, p = 0.82, partial η2 =
0.002. Because of the apparent difference in the variances, we
supplemented this analysis using a Mann-Whitney U test: We
found a significant difference between conditions, U = 11.50,
Z = 4.27, p < 0.01, but not in the number of correct answers
(“yes” in the late condition, and “no” in the early condition)
between age groups, U = 123.00, Z = 0.26, p = 0.87.
Anecdotally, several 4-year-olds seemed surprised that
merely changing the cover had changed the efficacy of the
relation. Some initially responded “maybe” to the test question – they were asked to choose either a “yes” or “no” response. All children eventually responded appropriately to
the test question.
Because of this phenomenon, we also tested for differences
between the experiments: We gave each child a score based
on the number of correct (“yes” in late inhibitor, and “no” in
early inhibitor) responses they made. We then performed a ttest on the difference between scores in the two experiments.
In Experiment 1, the mean score was 2.90, (SD = 0.29),
and in Experiment 2, the mean score was 2.65, (SD = 0.74).
This difference was only marginally statistically significant,
t = 1.76, d f = 62, p = 0.08. Because of the difference in
the variances, we supplemented this analysis using a MannWhitney U test, which also failed to show a significant difference, U = 443.50, Z = 1.48, p = 0.14.

Discussion
Even in the case of an intervention that is not normally
causally related to efficacy, 3- and 4-year-olds were able to
reason appropriately about stream location. That is, when
the unfamiliar intervention that resulted in a change in efficacy was early in the causal stream, children predicted that

Both experiments supported the stream location hypothesis:
Children were significantly more likely to predict a change
in both relations in the late intervention than in the early intervention condition. The results in both age groups indicate
that children have a strong understanding of stream location,
even as early as three years old. Furthermore, Experiment 2
showed that children would make these inferences even for
an unfamiliar intervention. This suggests that stream location
may reflect knowledge of the structure of causation in general, rather than just experience with a specific causal system.
Further work is necessary to provide more support for this
possibility. For instance, we may be able to find stream location effects when the intervention is not just unfamiliar but
opposite to past associations – if batteries disable rather than
enable the relation, for example.
CERP predicts and supports these findings. The model prescribes that early interventions on a common effect structure
are likely to fall on the independent portion of the path from
cause to effect, changing only one relation, whereas late interventions on a common effect structure are likely to fall on
the shared portion of the path from both causes to the effect,
changing both relations. While the data we present are consistent with the general causal graphical model framework –
we have shown that children prefer Figure 1b over Figure 1a
– only CERP explains how this preference is generated.
In Experiment 2, adding a cover appeared to change the
efficacy of a the causal relation, a situation that would be
counter to children’s experiences (if any) with such causal
systems in the real world. Why, then, did they not show a
significantly different pattern of responding in Experiment 2?
For instance, we might expect children to guess. The answer
comes from noticing that the intervention was perfectly correlated with a change in efficacy: the light never worked until
we added a cover. It seems that children required an explanation for this change, and the addition of the cover was the
only explanation available. This is in line with previous research (i.e. Schulz & Sommerville, 2006) that shows that
children are determinsists: they attribute such changes in efficacy to human interventions, rather than attributing them to
randomness. In work currently underway, we are exploring
the interaction between this type of determinism, and inferences about hidden interventions on a causal stream. CERP
makes clear predictions here: for instance, if failures sometimes occur without an intervention, a given failure is less
indicative of a changed causal relation. Thus, more variable
relations should show weaker stream location effects.

1790

Thelen, E., Schoner, G., Scheier, C., & Smith, L. (2001). The
dynamics of embodiment: A field theory of infant perseverative reaching. Behavioral and brain sciences, 24(01),
1–34.

The existence of stream location effects in preschoolers
provides support for CERP as a model of causal reasoning.
Although CERP arose from attempts to make quantitative fits
to data on a different phenomenon with adults (namely, the
nonindependence phenomenon mentioned above), it nonetheless predicted a novel, qualitative effect that could be detected
in children. We see this as one of many examples (i.e. Sobel,
Tenenbaum, & Gopnik, 2004; Thelen, Schoner, Scheier, &
Smith, 2001) of a productive dialog between experiments and
models in cognitive development and cognitive science.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NSF (DLS-0518161 to DMS).
We would like to thank all of the parents and children who
participated, and the Providence Children’s Museum and
Brown/Fox Point preschool for allowing us to recruit and test
on-site. We also thank Karis Casagrande, Caroline Kleeman,
Brianna Doherty, Katie Green, Rachel Shelley-Abrahamson,
Kristen Swan, for help with data collection and analysis.

References
Buchanan, D., & Sobel, D. (submitted). Mechanism-based
causal reasoning in young children.
Buchanan, D., Tenenbaum, J., & Sobel, D. (2010). Edge replacement and nonindependence in causation. In Proceedings of the 32nd annual conference of the cognitive science
society.
Bullock, M., Gelman, R., & Baillargeon, R. (1982). The
development of causal reasoning. In W. J. Friedman (Ed.),
The developmental psychology of time (pp. 209–254). Academic Press.
Gopnik, A., Glymour, C., Sobel, D., Schulz, L., Kushnir, T.,
& Danks, D. (2004). A theory of causal learning in children: Causal maps and Bayes nets. Psychological Review,
111, 3–32.
Gottfried, G., & Gelman, S. (2005). Developing domainspecific causal-explanatory frameworks: The role of insides and immanence. Cognitive Development, 20(1), 137–
158.
Leslie, A., & Keeble, S. (1987). Do six-month-old infants
perceive causality. Cognition, 25(3), 265–288.
Mayrhofer, R., Hagmayer, Y., & Waldmann, M. (2008). Violations of screening off: A Bayesian error attribution model
of causal reasoning. Unpublished presentation at Mathematical Psychology 2008.
Pearl, J. (2000). Causality: Models, reasoning, and inference. Cambridge University Press.
Schulz, L., & Sommerville, J. (2006). God does not play
dice: Causal determinism and preschoolers’ causal inferences. Child development, 77(2), 427–442.
Sobel, D., Tenenbaum, J., & Gopnik, A. (2004). Children’s causal inferences from indirect evidence: Backwards blocking and Bayesian reasoning in preschoolers.
Cognitive Science, 28(3), 303–333.
Spirtes, P., Glymour, C., & Scheines, R. (2001). Causation,
prediction, and search. The MIT Press.

1791

