UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Children's Inductive Inference with Synonymous Labels

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1q32k2fr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Matlen, Bryan
Fisher, Anna
Godwin, Karrie

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Children’s Inductive Inference with Synonymous Labels
Bryan J. Matlen (bmatlen@andrew.cmu.edu)
Department of Psychology, 5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Anna V. Fisher (fisher49@andrew.cmu.edu)
Department of Psychology, 5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Karrie E. Godwin (kegodwin@andrew.cmu.edu)
Department of Psychology, 5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
Abstract
Prior research indicates that young children can generalize
object properties on the basis of category information when it
is conveyed by identical labels or semantically similar labels
at the same level of taxonomy (i.e., synonyms) (Gelman &
Markman, 1986). However, in previous research semantic
similarity was confounded with co-occurrence probability.
Therefore, it is possible that synonym-based induction
observed in prior research stemmed from children relying on
cues other than the semantic similarity of labels. The present
study investigated synonym-based induction with labels that
do and do not co-occur in child-directed speech. Results
indicated that adults made inferences on the basis of the
semantic similarity of labels regardless of co-occurrence
probability. In contrast, 4-year-old children generalized based
on synonymous labels at above chance levels only when
synonyms co-occurred in child-directed speech.
Keywords: Labels. Synonyms. Word Learning. Induction.
Cognitive Development. Categories.

Introduction
Labels are pervasive in thought. Within the first six years of
life, a child may learn up to 14,000 labels (Markman, 1990).
It has been suggested that labels convey an object’s
category, thereby facilitating knowledge generalization
(Gelman & Markman, 1986). For example, if a sheepdog
has a certain property, would a bulldog be likely to share the
same property? Though this question has no definitive
answer, one might surmise that, both the sheepdog and the
bulldog are likely to possess the property because both are
referred to as ‘dogs.’
It is well documented that adults rely on category
information conveyed by labels to generalize from the
known to the unknown, however, it remains contested when
children begin to do so. Some research has suggested that
children can rely on category information conveyed by
labels as early as 13 months of age (Welder & Graham,
2001). Numerous studies have indicated that toddlers and
preschool-age children view labels as communicating
objects’ kind, and that identical labels elicit category-based
induction in young children as well as adults (Gelman 1988;
Gelman & Coley, 1990; Gelman & Markman, 1986; Jaswal,
2004).

This interpretation has recently been challenged on the
grounds that children may treat labels as perceptual
attributes of objects rather than as category markers
(Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004). Under this view, when two
objects share a label, children engage not in category-based
induction, but instead in label-based induction. In other
words, children may rely on shared labels in the course of
induction not because they understand that labels refer to
categories, but because auditory information (including
category labels) has a higher attentional weight than visual
information early in development (Robinson & Sloutsky,
2004; Sloutsky & Napolitano, 2003). Indeed, there is ample
evidence that auditory modality dominates the visual
modality in infancy (Lewkowicz, 1994; Robinson &
Sloutsky, 2004, 2007) and that these effects extend into
early childhood (Napolitano & Sloutsky, 2004).
Furthermore, there is evidence that a similarity-based
account of early induction (which considers labels to be
features of objects contributing to the overall perceived
similarity) can readily account for children’s reliance on
identical labels in the course of property induction as well as
categorization tasks (Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004; Sloutsky, Lo,
& Fisher, 2001).
Both label-based and category-based accounts predict that
children should rely on identical labels during the course of
induction. One way to tease apart these two perspectives, is
to convey category membership via non-identical
semantically similar labels: If it is the case that children
perceive labels as windows into categories, then children’s
generalizations based on semantically similar labels should
be similar to their generalizations based on identical labels.
If however, children are willing to generalize based on
identical labels but not on semantically similar labels, then
induction early in development can be label-based without
necessarily being category-based.
There are two ways to convey semantic similarity using
non-identical labels: by using hierarchically-related labels
(e.g., poodle-dog) or semantically-similar labels at the same
level of taxonomic hierarchy (e.g., puppy-dog). For the
purpose of brevity, semantically similar labels at the same
level of taxonomic hierarchy will be henceforth referred to
as synonyms. It has been shown that the ability to base

1493

inferences on familiar labels organized into taxonomic
hierarchies does not mature until 7- to 8-years of age
(Gelman & O’Reilly, 1988; Johnson, Scott, & Mervis,
1997). This finding could suggest that preschoolers’
induction with identical labels is unlikely to be categorybased. However, it is possible that children’s difficulty
using hierarchically-related labels stems from the lack of
understanding of class inclusion relations, rather than from
the lack of understanding that labels denote categories.
Indeed, children have been shown to master class inclusion
relations by 7- to 8-years of age (Klahr & Wallace, 1972) –
the same age at which children can use hierarchicallyrelated labels in the course of induction. The argument
presented above suggests that preschool-age children should
be successful in performing induction with synonyms,
because these labels denote objects of similar kind at the
same level of taxonomic hierarchy. At present, however,
few studies have examined this possibility.
In a now classic study, Gelman and Markman (1986,
Experiment 2) presented 4- to 5-year-old children with
triads of pictures consisting of a target item and two test
items: one test item looked similar to the target and the other
belonged to the same category as the target. Category
information was communicated by either identical or
synonymous labels. Children were asked to generalize a
property from one of the test items to the target. For
example, children could be told that a ‘rabbit eats bugs’
whereas a ‘squirrel eats grass’, and asked whether the target
item (referred to as a ‘rabbit” in the Identical Labels
condition and as a ‘bunny’ in the Synonyms condition) ‘eats
bugs like the rabbit’ or ‘eats grass like the squirrel.’ Gelman
and Markman found that children generalized properties to
categorically similar items at above chance level in both
labeling conditions. Notably, children’s performance with
synonyms was no different than their performance with
identical labels (63% and 67% of category-based responses,
respectively).
Gelman and Markman’s (1986) study provided support to
the notion that children utilize category information
conveyed by linguistic labels. However, it has recently been
suggested (Fisher, in press) that some label pairs in the
Synonyms condition consisted of labels that were not only
semantically similar, but also likely to co-occur as
compound nouns in child-directed speech (e.g., bunnyrabbit, puppy-dog) according to the CHILDES database
(MacWhinney, 2000). Co-occurrence of words in natural
language has been argued to give rise to strong lexical
associations (Brown & Berko, 1960; McKoon & Ratcliff,
1992); therefore in Gelman and Markman’s (1986) study it
is possible that when children were told that a ‘bunny’ had a
particular property and were asked whether this property
would be true of a ‘rabbit’ or a ‘squirrel’, children’s
responses were based not on the understanding that bunnies
and rabbits are the same kind of animal, but on the fact that
the word ‘bunny’ primed the word ‘rabbit’, whereas the
word ‘squirrel’ did not.

A recent study by Fisher (2010) provides preliminary
evidence to support this possibility. In this study
participants were presented with a label extension task, in
which they were taught a familiar label for a novel target
object (e.g. “on a different planet, this one is called a rock”),
and then asked which of the three test objects would likely
be referred by a synonymous label (e.g., “which one do you
think is called a stone on a different planet?”). The three test
objects varied in perceptual similarity to the target: one test
object looked similar, one looked less similar, and one
looked dissimilar. The Co-occurring Synonyms condition
included labels that co-occurred in child-directed speech
(e.g., bunny-rabbit, puppy-dog, kitty-cat), whereas the Nonco-occurring Synonyms condition included labels that never
co-occurred in child-directed speech in the CHILDES
database (e.g., rock-stone, couch-sofa, child-kid;
MacWhinney, 2000). Fisher found that adults and six-yearold children inferred that objects referred to by synonymous
labels were likely to look similar, exhibiting a high
proportion of choices of similar test items in both labeling
conditions. In contrast, 4 year-old children were more likely
to choose similar test items in the Co-occurring Synonyms
condition than in the Non-co-occurring Synonyms
condition. Moreover, young children’s performance in the
Non-co-occurring condition did not exceed chance.
The present study was designed to directly examine the
possibility that label co-occurrence may play a role in
inductive generalization. Four-year-old children and adults
participated in a triad induction task; on half of the trials
participants were asked to make inferences based on non cooccurring synonyms and on the other half of the trials
participants made inferences based on co-occurring
synonyms. An Identical Label condition was also included
as a control condition

Method
Participants
Participants were 33 4-year-old children (M = 4.52 years,
SD = .40 years, 18 females, 15 males) recruited from local
preschools and 30 undergraduate students from a local
university who received partial course credit.

Design
The experiment had a 2 (Label condition: Synonymous vs.
Identical Labels) by 2 (Co-occurrence condition: Non-cooccurring vs. Co-occurring Labels) by 2 (Age: Preschoolers
vs. Adults) mixed design. Labeling condition was a
between-subject factor: participants were randomly assigned
either to the Synonymous or Identical Labels condition. Cooccurrence probability of labels was a within-subject factor:
every participant performed induction both with cooccurring and non-co-occurring labels.

Materials
Language materials consisted of nine label triads, with each
triad comprised of a target item, a semantically related test

1494

item and an unrelated test item. Related test items could be
conveyed either by identical or by semantically similar
labels (in the Identical and Synonymous Labels conditions,
respectively). Unrelated items consisted of labels that a
separate group of adult participants judged to be unrelated to
the target items (see details below). To-be-generalized
properties consisted of two-syllable blank predicates. A full
list of linguistic stimuli is provided in Table 1.
Visual stimuli consisted of three sets of doors, with each
set including three identical doors. Participants were told
that objects were hiding behind each of the doors. This
procedure was used to provide participants with conditions
that were maximally favorable to relying on semantic
information conveyed by labels as there was no perceptual
conflict that participants had to resolve to perform categorybased induction. Since visual stimuli were identical,
category information conveyed by labels was the only basis
for induction. Additionally, a set of 27 pictures was used for
a Picture Identification task that all children completed after
the experiment proper. The goal of this task was to ensure
that children were familiar with all of the labels used in this
study, and that children were willing to use semantically
similar labels to refer to the same object (see the Procedure
section below for details).
Label Selection
Assignment of label pairs to the Co-occurring and Non-cooccurring conditions was similar to the procedure used in
Fisher (2010). Five different databases in the CHILDES
corpus were analyzed (i.e., Bates, Brown, Gleason, HSLLD,
and Wells). Children’s ages ranged from 1 ½ to 9 years,
and, across all databases a total of 2,264,722 words were
included. To obtain normalized co-occurrence scores, the
number of raw co-occurrences was divided by the sum of
instances of each word occurring individually minus the
number of times the two words co-occurred. For example,
the word “kitty” occurred in the analyzed databases 847
times, the word “cat” occurred 2,319 times, and these words
co-occurred 131 times. Using the normalization procedure
the probability of the words “kitty” and “cat” co-occurring
was calculated as 131 ÷[847+2,319–131] = .04.
Four co-occurring synonyms were selected based on their
above-zero co-occurrence probability and their likelihood of
being known to young children. Because all four cooccurring label-pairs referred to natural kinds, only non-cooccurring synonyms referring to natural kind objects were
selected for this study. We did not use some of the non-cooccurring label pairs used by Gelman and Markman (1986)
(e.g., cobra-snake and rose-flower) because these labels
were hierarchically related, and thus unlikely to generate
category-based induction in 4-year-old children (Gelman &
O’Reilly, 1988; Johnson, Scott, & Mervis, 1997).
Overall, the average co-occurrence probability of
synonyms was .033 in the Co-occurring condition and .000
in the Non-co-occurring condition, independent-samples
t(6) = 2.26, p = .03. Unrelated test items were also labels
that referred to natural kind objects. Unrelated test items

were matched in syllable length to the related items for all
triads except one1.
A separate calibration study was conducted with an
independent group of 22 adults to establish semantic
similarity of labels within each triad. Adults were asked to
rate semantic similarity of the Target items to the Related
and Unrelated test items (e.g., rock-stone, rock-cloud, and
stone-cloud) on a scale of 1 – 7, with 7 indicating that the
labels could be used interchangeably, and 1 indicating that
the labels had no overlap in meaning. Results of this
calibration confirmed that targets and related test items (i.e.
synonyms) were more semantically similar (M = 6.3) than
targets and unrelated test items (M = 2.8), t(14) = 11.43, p <
.001. There were no differences found when the analysis
was separated by co-occurrence condition, F (1, 15) < 1, ns.
Table 1: List of stimuli and co-occurrence probabilities of
semantically similar labels.
Target
Items

Related
Test Items

Unrelated
Test Items

Blank
Predicates

Co-Occ
Prob

Rock
Dolphin
Alligator
Toad
Mouse
Puppy
Kitty
Bunny
Pony

Stone
Whale
Crocodile
Frog
Rat
Dog
Cat
Rabbit
Horse

Cloud
Seal
Hippo
Bird
Duck
Cow
Pig
Squirrel
Fox

Higa
Omat
Matlen
Koski
Lignin
Erwin
Manchin
Creighan
Troxel

.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.010
.040
.070
.01

Procedure
Children were tested individually at their daycares in a quiet
room or hallway. Adults were tested individually in a
laboratory on campus. Visual stimuli were presented on a
computer and labels were provided verbally by
experimenters.
Labels used in the Synonyms condition are displayed in
Table 1. The same set of labels was used in the Identical
condition with the exception that the Target items and
Related Test items were referred by identical labels (e.g.,
rock-rock for half of the participants and stone-stone for the
other half of the participants). Half of the participants
participated in the Co-occurring condition first, and the
other half participated in the Non-co-occurring condition
first. Within each co-occurrence condition trials were
presented in one of two random orders. The rock-stonecloud triad always appeared first as served as an
instructional trial for all participants; the data from this trial
were not included in the analyses reported below.
Participants were told that they would be playing a game
about objects that were hiding behind doors (see Figure 1).
The experimenter told participants what object was hiding
1

Due to 4-year-old parlance, hippo was included as a lure for
alligator-crocodile, despite it not matching the number of syllables
of the related test item.

1495

behind each door. The Target objects were always hidden
behind the topmost door, and the location of the Related and
Unrelated Test objects (to the left or to the right of the
Target) was randomized across trials. The experimenter first
introduced the Target item (e.g., There is a rock hiding
behind this door) and then introduced the Test items in
random order (e.g., There is a cloud hiding behind this door.
There is a stone hiding behind this door). Then participants
were told about the property of the Target item (e.g., The
rock behind this door has higa inside) and asked to
generalize this property to one of the Test items (e.g., Do
you think that the cloud behind this door or the stone behind
this door also has higa inside?).
Additionally, participants were asked to remember where
each object was hiding. The memory check was included to
ensure that possible differences in induction performance
could not be attributed to children’s better memory for cooccurring than for non-co-occurring synonyms. After the
induction response was recorded, a memory check was
performed: the experimenter asked the participant if (s)he
remembered what was hiding behind each door, pointing to
the doors in random order.

Figure 1: Schematic depiction of door task.

After the induction task children (but not adults)
participated in a Picture Identification task similar to the
Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (Dunn & Dunn, 1997).
The goal of this task was to confirm that children were
familiar with each of the labels used in the induction task. In
each trial children were presented with four different
pictures, and asked to point to the target picture that was
verbally indicated by the experimenter (e.g., “can you find
the rock?”). Target items in the Picture Identification
consisted of all Target, Related, and Unrelated labels that
were included in the induction task. Importantly, knowledge
of synonymous labels was always tested using identical
pictures on separate trials (with location of the correct
response counterbalanced across trials). There were 18
unique pictures of interest (for the two labels in eight
experimental and one instructional trial in the induction
task). Pictures testing knowledge of synonyms were
presented twice and pictures testing knowledge of the
unrelated items were presented once, resulting in a total of
27 trials in the picture identification task.

Results
Preliminary analyses revealed no effects of block order (all
p’s > .20). In the Picture Identification task, children’s
accuracy was .99 in each Label condition, indicating that 1)
children were familiar with the words used in the
experiment proper, and that 2) children could readily apply
synonymous labels to the same objects.
Induction Accuracy
Proportions of category-based responses (i.e., choices of
identical or synonymous labels) were analyzed in a 3-way
mixed ANOVA, with Label condition and Age group as
between-subject factors and Co-occurrence condition as a
within-subject factor. The analysis revealed a significant
effect of Age, F(1, 58)=29.57, p<.001; a significant
interaction between Co-occurrence and Age F(1, 59)=5.58,
p<.05; and a significant three-way interaction F(1, 59)=
4.41, p<.05. Follow-up analyses revealed no differences
among conditions for adults (all p’s >.63). Adults’ categorybased responding was above chance in all conditions (all p’s
< .001) (means in all conditions were ≥ .97, SD’s ≤ .09).
Proportions of children’s category-based responses are
presented in Figure 2. For children there was a reliable
difference in performance between the Non-Co-Occurring
Synonyms and the Co-occurring Synonyms conditions,
paired-sample t(16) = 3.45, p <.005 (M = .52 and .74,
respectively). Within the Non-co-occurring condition, there
was also a reliable difference between the Synonymous and
Identical Label conditions, independent-sample t(31) = 2.41,
p <.05 (M = .52 and .75, respectively). Furthermore,
children’s performance in the Non-co-occurring Synonyms
condition did not exceed chance, one-sample t(17) = .20,
ns., whereas performance in all other conditions was above
chance (all one-sample t’s > 2.54, p’s <.05). There were no
differences in children’s performance with Identical Cooccurring and Identical Non-co-occurring labels, pairedsamples t(15) = .53, ns, (M=.75 and .70, respectively).

1496

Memory Accuracy
Adults’ overall memory scores were 99% in each label
condition. Children’s overall memory scores were 86% and
84% in the Synonymous and Identical Label conditions,
respectively. Children’s memory was well above chance
level of 33% in both conditions, both one-sample p’s < .001,
indicating that children had little difficulty with the memory
demands of the task. Most importantly, there was no
difference in children’s memory performance when
separated by co-occurrence condition (86% and 85% correct
in the Co-occurring and Non Co-occurring Synonyms
conditions, respectively), paired-sample t(32) < 1, ns. A
linear regression performed on children’s memory scores
and their induction performance revealed no significant
relationship in the Synonyms condition, r2(134) = .055, p >
.50, or the Identical condition, r2(126) = .019, p > .95.

Figure 2. Proportion of category-based responses in children.

To investigate performance at an individual level, we
classified participants into category-based and noncategory-based responders. A category-based responder was
defined as a participant who provided at least 3 of 4
category-based responses within each condition (see Figure
3). Individual response patterns mirrored the group data
summarized above. In particular, all adult participants in all
conditions were classified as category-based responders. In
the Co-Occurring labels condition the majority of 4-yearolds were also classified as category-based responders: 11
out of 17 (65%) in the Identical labels condition and 10 out
of 16 (63%) in the Synonyms condition (this association
was not significant, Fisher’s exact p > .99). Similarly, in the
Non-Co-Occurring/Identical labels condition the majority of
children were classified as category-based responders: 12
out of 16 (75%). However, in the Non-Co-Occurring/
Synonyms condition only 6 out of 17 children (35%) were
classified as category-based responders. The association
between condition and response type in the Non-CoOccurring/Synonyms and Non-Co-Occurring/Identical
labels condition was significant, Fisher’s exact p < .05.

Figure 3. Number of children classified as category-based
and non-category-based responders.

Discussion
Contrary to the notion that the ability to perform synonymbased induction is well established by four years of age, the
results of the present study suggest that this ability still
undergoes development during the preschool years. In
particular, 4-year-old children performed at chance in the
triad induction task when semantically similar label-pairs
did not co-occur in child-directed speech (e.g., alligatorcrocodile). However, we observed a significant
improvement in performance when children were presented
with semantically similar labels that co-occurred in childdirected speech (e.g., bunny-rabbit) and with identical labels
(e.g., bunny-bunny and alligator-alligator).
These findings are not easily explained by children’s
unfamiliarity with some of the words used in this research
as our participants exhibited near ceiling accuracy on the
picture identification task. Importantly, children readily
applied different words with shared meaning (e.g., alligatorcrocodile) to the same items in the picture identification
task. Therefore, children clearly possessed the requisite
knowledge to perform synonym-based induction. Yet, few
4-year-old children spontaneously relied on this knowledge
in the induction task, unless the labels not only shared
meaning but also co-occurred in child-directed speech.
Results reported in this paper suggest that poor
understanding of class-inclusion relations is not the sole
reason why preschool-age children fail to utilize taxonomic
labels (e.g., animal-cat) in the course of induction tasks. The
present findings add to the growing body of evidence
suggesting that the understanding that labels refer to
categories matures gradually between four and seven years
of age (Fisher, 2010; Fisher & Sloutsky, 2005; Matlen &
Fisher, 2008). In particular, consistent with the results
reported in this paper, Matlen and Fisher (2008) found that
only 15% of 4-year-old children spontaneously performed
synonym-based induction with labels that did not co-occur
in child-directed speech; this number increased to 51% of 5year-olds. By 6 years of age the majority of children (86%)
readily relied on synonymous labels to perform induction.

1497

The present study is the first to demonstrate the effect of
label co-occurrence on induction using a within-subject
design. Therefore, this study provides direct evidence that
results of earlier research on the development of synonymbased induction could stem from the fact that responses
were averaged across items that were likely to result in
above-chance performance (e.g., bunny-rabbit, puppy-dog)
and items that were unlikely to result in above-chance
performance (e.g., rock-stone, cobra-snake). It is
conceivable that overall results aggregated over a bimodal
distribution of responses could result in a mean proportion
of synonym-based responses that exceeded chance level
(i.e., 63%; Gelman & Markman, 1986; Experiment 2).
Indeed, when children’s responses in the Synonym
condition of the present study were aggregated across both
co-occurrence conditions, the average proportion of
category-based responses was .63, above chance, pairedsample t(16) = 2.17, p < .05.
In sum, the results presented in this paper provide
evidence that preschoolers’ willingness to rely on
semantically similar labels in the course of induction is
influenced by co-occurrence probability of these labels in
child-directed speech. This finding poses a challenge to the
theoretical approach that assumes children’s induction to be
category-based from very early in development. At the same
time, these results are consistent with the approach
suggesting that the development of category-based
induction follows a protracted developmental course.

Acknowledgments
We thank Malika Sinha, Sarah Shade, Janelle Higa, Tina Li,
Stephanie Brown, and Kimberly Dye for help in data
collection and the CHILDES analysis. We also thank the
children, parents, teachers, and administrators for their
participation. This research was supported by the Institute of
Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education through
Grant R305B040063 to Carnegie Mellon University.

References
Brown, R. & Berko, J. (1960). Word association and the
acquisition of grammar. Child Development, 31, 1-14.
Fisher, A. V. (2010). What’s in the name? Or how rocks and
stones are different from dogs and puppies. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 105, 198-212.
Fisher, A. V., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2005). When induction
meets memory: Evidence for gradual transition from
similarity-based to category-based induction. Child
Development, 76, 583-597.
Gelman, S.A. & O’Reilly, A.W. (1988). Children’s
inductive inferences within superordinate categories: The
role of language and category structure, Child
Development, 59, 876–887.
Gelman, S.A. & Coley, J.D. (1990). The importance of
knowing a dodo is a bird: Categories and inferences in 2year-old children. Developmental Psychology, 26, 796804.

Gelman, S.A., & Markman, E. (1986). Categories and
induction in young children. Cognition, 23, 183-209.
Graham, S.A., Kilbreath, C.S., & Welder, A.N. (2004).
Thirteen-month-olds rely on shared labels and shape
similarity for inductive inferences. Child Development,
75, 409–427.
Jaswal, V.K. (2004). Don’t believe everything you hear:
Preschoolers’ sensitivity to speaker intent in category
induction. Child Development, 3, 279-300.
Klahr, D. & Wallace. Class inclusion processes. In S.
Farnham-Diggory (Ed.), Information processing in
children. New York: Academic Press.
Lewkowicz, D. J. (1994). The development of intercessory
perception in human infants. In D. J. Lewkowicz & R.
Lickliter (Eds.), The development of perception:
Comparative perspectives. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES project: Tools for
analyzing talk. Third Edition. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Matlen, B.J. & Fisher, A.V. (2008). Development of
Synonym-Based Induction. Poster presented at the XXX
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society,
Washington, DC.
Markman, E. (1990). Constraints children place on word
meanings. Cognitive Science, 14, 57-77.
McKoon, G. & Ratcliff, R. (1992). Spreading activation
versus compound cue accounts of priming: Mediated
priming revisited. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 18, 1155 – 1172.
Napolitano, A. C., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2004). Is a picture
worth a thousand words? Part II: The flexible nature of
modality dominance in young children. Child
Development, 75 (6), 1850-1870.
Robinson, C.W., & Sloutsky, V.M. (2004). Auditory
Dominance and its change in the course of development.
Child Development, 75, 1387-1401.
Robinson, C. W., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2007). Linguistic
labels and categorization in infancy: Do labels facilitate or
hinder? Infancy, 11(3), 223-253.
Sloutsky, V.M., & Fisher, A.V. (2004). Induction and
categorization in young children: A similarity-based
model. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
133, 166-188.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Napolitano, A. (2003). Is a picture worth
a thousand words? Preference for auditory modality in
young children. Child Development, 74, 822-833.
Sloutsky, V.M., Lo, Y.-F., & Fisher, A.V. (2001). How
much does a shared name make things similar? Linguistic
labels and the development of inductive inference. Child
Development, 72, 1695-1709.
Welder, A.N., & Graham, S.A. (2001). The influences of
shape similarity and shared labels on infants' inductive
inferences about nonobvious object properties. Child
Development, 72, 1653-1673.

1498

