UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Comparison-Induced Sequence Effects on Hedonic Evaluations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4gr4d9q9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Choplin, Jessica
Lombardi, Megan

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Comparison-Induced Sequence Effects on Hedonic Evaluations
Jessica M. Choplin (jchoplin@depaul.edu) & Megan M. Lombardi (mlombar7@depaul.edu)
DePaul University Department of Psychology
2219 North Kenmore Avenue
Chicago, IL 60614-3504
investigated one type of context effect on evaluation,
namely, the effect of the sequence in which conditions are
experienced. Paying $2.85 per gallon of gasoline, for
example, might seem more reasonable if recent prices have
been over $2.85 than if recent prices have been under $2.85.
Waiting 5 minutes for a bus might seem more reasonable if
one has lately been waiting more than 5 minutes than if one
has been waiting less. The purpose of the research reported
here was to develop and test an account of how the
sequences in which conditions are experienced affect
evaluations. We will propose a comparison-induced
distortion (CID) account of sequence effects on evaluation
and pit this account against Helson’s (1964) adaptation-level
theory, Parducci’s (1995) range-frequency theory, and
Haubensak’s (1992) consistency model.

Abstract
Hedonic evaluations and emotional reactions to experiences
depend not only upon the conditions being experienced, but
also upon the sequences in which conditions are experienced.
The authors propose a comparison-induced distortion (CID)
model of sequence effects on evaluation in which to-beevaluated exemplars are verbally compared (Choplin &
Hummel, 2002; Choplin, 2007) to the most similar, recent
exemplars. Predictions of this model were tested and pit
against Helson’s (1964) adaptation-level theory, Parducci’s
(1995) range-frequency theory, and Haubensak’s (1992)
consistency model using a paradigm in which sequences
periodically improved (i.e., improved for n trials, returned to
the original state on a single trial, and improved for n trials
again) or periodically deteriorated by small or large amounts.
The results were consistent with the predictions of the
proposed CID model of sequence effects and inconsistent
with adaptation-level theory, range-frequency theory, and the
consistency model.

Comparison-Induced Distortions

Sequence Effects
Most theories of the causes of emotions posit that people’s
emotional reactions to the conditions they experience (e.g.,
prices, salaries, pain, tastes, wait times, and so forth) depend
in part upon their hedonic evaluations of those conditions—
how good or bad they judge those conditions to be (e.g.,
Kahneman, 1999; Lazarus, 1991; Tesser & Martin, 1996).
While some researchers conceptualize these evaluations as
measurements on a single good/bad dimension (Kahneman,
1999) and other researchers conceptualize these evaluations
as separate measurements of how good conditions are and
how bad conditions are (Cacioppo, Gardner, & Berntson,
1999; Watson & Tellegen, 1985), the general idea
underlying this common notion is that these evaluations
play a central role in the emotions people experience. If
people judge conditions to be good, then their emotional
reactions will generally be positive. That is, the evaluation
that a condition is good will evoke emotions such as
happiness, delight, and relief. If people judge conditions to
be bad, then their emotional reactions will generally be
negative. That is, the evaluation that a condition is bad will
evoke emotions such as anger, frustration, and worry.
A challenge for research on emotion and hedonic
evaluation arises from the fact that evaluations are not a
pure function of the objective conditions being evaluated.
Rather, hedonic evaluations depend upon the context in
which conditions are experienced (see, for example,
Parducci, 1995). Predicting people’s emotional reactions,
therefore, requires an understanding of the contextual
factors that affect evaluations. The research reported here

The basic idea underlying the CID model of sequence
effects is that people will verbally compare to-be-evaluated
items to the most similar items they have recently
encountered. The model selects previous exemplars to be
compared to the to-be-evaluated item using two criteria: 1)
giving more weight to exemplars that are more similar to the
to-be-evaluated item and 2) giving more weight to more
recent items (the 1-back item is weighted higher than the 2back item, the 2-back item higher than the 3-back item,
etc.). Although the proposal that these two criteria
determine recall and comparison processes has not
previously been applied to sequence effects on hedonic
evaluations, it has been applied to other domains in which
recall of previously presented exemplars affects judgment
(see, for example, Nosofsky & Palmeri, 1997; Smith &
Zarate, 1992).
After a comparison item is selected, we hypothesize that
the to-be-evaluated item is verbally (often sub-vocally, not
out loud) compared to the comparison item. CID theory
predicts that verbally comparing items causes people to
exaggerate small differences and under appreciate the size
of large differences. The reason for this pattern of
evaluation is that evaluations are biased toward the central
tendency (i.e., mean or median) of values associated with a
comparison word (Huttenlocher, Hedges, & Vevea, 2000).
For example, a longer wait for a bus could be 1 extra
minute or 30 extra minutes, but when we consulted city bus
schedules we found that the most common wait time
between buses was 10 minutes. That is, there is a
distribution of differences in wait times between busses
where the central tendency of the distribution of “longer
wait times” is around 10 extra minutes. Huttenlocher et al.
(2000) demonstrated that judgments of values are typically

1471

biased towards the central tendency of categories. If so, then
a “longer wait time” of 5 extra minutes (i.e., less than the
central tendency of the category of “longer wait times”
which is 10 extra minutes) would be biased towards the
evaluation of 10 extra minutes. That is, the difference would
be exaggerated. Likewise, a “longer wait time” of 15 extra
minutes (i.e., more than the central tendency of 10 extra
minutes) would also be biased towards the evaluation of 10
extra minutes. This time, however, the bias would cause the
size of the difference to be under appreciated.
The experiment described below was designed to test the
predictions of this model. To do so, participants were asked
to rate their aversion to several fictional wait times for a bus
in the winter. Participants evaluated wait time sequences
that improved or deteriorated in large or small increments,
returned to a value near the original value, and then
improved or deteriorated again. CID theory predicts that
there will be an amount of change (small or large) by
direction of change (improving or deteriorating) interaction
effect. Specifically, wait times in the small-increment
deteriorating sequence will be rated as worse than wait
times within the small-increment improving sequence,
because these small differences will be exaggerated. A little
worse will seem like a lot worse and a little better will seem
like a lot better. Conversely, wait times in the largeincrement deteriorating sequence will be rated better than
items in the large-increment improving sequence, because
people will under appreciate the sizes of the differences. A
lot worse will seem as if it is only a little worse and a lot
better will seem as if it is only a little better.

Adaptation-Level Theory
Models of sequence effects on evaluation commonly start
with Helson’s (1964) proposal that evaluations are made
relative the conditions to which people have adapted—that
is, the conditions to which they have become accustomed,
consider normal, and continue to expect (see Briesch,
Krishnamurthi, Mazumdar, & Raj, 1997; Frederick &
Loewenstein, 1999; Kalyanaram & Winer, 1995, for
reviews). Helson (1964) modeled the conditions to which
people adapted as the running average of all previously
experienced conditions (see also Kalwani, Yim, Rinne, &
Sugita, 1990; Rajendran & Tellis, 1994; Wedell, 1995).
These running averages then serve as reference points
against which all other conditions are evaluated. Models that
appeal to this explanation of sequence effects on evaluation
assume that sequence effects occur when the conditions
people consider normal change as they experience more
instances. If people experience additional favorable
conditions, they will start to consider these favorable
conditions to be normal. If people experience additional
unfavorable conditions, they will start to consider
unfavorable conditions normal. This change in what is
considered normal, thereby, causes sequence effects
wherein the same conditions might be evaluated as better (or
worse) depending upon whether the previously experienced
values were better or worse.
Contrary to CID theory, AL theory predicts that items in
deteriorating sequences will always be judged worse than
items in improving sequences regardless of the size of the

difference between items. Since items are evaluated in
comparison to the adaptation level—which is the average of
all previous items—the same item (e.g., 36 minutes) will be
evaluated differently based on the average of the items that
precede it in the sequence. For a deteriorating sequence, the
to-be-evaluated wait time will be worse than what people
have gotten used to, the average that they consider normal.
For an improving sequence, the to-be-evaluated wait times
will be better than what they are used to and consider
normal. This pattern would be true regardless of the sizes of
the differences between wait times. That is, adaptation-level
theory predicts that wait times will be evaluated as worse in
deteriorating than in improving conditions.

Range-Frequency Theory
One of the most important models of hedonic evaluation is
Parducci’s (1995) range-frequency theory. Range-frequency
theory is based on the idea that judgments are made based
on a compromise between range and frequency principles.
According to the range principle, individuals evaluate items
relative to the smallest and largest values that they have
previously encountered. The individual’s evaluation is based
on a calculation of the range value for the to-be-evaluated
item, which is the proportion of the range at which the tobe-evaluated item is located relative to the smallest and
largest values. The midpoint between the highest and lowest
values would be 50% of the way to the largest value from
the smallest; half way between the smallest value and the
midpoint would be 25%; and half way between the midpoint
and the largest value would be 75%. According to the
frequency principle, individuals evaluate to-be-evaluated
items by calculating their percentile rank among all of the
items that they have seen. Individuals compromise between
these two principles when making evaluations.
Unlike comparison-induced distortion theory, rangefrequency theory predicts that there will be no effect of the
amount of change between wait times as long as there are no
changes in the range or frequency values of the to-beevaluated wait times. The experiment described below
controls for this issue by keeping range and frequency
values constant across the amount of change manipulation.
Furthermore, the frequency values (percentile ranks) of the
to-be-evaluated wait times would be larger (worse) in the
deteriorating sequence than in the improving sequence,
because better previous exemplars would be included in the
context of judgment. Like adaptation-level theory, then,
range-frequency theory predicts that wait times will be
evaluated as worse in deteriorating than in improving
conditions.

Consistency Model
Similar to comparison-induced distortion theory,
Haubensak’s (1992) consistency model of evaluation relies
on the basic assumption that recalled exemplars affect
judgment. According to the consistency model, people
strive for internal consistency in their responses since
judgments are subjective in that the mapping between the
real-world dimension and the category-rating dimension is

1472

arbitrary. In attempting to maintain internal consistency in
their responses, people often constrain their responses based
on the first few exemplars they encounter. By making
judgments about preceding stimuli in a sequence, for
example, the person is confining subsequent judgments to a
specific response scale. If the person evaluates the first few
items in a sequence, doing so commits them to giving
subsequent judgments that are consistent with the previous
judgments. Evaluations that are consistent with those
previous judgments can be calculated by linearly
interpolating from previous evaluations.
To control for the effects of early judgments and the
requirement that participants’ evaluations be consistent with
these judgments, an initial sequence was held constant
across the direction of change manipulation for the current
study. If participants linearly interpolate from the initial
judgments they make, then evaluations should be the same
for the deteriorating and improving conditions. To control
for memory effects, a high and a low value were always
present within the previous five trials (less than the seven
represented in Haubensak’s model) and these high and low
values were constant across the direction of change
conditions. Since this model predicts that the initial
sequence will be the basis for wait time evaluations, this
model predicts no effects of the amount of change between
exemplars.

Experiment
To pit the predictions of the CID model of sequence effects
against the predictions of the other models, we used a
paradigm in which participants imagined that they had to
wait for the bus in a rural town in northern Minnesota on
each of 36 fictional winter days (manipulated within a single
session). Wait times either periodically improved (i.e., times
became successively shorter on each of n trials, returned to a
value near the original state on a single trial, and then
became successively shorter on each of n trials again) or
periodically deteriorated (i.e., times became successively
longer on each of n trials, returned to a value near the
original state on a single trial, and then became successively
longer on each of n trials again). Participants rated how
aversive each wait time would be.
This sequence is effective in pitting the CID model
against the other models. The CID model predicts that the
size of the difference between consecutive exemplars will
matter such that exemplars within periodically deteriorating
series will be rated as worse than exemplars within
periodically improving series when there is a small amount
of change between consecutive exemplars. Additionally,
exemplars within periodically deteriorating series will be
rated as better than exemplars within periodically improving
series when there is a large amount of difference between
consecutive exemplars. Adaptation-level and rangefrequency theories, by contrast, predict that exemplars
within periodically deteriorating series will always be
judged worse than exemplars within periodically improving
series. The consistency model predicts no effects of the
amount of change manipulation.

Method
Participants. An experimenter, who was blind to the
hypotheses, approached individual prospective participants
on a university campus or in the surrounding community.
Two hundred and five people volunteered after being
approached in this manner. Approximately half of the
participants (n = 101) experienced wait times that changed
(improved or deteriorated) by small amounts (i.e., 5
minutes) on each trial, excluding periodic large changes. Of
these, 50 participants were in the periodically improving
condition and 51 were in the periodically deteriorating
condition. The other half of the participants (n = 104)
experienced wait times that changed (improved or
deteriorated) by large amounts (i.e., 15 minutes) on each
trial, excluding periodic larger changes. Of these, 54
participants were in the periodically improving condition
and 50 were in the periodically deteriorating condition.
Materials and Procedure. Participants imagined that they
were spending 36 days in northern Minnesota during the
middle of the winter and had to rely upon an erratic bus for
transportation. The amount of time they spent waiting for
the bus each day was presented aloud and participants rated
how aversive that wait time for each day would be on a
scale from 0 (“not bad”) to 10 (“extremely bad”).
CID hypothesized that participants would overreact to
differences smaller than 10 minutes (i.e., 5 minutes) and
under-react to differences larger than 10 minutes (i.e., 15
minutes), because the median of values from the category of
“longer wait times” for busses was 10 minutes in local bus
schedules for the campus community. Furthermore, the
results of the experiment (presented shortly) suggest that
participants did overreact to 5-minute differences and underreact to 15-minute differences. Sequences of presented
values were constructed by dividing the middle 26 days of
the experiment into two 13-day periods. Within each 13-day
period, periodically improving and deteriorating sequences
like those in Table 1 were presented. The order of the three
series shown in Table 1 (i.e., Series A, B, and C) was fully
counterbalanced to produce six counterbalanced groups for
each of the four—2 (amount of change: 5 minutes or 15
minutes) x 2 (direction of change: improving or
deteriorating)—conditions. The sequence of wait times in
the second 13-day period was identical to the sequence in
the first 13-day period.
To control for primacy effects and introduce participants
to the range of values they would see prior to the sequence
manipulation, a sequence of 5 days was inserted at the
beginning of the experiment. The sequence on these 5 days
was 22, 35, 50, 35, and 22 minutes respectively in the smalldifference condition and 2, 35, 70, 35, 2 minutes
respectively in the large-difference condition. To make peak
and end values equivalent across periodically improving and
deteriorating sequences before asking participants to make a
retrospective
evaluation
(Kahneman,
Frederickson,
Schreiber, & Redelmeier, 1993; Redelmeier & Kahneman,
1996), a sequence of 5 days was added to the end of the

1473

Table 1. Wait Time Sequences (all values are in minutes)
Initial Sequences:
For Participants Experiencing Small Changes
For Participants Experiencing Large Changes
Manipulated Sequences:
Deteriorating in Small Increments
Improving in Small Increments
Deteriorating in Large Increments
Improving in Large Increments

22, 35, 50, 35, 22
2, 35, 70, 35, 2

Series A
26, 31, 36,
46, 41, 36,
6, 21, 36,
66, 51, 36,

Final Sequence:
For All Participants

41, 46
31, 26
51, 66
21, 6

Series B
27, 32, 37,
42, 37, 32,
11, 26, 41,
56, 41, 26,

42
27
56
11

Series C
29, 34, 39,
44, 39, 34,
16, 31, 46,
61, 46, 31,

44
29
61
16

35, 35, 35, 35, 35

experiment. The wait time for each of these 5 days was 35
minutes.
After evaluating wait times for all 36 days, participants
retrospectively evaluated all of the wait times they had seen
in the experiment on a scale from -50 (not bad at all) to +50
(extremely bad).

Results
We first analyzed the ratings participants gave for each of
the 36 days as they went through the experiment. To reduce
variance caused by idiosyncratic reactions to wait times,
participants’ judgments during the initial 5-day sequence
were used as a baseline. Each participant’s judgments on
trials 6 through 31 were divided by the average of her or his
average judgment on days 1 and 5, days 2 and 4, and her or
his judgment on day 3. The results are presented in Figure 1.
As shown in Figure 1, of the participants in the small
change condition, those who experienced periodically
deteriorating sequences rated wait times more aversive than
did those who experienced periodically improving
sequences for 11 of the 13 wait times. This proportion (.85)
was significantly greater than .50, χ2(1, N = 13) = 4.92, p <
.05. This effect was very weak, however. In fact, a 2
(direction of change: improving or deteriorating) x 2
(portion of sequence: days 6-18 and days 19-31) x 13(wait
times) Mixed-Factors Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) on
the evaluations of participants in the small-difference
condition failed to find a difference due to the direction of
change, F (1,99) = 0.04, MSE = 28.61, p > .05.
The participants in the large change condition showed a
very different pattern of evaluations. Of these participants,
those who experienced periodically improving sequences
rated wait times more aversive than did those who
experienced periodically deteriorating sequences for all 13
of the 13 wait times. This proportion (1.00) was
significantly greater than .50, χ2 (1, N = 13) = 4.92, p < .01.
A 2 (direction of change: improving or deteriorating) x 2
(portion of sequence: days 6-18 and days 19-31) x 13 (wait
times) Mixed-Factors ANOVA on the evaluations of

participants in the large-difference condition also found a
main effect of the direction of change, F (1,102) = 8.92,
MSE = 24.07, p < .05.
The interaction between amount of change and direction
of change was also significant as revealed by an omnibus 2
(amount of change: small or large) x 2 (direction of change:
improving or deteriorating) x 2 (portion of sequence: days
6-18 and days 19-31) x 13 (wait times) Mixed-Factors
ANOVA, F (1,201) = 8.25, MSE = 26.3, p < .05. This
finding is consistent with the predictions of the CID model
presented above and inconsistent with the predictions of
adaptation-level theory (Helson, 1964) and range-frequency
theory (Parducci, 1995) and not predicted by the consistency
model (Haubensak, 1992). Post hoc least significant
difference analyses found that participants who experienced
periodically improving large differences rated wait times
more aversive than did the other three groups. Evaluations
on days 19-31 did not significantly differ from evaluations
on days 6-18, F (1,102) = 0.11, MSE = 2.32, p > .05.
A 2 (amount of change: small or large) x 2 (direction of
change: improving or deteriorating) Between-Subject
ANOVA on participants’ retrospective evaluations showed
no main effect of the amount of change [F (1,201) = 3.18,
MSE = 621.1, p > .05], no main effect of the direction of
change [F (1,201) = 0.46, MSE = 621.1, p > .05], and no
interaction between them [F (1,201) = 0.87, MSE = 621.1, p
> .05] suggesting that the algorithms responsible for
retrospective evaluations might be different from the
algorithms responsible for online evaluations. This result
also suggests that the finding that people prefer improving
to deteriorating sequences (Hsee & Abelson, 1991; Hsee et
al., 1991; Schifferstein & Frijters, 1992; Varey &
Kahneman, 1992) might not generalize to online evaluations
of periodically improving and deteriorating sequences such
as the sequences investigated here.

Discussion
Theories of sequence effects on hedonic evaluation were
assessed using a paradigm in which values periodically

1474

more aversive

Large-Difference Condition

less aversive

Aversiveness Ratings

Small-Difference Condition

Note: Error bars represent one standard error about the mean.
Periodically Improving
Periodically Deteriorating

Figure 1. Results
improved or deteriorated by small or large amounts. When
values changed by small amounts, participants evaluated
periodically improving sequences more positively than
periodically deteriorating sequences; but when values
changed by large amounts, participants evaluated
periodically deteriorating sequences more positively than
periodically improving sequences.
Helson’s (1964) adaptation-level theory cannot explain
the finding that evaluations differed based on the size of the
difference between exemplars since AL theory makes the
prediction that items in deteriorating sequences will always
be judged worse than items in improving sequences
regardless of the size of the difference between items. Since
wait times in the large change deteriorating sequence were
preferred over wait times in the large change improving
sequence it seems as though participants’ evaluations were
not based on a comparison of the to-be-evaluated wait time
and the average of the preceding wait times, which would
result in the opposite finding.
Since the range and frequency values of each wait time in
the small change condition mapped onto the range and
frequency values of each wait time in the large change
condition, range-frequency theory (Niedrich, Sharma, &
Wedell, 2001; Parducci, 1995) cannot explain the finding
that the amount of change between items influenced wait
time evaluations. Furthermore, range-frequency theory
cannot explain the finding that wait times were evaluated as
better in the large change deteriorating condition than in the
large change improving condition; the frequency principle
predicts that wait times will be worse in the deteriorating
condition than in the improving condition since there would
be more positive exemplars in the context of judgment.
Based on the current findings, it seems as though range and
frequency principles were not used to make evaluations of

wait time since these principles would produce the opposite
pattern of evaluations.
Haubensak’s (1992) consistency model of judgment also
cannot explain the finding that the amount of change
between wait times influenced evaluations. The consistency
model predicts that evaluations are based on linear
interpolations from initial items in a sequence. Because
linearly interpolating between the evaluations made during
the initial sequence would have made evaluations in the
periodically improving and deteriorating sequences
identical, the finding that there were differences in the
evaluated wait times in these sequences suggests that
participants did not base their evaluations off of the initial
sequence of wait times that was presented.
Of the four evaluation models presented in this paper,
only the CID model proposed above was able to predict and
explain the observed results. The finding that participants
preferred
periodically
improving
to
periodically
deteriorating sequences when wait times changed by small
amounts is consistent with the CID prediction that
differences will be exaggerated toward the central tendency
of values that have been associated with a comparison word
(Huttenlocher et al., 2000). Similarly, the finding that
participants preferred periodically deteriorating to
periodically improving sequences when wait times changed
by large amounts is consistent with the CID prediction that
differences will be under appreciated when the central
tendency of values associated with a comparison word is
smaller than the amount of change.
The results reported here have implications for how
managers, price strategists, administrators, politicians, and
other bearers of good and bad news ought to present news to
others. Consistent with research on hedonic editing (Thaler
& Johnson, 1990), if circumstances (e.g., prices, salaries,
service quality, and so forth) are going to become better,

1475

perhaps it is best to present the good news a little bit at a
time. People will appreciate the good news; and they will be
likely to exhibit positive emotions such as happiness,
delight, and relief each time that good news is presented. If
circumstances were going to become worse, however,
perhaps it would be best to present all of the bad news at
once. People might not realize how bad circumstances have
actually gotten; and while they will likely exhibit negative
emotions such as anger, frustration, and worry, the sum total
of these negative emotions might be less than if the bad
news were presented a little bit at a time. The CID model
builds on this previous research by offering guidance on the
size of the changes that will be underappreciated or
exaggerated. Changes that are larger than the central
tendency of the distribution of previously observed changes
will be underappreciated; and changes that are smaller than
this central tendency will be exaggerated.

References
Briesch, R. A., Krishnamurthi, L., Mazumdar, T., & Raj, S.
P. (1997). A comparative analysis of reference price
models. Journal of Consumer Research, 24, 202-214.
Cacioppo, J. T., Gardner, W. L., & Berntson, G. G. (1999).
The affect system has parallel and integrative processing
components: Form follows function. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 76, 839-855.
Choplin, J. M., & Hummel, J. E. (2002). Magnitude
comparisons distort mental representations of magnitude.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 131(2),
270-286.
Choplin, J.M. (2007). Toward a comparison-induced
distortion theory of judgment and decision making. In
J.A. Elsworth (Ed.), Psychology of decision making in
education, behavior and high risk situations (pp. 11-40).
Hauppauge, NY: Nova Science.
Frederick, S., & Loewenstein, G. (1999). Hedonic
Adaptation. In D. Kahneman, E. Diener & N. Schwarz
(Eds.), Well-being: The foundations of hedonic
psychology (pp. 302-329). New York: NY: Russell Sage.
Haubensak, G. (1992). The consistency model: A process
model for absolute judgments. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 18,
303-309.
Helson, H. (1964). Adaptation-level theory. New York:
Harper & Row.
Hsee, C. K., & Abelson, R. P. (1991). Velocity relation:
Satisfaction as a function of the first derivative of
outcome over time. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 60, 341-347.
Hsee, C. K., Abelson, R. P., & Salovey, P. (1991). The
relative weighting of position and velocity in satisfaction.
Psychological Science, 2, 263-266.
Kahneman, D. (1999). Objective happiness. In D.
Kahneman, E. Diener & N. Schwarz (Eds.), Well-being:
The foundations of hedonic psychology. New York, NY:
Russell Sage.
Kahneman, D., Frederickson, B. L., Schreiber, C. A., &
Redelmeier, D. A. (1993). When more pain is preferred to

less: Adding a better end. Psychological Science, 4, 401405.
Kalwani, M. U., Yim, C. K., Rinne, H. J., & Sugita, Y.
(1990). A price expectations model of customer brand
choice. Journal of Marketing Research, 27, 251-262.
Kalyanaram, G., & Winer, R. S. (1995). Empirical
Generalizations from reference price research. Marketing
Science, 14, G161-G169.
Lazarus, R. S. (1991). Emotion and adaptation. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Niedrich, R. W., Sharma, S., & Wedell, D. H. (2001).
Reference price and price perceptions: A comparison of
alternative models. Journal of Consumer Research, 28(3),
339-354.
Nosofsky, R. M., & Palmeri, T. J. (1997). An exemplarbased random walk model of speeded classification.
Psychological Review, 104, 266-300.
Parducci, A. (1995). Happiness, pleasure and judgment:
The contextual theory and its applications. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Rajendran, K. N., & Tellis, G. J. (1994). Contextual and
temporal components of reference price. Journal of
Marketing, 58, 22-34.
Redelmeier, D. A., & Kahneman, D. (1996). Patients'
memories of painful medical treatments: Real-time and
retrospective evaluations of two minimally invasive
procedures. Pain, 66, 3-8.
Schifferstein, H. N. J., & Frijters, J. E. R. (1992).
Contextual and sequential effects on judgments of
sweetness intensity. Perception & Psychophysics, 52,
243-255.
Smith, E. R., & Zarate, M. A. (1992). Exemplar-based
model of social judgment. Psychological Review, 99, 321.
Tesser, A., & Martin, L. (1996). The psychology of
evaluation. In E. T. Higgins & A. W. Kruglanski (Eds.),
Social psychology: Handbook of basic principles (pp.
400-432). New York: Guilford.
Thaler, R.H. and Johnson, E.J. (1990). Gambling with the
house money and trying to break even: The effects of
prior outcomes on risky choice. Management Science, 36,
643-660.
Varey, C., & Kahneman, D. (1992). Experiences extended
across time: Evaluation of moments and episodes.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 5, 169-185.
Watson, D., & Tellegen, A. (1985). Toward a consensual
structure of mood. Psychological Bulletin, 98, 219-235.
Wedell, D. H. (1995). Contrast effects in paired
comparisons: Evidence for both stimulus-based and
response-based processes. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 21,
1158-1173.

1476

