UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Concreteness and Relational Matching in Preschoolers

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0td7475d

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Kaminski, Jennifer
Sloutsky, Vladimir

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Concreteness and Relational Matching in Preschoolers
Jennifer A. Kaminski (kaminski.16@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science, Ohio State University
208A Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place, Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Vladimir M. Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science, Ohio State University
208D Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place, Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Abstract
This study investigated the effect of concreteness on preschool
children’s ability to recognize simple relations. Participants, age 3.0
to 5.0 years, were asked to make one-shot relational matches from a
base to a target display. Two types of questions were posed: Generic
in which the base display contained simple geometric shapes and
Concrete in which the base display contained colorful familiar
objects. Two between-subjects conditions varied the order in which
the Concrete and Generic questions were asked. The results reveal
relational matching on Concrete questions was significantly higher
when preceded by Generic questions than when answered first,
suggesting children transferred relational knowledge acquired
through the Generic questions to answer the Concrete questions.
However, there was no improvement on Generic questions when
preceded by Concrete questions.
These are novel findings
suggesting that young children can better acquire and subsequently
transfer relational knowledge from a generic format than from a
concrete, perceptually rich format.
Keywords: Cognitive Science;
Relations, Structure Recognition.

Psychology;

Transfer;

Introduction
The ability to recognize common relations across
different situations is not always easy, but tends to improve
through the course of development. Most researchers agree
that some form of a relational shift occurs in development
(e.g. Gentner, 1988; Gentner & Ratterman, 1991, see also
Goswami, 1991); young children are more likely to attend to
object-level similarities between systems or displays and
overlook relations. Later in development, people become
more likely to attend to relational similarities. For example,
when given a simple metaphor such as a plant stem is like a
straw, children’s interpretation is often based on superficial
attributes, such as both are thin and straight. Adults tend to
interpret such metaphors through deeper relations; in this
case, both can carry water (Gentner, 1988).
One category of theoretical accounts of relational
development is that the relational shift is knowledge-driven
(Brown, 1989, Brown & Kane, 1988; Gentner, 1988,
Gentner & Ratterman, 1991, Vosniadou, 1989). By such
accounts, domain-specific knowledge is the primary
predictor of ability to attend to relations. In support of this
position, there is considerable evidence that while young

children may fail to reason analogically (i.e. based on
relational structure) in many instances, they can reason
analogically in contexts that are familiar to them (see
Gentner, Ratterman, Markman, & Kotovsky, 1995 for
discussion). For example, Gentner (1977a, 1977b) found
that when 4-year-old children were shown a picture of a tree
and asked, “If a tree had a knee, where would it be?”, they
interpreted the relational correspondence and responded as
accurately as adults. Similarly, preschool children, aged 3 to
5 years, successfully transferred problem-solving strategies
from contexts involving simple, familiar relations such as
mimicry and camouflage (Brown & Kane, 1988).
Additionally, 4-year-olds applied relational reasoning on
tasks involving known relations, such as cutting and melting
(Goswami & Brown, 1989). Taken together, there is ample
evidence of successful relational reasoning by young
children when the relations are known to them.
Yet, even in the context of simple relations and familiar
objects, attention to relations can be diverted by interference
of surface similarities across the base and target domains.
For example, preschool children, age 3 and 4 years, were
tested on their ability to make relational matches involving
the relation of monotonic increase or decrease of three items
(Gentner & Rattermann, 1991; see Gentner, et al., 1995 for
summary). In the task, the experimenter and the participant
each had sets of three items arranged in monotonically
increasing or decreasing order. The child was asked to close
his/ her eyes while the experimenter hid stickers under one
object in each set. The stickers were always placed under
items in the same relational roles across sets. When the
child opened his/her eyes, the experimenter showed the
child an object with sticker in the experimenter’s set and
asked the child to find the sticker was in the child’s set. This
study had a 2 x 2 design: literal similarity or cross-mapping
by stimuli type. In the literal similarity condition, the correct
item matched the target on both object appearance and
relational location. In the cross-mapping condition, the
correct item differed in appearance and matched the target
only on relational location. Also, in the cross-mapped
condition, an incorrect relational choice matched the target
object in appearance. Hence, children could make either
relational matches or appearance matches. The stimuli type
varied the perceptual richness of the objects: either sparse,

1828

such as clay pots or blue boxes, or rich, such as colorful toys
or silk flowers.
It was found that children were more likely to choose
relational responses in the literal condition than in the crossmapped condition. Four-year-olds were very accurate on
matching literal similarity for both rich and sparse material.
However, 3-year-olds had difficulty with the sparse stimuli.
In the cross-mapped condition, 3- and 4-year-olds generally
matched on object appearance rather than on relational role.
Furthermore, performance was much worse for perceptually
rich objects than for perceptually sparse objects, suggesting
that the richer objects were more likely to divert attention
from relations than the more sparse objects.
Adults are also susceptible to interference from crossmapped elements involved in complex relational tasks
(Ross, 1987, 1989). When attempting to transfer
mathematical solution strategies from one example problem
to another, college students tend to align structure based on
similarity of elements, placing similar elements in the same
relational roles. This leads to incorrect solutions if the
similar elements do not actually hold analogous roles.
The ability to perceive common relational structure
underlies not only simple analogies, but also higher-order
cognitive processes such as the acquisition and transfer of
mathematical knowledge. This is because mathematical
concepts are defined, not by surface features, but by their
relational structure. Therefore, relational knowledge can
potentially be transferred between situations that appear
very different on the surface but have the same underlying
structure. For example, the same probability principles can
be applied to problems involving the number of ways
computers can be assigned to offices or the number of ways
toppings can be applied to pizza (e.g. Ross, 1987).
Therefore, the study of factors that promote the recognition
of common relations has importance to both the study of
general cognition as well as practical importance for the
potential improvement of acquisition of abstract concepts
such as mathematical concepts.
One way of facilitating recognition of common relations
is through explicit comparison (e.g. Catrambone &
Holyoak, 1989; Loewenstein, Thompson, & Gentner, 1999;
Gentner, Loewenstein, Thompson, 2003). Learners are
more likely to recognize common relational structure
between two instances when they explicitly compare them
than when they encounter them sequentially. The process of
comparison requires alignment that highlights common
structure. Comparison appears to promote the formation of a
schema which can in turn allow for successful transfer of
relational knowledge to novel analogous situations
(Gentner, et al., 2003; Gick & Holyoak, 1983).
Another factor that has been shown to affect the detection
of common relations is the concreteness of the learning
material. Concreteness of a given instantiation of an abstract
concept can be construed as the amount of information
communicated to an individual by that particular
instantiation. By this interpretation concreteness can be in
the form of perceptual richness or contextual richness

including prior knowledge. In contrast to concrete
instantiations, generic instantiations communicate little
extraneous information. Concrete, perceptually rich objects
and contexts can hinder performance on relational tasks in
comparison to more abstract generic instantiations of the
same concepts. This pattern is suggested by the performance
of preschoolers on the relational matching task involving
monotonic increase and decrease mentioned above (Gentner
& Rattermann, 1991; see Gentner, et al., 1995). Children
were more likely to make relational responses in the face of
conflicting object matches when the task was conducted
with perceptually sparse material than with perceptually rich
material.
Other evidence for the hindering effects of concreteness is
found from studies investigating the development of
children’s symbol use (DeLoache, 1995a, 1995b, 1997,
2000). Successful symbol use requires the detection of
common relations. For example, to effectively use a map as
a symbol for a real location, one must recognize the
common relations between entities on the map and their
real-world analogs. Young children have difficulty using
concrete, perceptually rich objects as symbols. In a series of
studies, 2½ to 3-year-old children were shown a 3dimensional scaled model of a real room and told that a
stuffed animal was hidden in the actual room. The
experimenter then placed a miniature toy in the model
telling the children that the location of the miniature toy in
the model corresponded to the location of the actual toy in
the real room. The children were then asked to retrieve the
real toy. Only 16% of the children were able to make
errorless retrieval of the actual toy. The children were then
asked to retrieve the miniature toy. The accuracy of the
miniature toy retrieval was 88% implying that the poor
performance on the retrieval of the actual toy was not due to
inability to remember the location, but an inability to realize
that the model symbolically represented the actual room. In
subsequent studies, the salience of the model was decreased
by putting it behind a glass window. Under this condition,
more than half of the participants accurately retrieved the
toy. Similarly, when children were shown the location in a
picture and not a 3-dimensional model, 80% of participants
ably retrieved the real toy.
By 3 years of age, most children are successful in such a
task. However, when the 3- year-old study participants were
encouraged to play with the model first only 44% of them
successfully retrieved the toy, compared to 78% of 3-yearolds who retrieved the object with no opportunity to play.
The physical interaction with the model made it more
difficult for the children to treat it as a symbol. In sum,
decreasing the concreteness of the objects increased the ease
of their symbolic use.
The hindering effects of concreteness demonstrated in the
mentioned studies were found in the context of similarities
between the base and target situations. In the Gentner and
Ratterman study, object similarity was directly pitted
against relational similarity. In the DeLoache et al. studies,
there was some alignable similarity across base and target as

1829

the model was intended to represent the real room. Little is
known about the effects of concreteness on children’s
relational reasoning in absence of either relationally
alignable or cross-mapped similarities between base and
target.
There is some recent evidence for an advantage of generic
material over more concrete material for children’s
relational reasoning in the absence of overt interdomain
similarities. Kindergarteners were more likely to acquire the
concept of proportion and correctly match displays of
different objects based on proportion when training
instantiated proportions using generic shapes than when
proportions were instantiated with colorful, concrete objects
(Kaminski & Sloutsky, 2009).
There is also evidence that concreteness can hinder the
ability of adults to detect common relations (Kaminski,
Sloutsky, & Heckler, 2006). Undergraduate students were
less able, or often unable, to transfer complex relational
knowledge to novel analogous when knowledge was
acquired in a concrete format than when knowledge was
acquired in a more generic format (Goldstone & Sakamoto,
2003; Goldstone & Son, 2005; Kaminski, Sloutsky, &
Heckler, 2008; Sloutsky, Kaminski, & Heckler, 2005).
Taken together, prior research shows that adults are better
able to recognize learned relations in novel contexts when
they have initially acquired those relations through a more
abstract, generic instantiation than through a more concrete,
contextualized one. Generic instantiations also have
advantages over concrete instantiations for children’s ability
to acquire novel relations such as proportion. It is unclear
whether this advantage will hold for young children’s ability
to recognize simpler relations such as monotonic increase in
the absence of surface similarities. It is possible that without
competition of element similarity, children’s attention can
be focused on the underlying relation. At the same time,
relations are less observable than elements and perhaps
added perceptual richness of the elements will itself detract
from relations.
The goal of the present study was to examine the effect of
concreteness of elements on young children’s ability to
detect common relations. We considered the relations of
monotonic increase, monotonic decrease, and symmetry
involving three elements. These relations should be easier
for children to recognize than proportion (Kaminski &
Sloutsky, 2009) because they are built on the simple and
familiar relation of “bigger than”. Like previous research,
we asked 3- and 4-year-old children to make one-shot
relational matches across displays. This task prompts
participants to compare two displays instantiating the same
relation, therefore it allowed us to see whether or not
generic instantiations can provide an advantage for
recognition of relations beyond the comparison process
alone.

Experiment
Method
Participants Participants were 100 preschool children from
middle-class, suburban preschools and child care centers in
the Columbus, Ohio area (51 girls and 49 boys). Participants’
ages ranged from 3.0 to 5.0 years (M = 3.72 years, SD = .47
years).
Materials and Design Participants were shown two displays
presented side by side involving a common relation. The task
was to choose an item in the right display that was in the
same relational role as an indicated item in the left display.
Each display involved three objects. The relations considered
in this experiment were monotonic increase, monotonic
decrease, and symmetry. There were a total of 18 test
questions (six increase, six decrease, six symmetry); half
were Generic questions and half were Concrete. Generic
questions presented simple colored, geometric shapes (circles,
triangles, rectangle, or non-rectangluar parallelograms) in the
base display. Concrete questions presented colorful
perceptually rich objects (dogs, bugs, little girls, shoes, piggy
banks, frogs, cats, jack-o-lanterns, and slices of cake) in the
base display. The target display for all questions involved
colorful perceptually rich objects (ducks, cats, fish, crayons,
birds, flowers, ice cream, rocking horses, and ginger bread
houses). Each of the target objects were used twice, once for a
generic question and once for an analogous concrete question
(see Figure 1). The color of the shapes for a generic question
was the same as the predominant color of the perceptually
rich objects in the analogous concrete question.
Participants were randomly assigned to one of two
conditions (Generic-then-Concrete or Concrete-thenGeneric). In the Generic-then-Concrete condition, participants
were presented with the Generic questions first and then
presented with the Concrete questions. The Concrete-thenGeneric condition presented the Concrete questions first
followed by the Generic questions. Prior to the test questions,
participants were shown one example which illustrated the
relation of bigger than. The base display of this example
showed a bigger boy and a smaller boy in the Concrete-thenGeneric condition and a bigger triangle and a smaller triangle
in the Generic-then-Concrete condition. For both conditions,
the target display showed a bigger teddy bear and a smaller
teddy bear.
For the example and all test questions, the elements were
identical except in size within each display. For example, in
the questions shown in Figure 1, the triangles, dogs, and fish
are identical except in size. There were no variations
between elements in any other surface features.

1830

The next slide showed the original base display and a new
target display on the right side of the screen. In addition an
arrow appeared over one of the objects in the base (left)
display. The experimenter asked the child, “According to
the pattern, what in this picture (the experimenter gestured
to the right picture) is like this?” (the experimenter pointed
to the object with the arrow). The experimenter recorded
the child’s response on a paper. Then feedback which
explicitly stated the relation was given after both correct and
incorrect responses. For example, the feedback to the
Concrete question that appears in Figure 1 was: “Right or
No, actually… because in this picture (the experimenter
pointed to the left picture), these dogs are getting bigger and
bigger (the experimenter gestured) and I pointed to the
biggest one. And in this picture (the experimenter pointed to
the right picture), these fish are also getting bigger and
bigger and this is the biggest one. So, you should point to
this one (the experimenter pointed).

Results and Discussion
Figure 1: Example of a Generic question (upper) and its
analogous Concrete question (lower).
Procedure Participants were asked to play a matching game
with the experimenter. All questions were presented on the
computer.
The experimenter told the child that he/she would see two
pictures and showed the child the example of “bigger than”.
The experimenter explained that one picture had a certain
pattern in it and the same patter was in the other picture, but it
looked different. The following is the script:
“See, in the top picture, there are a bigger boy and a
smaller boy. This is the bigger boy, and this is the
smaller boy (the experimenter pointed to each as
described). Now in the bottom picture, there is a bigger
bear and a smaller bear (the experimenter pointed to
each as described). See, the same pattern happens in
both, but it looks different. Now, in this game, first you
have to figure out what the pattern is that happens in
both pictures. Okay? Then I am going to point to one
thing in one picture, and your job is to tell me what is in
the same part of the pattern in the other picture.”
“So here, we have a bigger boy and a smaller boy, and a
bigger bear and a smaller bear. Now I am going to
point to the smaller boy (the experimenter pointed).
Which one is like the smaller boy in the bottom picture
according to the pattern? Which one is in the same part
of the pattern in the bottom picture?”
The Generic condition presented an analogous script which
replaced the word “boy” with the word “triangle”. The
experimenter gave corrective feedback to this example.
Test questions first presented the base display alone on
the left side of the computer screen and participants were
told to “look for the pattern between things in this picture”.

In both the Generic-then-Concrete and Concrete-then-Generic
conditions, children were successful at relational matching on
both the Generic and Concrete questions. Mean test scores
are presented in Figure 2. Scores were above a chance score
of 33% (3 out of 9 correct), one-sample t-tests, ts > 8.1, ps <
0.001. However, there was a significant difference in
performance as a function of the order in which participants
received the Generic and Concrete questions. Test scores
were submitted to a two-way analysis of variance with order
of the test question type as a between-subjects factor, age as a
covariate, and test question type as a repeated measure. The
analysis indicated a significant order x question type
interaction, F(1,91) = 11.09, p < .001, p2 = .11. There were
no differences in scores on the Generic questions between
the Generic-then-Concrete condition and the Concrete-thenGeneric condition, independent samples t-test, t(92) = .079,
p > .93. At the same time, there were differences in scores
on the Concrete questions, participants in the Generic-thenConcrete condition scored significantly higher than
participants in the Concrete-then-Generic condition,
independent samples t-test, t(92) = 3.16, p < .003. These
findings suggest that children who first answered the
Generic questions acquired knowledge of the relevant
relations that they were able to transfer to the Concrete
questions. The reverse was not the case, answering the
Concrete questions first did not improve scores on the
Generic test. Therefore, experience answering the Generic
questions offered an advantage for subsequent transfer that
answering the Concrete questions did not.
Additionally, there were improvements with age in test
scores on both question types, ANCOVA F(1,91) = 21.66, p
< .001, p2 = .19. Figures 3 and 4 present accuracy for the
Concrete and Generic questions respectively split across the
participant age range. Figure 3 illustrates that the differences
in accuracy on Concrete questions is present across the age
range. Therefore, while development leads to better

1831

100

Order of test

90

1st

80

2nd

70
60
50
40
30

Generic

Concrete

Figure 2: Mean test scores (% correct) by order of test.
Error bars represent standard error of mean. Chance
score is 33%.
100
90
80
Concrete

70

Generic

60
50

40
30
3.0-3.24

3.25-3.49

3.5-3.74

3.75-3.99

over 3.99

Figure 3: Mean test scores (% correct) on Concrete
questions by age of participant in years. Error bars
represent standard error of mean.
100

90
80
70

Concrete

60

Generic

50

40
30
3.0-3.24

3.25-3.49

3.5-3.74

3.75-3.99

over 3.99

Figure 4: Mean test scores (% correct) on Generic
questions by age of participant in year. Error bars
represent standard error of mean.
recognition of relations, there is a consistent transfer
advantage when first answering the Generic questions.

General Discussion
Previous research has demonstrated the difficulty young
children have attending to common relations across displays
particularly in the face of competing surface similarities
(e.g. Gentner & Ratterman, 1991; Gentner et al, 1995,

Richland, Morrison, & Holyoak, 2006).
Explicit
comparisons, as well as the use of relational language, have
been shown to increase relational reasoning (e.g. Gelman,
Raman, & Gentner, 2009). There is also evidence that
learning a generic instantiation of an abstract concept can
facilitate subsequent relational transfer for adults (Goldstone
& Sakamoto, 2003; Goldstone & Son, 2005; Kaminski,
Sloutsky, & Heckler, 2008; Sloutsky, Kaminski, & Heckler,
2005). However, little research has considered what types of
learning instantiations might help promote young children’s
relational reasoning in the absence of competing surface
similarity.
The present study considered preschool children’s ability
to recognize the relations of symmetry and monotonic
increase and decrease. Preschool children were asked to
make one-shot mappings across displays of three items.
This task encourages participants to make comparisons
between instantiations of the same relations. Participants
were given generic questions in which relations were
mapped from displays of generic shapes to displays of
colorful, concrete items. They also answered concrete
question in which the mapping was between two displays of
different colorful, concrete objects. The results found that
when participants first answered the generic questions they
scored markedly higher on the subsequent concrete
questions than when the concrete questions were answered
first. This suggests that by answering the generic questions,
participants acquired solid knowledge of the relations which
they ably transferred to the concrete questions. At the same
time, there were no differences in scores on the generic
questions as a function of when they were answered.
Therefore, answering the concrete questions provided no
benefit for subsequent transfer of relations.
In order to successfully recognize common relations in
two different instantiations, the learner must focus attention
on the relations between the objects and not directly on the
objects themselves. Perceptually rich, concrete objects
communicate much more information than perceptually
sparse objects. Consider how much more information is
communicated by the dogs versus the triangles in the base
displays of Figure 1. This abundance of extraneous
information may divert the learner’s attention from relevant
relations making it difficult to recognize these relations. In
addition, the present findings suggest that when acquiring
relations in the presence of extraneous concrete information,
learners may form a weaker representation of the relational
knowledge that can hinder future transfer.
Simple generic objects likely have less potential to
capture attention, allowing more attentional resources to be
focused on relevant relations. Therefore, instantiating
relations with generic elements may provide an advantage
for later transfer even for very young children.
While it is well accepted that the process of comparison
can facilitate abstraction of relations and transfer, these
findings suggest that comparisons between some types of
instantiations may be more beneficial than comparison
between other types of instantiations. Furthermore, this

1832

advantage may not be detectable in immediate performance,
but in later tasks involving the same relations.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported by a grant from the Institute of
Educational Sciences of the U.S. Department of Education
(#R305B070407.) to V. M. Sloutsky and J. A. Kaminski.

References
Brown, A. L. (1989). Analogical learning and transfer:
What develops? In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.),
Similarity and Analogical Reasoning (pp. 369-412).
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Brown, A. L., & Kane, M. J. (1988). Preschool children can
learn to transfer: Learning to learn and learning by
example. Cognitive Psychology, 20, 493-523.
Catrambone, R., & Holyoak, K. J. (1989). Overcoming
contextual limitations on problem-solving transfer.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 15, 1147–1156.
DeLoache, J. S. (1995a). Symbolic functioning in very
young children: Understanding of pictures and models.
Child Development, 62, 736-752.
DeLoache, J. S. (1995b). Early understanding and use of
symbols: The model model. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 4, 109-113.
DeLoache, J. S. (1997). Manipulatives as symbols: A new
perspective on the use of concrete objects to teach
mathematics. Journal of Applied Developmental
Psychology, 18, 37-54.
DeLoache, J. S. (2000). Dual representation and young
children’s use of scale models. Child Development, 71,
\329-338.
Gelman, S. A., Raman, L., & Gentner, D. (2009). Effects of
language and similarity on comparison processing.
Language Learning and Development, 5, 147-171.
Gentner, D. (1977a). Children's performance on a spatial
analogies task. Child Development, 48, 1034-1039.
Gentner, D. (1977b). If a tree had a knee, where would it
be? Children's performance on simple spatial metaphors.
Papers and Reports on Child Language Development, 13,
157-164.
Gentner, D. (1988). Metaphor as structure mapping: The
relational shift. Child Development, 59, 47-59.
Gentner, D., Loewenstein, J., & Thompson, L. (2003).
Learning and transfer: A general role for analogical
encoding. Journal of Educational Psychology 95 (2) 393408.
Gentner, D., & Rattermann, M. J. (1991). Language and the
career of similarity. In S. A. Gelman & J. P. Byrnes
(Eds.), Perspectives on language and thought:
Interrelations in development (pp. 225-277). London:
Cambridge University Press.
Gentner, D., Ratterman, M. J., Markman, A., & Kotovsky,
L. (1995). Two forces in the development of relational
similarity. In T. J. Simon & G. S. Halford (Eds.),

Developing cognitive competence (pp. 263-314).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Goldstone, R. L. & Sakamoto, Y. (2003). The transfer of
abstract principles governing complex adaptive systems.
Cognitive Psychology, 46(4), 414-466.
Goldstone, R. L., & Son, J. Y. (2005). The transfer of
scientific principles using concrete and idealized
simulations. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14,
69-110.
Goswami, U. (1991). Analogical reasoning: What develops?
A review of research and theory. Child Development, 62,
1-22.
Goswami, U., & Brown, A. L. (1989). Melting chocolate
and melting snowmen: Analogical reasoning and causal
relations. Cognition, 35, 69-95.
Kaminski, J. A., Sloutsky, V. M., & Heckler, A. F. (2006).
Effects of concreteness on representation: An explanation
for differential transfer. In R. Sun & N. Miyake (Eds.),
Proceedings of the XXVIII Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society.
Kaminski, J. A., Sloutsky, V. M., & Heckler, A. F. (2008).
The advantage of abstract examples in learning math,
Science, 320, 454-455.
Kaminski, J. A., & Sloutsky, V. M, Heckler, A. F. (in
press). The devil is in the superficial details: Why generic
instantiations promote portable mathematical knowledge.
Child Development Perspectives.
Kaminski, J. A., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2009). The effect of
concreteness on children’s ability to detect common
proportion. In N. Taatgen & H. van Rijn (Eds.),
Proceedings of the XXXI Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society.
Loewenstein, J., Thompson, L., & Gentner, D. (1999).
Analogical encoding facilitates knowledge transfer in
negotiation. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 6, 586-597.
Richland, L. E., Morrison, R. G., & Holyoak, K. J. (2006).
Children’s development of analogical reasoning: Insights
from scene analogy problems. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 94, 249-273.
Ross, B. H. (1987). This is like that: The use of earlier
problems and the separation of similarity effects. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, &
Cognition, 13, 629-639.
Ross, B. H. (1989). Distinguishing types of superficial
similarities: Different effects on the access and use of
earlier problems. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 15, 456-468.
Sloutsky, V. M., Kaminski, J. A., & Heckler, A. F. (2005).
The advantage of simple symbols for learning and transfer.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12, 508-513.
Vosniadou, S. (1989). Analogical reasoning as a mechanism
in knowledge acquisition: A developmental perspective.
In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.), Similarity and
analogical reasoning (pp. 413-437). New York:
Cambridge University Press.

1833

