UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Connecting the Visible to the Invisible: Helping Middle School Students Understand Complex
Ecosystem Processes.

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9pr1878p

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Honwad, Sameer
Hmelo-Silver, Cindy
Jordan, Rebecca
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Connecting the Visible to the Invisible: Helping Middle School Students Understand Complex
Ecosystem Processes
Sameer Honwad1, Cindy Hmelo-Silver1, Rebecca Jordan2, Catherine Eberbach1, Steven Gray2,
Suparna Sinha1
1
Department of Educational Psychology, Graduate School of Education, Rutgers University, New Brunswick 08901
2
School of Environmental and Biological Sciences, Department of Ecology, Evolution, and Natural Resources
and the Program in Science Learning, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ 08901.
3

3

Ashok Goel, 3Swaroop 3Vattam, 3Spencer Rugaber, 3David Joyner
Design & Intelligence Laboratory, School of Interactive Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta,
GA 30332.
Abstract

change in the patterns, affects not only other components,
but also overall functioning of the system (Jordan, et al
2009). The dynamic and multifaceted nature of an
ecosystem makes it difficult for learners to grasp the
associations and interactions among system components
(Gallegos et al 1994).
Learners find it challenging to think beyond the linear
relationships and visible components of an ecosystem (e.g.,
food chains: Reiner & Eilam, 2001; aquaria: Hmelo-Silver,
Marathe, & Liu, 2007; systems: Hogan, 2000, food
webs/nutrient cycles: Hogan & Fisherkeller, 1996, energy
flow: Leach et al. 1996; water cycle: Covitt & Gunkel,
2008). When asked to draw or name components of an
ecosystem, learners often focus on the visible components
of the ecosystem (Gellert, 1962; Hmelo, Holton, &
Kolodner, 2000). Expert-novice studies suggest that that it is
hard for young learners to conceptualize the invisible
components within an ecosystem such as: oxygen, nitrogen,
and bacteria, (Hmelo-Silver, Marathe, & Liu, 2007). It is
also challenging for students to think beyond single
causality and linear connections between ecosystem
components (Grotzer & Basca 2003).
In this paper, we present the results of a technologyintensive classroom intervention designed to teach middle
schools students about aquatic ecosystems. The goals of our
intervention are to help learners develop deep understanding
of ecosystems and to use tools that make the invisible
visible and the interconnections explicit.

Learning about ecosystems is challenging because, like any
complex system, they are simultaneously multidimensional and
dynamic. Often, learners engage only with the visible
components of an ecosystem and draw either single or linear
causal connections between components. In this study, we
explored how using a Structure-Behavior-Function framework
supported middle school students’ conceptual and complex
reasoning about the visible and invisible components of an
ecosystem. Research shows that learners often engage only with
the visible components of an ecosystem and draw linear/single
causal connections between the components of the ecosystem.
Our findings suggest that a combination of using structure,
behavior, and function approach along with a set of carefully
designed technology tools can push the students toward a better
understanding of the ecosystem functioning. The results show
that along with the visible components of the ecosystem,
students have started to identify the invisible components of the
ecosystem.
Keywords: Ecosystems learning, SBF, complex systems,
Science education

Introduction
Given the urgent need to empower the future generation
with knowledge to help them make informed decisions
about their ecosystems and environment, both national and
local science standards have a growing focus on ecosystems
learning (e.g., National Research Council, 1996; New Jersey
Department of Education, 2006). Developing ecosystems
understanding is challenging, because it requires learners to
understand how different aspects of an ecosystem are
interconnected, and the processes that occur within such
systems (Anderson, 2008; Covitt & Gunckel, 2008; Jordan
et al., 2009).
Ecosystem processes are challenging for learners, because
these are complex systems that transcend spatial, temporal
and cognitive boundaries (Pickett, et al 1997). Similar to
other complex systems, ecosystems are also characterized
by multidimensional processes that connect visible and
invisible components of the system to one another (HmeloSilver & Azevedo, 2006). These visible and invisible
components within the ecosystem are interdependent. The
components have their own behavior patterns and any

Aquariums as Models for Learning
To help students understand complex systems, we
implemented a two-week aquarium unit that was designed
by a team of learning scientists, middle school classroom
teachers, and ecologists. The technology consisted of a suite
of tools: a function-oriented hypermedia (Liu & HmeloSilver, 2009), simulations of macro- and micro-level
processes (Liu & Hmelo-Silver, 2008; Gray et al. 2008), and
the Aquarium Construction Kit (ACT; Goel, Rugaber, &
Vattam, 2009). The unit was grounded in the structure
behavior and function approach.
Our approach to instruction is grounded in the structure-

133

behavior-function theory (Goel et al., 2009). The structure
behavior function (SBF) approach is useful to explain
dynamic systems with multiple components and levels
(Goel et al., 2009; Liu & Hmelo-Silver, 2009). We view
SBF theory as providing a conceptual representation with
canonical explanations in biological systems, as well as,
being consistent with expert understanding (Bechtel &
Abrahamson, 2005; Hmelo-Silver et al., 2007). In addition
to helping students organize their system knowledge the
SBF representation also provides a scaffold for overall
knowledge organization. The approach helps the learner to
breakdown and distinguish individual parts of the complex
system.
In a biological system, structure refers to components of
an ecosystem that have form. Structures can be macro (e.g
Fish, plants) or micro (e.g bacteria, fungi) in nature.
Behavior represents the process of how structures achieve
their functions, and, finally, functions are roles the
structures play in an ecosystem.
Figure 1b. ACT: Example of model created by a student.

Technology Support for Learning about
Complex System
It is difficult for learners to understand many aspects of
ecosystems because they have not had opportunities to
engage with those processes that are dynamic and outside
their perceptual understanding. In addition to helping
students organize their system knowledge, the SBF
representation also provides a scaffold for overall
knowledge organization because it helps learners consider
the relationships among form and function as well as the
causal behaviors. We make SBF explicit through the use of
hypermedia, organized in terms of SBF, and through the
Aquarium Construction Toolkit (ACT) (Figure 1a and 1b).

Figure 2. SBF is used to organize the hypermedia
Along with the hypermedia and ACT tools students also
used NetLogo simulations to learn about behaviors and
functions within an ecosystem (Wilensky & Reisman,
2006). Using these simulations, (Figure 3) students learned
about how to keep an ecosystem ‘healthy.’ For example, the
macro fishspawn simulation allowed students to manipulate
different aspects of the ecosystem such as initial population,
spawning, filtrations, and amount of food. Thus if the
students overfed the fish then the increasing ammonia (due
to fish waste) within the water would affect water quality
and the fish would die. This helps problematize water
quality, which is a black box in the macro simulation. This
creates the need for students to identify some of the
invisible components within an ecosystem, and students also
start to see the importance of these invisible components.
For example, the students can observe how crucial
nitrification cycle is for the overall health of an ecosystem.
They also can learn that many components of the ecosystem
involved in the nitrification process are invisible. These

Figure 1a. ACT: A space to create models

134

behaviors and functions can then be observed in the micro
level simulation.

their models. Finally at the end of the two-week period the
students presented their models in front of the entire
classroom.

Methods
Participants
Fifty-four seventh grade students from a suburban public
middle school in the northeast United States participated in
this study during their regular science instruction time. Two
of the participants reported having an aquarium at home and
most had been to a public aquarium. Many had also been on
excursions to the beach or on fishing trips with adults in
their families.
Data Sources
The students were given pre and post-tests before and
after the intervention. In the pre and post-test students were
asked to draw components of an aquatic ecosystem, and
show relationships between them. They were also asked to
label all of the components and relationships between those
components.
Coding for pre and post tests
There were three parts to the coding. The first part of the
coding scheme involved counting the number of visible and
invisible ecosystem components that were drawn by the
students. The second part of the coding scheme involved
counting the number of relationships that the students
observed between the components in their drawing. Care
was taken to make sure that the relationships were
scientifically plausible. We coded the connections on a
three-point scale. We gave a connection one point if
students made implausible connections between components
of the ecosystem. A connection was assigned two points if
students made plausible connections within the same level
of an ecosystem (e,g. visible component to visible
component; invisibile to invisible). One example of this is a
connection that shows fish eat plants. Here both fish and
plants are visible components of the ecosystem.
A
connection was assigned three points if students were able
to make plausible connections between the visible and
invisible components of the ecosystem. An example of this
would be a connection showing that fish breathe oxygen
(Figure 5). Here fish is the visible component of the
ecosystem and oxygen is the invisible component of the
ecosystem.
The third part of the coding scheme was designed to find
out the type of connections the students made between the
different components of the ecosystem. As components
within an ecosystem function nonlinearly, it was important
to find out whether student understanding of ecosystem
functioning went beyond linear-single cause relationships.
The coding scheme for the third part (types of connections)
was adapted from Grotzer & Basca (2003).
This part of the coding scheme was also coded on a threepoint scale. A connection was assigned a point if students
made a ‘simple linear’ connection between the components
of the ecosystem. A simple linear connection was observed
as a connection that was linear, one directional and

Figure 3: NetLogo simulation

Classroom Instruction
The science teacher introduced the unit by asking students
to articulate their thoughts about ecosystems functions. This
allowed the teacher to gauge the students’ prior knowledge.
The teacher then moved on to the ACT modeling tool and
asked the students to represent their thoughts about
ecosystems as structures behaviors and functions. The
students recorded their ideas in a table within the ACT tool
(Figure 4).

Figure 4: ACT table where students record ideas as
structure, behavior, and function
The teacher also encouraged the students to use the
hypermedia to sharpen their existing ideas about the
ecosystems. The teacher then proceeded to the modeling
activity using NetLogo simulations. In the NetLogo
simulations students manipulated various ecosystem
components (number of fish, amount of food, etc) in order
to maintain a healthy ecosystem. The students worked in
groups and were given the freedom to continuously refine

135

indicating single cause and effect. For example, fish eat
plants is a linear connection because it indicates that only
fish benefit from the plants. A connection was given two
points if the students made a ‘complex linear’ connection
between the components of the ecosystem.
A complex linear connection was defined as a linear
connection that had more than one cause and effect. For
example, plants get energy from the sun, fish eat plants and
thus fish get energy from the plants is a complex linear
relationship because it shows one directional relationship
between more than two components of the ecosystem. This
code was also used when students represented symbiotic
relationships/mutually beneficial relationships.
Finally a connection was given three points if the
connection was observed to connect more than two
components in a mutually benefiting relationship. The
connection was called ‘cyclic’ (Figure 5). For example, fish
waste produces ammonia, a form of nitrogen that is then
transformed by different bacteria into new forms of nitrogen
that support plant growth, which in turn benefit the fish.

Table 1: Components coding (N=54).
Visible
Invisible
Pretest
8.50 (3.34)
0.28 (0.49)
Mean (SD)
Posttest
7.61 (3.21)
2.87 (2.17)
Mean (SD)
Sample Size
54
54
T (53)
1.90
8.86*
Effect Size
0.13
0.64
*p< 0.05
We also expected the students to make more plausible
connections between the components because the
instruction was designed to scaffold students’ understanding
of how ecosystem components are connected to each other.
The results, shown in Table 2, demonstrate that students
made significant progress in making plausible connections
within levels (visible to visible and invisible to invisible)
and between levels (visible to invisible).
Table 2: Plausible connections made between ecosystems
components (N=54)
Plausible
Plausible
connections made connections made
within level
between levels:
Pretest Mean
3.81 (2.15)
0.17 (0.61)
(SD)
Posttest Mean
4.87 (2.91)
1.43 (1.53)
(SD)
Sample Size
54
54
T (53)
2.55*
7.09*
Effect Size
0.21
0.47
*p< 0.05
Finally we investigated whether the types of plausible
connections students were making were demonstrating the
complexity of ecosystem functions. It was not clear whether
students were able to move beyond making linear
connections or complex linear connections. We found that
the number of students making simple linear connections
increased from pre to post. However, there was no
significant change in the number of students making
complex linear connections. Finally there was a significant
change in the number of students making cyclic
connections. Although, the results clearly showed that only
a small number of students made a leap to making more
complex connections between the ecosystem components
(Table 3).

Figure 5: Connecting the visible (fish) to invisible
(ammonia). Also, an example of a cyclic connection.
Reliability was calculated by having three independent
raters code the entire sample. The overall reliability was
98% agreement.

Results
We expected the students to start identifying invisible
components within an ecosystem. Since the intervention
provided them with an opportunity to learn about the system
in depth the results show that the students have identified
more invisible components (Table 1). However, the students
did not show any significant change in identifying the
visible components (Table 1).

136

Table 3: Types of connections made by students
Linear
Linear
Cyclic
Relationships Complex
relationships
Pretest
1.85 (1.87) 0.52 (0.91)
0.02 (0.14)
Mean (SD)
Posttest
2.80 (2.33) 0.74 (0.96)
0.15 (0.36)
Mean (SD)
T (53)
2.76*
1.73
2.81*
Effect Size
0.21
0.11
0.09
*p< 0.05

Bechtel, W., & Abrahamson, A. (2005). Explanation: A
mechanist alternative. Studies in the History and
Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, 36,
421-441.
Covitt, B.A., Gunckel, K.L. & Anderson C.W. (2009).
Students' Developing Understanding of Water in
Environmental Systems. Journal of Environment
Education, 40(3), 37-51.
Gallegos, L., Jerezano, M.E., & Flores, F. (1994).
Preconceptions and relations used by children in the
construction of food chains. Journal of Research in
Science Teaching, 22, 421-426.
Gellert, E. (1962) Children’s conceptions of the content and
functions of the human body. Genetic Psychology
Monographs, 65, 293-411.
Goel, A. K., Gomez de Silva Garza, A., Grué, N., Murdock,
J. W., Recker, M. M., & Govinderaj, T.(1996). Towards
designing learning environments -I: Exploring
Goel, A.K., Vattam, S.S., Rugaber, S., Joyner, D., HmeloSilver, C., Jordan, R., Honwad, S., Gray, S. & Sinha, S.
(2010). Functional and causal abstractions of complex
systems. Paper to be presented at the annual conference
of the Cognitive Science Society, 2010.
Grotzer, T. & Basca, B.B. (2003). How does grasping the
underlying causal structures of ecosystems impact
students’ understanding? Journal of Biological
Education. 38 (1)16-35.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E. & Azevedo, R. (2006). Understanding
complex systems: Some core challenges. Journal of the
Learning Sciences, 15, 53-61.
Hmelo, C. E., Holton, D. L., & Kolodner, J. L. (2000).
Designing to learn about complex systems. Journal of
the Learning Sciences, 9(3), 247– 298.
Hmelo-Silver, C. Marathe, S., & Liu, L. (2007). Fish swim,
rocks sit, and lungs breathe: expert- novice
understanding of complex systems. Journal of the
Learning Sciences, 16, 307- 331.
Hogan, K. & Fisherkeller, J. (1996) Representing students’
thinking about nutrient cycling in ecosystems:
Bidemensional coding of a complex topic. Journal of
Research in Science Teaching, 33, 941-970.
Hogan, K. (2000). Assessing students’ systems reasoning in
ecology. Journal of Biological Education, 35, 22-28.
Hungerford, H.R., Bluhm, W.J., Volk, T.L., & Ramsey,
J.M. (eds.) (2001) Essential Readings in Environmental
Education; 2nd Edition. Stipes: Champaign, IL.
Jordan, R., Gray, S., Demeter, M., Lui, L. & Hmelo-Silver,
C (2009). An Assessment of Student’ Understanding of
Ecosystem Concepts: Conflating Ecological Systems
and Cycles. Applied Environment Education and
Communication, 8, 40-48.
Leach, J., Driver, R., Scott, P. & Wood-Robinson, C.
(1996). Children's ideas about ecology 2: ideas found in
children aged 5-16 about the cycling of matter.
International Journal of Science Education, 18, 19-34.

Discussion and Conclusion
Our results show that students find it challenging to
conceptualize the role of invisible components within an
ecosystem. Consistent with other research, students initially
focus on the interactions between the visible components of
the ecosystem (e.g., Hmelo-Silver et al., 2007). For
example, most students represented the fish eating fish (prey
predator) relationship as the primary relationship within an
ecosystem. However the study also shows that students are
on a trajectory of conceptual change and began to consider
invisible components of the ecosystem and how they
connect to what is visible.
Our findings suggest that a combination of using
structure, behavior, and function approach along with a set
of carefully designed technology tools can push the students
toward a better understanding of the ecosystem. Another
study (Goel et al. 2010) that looks at how the ACT tool
helps students construct SBF models of complex ecosystem
processes is a part of the proceedings.
The results show that along with the visible components
of the ecosystem, students have started to identify the
invisible components of the ecosystem. They are still not
completely making a sophisticated model that includes the
visible and invisible components connected to each other,
but this is the first step. Moving students to a more robust
and rich understanding of complex systems requires more
than a two week intervention. In our ongoing research, we
are exploring how SBF thinking can provide a tool for
students to understand complex biological systems that are
pervasive in the world in which they live and are key
components of helping students become scientifically and
environmentally literate citizens.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Staci Klienbaum, Rebecca
Digiglo and Courtney Farruggia for data organization and
coding.

References
Anderson, C.W. (2008). Learning Progression for
Environmental Science Literacy: Overview of the
Interactive Poster Symposium. Paper presented at the
annual meeting of the National Association for
Research in Science Teaching, 2008.

137

Liu, L. & Hmelo-Silver, C. (2009). Promoting complex
systems learning through the use of conceptual
representations in hypermedia. Journal of Research in
Science Teaching, 46, 1023-1040.
Liu, L., & Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2008). Collaborative
Scientific Conceptual Change in a Simulationsupported Learning Environment. In G. Kanselaar,
Jonker, V., Kirschner, P., & Prins, F. (Ed.),
Proceedings of the Eight International Conference for
the Learning Sciences (Vol. 1, pp. 477-484). Utrecht,
The Netherlands: International Society for the Learning
Sciences.
National Research Council. (1996). National science
education standards. Washington D.C.: National
Academy Press.
Pickett, S.T.A., Burch, W.R., Dalton, S.E., Foresman, T.W.,
Grove, M.J. & Rowntree, R. (1997). A conceptual
framework for the study of human ecosystems in urban
areas. Urban Ecosystems, 1, 185-199.
Reiner, M. & Eilam, B. (2001). A systems view of learning.
International Journal of Science Education, 23, 551568.
Vattam, S., Goel, A. K., Rugaber, S., Hmelo-Silver, C. E.,
& Jordan, R. (2009). From conceptual models to agentbased simulations: Why and How. Paper presented at
the Fourteenth International Conference on AI in
Education, Brighton UK.
Wilensky, U. & Reisman, K. (2006). Thinking like a wolf, a
sheep or a firefly: Learning biology through
constructing and testing computational theories -- An
embodied modeling approach. Cognition and
Instruction, 24, 171-209.

138

