UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Context, Syntactic Priming, and Referential Form in an Interactive Dialogue Task:
Implications for Models of Alignment

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5hm4j7wj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Carbary, Kathleen M
Frohning, Ellen E
Tanenhaus, Michael K

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Context, Syntactic Priming, and Referential Form in an Interactive Dialogue Task:
Implications for Models of Alignment
Kathleen M. Carbary (kcarbary@bcs.rochester.edu)
Ellen E. Frohning (efrohnin@u.rochester.edu)
Michael K. Tanenhaus (mtan@bcs.rochester.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627 USA
Abstract

often referred to as structural persistence, syntactic
persistence, structural priming, or – as we will call it in this
paper – syntactic priming (Bock, 1986; Ferreira & Bock,
2006; Pickering & Ferreira, 2008). Some research suggests
that syntactic priming might be stronger in dialogue settings
than in other types of experimental tasks (Branigan,
Pickering, McLean, & Cleland, 2007; Branigan, Pickering,
& Cleland, 2000). Pickering & Garrod account for this trend
by suggesting that “a major reason why priming effects
occur is to facilitate alignment, and therefore they are likely
to be particularly strong during natural language
interactions” (p. 174, 2004).

Two experiments examined how context and syntactic
priming interact to determine interlocutors’ choice of
referential form. Pairs of naïve participants took turns
producing descriptions of target pictures from a set of
alternatives. The first experiment established that a contrast
picture in the display (e.g. a striped cat in a display where a
spotted cat was the target) primarily determined whether an
adjective was used. Priming with an adjective had a only
small, secondary effect on adjective use. However, when an
adjective was used, it was more likely to occur in the primecongruent structure than the alternative structure. Experiment
2 compared the effects of a prime produced by the dialogue
partner with the effects of a pre-recorded prime played
through headphones. Syntactic priming was significant only
for the dialogue prime trials, indicating that priming may be
stronger in dialogue than outside of dialogue, as previous
work has suggested. However, even in dialogue, the primary
factor that determined referential form was the set of
alternatives. Our results begin to clarify the role of syntactic
priming in dialogue, suggesting that it has at most a small
effect on message formulation.
Keywords: dialogue; language production; referential form;
syntactic priming; alignment; message formulation.

Introduction
How does a speaker choose the content and form of a
referring expression? In addition to being a classic question
in the philosophy of language, it is an important problem for
language generation systems. Such systems aim to
approximate the types of utterances that a speaker would
produce in a task-oriented dialogue, and thus provide
important data for evaluating models of dialogue developed
within psycholinguistics.
Work on reference production in the Gricean tradition
assumes that a speaker will provide sufficient information
for her addressee to identify an intended referent, taking into
account the purpose of the conversation (Grice, 1975).
Speakers should be specific enough for the addressee to
identify the intended referent, without being overly specific
by providing unnecessary information. For example, a
speaker might say “the cat” when referring to a single cat
among several other animals, but refer to the same animal as
“the striped cat” when there are multiple cats present.
A more striking observation in language production
research is that interlocutors not only converge on the same
referring expressions (Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986), but
also begin to use the same syntactic forms. This effect is

Figure 1: The Interactive Alignment Model (based on
Pickering and Garrod, 2004); the mental representations of
hypothetical interlocutors, A and B, are shown.
As a first step toward extending this idea and integrating it
with a broader model of language production in dialogue,
Pickering & Garrod (2004) proposed the Interactive
Alignment Model, illustrated in Figure 1. The model assigns
a central role to syntactic priming, casting it as a mechanism
that aligns interlocutors’ representations at multiple levels.
Alignment at one level affects alignment at higher and lower
levels of representation, making the model interactive.
Notably, the model assumes that the process through
which interlocutors come to have the same representation of
a situation is unconscious and automatic. Alignment at the
syntactic level – that is, syntactic priming – is treated as an
important factor that allows for communicative success, by
increasing alignment at these other levels (Pickering &

109

Garrod, 2004, 2006). The model treats syntactic priming as
a mechanism for alignment at other levels, which in turn
explains how interlocutors are able to communicate
successfully. In this way, syntactic priming has played a
major empirical and theoretical role in the development of
alignment models of dialogue. However, few, if any,
investigations have attempted to examine how and when
syntactic priming might affect representations and processes
at various levels of representation in dialogue. We focus on
two levels of representation that are typically distinguished
in models of language production: message formulation and
building the syntactic form of the utterances (see Bock &
Levelt, 1994, for a classic language production model that
makes this distinction).
According to Bock & Levelt, the message formulation
level “captures features of the speaker’s intended meaning
and provides the raw material for the processes of
grammatical encoding” (p. 946, 1994). In other words, the
message formulation stage involves planning the
information to be communicated at a pre-grammatical level.
Bock & Levelt present this as a stage that occurs before
grammatical encoding begins. However, the Interactive
Alignment Model is compatible with the possibility that
grammatical encoding, such as syntactic category selection,
could indirectly affect the message (refer to Figure 1 for a
general idea of how this would work in that model). While
message selection is most naturally affected by Gricean
processes, like including the appropriate amount of
information in an utterance, it is possible that the
availability of syntactic structures could have some
influence on the message that is formed.
Optional adjective use within a noun phrase is ideal for
investigating this possibility. Adjectives are often used in
referential expressions, even when the context does not
require it from a Gricean perspective. Speakers’ are prone to
over-informative adjective use when describing objects,
including adjectives in their descriptions unnecessarily up to
46% of the time (Belke, 2006; Sedivy, 2003). This makes
noun phrases that can optionally contain adjectives (e.g. the
[striped] cat) ideal for an investigation of how syntactic
priming and message formulation interact. Syntactic
priming with an adjective-containing structure might
increase the likelihood that the subsequent message will
include information associated with an adjective, so that the
primed syntactic structure can be used again. This structure
provides a special opportunity to observe any potential
effects of priming on message content, since speakers are
free to use adjectives, even when the context does not
require it. In addition, previous work has indicated that noun
phrase structures containing adjectives are susceptible to
syntactic priming effects (Branigan, McLean, & Jones,
2005). This structure should therefore allow us to observe
any possible effects of syntactic priming on message
formulation.
The hypothesis is that the message selection level of
representation could be subtly affected by the increased
availability of a primed syntactic representation. We

compare two conditions: one in which syntactic priming
could affect message formulation by increasing the
likelihood of subsequent adjective use, and another where
no increase in adjective use would be expected. For
example, will a speaker be more likely to refer to a single
cat, among other potential referents, as “the striped cat,” if
their interlocutor had used an adjective-containing noun
phrase construction on the previous trial?
Our design also allows us to explore the claim that
syntactic priming effects are stronger in dialogue than in
non-dialogue situations. Although some previous research
has suggested that syntactic priming effects are stronger in
dialogue, this conclusion has been primarily based on posthoc comparisons of priming effects between experiments
that use different methods (but see Branigan, et. al., 2000,
2007 for exceptions). This creates the potential for
confounds which could mimic a difference between
dialogue and non-dialogue, and makes it difficult to
determine whether differences are significant.
In addition, the few experiments (Branigan, et. al., 2000,
2007) that directly examine syntactic priming effects in
dialogue are scripted confederate studies, in which a
participant takes part in a highly controlled task with a
trained assistant. In this setting, many factors that would
normally affect what is said – such as referential context and
lexical availability – are highly controlled by the situation,
and unlikely to have a strong effect. This is a problem, since
syntactic priming effects may appear to be larger when other
influences on a referential expression are minimized. It is
unclear whether the magnitude of priming effects in such a
setting can be considered evidence that priming is a special
mechanism that causes language production to occur
differently in dialogue than in other experimental settings.
We report two experiments that investigate how syntactic
priming affects referential form in an unscripted dialogue
task. The first experiment examined the effects of syntactic
priming on message formulation during dialogue. The
second experiment compared priming effects in dialogue
with priming effects outside the dialogue, in an otherwise
identical task. Both experiments allowed us to explore how
referential constraints interact with syntactic priming to
determine referential form, and to address the relationship
between syntactic priming and successful communication.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 was a first step towards examining how
syntactic priming in dialogue affects other levels of
representation. Specifically, does priming affect alignment
at the level of message formulation, as one interpretation of
the Interactive Alignment Model suggests? Or, does
syntactic priming exert an effect on language production
only after the message to be communicated has been fully
planned, as the Bock & Levelt (1994) model predicts?

110

the target.1 The no adjective prime displays contained a
target picture with no related pictures in the display,
allowing participants to successfully describe the target
without an adjective.
Each prime display was followed by a response display.
The referential context of the response displays was
manipulated so that the target was part of a contrast set half
the time, and appeared with unrelated pictures only half the
time. When there was contrast in the display, an adjective
was required for a felicitous referential expression, and
when there was no contrast an adjective was unnecessary.
This 3 x 2 design allowed us to test the effects of prime type
(no-adjective, prenominal, postnominal) and contrast
(present or absent) on the referential expression produced in
a response display.

Materials and Methods
Participants Fifteen pairs of friends from the University of
Rochester were paid to participate. All were native English
speakers and naïve to the purpose of the experiment.
Experimental Setup Individual participants sat at separate
computers on either side of a large cardboard barrier, so that
they could not see each other or each other’s computer
screens. To ensure that they could clearly hear each other,
participants wore headphones and spoke into microphones.
This setup facilitated audio recording of the entire session.
To initiate each trial, one participant clicked a central
fixation cross. The same set of four clip-art pictures then
appeared on both screens. To discourage participants from
using expressions like “the top left picture,” picture
locations were pseudo-randomized. After a 2-second delay,
Participant 1 saw a circle appear around the target picture.
Her task was to instruct her partner to click on that picture,
using any description she chose. The trial ended when
Participant 2 clicked the target picture. The overall error rate
was less than 1%, and participants were given no feedback
about their performance. Participants alternated between
giving and responding to instructions, and found the task
very easy and natural (see Figure 2).

Coding and Analysis The entire interaction was digitally
recorded. Participants’ descriptions of the pictures were
later transcribed word-by-word, and coded by the second
author according to the syntactic structure had been used
(e.g. prenominal, postnominal, noun only, etc.). Taskirrelevant utterances were not included in the analysis. All
statistical comparisons were made using mixed-effects
regression models,2 which were computed using the R data
analysis software, version 2.6.1 (2007).

Results and Discussion
We wanted to answer two questions: was there a basic
syntactic priming effect, and if so, did priming affect
message formulation by increasing adjective use? Looking
first at the subset of data where an adjective was used in the
description of the response display, we asked whether
prenominal and postnominal primes types had an impact on
the syntactic structure of the description. If syntactic
priming effects in dialogue are strong, then we would expect
to see a strong syntactic priming effect: participants should
produce more prenominal structures following prenominal
primes, and more postnominal structures following
postnominal primes. When the property associated with an
adjective was already included in the message, we expected
that the prime type would affect the structure in which the
adjective appeared. Two separate mixed-effects regression
models, with subject pair and item as random effects, were

Figure 2: The experimental setup.
The order of prime target pairs was pseudo-randomized so
that different participant pairs saw the displays in different
counter-balanced orders. The experiment was divided into
blocks, so that participants had 5 breaks throughout the
experiment.
Experimental Items There were two types of displays that
occurred in pairs: prime displays and response displays.
Half of the prime displays were adjective primes, designed
to elicit descriptions that included either a pre- or postnominal adjective; for example, “click the striped cat” or
“click the cat with stripes.” This was achieved using a
contrast set, including the target and a picture that differed
from the target in only one adjectival property (e.g. a striped
cat vs. a spotted cat). This required participants to use an
adjective in their description in order to uniquely identify

1
Norming data allowed us to classify prime displays as being
likely to generate prenominal or postnominal descriptions, and the
experiment included half of each display type. This prompted
participants to use a prenominal adjective on 47% of prime
descriptions, and a postnominal adjective on 43% of prime
descriptions, even though no limitations were placed on what
participants could say.
2
Mixed-effects regression models were more appropriate for our
dataset than ANOVAs, since the unscripted nature of the task led
to unequal numbers and variances in each cell of the design. For a
discussion of why this choice was appropriate, see Jaeger (2008).

111

used to test for significance of prenominal and postnominal
priming.3
This analysis revealed that the use of a prenominal prime
significantly predicted the use of a prenominal adjective in
the subsequent response description (B = 0.45, SE = 0.20, p
= 0.05). Similarly, the use of a postnominal prime
significantly predicted the use of a postnominal response
description (B = 0.46, SE = 0.21, p < 0.05). As shown by the
coefficients, the magnitude of the effect was approximately
equal for pre- and postnominal primes. On average,
participants produced a prime-congruent response (i.e. a
response that contained the same structure as the prime)
61% of the time, and an incongruent response 39% of the
time. This 22% difference is similar to what has been found
in classic priming studies not involving dialogue (e.g. the
alternating dative priming effect shown by Bock, 1986).
Having established a syntactic priming effect when the
message includes an adjective, we evaluated the extent to
which priming affected message content. Figure 3 shows the
rate of adjective use for response descriptions following
each prime type. The pre- and postnominal prime types did
not produce different effects, and so they were collapsed
into one “adjective prime” type for the purposes of analysis.
A mixed-effects regression model with subject pair and item
as random effects tested the significance of three predictor
variables: Display Type, Trial Order, and Prime Type. The
coefficient and significance level for each of these factors is
shown in Table 1.

successful dialogue, as participants became faster and better
at this communication task as the experiment unfolded.
As shown in Table 1, adjective use in response display
descriptions was predicted only by a main effect of contrast
and an interaction between prime type and contrast.
The primary determiner of whether the message included
an adjective was the referential context. When a contrast
was present in the display, there was a small additional
increase in adjective use when the preceding prime had
contained an adjective (see Figure 3). However, there was
no main effect of adjective prime indicating a complex
relationship between priming and adjective use. This was
true even though the message could have been modified to
include more information based on the presence of an
adjective in the preceding prime without any negative
consequences for communication.

Table 1: The effects of contrast, trial order, and prime
type on adjective use.
Predictor
Coefficient
Significance
(SE)
Contrast in Display
4.53 (0.43)
p < 0.001
No Adjective Prime
0.60 (0.61)
n.s.
Trial Order
-0.0004 (0.002) n.s.
No Adjective Prime x
-2.06 (0.88)
p < 0.05
Contrast in Display
No Adjective Prime x
-0.0015 (0.005) n.s.
Trial Order
Contrast in Display x
-0.0011
n.s.
Trial Order
(0.0038)
Contrast x Trial Order -0.0040
n.s.
x No Adjective Prime
(0.0074)

Figure 3: Mean (standard error) adjective inclusion rates
in response descriptions following three prime types, for
contrast and no-contrast displays.
The only suggestion of an effect of syntactic priming on
message content was the slightly higher rate of adjective use
following adjective primes. Priming appeared to increase
the rate of adjective use only when a contrast was present.
An alternative interpretation is that adjective use following
no-adjective primes was artificially low. This may have
occurred because some of no-adjective primes involved
single words that were coded as nouns, but that could also
have been considered adjectives (e.g. wood for a tree branch
or fluffy for a Persian cat). This small subset of the data may
have increased the likelihood that an alternative adjectivecontaining structure would be used again, thereby reducing
the rate of pre- and postnominal adjective use following noadjective primes. This is a viable alternative explanation for
the lower rate of adjective use following no-adjective
primes in this study, which will need to be carefully
explored in future work.

There was no effect of trial order, indicating that
participants did not prime each other more as the experiment
unfolded. Instead, the degree of syntactic priming remained
constant over the course of the experiment. This is not what
would be expected if syntactic priming was associated with
3
We tested for prenominal and postnominal priming separately,
to determine whether one structure caused stronger priming than
the other, and to rule out the possibility that the overall priming
effect was driven by only one of these structures. Since priming
effects were comparable for both structures, subsequent analyses
treat prenominal and postnominal priming together.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 was designed to extend the results of
Experiment 1, by directly comparing the effects of dialogue
and non-dialogue primes using a within-subjects design. If

112

syntactic priming is stronger in an unscripted dialogue
setting than in a non-dialogue setting, participants should be
more likely to reuse a syntactic structure generated by the
conversation partner than a description that had been prerecorded by a speaker not participating in the dialogue.

observation of priming effects in this paradigm depended on
dialogue, since syntactic priming was not observed with the
pre-recorded primes.

Materials and Methods
Participants Seventeen pairs of friends from the University
of Rochester were paid to participate. All were native
English speakers who had not taken part in the first
experiment.
Experimental Setup and Items The setup was the same as
for the first experiment, with a few notable changes. First,
primes were now divided into two new categories,
depending on dialogue status. Dialogue primes involved one
participant describing a prime display to her partner; this
was followed by the other participant describing a response
display. For one third of trials, non-dialogue primes that had
been pre-recorded by a trained female speaker were played
through headphones to the participant who was the listener
on that trial. The other participant, who would normally be
generating the prime description, did not hear the prime, and
instead completed an unrelated task (clicking a dot that
appeared in an unpredictable location). This prevented the
pre-recorded prime from becoming part of the participants’
shared knowledge about the situation, or become introduced
to the dialogue in any another way. All the response
descriptions were participant-generated, regardless of prime
status. In order to include enough trials in each condition to
support the comparison between dialogue and non-dialogue,
the no-adjective primes were eliminated. Thus, we
manipulated prime type (prenominal or postnominal) and
prime status (dialogue or non-dialogue) independently.

Figure 4: The proportion (standard error) of primecongruent and prime-incongruent response descriptions
following dialogue and non-dialogue primes, when only
trials containing an adjective are considered.
Next, we wanted to address the hypothesis that syntactic
priming effects in dialogue are instrumental in successful
communication, as has been suggested by Pickering and
Garrod (2006). One way to test this hypothesis is to
examine priming over the course of the experiment. As the
experiment unfolded, participants become better at the task,
making fewer mistakes, and competing the trials more
quickly. If syntactic priming promotes successful
communication by increasing alignment at other levels, then
we might expect that increased levels of priming should be
correlated with this improvement at the task. However, this
was not the case: syntactic priming did not significantly
increase or decrease over the course of the experiment.
Moreover, the degree of syntactic alignment, that is, the
proportion of trials where participants re-used the primed
structure, was not correlated with a pair completing the task
more quickly (Spearman’s rho = -0.197, n.s.). This was true
both for the subset of trials where the response description
included an adjective and for all of the trials.
When examined as part of a larger system of language
production in dialogue, syntactic priming appeared to play
only a small part in determining referential forms. There
was no evidence from this experiment to support the idea
that syntactic priming contributed to task success. This
suggests that syntactic priming and successful
communication are not necessarily related.

Results and Discussion
If syntactic priming in dialogue is truly stronger than
outside of dialogue, then participants should be more likely
to re-use the syntactic structure just used by an interlocutor
than a structure just produced by a prerecorded voice. The
results of our second experiment supported this prediction.
When all the descriptions that included adjectives were
considered together, we saw a small but significant priming
effect for both prenominal and postnominal primes (p <
0.05), just as in experiment 1. However, when these
response descriptions were examined separately by prime
status, participant-generated primes had a greater impact on
the subsequent descriptions than pre-recorded primes (see
Figure 4).
A mixed effects regression model with participant pair and
item as random effects was used to test for significance.
Whether a response description was syntactically congruent
or incongruent with the preceding prime was predicted from
the prime status. When only trials containing adjectives
were considered, incongruent responses were significantly
more likely following pre-recorded primes than following
dialogue primes (B =0.58, SE = 0.16, p < 0.001). The

General Discussion and Conclusions
In Experiment 1, we examined how referential context
and syntactic priming interact to affect referential form. At
the level of message formulation, where a speaker makes
decisions about what information to include in an utterance,
content was determined primarily by referential context.

113

One hypothesis was that syntactic priming would increase
the likelihood that a speaker would include an adjectival
property in the message, in order to re-use the structure that
had just been primed. When the context strongly supported
including an adjective in the message, priming with
structures containing an adjective had a small additional
effect on adjective use. However, when the context did not
support adjective inclusion, priming had no affect on
message content. This rules out the possibility that syntactic
priming has a strong affect on message formulation
independent of other factors. Our results are compatible
with a model in which context constrains message content,
and syntactic priming exerts a small additional affect.
However, it is also possible that syntactic priming affected
the message structure, but not the content; the rate of
adjective use following no-adjective primes might have
been lower due to adjective-like content being incorporated
into the message in other ways.
In Experiment 2, we compared syntactic priming in
dialogue and non-dialogue trials during an unscripted
interaction between two naive participants. We found that
syntactic priming depended on a prime that was generated
by the conversation partner, as the Interactive Alignment
Model suggests. This is in line with the trends that have
been observed in previous experiments: syntactic priming
effects are greater in dialogue than in response to a nondialogue prime. We did not, however, find a relationship
between syntactic alignment and task success. These results,
taken together with the findings of previous work, raise
questions about whether priming facilitates communication
by aligning interlocutors’ mental representations. In future
research it will be important to address the relationship
between priming and task success more directly. This could
involve using more complex tasks, where there is a greater
likelihood of differences in how well participants perform in
a task-oriented dialogue.
These experiments shed light on how syntactic priming
affects the selection of referential forms in dialogue,
suggesting that while priming occurs, it is secondary to
contextual factors that more strongly constrain what is said.
This represents an initial step toward more carefully
evaluating if and how syntactic priming impacts other levels
of representation in dialogue. It also highlights the
importance of using experimental designs where potential
priming can be observed in interaction with other variables
affecting message formulation. Experimental situations in
which speakers have a larger range of options, (e.g. Gómez
Gallo, Jaeger & Smyth, 2008), will allow priming to be
examined in conjunction with such variables in single
utterances and pairs of utterances. Situations like these are
also ideal for future investigations because they closely
approximating natural dialogue settings.

experiments were supported by the NIH grant HD-27026 to
Michael Tanenhaus.

References
Belke, E. (2006). Visual determinants of preferred adjective
order. Visual Cognition, 14(3), 261-294.
Bock, J.K., & Levelt, W.J.M. (1994). Language production:
grammatical encoding. In M. Gernsbacher (Ed.),
Handbook of Psycholinguistics (pp. 945-984). Orlando:
Academic Press.
Bock, J.K. (1986). Syntactic persistence in language
production. Cognitive Psychology, 18, 355-387.
Branigan, H., Pickering, M., McLean, J., & Cleland, A.
(2007). Syntactic alignment and participant role in
dialogue. Cognition, 104, 163-197.
Branigan, H., McLean, J., & Jones, M.W. (2005). A blue cat
or a cat that is blue? Evidence for abstract syntax in
young children’s noun phrases. In Proceedings of the 29th
Annual Boston University Conference on Language
Development, (p. 109-121). Somerville, MA: Cascadilla
Press.
Branigan, H., Pickering, M., & Cleland, A. (2000).
Syntactic co-ordination in dialogue. Cognition, 75, B13B25.
Clark, H.H., & Wilkes-Gibbs, D. (1986). Referring as a
collaborative process. Cognition, 22, 1-30.
Gómez Gallo, C., Jaeger, T.F., & Smyth, R. Incremental
syntactic planning across clauses. In Proceedings of the
30th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
845-850). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Ferreira, V. & Bock, K. (2006). The functions of structural
priming. Language and Cognitive Processes, 21(7-8),
1011-1029.
Grice, H.P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J.
Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and Semantics. Volume 3: Speech
Acts (pp. 41-58): Academic Press.
Jaeger, T.F. (2008). Categorical data analysis: away from
ANOVAs (transformation or not) and towards logit mixed
models. Journal of Memory and Language (Special Issue
on Emerging Data Analysis), 59, 434-446.
Pickering, M., & Ferreira, V. (2008). Structural priming: a
critical review. Psychological Bulletin, 134(3), 427-459.
Pickering, M. & Garrod, S. (2004). Toward a mechanistic
psychology of dialogue. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
27, 169-226.
Pickering, M. & Garrod, S. (2006). Alignment as the basis
for successful communication. Research on Language and
Computation, 4, 203-228.
R, version 2.6.1, The R Foundation for Statistical
Computing, 2007.
Sedivy, J. C. (2003). Pragmatic versus form-based accounts
of referential contrast: evidence for effects of
informativity expectations. Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research, 32(1), 3-23.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dana Subik for years of assistance with data
collection, and current and former members of the
Tanenhaus lab for helpful comments on this project. These

114

