UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Converging Hands or Converging Minds?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/14k613b8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Mol, Lisette
Krahmer, Emiel
Maes, Alfons
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Converging Hands or Converging Minds?
Lisette Mol (L.Mol@uvt.nl)
Emiel Krahmer (E.J.Krahmer@uvt.nl)
Alfons Maes (Maes@uvt.nl)
Marc Swerts (M.G.J.Swerts@uvt.nl)
Tilburg Centre for Cognition and Communication (TiCC), School of Humanities, Tilburg University
P.O. Box 90135, NL-5000 LE Tilburg, The Netherlands
Abstract

repetition of each other’s (other) linguistic forms. On the
other hand, repetitions in physical behavior are found in
many species, and need not be tied to speech (Parrill &
Kimbara, 2006). In this paper, we focus on gestures that
depict some of the content a speaker is conveying, which are
known as illustrators (Ekman & Friesen, 1969) or
representational gestures (McNeill, 1992). We compare the
repetition across speakers of certain articulators of such
gestures to the repetition of meaningful units in speech,
specifically lexical entrainment, as well as to non-linguistic
forms of behavioral mimicry. We first explain a difference
between direct behavioral mimicry and lexical entrainment.
We then describe some empirical results on the repetition of
gesture forms across speakers. This will lead to our research
question: Is the repetition of meaningful gesture forms
across interlocutors a consequence of converging semantic
representations, or is there a more direct link between
perceiving a form and producing a form?

Interlocutors sometimes repeat each other’s representational
hand gestures. We investigated if this is a case of direct
mimicry of form, or whether perceiving a gesture gives rise to
a semantic representation, which subsequently informs
gesture production. For this we used an interactive route
description task, in which a confederate’s gestures indicated
the route in either the vertical or the horizontal plane and
either with one or four fingers extended as an index. We
found that perceiving vertical gestures led to an increase not
only in participants’ production of vertical gestures, but also
in their use of one finger as an index, suggesting that seeing
vertical gestures caused participants to think of the route as on
a map, which led them to point with one finger (as is common
on a map) rather than four. Our results support the notion that
repetition of meaningful gesture forms results from
converging semantic representations.
Keywords: Gesture; Adaptation, Lexical Entrainment.

Introduction
It is well established that when people interact in dialogue,
they tend to adapt to each other in many ways (for an
overview, see Pickering & Garrod, 2004). For example,
interlocutors reuse each other’s (referring) expressions (e.g.
Brennan & Clark, 1996) and syntactic constructions (e.g.
Branigan, Pickering, & Cleland, 2000). In one study, Levelt
and Kelter (1982) found that if shop keepers where asked in
Dutch “(At) what time does your shop close?”, their answer
tended to match the question in surface form, either
including or omitting ‘at’. Similarly, repetitions of form
across interlocutors have also been found for co-speech
hand gestures (e.g. De Fornel, 1992). Such gestures are
spontaneous movements of the hands and arms during
speech, which can convey information, or emphasize certain
parts of speech (e.g. McNeill, 1992). Elements of a gesture’s
physical form (articulators), like the shape and orientation
of the hand, the direction and size of the movement, and
where it is performed relative to the speaker can be repeated
in subsequent gestures by the same or another speaker.
Some scholars believe that speech and gesture jointly
express a speaker’s ideas (McNeill, 1992), or that speech
and gesture are both part of a speaker’s communicative
effort (Kendon, 2004). From this perspective, it seems likely
that repetition of each other’s gesture forms would resemble

Mimicry and Adaptation
Mimicry is defined as one person repeating the behavior of
another person (Bock, 1986). Some forms of mimicry
enable the transfer of important functional behaviors
(Tomasello, Savage-Rumbaugh, & Kruger, 1993). It has
also been found that repeating others can have social
benefits. Van Baaren et al. (2003) found that a waitress
received higher tips when repeating her customers’ orders
literally, than when signaling in some other way that she
understood the order. Yet for some repetitions of behavior,
the functional or social purpose is less clear (Chartrand &
Bargh, 1999). For example, if one person starts yawning,
oftentimes those around will start yawning as well.
Chartrand and Bargh explain this type of behavior in terms
of the perception-behavior link, meaning “the mere
perception of another’s behavior automatically increases the
likelihood of engaging in that behavior oneself”, p. 893.
Notably, they state that although such mimicry may act as a
kind of ‘social glue’, intent or conscious effort are not
required for it to occur. We will subsequently use the term
‘mimicry’ to refer to such automated repetitions of behavior.
Pickering and Garrod (2004) propose that similar
automatic priming underlies the repetition of linguistic

115

behaviors across interlocutors, a form of adaptation which
they call alignment. They state that at each linguistic level,
“the activation of a representation in one interlocutor leads
to the activation of the matching representation in the other
interlocutor directly”, p. 177. These representations are
thought to be used in both language production and processsing (parity of representation). Thus, if a certain lexical or
semantic representation has just been constructed as a result
of hearing an utterance, it can subsequently be used for
production. In addition to this direct source of alignment
across interlocutors, alignment at one level can also enhance
alignment at certain other levels within a speaker, because
of bidirectional connections between the representations at
different levels. Thus, if a lexical representation is
connected to a semantic one, activation of that semantic
representation may subsequently activate the lexical one.
Let us focus on one particular case of converging
linguistic behavior: the repetition of referring expressions
across speakers, known as lexical entrainment (Brennan &
Clark, 1996). Brennan and Clark propose that interlocutors
use the same words to refer to the same objects, because
they use similar conceptualizations of that object. For
example, suppose a particular object could be thought of as
a document, a picture, or a map. When a speaker refers to it
with ‘the map’, she conceptualizes the object for the current
purpose as such. If the addressee agrees with this
conceptualization and a conceptual pact is formed, both
interlocutors can subsequently use ‘the map’ as a reference
to both the object and the particular conceptualization of it.
In this view, the repetition of references across interlocutors
results from the establishment of conceptual pacts.
In both the model by Pickering and Garrod and the model
by Brennan and Clark, lexical representations and semantic
representations are linked. This is where lexical entrainment
seems to differ from some instances of direct behavioral
mimicry. In mimicry, we may repeat forms without being
aware of their meaning. In other words, the perception of a
form directly leads to the production of that form. In lexical
entrainment on the other hand, there seems to be an
intermediate stage: meaning. A form that is perceived is
coupled with a certain meaning. Only when that meaning is
activated again is the same form a likely candidate for
repetition.

Figure 1: Part of a scene used in the experiment, note the
route starting at the bottom-center.
speech. Therefore, it may be the case that the repetitions of
gesture form resulted from the automatic across-speaker
path of alignment (direct copying of form), rather than from
connections between gesture forms and semantic
representations, or the establishment of conceptual pacts.
In a previous study, we have investigated how relevant
the semantic context was for certain gestures to be repeated
across interlocutors (Mol, Krahmer, & Swerts, 2009).
Gestures were either performed with speech matching the
gesture’s form in meaning (e.g. a speaker moved his arms as
though running, while talking about running), or with
speech that expressed a very different meaning (e.g. the
same gesture performed while describing looking through
binoculars). We found that repetition did not occur when a
gesture was shown in a non-matching semantic context.
This suggests that repetition of form in gesture may result
from the coupling of a certain form to a certain meaning,
rather than from direct copying of form. However, since the
mismatches were designed to be very clear in this study, the
non-matching gestures may not have been processed very
deeply to begin with, or participants may simply be less
likely to adapt to a less coherent speaker. We thus need to
investigate further whether repetition of gesture forms
across interlocutors results from converging meanings.

Present Study
In this study we investigate whether a perceived gesture
form can influence the construction of meaning (whether it
be any semantic representation or a conceptual pact), which
subsequently influences gesture production (also see
Cassell, McNeill, & McCullough, 1998). Suppose that
certain articulators of a perceived gesture give rise to the
construction of meaning. Then when this meaning is
subsequently expressed in gesture, all articulators of the
gesture produced will likely be consistent with this meaning.
Therefore, we would expect that articulators of the
perceived gesture that are inconsistent with the meaning
constructed would not be repeated as frequently. On the
other hand, if repetition of gesture form happens without the

Repetition of Gesture Form
Is meaning also involved in the repetition of gesture forms
across interlocutors? Kimbara (2008) observed interlocutors
while they were discussing an animated cartoon. She found
that their gestures looked more similar if they could see
each other, compared to when they were separated by an
opaque screen. Thus, it seems that adaptation occurs in
gesture like it does in speech. Yet if these similarities in
gesture form resulted from similarities in semantic
representations, one could argue that they would also occur
when interlocutors cannot see each other, since similarities
in semantic representations can also be arrived at through

116

semantic level being involved, any combination of
perceived articulators could be repeated in gesture
production. In this case, whether an articulator matches the
constructed meaning will not affect how frequently it is
repeated.
To test this we use a task in which a confederate and a
participant give each other route directions repeatedly. We
present participants with bird’s view drawings of a city
scene, with a short route indicated on them (see Figure 1 for
an example). These scenes are neither presented vertically
nor horizontally, but at an angle. Therefore, the production
task can be thought of as either describing a route on a
vertically oriented map, or as describing a route through an
actual (horizontal) city.
In each condition, the confederate expresses only one of
these conceptualizations in her gesturing. While speech is
kept constant, she gestures either as though moving along a
route in a horizontal city, or as though indicating the route
on a vertical map. This is done using two articulators: the
plane in which the gesture is produced (either horizontal or
vertical) and hand orientation (with fingers moving along
with the route, or pointing forward as though on a map).
It is interesting in itself to see whether participants adapt
to the confederate’s perspective in their gesturing. Yet this
alone would not tell us whether this is based on direct
mimicry of form, or on the convergence of semantic
representations. Therefore, we manipulate a third articulator
(hand shape) independently. Gestures are produced either
with one finger, or four fingers extended as an index. Now if
it is the case that gesture form is perceived and reproduced
directly, without mediation of meaning, both the
confederate’s perspective and her hand shape could be
repeated independently by participants in their own
gesturing. There may be a difference in how frequently each
aspect is repeated, but what we would not expect based on
this view, is for the confederate’s perspective to influence
participants’ hand shapes or for the confederate’s hand
shape to influence participants’ perspective.
On the other hand, if meaning does form an intermediate
stage between the perception and production of gesture
forms, we would expect such cross-effects to occur. For
example, it is more common to point at a map using a single
finger, than it is to point at a map using four fingers at once.
Therefore, if the confederate’s vertical perspective would
lead participants to think of the communication task as
describing a route on a map, then their gestures may be
produced more frequently with only one finger as an index
(even if the confederate uses more than one finger). This
would mean there is an effect of the confederate’s gestures’
perspective on the hand shape of participants’ gestures. This
effect may also be found in the opposite direction: the
confederate’s use of more fingers as an index may lead
participants to think of the route as through an actual city
rather than on a map, causing them to gesture horizontally
more frequently.

Figure 2: Partial view of the experimental set-up.
Participants were seated on the right.

Method
Participants
48 Native Dutch speakers, all students of Tilburg University
took part in this study. The data of eight participants could
not be used for analysis (six participants did not produce
any relevant gestures). The remaining 40 participants (33
female) had a mean age of 20.5, range 18 – 25.

Procedure
The participant and the confederate came to the lab and
were introduced by the experimenter. They each received a
written instruction and were seated across from each other.
The instruction explained the communication task, and
stated that the couple with most correct responses could win
a book voucher (in reality there was a random draw). To
their side (right to the participant) was a table, on which
there was a flip chart for each of them. In between these flip
charts was a screen, such as to keep information private.
The screen did not keep the interlocutors from seeing each
other, see Figure 2. Both behind the confederate and the
participant was a camera capturing the other interlocutor.
After reading the instruction, both ‘participants’ were
allowed to ask questions. The confederate always asked one
question, after which the experimenter quickly went over
the task again. Then the experimenter turned on the cameras
and left the room.
The confederate started by studying a little map and
memorizing the route on it. Each route had one turn, see
Figure 1 for an example. She then turned the page of her flip
chart and described the route to the participant, for example:
“Je begint bij de rondvaartboot, dan ga je langs het
voetbalstadion en dan rechts een winkelstraat in tot
ongeveer halverwege.” (“You start at the tour boat, then you
go along the soccer stadium and then into a shopping street
on the right until about halfway.”) The confederate’s speech
always followed the same script. Gestures were timed
naturally with speech and gazed at by the confederate.

117

Figure 3: The confederate’s path gestures. a: Hand/ Route;
b: Finger/ Route; c: Hand/ Map; d: Finger/ Map.
After the confederate’s description, the participant turned a
page and was to choose which route had just been described,
selecting from four alternatives by pronouncing the
corresponding letter. No feedback was provided. Then it
was the participant’s turn to study a route. This route was
always on the same scene that the confederate’s route had
been on. After turning the page (rendering a blank page) the
participant described the route to the confederate, who then
turned a page and selected one of the four alternatives. This
ended one cycle of the experiment. In total each participant
perceived and produced five route descriptions.
Afterward, both the confederate and the participant filled
out a questionnaire, which included questions on the
presumed purpose of the experiment and whether the
participant noticed anything peculiar, as well as some
questions on how they liked their interaction partner. It
ended with the question whether the participant was left or
right handed. When the participant was done filling out the
forms, the confederate revealed herself and asked the
participant’s consent for the use of the data. Participants
were also asked if they had suspected any deception. Two
participants were excluded from our analysis, because they
indicated having been suspicious about either the goal of the
experiment or the role of the confederate.

Figure 4: Examples of participants’ path gestures (published
with permission of the people depicted).
a: Hand/ Vertical Map; b: Finger/ Vertical Map;
c: Hand/ Route; d: Finger/ Horizontal Map.
We coded all path gestures participants produced, that is, all
gestures in which one or more fingers were extended as an
index, there was hand movement along some virtual path,
and the co-occurring speech mentioned a direction to take.
Within the stroke phase of each path gesture, we coded hand
shape and perspective. The labels for hand shape were
Finger, when one finger was extended as an index, and
Hand, if more than one finger was extended. The label for
perspective was based on three articulators: location in the
gesture space, hand orientation, and movement (direction
and size). It turned out that in addition to the two
perspectives the confederate had used, participants
occasionally used an alternative one, as though pointing on
a horizontal map. Therefore, we chose from three labels:
Route, Vertical Map, and Horizontal Map. A gesture in the
route perspective would typically have horizontal movement
in front of and to the side of the speaker, with the fingers
pointing in the direction of the hand movement (Figure 4c).
Vertical Map gestures on the other hand would typically
have vertical movement, with relative sizes mapping onto
distances on the map, fingers pointing forward and the
location in the gestures space corresponding to the location
on the map (Figure 4a, 4b). Horizontal Map gestures (Figure
4d) differ from Route gestures in their hand orientation
(fingers pointing down), and their relative size and location.
The label that could explain most of the articulators was
assigned to each gesture. Figure 4 shows some examples of
participants’ path gestures and our coding.
Each of the confederate’s verbal descriptions contained
two target landmarks, which also appeared along the
participant’s route. For each of these landmarks it was

Design, Coding and Analysis
We used a 2 x 2 between subjects design. The independent
variables were the hand shape (one or four fingers extended)
and perspective (route or map) of the confederate’s path
gestures. In the route perspective, gestures were performed
with the index in the direction of the hand movement and
movement was in the horizontal plane, as though following
a virtual route (Figure 3a, 3b). In the map perspective,
gestures were performed in the vertical plane and the index
was always pointing forward, as though pointing on a
virtual map (Figure 3c, 3d).
The confederate gestured with her right hand. The first
direction of a route was always straight, which was depicted
with either a forward or an upward movement. These
movements were of comparable size. The gesture for the
second direction (to the side) was placed relative to the first
gesture; it started where the first gesture had ended.

118

Table 1: Means and standard deviations of the proportion of
path gestures participants produced from each perspective.

determined whether the participant referred to it, and if so
whether it was a literal repetition, an elaboration or
shortening of the confederate’s reference (both counted as
partial match) or a complete mismatch. For example, if the
confederate said “hoog gebouw” (tall building), “gebouw”
(building) and “hoog grijs gebouw” (tall grey building)
would be labeled as partial match whereas “flat” (apartment
building) would be a mismatch.
The data of 6 participants were excluded because these
participants did not produce any path gestures. This left 40
participants, 10 in each cell. Analysis was done using
ANOVA, with factors perspective (levels: Route & Map)
and hand shape (levels: Finger & Hand) of the confederate’s
gestures. The significance threshold was .05 and we used
partial eta squared as a measure of effect size.

Confederate’s
Perspective
Route
Map

Prop.
Route

Prop.
Vertical Map

Prop.
Hor. Map

0.77 (.32)
0.43 (.31)

0.11 (.20)
0.46 (.35)

0.12 (.26)
0.11 (.25)

Table 2: Means and standard deviations of the proportion of
path gestures participants produced with each hand shape.
Confederate’s Perspective
Route
Map

Prop. Hand
.78 (.37)
.52 (.39)

Prop. Finger
.22 (.37)
.48 (.39)

Effects of the Confederate’s Hand Shape

Results

We did not find that the confederate’s hand shape
influenced participants’ hand shape F(1, 36) = .04, p = .85,
nor that her hand shape influenced the proportion of
gestures in the map, F(1, 36) = .38, p = .54, or route
perspective, F(1, 36) = .030, p = .86.

Neither the confederate’s hand shape nor her perspective
significantly influenced the total number of path gestures
participants produced (M = 5.5, SD = 3.9) and there was no
interaction between these factors. We did not find a
significant effect of gender, or left or right handedness on
the amount or type of path gestures produced. Analysis of
the answers to the questionnaire showed no significant
effect of condition on how the participants perceived the
confederate.

Discussion
We found some of the cross-effects we expected if
perceiving gestures would lead to the construction of
meaning, which in turn would influence gesture production.
The perspective of the confederate’s gestures influenced the
hand shape of participants’ gestures: participants more
frequently pointed with one finger if the confederate
gestured as though on a vertical map. This can be explained
by the confederate’s vertical gestures leading participants to
think of the route as on a map, which caused them to point
with their finger more frequently.
Gestures, like speech, seem to allow for the convergence
of representations of meaning across interlocutors. This
leads to the question of whether the same representations
underlie adaptation in both gesture and speech, and whether
these representations can also be influenced by both gesture
and speech.

Verbal Alignment
Neither the confederate’s perspective (p = .63), nor her hand
shape (p = .81) had a significant effect on the number of
target nouns repeated by participants (M = 6.2, SD = 1.3), or
on the number of partial matches or mismatches.

Effects of the Confederate’s Perspective
The confederate’s perspective influenced participants’
perspective. When the confederate gestured as though on a
map, the mean proportion of participants’ path gestures in
the vertical map perspective was higher (M = .46, SD = .35)
than when she gestured as though following a route (M =
.11, SD = .20), F(1, 36) = 14.88, p < .001, !2 = .29.
Similarly, when the confederate gestured as though
following a route, participants produced a higher proportion
of gestures with the route perspective (M = .77, SD = .32)
than when she gestured as though on a map (M =.52, SD =
.39), F(1, 36) = 12.35, p < .001, !2 = .14, see Table 1.
The confederate’s gestures’ perspective also influenced
the hand shape used by participants, F (1, 36) = 5.00, p <
.05, !2 = .12. The proportion of gestures with more than one
finger extended was higher when the confederate used the
route perspective (M = .78, SD = .37) than when she used
the map perspective (M = .52, SD = .39), whereas the
proportion of gestures with one finger extended was higher
when she used the map perspective (M = .48, SD = .39),
compared to when she used the route perspective (M = .22,
SD = .37), see Table 2.

Adaptation in Gesture through Speech
The results of an additional study indeed point in this
direction. In this study, the confederate gestured with one
finger extended and in the map perspective. Thus, all
articulators in gesture suggested a vertically oriented map.
Yet we added a condition (N = 10) to the previous study, in
which speech also matched this perspective. Rather than
using horizontal terms like “rechtdoor” (straight), the
confederate now used vertical terms like “naar boven” (up)
instead. Note that the first direction was always straight/ up.
When comparing this condition to the Finger/ Map
condition with horizontal speech, we found that the
perspective of the confederate’s speech had an additional
effect on the perspective of participants’ gestures. With

119

vertical terms, participants produced a lower rate of gestures
with the route perspective (M = .17, SD = .25) than with
horizontal terms (M = .54, SD = .36), F(1, 18) = 7.21, p <
.02, !2 = .29. This supports the notion that semantic
representations were converging across interlocutors, rather
than surface forms. In addition, it suggests that these
representations may be shared between speech and gesture.

Tilburg University for assisting in the data collection, and
the anonymous reviewers.

References
Bock, J. (1986). Syntactic persistence in language
production. Cognitive Psychology, 18, 355-387.
Branigan, H. P., Pickering, M. J., & Cleland, A. A. (2000).
Syntactic co-ordination in dialogue. Cognition, 75(2),
B13-B25.
Brennan, S. E., & Clark, H. H. (1996). Conceptual pacts and
lexical choice in conversation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology-Learning Memory and Cognition, 22(6),
1482-1493.
Cassell, J., McNeill, D., & McCullough, K.-E. (1998).
Speech-gesture mismatches: Evidence for one underlying
representation of linguistic & nonlinguistic information.
Pragmatics & Cognition, 6(2), 1-33.
Chartrand, T. L., & Bargh, J. A. (1999). The Chameleon
effect: The perception-behavior link and social interaction.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 76(6), 893910.
De Fornel, M. (1992). The return gesture. . In P. Auer & A.
di Luzio (Eds.), The contextualization of language.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Ekman, P., & Friesen, W. V. (1969). The repertoire of
nonverbal behavior: Categories, origins, usage, and
coding. Semiotica, 1, 49-98.
Kendon, A. (2004). Gesture: Visible Action as Utterance.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kimbara, I. (2008). Gesture form convergence in joint
description. Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 32(2), 123131.
Levelt, W. J. M., & Kelter, S. (1982). Surface form and
memory in question answering. Cognitive Psychology,
14(1), 78-106.
McNeill, D. (1992). Hand and Mind: what gestures reveal
about thought. Chicago and London: The University of
Chicago Press.
Mol, L., Krahmer, E., & Swerts, M. (2009). Alignment in
iconic gestures: Does it make sense? Paper presented at
the The eight international conference on auditory-visual
speech processing, Norwich, United Kingdom.
Parrill, F., & Kimbara, I. (2006). Seeing and hearing double:
The influence of mimicry in speech and gesture on
observerse. Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 30(4), 157166.
Pickering, M. J., & Garrod, S. (2004). Toward a mechanistic
psychology of dialogue. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
27(2), 169-225.
Tomasello, M., Savage-Rumbaugh, S., & Kruger, A. (1993).
Imitative learning of actions on objects by children,
chimpanzees and enculturated chimpanzees. Child
Development, 64, 1688-1705.
Van Baaren, R. B., Holland, R. W., Steenaert, B., & Van
Knippenberg, A. (2003). Mimicry for money: Behavioral
consequences of imitation. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 39(4), 393-398.

Future Work
A limitation of our studies is that the confederate always
acted according to a script, and thus was not exactly like a
spontaneous partner in forming a conceptual pact. Whereas
this usually can be thought of as an interactive process
between both interlocutors, the confederate always stuck to
her own initial proposal. It would be interesting to see how
spontaneous interaction is similar to or differs from this
partly staged interaction.
Overall, perspective was repeated more than hand shape.
This may be because perspective was expressed in two
articulators, whereas hand shape is only one. Thus, the one
articulator not matching the constructed meaning may have
been adapted to the two matching ones. Another explanation
would be that in this task, perspective carried a more
important meaning than did hand shape. A vertical gesture
cannot possibly depict a route one can walk (at least not in
the Netherlands), whereas the distinctions between the
different hand shapes are probably far subtler. Therefore,
the perspective of gestures may have influenced the
construction of meaning more readily than their hand shape.
Apparently, in this task, hand shape was not a likely
candidate for the type of direct alignment at one level
between interlocutors that Pickering and Garrod (2004)
proposed. However, in other settings it may very well be. It
would be interesting to investigate whether adaptation in
hand shape depends on to what extent hand shape carries
meaning, and similarly for other articulators. Additionally,
other types of gestures (especially non representational
gestures) need to be looked at, since they may carry
meaning in a way different from the path gestures we
studied, and may or may not be linked to semantic
representations.

Conclusion
In the adaptation of one interlocutor to another, some hand
gestures seem to behave truly like linguistic forms. Whether
they are repeated across interlocutors depends on whether
their form corresponds to the semantic context (Mol et al.,
2009), and the repetition of forms is mediated by mental
representations of meaning, rather than being based on a
direct perception-action link.

Acknowledgements
We like to thank Susan Brennan and Sotaro Kita for
valuable discussions on this work. We also thank Nathalie
Bastiaansen for drawing the stimuli, our co-workers at

120

