UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Decomposing Externally Cued Task Switching Costs

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8ps2n2gk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Author
Wasylyshyn, Christina

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Decomposing Externally Cued Task Switching Costs
Christina Wasylyshyn (christina.wasylyshyn@nrl.navy.mil)
Naval Research Laboratory, 4555 Overlook Ave., S.W.
Washington, DC 20375 USA
Abstract
The double-cued task switching procedure has recently been
introduced as a new way to measure externally cued switch
costs. In the present individual differences study, two hundred
fifty young adults completed measures of task switching,
inhibition, and long-term memory. A latent variable approach
was taken to examine the relationships among these cognitive
measures. Decomposing the externally cued task switching
costs into a cue switch component and a task switch
component indicated that individual differences in these costs
could be explained by benefits of repeated cues rather than by
changes in tasks. Individual differences in the cue switch
component were predicted by long-term memory scores.
Keywords: cued task switching; switch costs; individual
differences; long-term memory; inhibition

Introduction
Recent interest in understanding how people shift their
mental sets in response to external cues has led to the
development of a new method of measuring task switching
costs: the double-cued procedure. In traditional, single-cued
procedures, cues and tasks are mapped one-to-one, leading
to the possibility that the components of cue switching and
task switching are confounded. When there is a change in
cue, there must be a change in task; when there is no change
in cue, it follows that the task will repeat from the previous
trial. Both cue switching and task switching then contribute
to the overall switch cost in an undifferentiated manner.
One way to distinguish between cue switching and task
switching is to use a double-cued procedure, that is, to have
two cues to indicate each task. This leads to three types of
trials: cue repeat, cue switch, and task switch. In cue repeat
trials, both the cue and the task repeat; this is a traditional
nonswitch trial. In cue switch trials, the cue changes but the
task remains the same; this is also classified as a nonswitch
trial. In task switch trials, both the cue and the task change.
The latency differences between cue switch and cue repeat
trials are thought to indicate encoding benefits from
repeated cues. The latency differences between task switch
and cue switch trials are thought to reflect the act of task
switching.
In task switching paradigms, responses to the current
stimulus trial are slower (and typically less accurate) if the
task differs from that completed on the previous trial.
Switch costs are thought to indicate how flexibly one can
change his/her cognitive configurations, or task sets, to
accommodate newly relevant task demands. In order to
establish a task set, one must activate relevant task rules
(e.g., Mayr & Kliegl, 2003; Rubinstein, Meyer, & Evans,
2001) and minimize interference from competing task sets,

possibly through inhibition processes (e.g., see Mayr &
Keele, 2000). It has therefore been suggested that one’s task
set reflects the interaction of task set inertia from previous
trial(s), exogenous task set activation from the stimulus
itself, and endogenous control input needed to overcome the
other two biases and to reconfigure the cognitive system for
a change in task (Aron, Monsell, Sahakian, & Robbins,
2004).
Mayr and Kliegl (2003) suggest that performance in
double-cued procedures can be explained by two processes:
cue-based retrieval of task rules from memory and the
application of task rules to the target. The retrieval of task
rules produces the cue encoding benefit, while the time
involved in applying the mapping rules produces the actual
switch cost. Retrieval and loading of task rules from longterm memory is necessary for both nonswitch and switch
trials. A repetition of the immediately preceding cue leads to
a reactivation of the most recent retrieval process (i.e.,
positive priming); a cue change, however, requires
activation of a new (or less recently activated) retrieval
process.
Logan and Bundesen (2003) offer a similar explanation,
but one that assumes there is no endogenous control
component. The explicit task cue provides enough
information to uniquely indicate a response on each trial.
There is no task set reconfiguration process between the cue
and the target stimulus. Instead, any switch costs that remain
beyond the act of cue switching are the result of encoding
benefits on nonswitch trials, or priming from related cues,
not task switching (see Logan & Bundesen, 2004, for
explanation of the process of mediator repetition, and see
Schneider & Logan, 2005, for formal model).
Using double-cued procedures, several studies have
shown evidence for cue encoding benefits (i.e., responses
were faster for cue repeat trials than for cue switch trials).
However, after cue encoding effects have been accounted
for, the remaining task switch costs have been negligible in
some studies (e.g., Logan & Bundesen, 2003, 2004; Monsell
& Mizon, 2006 Experiment 1) and substantial in others
(e.g., Mayr & Kliegl, 2003; Arrington & Logan, 2005
Experiment 3; Monsell & Mizon, 2006 Experiments 2-6).
There are several procedural differences between these
studies that may explain some of the differences in results,
including type of task cue and frequencies for task switches.
Evidence that switch costs result from the processing of the
task cue rather than from the switching of tasks has been
shown in studies that use salient verbal or pictorial task cues
and/or 50% task switch frequency. Evidence for substantial
task switch costs over and above any effect of a cue change

2254

has been shown in studies that employ arbitrary task cues
and/or 33% or less task switch frequency.
Most of the research in task switching and executive
control functioning has been experimental in nature. The
present study, however, takes a novel individual differences
approach to decompose switch costs to determine whether a
cue switch component can be differentiated from a task
switch component. The overall goal is to establish a
representation of the structure of individual differences in
the double-cued procedure to determine whether switch
costs are more likely to reflect processes involved in the
interpretation of instructional cues (i.e., trial to trial change
in retrieval path) or the switching of task sets (i.e., trial to
trial change in the task itself). In this way, it will be possible
to test, at the latent level, if individual differences in the
costs incurred reflect a benefit for cue repetition instead of,
or as well as, a cost for task switching.

Method
Participants
Two hundred fifty Syracuse University students (169
females, 81 males, mean age = 18.92, SD = 1.21)
participated. All students were native English speakers and
non-colorblind.

Tasks
There were three task categories: task switching, long-term
memory, and inhibition.
Task Switching Switch costs were measured in three task
domains: digits, shapes, and verbal. For the digits task,
magnitude and parity judgments were made on a series of
digits (1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9). In the shapes task, participants
determined either the form or color of an image. Stimuli
consisted of combinations of two shapes and two colors. For
the verbal task, participants determined if a word shown
could be classified as an animal or a non-animal or if it
could be classified as something that was smaller or larger
than a basketball. Stimuli consisted of 64 high frequency
and high imagery nouns obtained from the Toronto Word
Pool.
Each task consisted of 120 trials. Cues and targets were
combined randomly, with the constraint that cue-repeat,
cue-switch, and task-switch trials each occurred on onethird of the trials. In each task, there were four cues. Two
meaningful and salient cues distinguished each sub-task, so
that one cue noted category membership and the other noted
response mapping. In the digits task, participants were
presented with one of four cues on each trial: Magnitude,
High-Low, Parity, or Odd-Even. Depending on the cue
shown, participants pressed the ‘z’ key if the target digit was
higher than five or odd, and the ‘/’ key if the target digit was
lower than five or even. In the shapes task, one of four cues
was presented on each trial: Shape, Triangle-Circle, Color,
or Red-Green. Participants pressed the ‘z’ key if the target
image was a triangle or was colored red, and the ‘/’ key if
the target image was a circle or was colored green. In the

verbal task, either the cue Creature, Animal-Nonanimal,
Size, or Smaller-Larger was presented on each trial.
Participants pressed the ‘z’ key if the target word was an
animal or was smaller than a basketball, and the ‘/’ key if
the target word was a non-animal or larger than a basketball.
On cue repeat trials, both the cue and the task repeated from
trial n to trial n+1 (e.g., in the digits task, magnitude
followed by magnitude). On cue switch trials, the cue
changed but the task repeated (e.g., magnitude followed by
high-low). On task switch trials, both the cue and the task
changed (e.g., magnitude followed by parity). Participants
were given 150 ms for preparation during the cue-stimulus
interval and 300 ms for passive dissipation during the
response-cue interval.
Inhibition In the flanker task (Eriksen & Eriksen, 1974),
participants were asked to identify a centrally presented
target letter (either an ‘S,’ ‘C,’ ‘H,’ or ‘K’). This target letter
was either presented alone or with three noise letters
flanking it on each side. Participants pressed the ‘z’ key
when the target letter was S or C, and the ‘/’ key when the
target letter was H or K, as quickly as possible. There were
four stimulus conditions: (1) no noise (e.g., S), (2) noise
same as target (e.g., SSSSSSS), (3) noise response
compatible (e.g., SSSCSSS), and (4) noise response
incompatible (e.g., SSSKSSS). After completing 32 practice
trials, participants completed 160 trials (4 blocks of 40
trials). Trials began with a 500 millisecond fixation cross
presented in the center of the screen, followed by a blank
screen for 50 milliseconds. The stimulus was then presented
until a response was made. The latency difference between
the noise response incompatible condition and the no noise
condition served as the dependent measure.
Long-Term Memory Participants were asked to learn a list
of 30 words. Words were presented one at a time in the
center of the screen at a rate of 3 seconds each. After
approximately 15 minutes, participants were given a
recognition test of all 30 words randomly mixed with 30 foil
words. Participants pressed the ‘z’ key if the word was part
of the original study list and the ‘/’ key if the word was not
presented in the original list. Stimuli were obtained from the
Toronto Word Pool and consisted of highly familiar 1
syllable words that were 3, 4, or 5 letters in length. Scores
were obtained using a nonparametric form of the
discriminability index (i.e., a′), and participants with an a′
score below .5 were excluded from analysis.

Results
Descriptive Statistics
Descriptive statistics are presented in Table 1. All of the
measures meet the criteria for univariate normality (Kline,
1998); skews are all less than 3 and kurtosis values are all
less than 4. All measures therefore displayed adequate
distributional properties for being subjected to latent
variable analysis.

2255

Table 1: Descriptive statistics
Variable
M
Digits
CR
808.72
CS
1204.26
TS
1299.25
Shapes
CR
797.77
CS
1055.56
TS
1135.71
Verbal
CR
934.63
CS
1286.99
TS
1406.19
Delayed
Word
0.83
Recognition

n

SD

Skew

Kurtosis

241
241
241

118.72
251.99
290.04

0.16
0.48
0.51

-0.41
0.05
0.49

245
245
245

138.43
190.16
211.97

0.39
0.41
0.44

-0.42
0.23
-0.13

245
245
245

149.29
242.03
268.89

0.44
0.38
0.28

-0.08
-0.38
-0.16

248

0.08

-0.91

1.29
Figure 1: Mean encoding costs and task switching costs
(± SE) by task domain (digits, shapes, verbal)

Flanker
85.39
250
59.92
0.23
0.79
__________________________________________
Note: CR = cue repeat trial, CS = cue switch trial,
TS = task switch trial

Cue Switching vs. Task Switching: Accounting for
Individual Differences in Switch Costs
Figure 1 presents the mean encoding costs and task
switching costs (errors bars indicate SE) by task domain
(digits, shapes, verbal). Encoding costs were calculated as
latency differences between cue switch and cue repeat trials,
and task switch costs were computed as latency differences
between task switch and cue switch trials. Across task
domains (please refer to Table 1), cue repeat trials were the
fastest (M = 847 ms), followed by cue switch trials (M =
1182 ms), and finally task switch trials (M = 1280 ms). Cue
switch trials were more like task switch trials than cue
repeat trials, suggesting that cue repetition effects account
for most of the switch cost. Indeed, the majority (77%) of
the switch cost is accounted for by the cost of encoding the
cue (335 ms cost). However, there is an overall mean
residual task switching cost of 98 ms. Planned contrasts
indicated that task switch trials were significantly slower
than cue switch trials, t = 8.04, p < 0.0001. Therefore, from
the means analysis, we can conclude that there is an effect
of task switching. Partial correlations between cue repeat
and cue switch trials, controlling for performance on task
switch trials, were also computed. Controlling for task
switch trials did not significantly attenuate the relationship
between cue repeat and cue switch trials in any of the task
domains; this suggested that the residual effect of task
switching might not be useful as an individual differences
variable. The next goal was to use Structural Equation
Modeling to test for reliable individual differences.
Two models were contrasted to test whether, after
accounting for cue encoding, the process of cue-switching is

sufficient to explain individual differences in switch costs,
or whether an additional task switching process is needed to
fully account for these costs. The former will be called the
2-factor model, and the later will be referred to as the 3factor model. In both models, the manifest measures are the
RTs from the cue repeat, cue switch, and task switch trials
from the digits, shapes, and verbal tasks. Residual variances
of trial type measures employing the same task domain were
correlated.
Model fit was assessed using the chi-square test for
goodness of fit, the comparative fit index (CFI; Bentler,
1990), the Tucker-Lewis index (TLI; Tucker & Lewis,
1973), and the root mean square error of approximation
(RMSEA; Browne & Cudek, 1992). Acceptable model fit is
reflected by a nonsignificant chi-square test for goodness of
fit, relative fit indices (i.e., CFI and TLI) above .90, and a
RMSEA value below .08 (Bentler, 1990; Bentler & Bonnet,
1980). A RMSEA value below .05 indicates excellent fit.
Analyses were conducted with AMOS 5 software
(Arbuckle, 2003) using maximum likelihood estimation. For
all of the SEM models, the factor loadings and interfactor
correlations were allowed to vary (Anderson & Gerbing,
1988).
In order to capture what was common, all nine measures
were free to load on the first factor, that is, an encoding
baseline, because all types of trials (cue repeat, cue switch,
and task switch) involve encoding the external cue and thus
should have systematic differences in the encoding process.
A 1-factor encoding model, however, did not sufficiently
account for individual differences in switch costs, χ2(18) =
108.88, p = .000, TLI = .881, CFI = .952, RMSEA = .142.
The second factor, cue switch, was then introduced to reflect
the systematic individual differences associated only with
switching a cue; it represents the common variance of the
cue switch and task switch trials, once baseline encoding
has been accounted for. The 2-factor model (please see

2256

Figure 2; note that the correlations among the residual
variances are not included in the figure for ease of
interpretation) provided an acceptable fit to the data, χ2(12)
= 22.76, p = .030, TLI = .979, CFI = .994, RMSEA = .060.
In Figure 2, the larger circles represent the latent variables,
and the rectangles represent the scores on the individual
indicator tasks that were used to measure each of the latent
variables. The smaller circles represent the residual
variances of the indictor tasks.
A third factor, task switch, was then introduced to
determine if a task switching process, in addition to
encoding baseline and cue switching, could better explain
individual differences in switch costs. This third factor was
equal to the residual common variance of task switch trials
only. The 3-factor model (please see Figure 3) provided an
excellent fit to the data, χ2(9) = 12.62, p = .181, TLI = .991,
CFI = .998, RMSEA = .040. At first glance, this suggests
that there is an effect of task switching, over and beyond the
processes of cue encoding and cue switching.
Because the 2-factor and 3-factor models are not nested,
the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) and the Expected
Cross-Validation Index (ECVI) were used to compare
overall model fit (Note: unlike the chi-square difference test,
these indices do not provide a statistical comparison of
competing models). In general, a model that has the lowest
AIC and ECVI values is judged to fit the data better than the
alternative model(s) tested (Brown, 2006). For the 2-factor
model, AIC = 106.76 and ECVI = 0.429; for the 3-factor
model, AIC = 102.62 and ECVI = 0.412. In terms of the
AIC and ECVI indices, the 3-factor model best fits the data,
however, the 3-factor model was deemed unacceptable due
to non-interpretable and ill-fitting parameter estimates of the
task switch factor. The variance of the task switch factor
was not significant, p = 0.272. Only the path loading for the
task switch trials in the Shapes task to the task switch factor
was significant (β = 0.18, p = 0.015); the path loadings for
the Digits and Verbal tasks were not significant.
Therefore, the 2-factor model was accepted. The lower
(i.e., better fitting) AIC and ECVI values for the 3-factor
model seem to simply reflect adjustment for model
complexity compared to the 2-factor model, so that the 3factor model does not account for any additional systematic
differences in switch costs. The act of task switching does
not provide reliable information that was not already
available from cue switching.

switching or task switching. That is, individuals who are
quicker at encoding the present, most relevant information
are also faster at inhibiting previous and/or distracting
information. Individual differences in long-term memory

Figure 2: 2-Factor latent variable model to account for
switch costs

Using Cognitive Measures to Explain Individual
Differences in Task Switching
Further support for this claim comes from additional
modeling of possible cognitive predictors (inhibition and
long-term memory) that might serve to explain some of the
systematic differences in each of the latent factors. Please
see Table 2 for standardized effects and model fits. It should
be noted that because only single indicator predictors are
being employed, the following effects are small, but
significant. Individual differences in inhibition significantly
predict individual differences in encoding, but not cue

Figure 3: 3-Factor latent variable model to account for
switch costs

2257

significantly predict individual differences in cue switching,
but not encoding or task switching. That is, individuals who
are able to efficiently switch between trials that require a
change in information, or change in instructional cue, have
higher long-term memory scores.
Table 2: Standardized effects of inhibition and long-term
memory on the task switching factor components and model
fit statistics
Inhibition

Long-Term
Memory

β
Encoding

p

β

p

.203*

.005*

-.039

.586

Cue Switch

-.099

.274

-.187*

.036*

Task Switch

.109

.375

-.132

.412

χ2

22.339

17.37

df

15

15

p

.099

.297

CFI

.996

.999

TLI

.986

.995

RMSEA

.044

.025

Baseline

Discussion
The overall goal of the present study was to establish a
representation of the structure of individual differences in
the double-cued procedure. There were two specific aims.
The first aim was to examine if individual differences in
performance on cue switch and task switch trials could be
distinguished at the level of latent variables to determine
whether switch costs reflect processes involved in
interpreting instructional cues rather than, or in addition to,
switching task sets. The second aim was to examine the
relationships of the decomposed costs with measures of
long-term memory and inhibition to determine the
underlying mechanisms or processes that might explain
some of the variance in each of the components.
In the aggregate trial-type RT analysis, cue switch trials
(M = 1182 ms) appeared more like task switch trials (M =
1280 ms), than like cue repeat trials (M = 847 ms).
Although 77% of the switch cost was accounted for by
encoding the cue (335 ms), the mean overall residual task
switching cost of 98 ms was significant. That is, average
performance on task switch trials was significantly slower
than average performance on cue switch trials. Using partial
correlation, it was found that the first-order correlation

between cue repeat and cue switch trials in the digits task
was reduced from .76 to .40 after controlling for
performance on task switch trials. The correlation between
cue repeat and cue switch trials in the shapes task reduced
from .80 to .52, and the correlation for the verbal task cue
repeat and cue switch trials reduced from .76 to .35. This
implied that 63%, 72%, and 59% of the variance shared
between the cue repeat and cue switch trials in the digits,
shapes, and verbal tasks, respectively, was associated with
performance on task switch trials. However, controlling for
task switch trials did not significantly attenuate the
relationship between cue repeat and cue switch trials in any
of the task domains, suggesting that the residual effect of
task switching might not be useful as an individual
differences variable.
The results of the present study showed that task
switching did not serve as a reliable individual differences
variable; task switch trials did not provide any additional
information that was not already accounted for by the cue
switch and cue repeat trials. The residual common variance
for the task switch factor was not significant, lending
support to the claim made by Logan and Bundesen (2003)
that efficient performance does not require an actual act of
task switching. It should be noted that this claim can only be
made for externally cued paradigms that employ short
preparation intervals, as this study only used one interval.
Yehene and Meiran (2007) suggest that this may not be the
case at longer preparation intervals. However, it should also
be noted that in an individual differences study, Friedman
and Miyake (2004) could not distinguish switch costs
incurred at short preparation intervals from those incurred at
longer preparation intervals at the level of latent variables.
That there were no reliable individual differences to
account for the act of task switching cannot be attributed to
participants’ preparatory strategies in response to a high
probability of a task switch trial. Recent studies (e.g.,
Schneider & Logan, 2006; Monsell & Mizon, 2006) have
indicated that the frequency of switch trials is related to the
magnitude of switch costs, so that the higher the probability
of the occurrence of a task switch trial, the smaller the
overall switch cost. In the present study, the overall
probability of a task switch, p(task switch), was 0.33, and
the probability of a task switch given a cue switch, p(task
switch|cue switch) was 0.5. In the Logan and Bundesen
(2003) studies, p(task switch) = 0.5, and p(task switch|cue
switch) = 0.67. Unlike the Logan and Bundesen
experiments, the present study can rule out the possibility
that participants might have strategically controlled their
task-set readiness as a function of expectation for a task
switch trial, thereby reducing their overall switch costs.
Moreover, other procedural precautions were taken in the
design of the current study, as suggested by Monsell and
Mizon (2006), to capture an endogenous control process, or
actual act of task switching, if there was one. For example,
the response-stimulus interval was kept constant to avoid
confounding active preparation with passive decay, and
highly salient cues were used. Finally, the present study can

2258

make the claim that increasing the number of target stimuli
from 4 in the shapes task, to 8 in the digits task, to 64 in the
verbal task did not lead to a task switching effect;
participants did not resort to switching task sets in response
to the cue as the mapping combinations between cues,
targets, and responses got larger.

Conclusions
In summary, individual differences in switch costs were
attributed to changes in cue initiated retrieval; switch costs
were a consequence of cue priming effects, not a
consequence of task changes. The further modeling of
cognitive measures to predict individual differences in the
component factors indicated that the single inhibition
measure was associated with individual differences in the
encoding baseline factor, and the single long-term memory
measure was related to individual differences in the cue
switching factor. It should be noted that although these
effects were small, they were theoretically grounded. These
results lend support to the claim that the loading of task
rules from long-term memory was necessary even on
nonswitch trials (Mayr & Kliegl, 2003). Because only one
preparation interval was included, the reduction in the
switch cost effect across increasing preparation intervals
cannot be measured. Therefore, it is not possible to
completely rule out an endogenous task set reconfiguration
process. The present study can, however, conclude that at
short preparation intervals, reliable variance in switch costs
could be explained by a cue repetition benefit; an additional
task switching process was not needed to fully account for
individual differences.

References
Anderson, J. C., & Gerbing, D. W. (1988). Structural
equation modeling in practice: A review and
recommended two-step approach. Psychological Bulletin,
103, 411-423.
Arbuckle, J. L. (2003). Amos (Version 5.0) [Computer
software]. Spring House, PA: Amos Development
Corporation.
Aron, A. R., Monsell, S., Sahakian, B. J., & Robbins, T. W.
(2004). A componential analysis of task-switching
deficits associated with lesions of left and right frontal
cortex. Brain: A Journal of Neurology, 127(7), 15611573.
Arrington, C. M., & Logan, G. D. (2005). Voluntary task
switching: Chasing the elusive homunculus. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, &
Cognition, 31(4), 683-702.
Bentler, P. M. (1990). Comparative fit indices in structural
models. Psychological Bulletin, 23, 611-626.
Bentler, P. M., & Bonnet, D. G. (1980). Significance tests
and goodness of fit in the analysis of covariance
structures. Psychological Bulletin, 88, 588-606.
Brown, T. A. (2006). Confirmatory factor analysis for
applied research. New York: Guilford Press.

Browne, M. W., & Cudeck, R. (1992). Alternative ways of
assessing model fit. Sociological Methods and Research,
21, 230-258.
Eriksen, B. A., & Eriksen, C. W. (1974). Effects of noise
letters upon the identification of a target letter in a
nonsearch task. Perception & Psychophysics, 16, 143149.
Friedman, N. P., & Miyake, A. (2004). The relations among
inhibition and interference control functions: A latentvariable analysis. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 133(1), 101-135.
Klein, R. B. (1998). Principles and practice of structural
equation modeling. New York: Guilford Press.
Logan, G. D., & Bundesen, C. (2003). Clever homunculus:
Is there an endogenous act of control in the explicit taskcuing procedure? Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception & Performance, 29(3), 575-599.
Logan, G. D., & Bundesen, C. (2004). Very clever
homunculus: Compound stimulus strategies for the
explicit task-cuing procedure. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 11(5), 832-840.
Mayr, U., & Keele, S. W. (2000). Changing internal
constraints on action: The role of backward inhibition.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 129(1), 426.
Mayr, U., & Kliegl, R. (2003). Differential effects of cue
changes and task changes on task-set selection
costs. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, & Cognition, 29(3), 362-372.
Monsell, S., & Mizon, G. A. (2006). Can the task-cuing
paradigm measure an endogenous task-set reconfiguration
process? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 32(3), 493-516.
Rubinstein, J. S., Meyer, D. E., & Evans, J. E. (2001).
Executive control of cognitive processes in task
switching. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 27, 763-797.
Schneider, D. W., & Logan, G. D. (2005). Modeling task
switching without switching tasks: A short-term priming
account of explicitly cued performance. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 134(3), 343-367.
Schneider, D. W., & Logan, G. D. (2006). Priming cue
encoding by manipulating transition frequency in
explicitly cued task switching. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 13(1), 145-151.
Tucker, L. R., & Lewis, C. (1973). A reliability coefficient
for maximum likelihood factor analysis. Psychometrika,
38(1), 1-10.
Yehene, E., & Meiran, N. (2007). Is there a general task
switching ability? Acta Psychologica, 126(3), 169-195.

2259

