UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Deconfounding Distance Effects in Moral Reasoning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/22t343k2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Nagel, Jonas
Waldmann, Michael

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Deconfounding Distance Effects in Moral Reasoning
Jonas Nagel (jnagel1@uni-goettingen.de)
Michael R. Waldmann (michael.waldmann@bio.uni-goettingen.de)
Department of Psychology, University of Göttingen, Germany

Abstract
A central question of moral philosophy and moral psychology
is whether spatial distance is morally relevant (Kamm, 2007).
Does spatial distance reduce our sense of obligation to help
strangers in great need? One problem of assessing this
question is that distance between agent and victim is typically
confounded with other factors, such as saliency of the
victim’s need, costs for the agent, or location of the agent’s
means. The goal of our experiments is to find out whether
spatial distance per se matters in people’s intuitions. Whereas
the first two experiments seem to indicate that spatial distance
between the agent and the victim or between the agent’s
means and the victim affect subjects’ intuitions, Experiment 3
and a closer look at Experiment 2 both reveal that the
assumed distance effects disappear if the compared cases are
properly deconfounded. Implications of these findings for
theories of psychological distance are discussed.
Keywords: moral reasoning; moral intuitions; distance;
obligation to help; human experimentation

Introduction
The present research aims at exploring the role of spatial
distance in moral judgments: Does spatial distance reduce
our sense of obligation to help strangers in great need? The
normative relevance of this factor has been heavily disputed
in philosophy. Thus, we will set out by first reviewing some
of the philosophical debate about whether distance ought to
matter morally. The aim of this section will not be to
contribute to this normative issue, but instead to motivate
our empirical investigation and to introduce the thought
experiments on which our experimental materials are based.
Unlike philosophers we do not want to address the question
whether spatial distance ought to matter, but rather aim at
finding out whether spatial distance per se is
psychologically relevant in moral judgments. Alternatively,
distance may only appear to be descriptively relevant due to
factors with which it is typically confounded. After a brief
discussion of relevant empirical work in psychology, we
will report three experiments which explore whether our
sense of obligation to help strangers is affected by distance
per se. In the concluding section, we briefly discuss the
implications of our findings for theories of psychological
distance.

Distance and the Obligation to Help in Philosophy
In his famous article Famine, Affluence, and Morality, the
philosopher Singer (1972) argues for an intuitive moral
principle: “If it is in our power to prevent something bad
from happening, without thereby sacrificing anything of
comparable moral importance, we ought, morally, to do it”

(p. 231). In a case example supposed to illustrate this
principle, a child is drowning in a shallow pond. Intuitively,
a person walking past this pond has a strong obligation to
rescue the child, even if this means that she will spoil her
clothes. Singer then argues that there is no justification to
mitigate this principle on the grounds of increased distance
between the victim and the potential agent, for such
reasoning would clash with “any principle of impartiality,
universalizability, [or] equality” (p. 232). Therefore he
believes that we are obligated to help distant strangers as
much as physically close strangers, for example by donating
a good proportion of our assets to the needy.
The philosopher Unger (1996) agrees with this
conclusion, and similarly does not view distance as a
normatively relevant factor. For him, physical proximity is
merely a factor increasing the conspicuousness of a victim’s
needs to a potential agent. This conspicuousness, while
responsible for our increased urge to help near as opposed to
far strangers, is not itself given any moral weight by Unger.
He supports this view by contrasting several versions of two
cases, The Vintage Sedan and The Envelope. In Sedan, the
agent refuses to pick up a man with a self-inflicted injury
and to drive him to a hospital, because he fears that the
victim’s blood will spoil the leather-seating of his car,
leading to a $5000 damage. As a consequence, the victim
loses a leg. In Envelope, the agent refuses to respond to a
letter from UNICEF which informed him that 30 children
could be saved from death if he sent in a check for $100. As
a consequence, 30 more children lose their lives than if the
agent had donated the money. According to Unger, our
intuitions tell us that the agent’s behavior is severely wrong
in Sedan, but not so much in Envelope, although there are
many features suggesting that the Envelope’s behavior is
actually much worse (e.g., more victims, each of them
suffering a greater loss, smaller costs for the agent, etc.).
To show that the difference in our intuitions between
these cases is not primarily grounded in physical proximity,
Unger (1996) then discusses both a version of Sedan in
which physical distance is increased (The CB Radios, in
which the agent is informed via a radio in his car about the
victim’s bad condition while he is ten miles away from
him), and a version of Envelope in which distance is
decreased (The Bungalow Compound, in which the agent
receives the UNICEF mail while he is on holiday, and the
children are suffering in his immediate neighborhood).
Unger’s intuitions (which can in our view be debated) is that
we condemn the agent’s behavior in CB Radios as strongly
as in Sedan, and that we judge his behavior in the Bungalow
as leniently as in the Envelope. Therefore, our diverging
intuitions toward Sedan and Envelope cannot be accounted

2595

for by the difference of physical distance between agent and
victim.
Recently, the philosopher Kamm (2007)1, who in contrast
to Singer and Unger endorses a nonconsequentialist ethical
position, has presented a different view on these matters.
Part of her argument against Unger’s (1996) claims is as
follows: If one wants to show that distance per se never
matters morally, it does not suffice to provide a couple of
sets of cases in which it does not matter morally, for there
might be different equalized contexts in which it does. For
example, in both the Envelope and the Bungalow, the
children’s bad condition is caused by a lack of basic social
justice, and it might be that an individual’s obligation to
help in such cases is not tracked by distance. However, this
does not imply that the same holds true for cases involving
accidents, for example. On the flipside, Kamm argues, if
one wants to show that distance per se does matter morally,
it suffices to provide one single set of perfectly equalized
cases in which it does. Her approximation of such a set of
cases (with the contrast case in parentheses) is as follows:
Near [Far] Alone Case. I am walking past a pond in a foreign
country that I am visiting. I alone see many children drowning
in it, and I alone can save one of them. [I alone know that in a
distant part of a foreign country that I am visiting, many
children are drowning, and I alone can save one of them.] To
save the one, I must put the $500 I have in my pocket into a
machine that then triggers (via electric current) rescue
machinery that will certainly scoop him out. (p. 348)

Kamm’s intuition is that she has a stronger obligation to
the child in Near Alone than to the child in Far Alone. As
she notes, in this set of cases most of the factors normally
confounded with distance are held constant. Among them
are, for example, the numbers of victims, the seriousness of
their suffering and how it came about. Further factors are
the costs for the agent and the way in which they arise, as
well as the agent’s means of helping and their probability of
success. Moreover, the number of potential alternative
helpers typically increases with distance. Because all these
confounded factors are held constant, Kamm believes that
spatial distance alone is responsible for the difference in our
sense of moral obligation between Near Alone and Far
Alone.
In summary, the question of whether we ought to help
needy strangers who are near us more than those who are far
is controversial among philosophers. In the current research
we are more interested in the question whether spatial
distance per se affects intuitive judgments of laypeople if,
like in Kamm’s cases, potentially confounded variables are
controlled. Surely, the intuition that we have a greater
responsibility to take care of what is going on near us rather
than far from us is shared by most people. But why is this?
Is this intuition entirely explainable in terms of distinct,
confounded factors like conspicuousness of need, as Unger
(1996) claims? Or does distance possess some moral weight
of its own in our intuitive judgments, even if all
confounding factors are controlled?
1

All following references to Kamm refer to this volume.

Distance and Obligation to Help in Psychology
Before we present our experiments, we want to take a look
at previous relevant research in psychology. We are
primarily interested in the determinants of moral intuitions
rather than in what people actually do. Of course, there is an
enormous amount of social psychological studies on
determinants of actual (im)moral behavior, some of which
also involve investigations of distance effects (e.g.,
Milgram, 1965). However, such behavior is obviously
determined by many more factors than moral judgment
alone (e.g., Latané & Darley, 1970).
To our knowledge, only a few studies have directly
investigated the influence of distance on people’s sense of
obligation to help. One study is by Gillis and Hagan (1983),
in which participants reported that they were more likely to
intervene to prevent criminal behavior if the incident
occurred close to their own home as opposed to a distant
part of their hometown. In this case, distance refers to the
proximity of a threat to the center of an agent’s territory,
whereas the distance between agent, threat, and victim at the
time of the incident is constantly small. Hence, the results
indicate that some types of spatial distance may influence
people’s sense of obligation.
Levine and Thompson (2004) presented a British sample
of participants with two scenarios describing the aftermath
of a natural disaster. One was about an earthquake in
Eastern Europe, the other about a flood in South America.
Additionally, the instructions highlighted for half of the
participants their British identity, whereas for the other half
their identity as Europeans was emphasized. Participants
responded to be more likely to offer financial help as well as
political engagement if the disaster happened in Europe
rather than in America. However, this main effect was
qualified by an interaction with the highlighted identity: The
difference was greater when the European identity was
salient, in which case the comparison between Eastern
Europe and South America involved an ingroup/outgroup
contrast. For this reason, Levine and Thompson (2004)
argue that social categorization of the self relative to the
victims rather than absolute geographical distance between
them crucially affects whether people feel obligated to help.
Note, however, that the distance between agent and victims,
while differing in relative terms, is very large in both
location conditions. Thus, these results do not rule out that
distance effects could be found if the contrast involved one
case in which the victim is near the agent in absolute terms
and one case in which she is far. As Kamm argues, it might
be really spatial proximity or absolute nearness which makes
a moral difference, rather than any difference in relative
distance.
Finally, Baron and Miller (2000) explored how people
deal with the fact that, in principle, they have an unlimited
amount of opportunities to help others in great need at little
costs to themselves. They considered several factors that
people might use to limit the scope of their positive duties,
among them spatial distance. They found in both an
American and an Indian sample that people find it more

2596

wrong that an agent does not donate bone marrow to a sick
patient if this patient lives in the same town as opposed to
on the other side of the world. Moreover, significantly more
subjects feel that the agent has a responsibility to donate in
the near rather than in the far condition. Whereas the
contrast in this study contains a genuine difference of
proximity between agent and victim, it is again confounded
with a difference in shared group membership. In fact,
Baron and Miller (2000) themselves explicitly make the
ingroup/outgroup contrast accountable for the distance
effect they found.
In sum, there is some evidence compatible with the
hypothesis that spatial distance might play a role when
people consider whether they ought to help needy others.
However, there is no previous study that thoroughly
deconfounded distance from other factors naturally varying
with distance, such as group membership. Moreover, in all
studies reviewed so far the distance factor was varied within
subjects only. Since people had to compare cases that were
otherwise very similar, the salience of the varied factor was
probably artificially increased. Thus, demand characteristics
may have distorted the results. While the within-subjects
component is actually typical for the setting in which
philosophers usually form their intuitions (see above), we
believe a stronger empirical case for a true influence of
spatial distance on laypersons’ moral intuitions could be
made if effects were found in a properly deconfounded
between-subjects design.

Experiment 1
We take Kamm’s Near Alone and Far Alone cases as a
starting point for our investigation. As noted above, these
cases are equalized in many important respects.
Consequently, confounds contained in previous studies can
largely be avoided. Moreover, past research (Miller,
Bersoff, & Harwood, 1990) has shown that members of
different cultures unanimously regard helping strangers in
life-threatening situations as a genuine moral obligation
rather than as a matter of social convention or personal
choice. That is, helping in such cases is considered both as
an “objective” duty (i.e., existing not just because of a law)
and as legitimately regulated by society. This indicates that
most subjects will evaluate the selected cases in moral
terms. If a lack of mere spatial proximity between agent and
victim decreases people’s sense of obligation to help,
subjects should judge the agent’s obligation in Far Alone to
be somewhat lower than in Near Alone. Experiment 1 tests
this hypothesis. Note that, since both cases involve an action
that is generally considered to be driven by a strong moral
duty, a small effect size near the ceiling is to be expected if
distance turns out to be relevant.

Method
Participants 62 Göttingen University students (48 women)
with a mean age of 23 years participated voluntarily. The
experiment was conducted either in a class room before a

lecture, or subjects were individually approached on
campus.
Design, materials, and procedure Each participant
individually filled out a questionnaire consisting of two
pages. The first page contained general instructions
explaining the task and asking the participant to try to
empathize with the scenario’s agent, even though, for
methodological reasons, the scenario content would not be
realistic. After turning the page, half of the participants
(n=31) read a variant of Near Alone, the other half (n=31) a
variant of Far Alone. The wording of both cases was kept as
close as possible to Kamm’s original formulation (see
above), but we decided to include the description of a
mechanism by which the agent could possibly have learned
about the victims in Far Alone. The text of our Near [Far]
case was as follows (translated from German):
You are on holiday in a foreign country. There, you take a
walk past a pond. You alone see many children drowning in it
[While you take a walk there, you alone learn via an
information service on your cell phone that many children are
drowning in a pond situated in a distant part of the country],
and you alone can save one of them. To save the one, you
must put the €500 you have in your pocket into a machine
that accidentally is situated right next to you. This machine
then triggers a remote-controlled rescue machine in the pond
which will definitely pull one of the children out of the water
and save her life. There is no other possibility to save one or
more of the children.

This case description was followed by an assessment of
the participants’ sense of obligation to help. The wording of
the question was: “How strongly do you feel obligated to
put your €500 into the machine in order to save one of the
children?,” highlighting both consequences and costs of the
action. Finally, participants were asked to indicate their
judgment on a 6-point rating scale, labeled “not at all” at the
left-hand end (1) and “very strongly” at the right-hand end
(6).

Results
The mean rating for sense of obligation was 5.61 (SD=.67)
in the Near condition, and 4.97 (SD=1.22) in the Far
condition. This difference was statistically significant
(t[dfcorr=46.37]=2.58, one-tailed, p<.01, d=.65).2

Discussion
Our participants seem to share Kamm’s intuitions regarding
the Near Alone and Far Alone cases. Even though, as
expected, ratings were very high in both conditions,
participants reported a higher sense of obligation to rescue a
child drowning near them rather than far from them. This
effect cannot be accounted for by most confounds usually
associated with spatial distance, such as social distance,
number of potential saviors, urgency, probability of success,
or type, and size of costs for the agent.

2

In none of the experiments there was a significant effect of sex
on sense of obligation to help. Therefore, this factor is excluded
from all analyses.

2597

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2 we seek to test the hypothesis that
proximity between an agent’s means and the victim
increases the agent’s sense of obligation to help, even if the
agent himself is constantly far away from the victim. We
construed a scenario in which an agent has the opportunity
to donate money in order to save sick children in Kenya
from early death. His means to this end is money on a bank
account which is either located close to him but far from the
victims (in Göttingen, Germany) or close to the victims (in
Kenya). Additionally, we anticipated that subjects might
infer that they are in some way involved with Kenya from
the fact that their money is there already. To control for this
obvious confound, we decided to include previous personal
involvement with Kenya as an additional independent
variable.

The respective Far conditions were identical, except that
the agent’s bank account was located in Göttingen. Sense of
obligation was assessed using the same scale as in
Experiment 1. The wording of the question was: “How
strongly do you feel obligated to perform the proposed
action?”

Results
The results are summarized in Figure 1. A two-way
ANOVA revealed a main effect of involvement on sense of
obligation to help (F[1,76]=11.25; p<.01; 𝜂𝑝2 =.13),
indicating that stronger previous involvement with Kenya
led participants to report that they feel more strongly
obligated to donate the money. Moreover, there was a main
effect of distance (F[1,76]=4.31; p<.05; 𝜂𝑝2 =.05), showing
that participants reported feeling more strongly obligated to
help if their bank account was in Kenya. The interaction
between both independent variables was not significant
(F[1,76]=1.25; p=.27).
5

Mean Sense of Obligation

This result encouraged us to test further factors proposed
by Kamm. In particular, an important claim she makes is
that not only proximity between agent and victim might be
of moral importance, but also proximity between the victim
and the agent’s items that are efficacious in helping the
victim. In other words, Kamm’s intuition is that an agent is
more strongly obligated to let his means be used if they are
situated near the victim rather than if they are far, even if he
is far from the victim himself in both cases. As an example
she uses drowning scenarios in which the distance between
agent and victim is kept constantly high, but the distance of
the means of saving, a boat the agent owns, is either near or
far the victim. Kamm’s intuition is that this distance is
morally relevant.

4

Distance
Near
Far

3

2
4.7

4.4

4.0

High

3.0

Low

Involvement

Figure 1: Mean ratings of sense of obligation in
Experiment 2. Error bars indicate SEM.

Method
Participants 80 Göttingen University students (48 women)
with a mean age of 24 years participated voluntarily after
being approached individually on campus.
Design, materials, and procedure The two independent
variables yielded a 2 (distance between victim and agent’s
means: Near vs. Far) × 2 (involvement: High vs. Low)
between-subjects design (each n=20). The questionnaires
had the same format as in Experiment 1. The case vignette
in the Near/High [Near/Low] condition read as follows
(translated from German):
A couple of years ago, you have opened a bank account in
Kenya while you spent your holidays there [because you
found out about the high interest rates there]. Since then, you
have returned there a couple of times. This is why you are still
maintaining this account today. [Since this proved of value,
you are still maintaining this account today. Neither have you
ever been to Kenya yourself, nor have you had any other
connection to that country.]
One day, while you are in Göttingen, you hear in the news
that several children in Kenya have been infected with a
rapidly progressing disease. If these children do not receive
medical treatment, they will die within the next few days.
However, there is a lack of money for the urgently needed
treatment. You could effectively contribute to saving the
children by transferring €30 via internet from your Kenyan
bank account to a local donation account.

Discussion
As expected, previous personal involvement with the home
country of the children in need heavily increased
respondents’ sense of obligation to help. More interestingly,
we found an independent effect of the location of the bank
account: Participants felt more obligated to help if the
means by which they could do so were already located close
to the victims, even in the case in which the agent had never
visited the country and only had opened an account because
of the favorable interest rate. The effect of the spatial
distance of the means is especially interesting since the
action required to help (i.e., instructing a transfer of funds
via internet) is virtually identical in both conditions.
Moreover, the location of the means is actually merely
symbolic in this scenario, since the agent’s money does not
have real physical presence either in Kenya or in Göttingen
prior to being withdrawn from a cash machine. Still, it
seems that even under these conditions participants share
Kamm’s intuition that proximity of means increases
obligation to help.
So far, Kamm’s propositions about the impact of mere
spatial distance on moral intuitions are mirrored in our

2598

participants’ judgments in both experiments. However,
despite all the effort invested in making the cases maximally
parallel, both experiments still contain remaining
confounds. In particular, it cannot be ruled out that in the
Near/Low condition in Experiment 2, the knowledge that
the agent is somehow profiting from the Kenyan financial
system is the source of increased obligation, even if all other
personal involvement is explicitly ruled out. In fact, in
informal discussions with participants who had completed
this condition, quite a few of them spontaneously mentioned
that such considerations had influenced their judgment.
Moreover, even in the more tightly controlled and therefore
more artificial cases of Experiment 1 there is a remaining
potentially relevant confound (see also Kamm): In the Near
case, the agent directly sees the drowning children with her
own eyes, whereas in the Far case the information is
mediated by an electronic device. Therefore, in Experiment
3, apart from trying to replicate the results from Experiment
1, we aim to go one step further and try to experimentally
control for informational directness in order to find out
whether an independent effect of spatial distance can still be
found.

Experiment 3
Experiment 3 aims at replicating the results of Experiment 1
while controlling for the previously confounded factor of
informational directness. Additionally, we seek to find out
whether a distance effect can be found if there are no
considerable costs to the agent. Kamm’s intuition is that
distance does not matter under such conditions of no cost: If
all I need to do to save someone’s life is to pull a switch, I
ought to do so regardless of whether the victim is near me or
not.

children screaming. In Near/Direct, we included a fence
instead of a wall to make sure that participants in this
condition would not believe the agent could simply jump
into the river. Finally, in all Zero cost conditions, the action
no longer consisted of putting money (in the costly case
€300, being closer to Kamm’s $500 in terms of actual
worth) into the machine, but rather of pulling a switch.
Sense of obligation was assessed using the same scale and
wording of question as in Experiment 2.

Results
The results are summarized in Figure 2. In order to test
whether the results of Experiment 1 could be replicated, we
first conducted a planned contrast between the conditions
Near/Direct/High and Far/Mediated/High, which correspond
to Near and Far in Experiment 1. This contrast was
significant (t[232]=2.41, one-tailed, p<.01, d=.62)3 and the
respective means were almost identical with those obtained
in Experiment 1, thus neatly replicating its results.
Afterwards, we conducted a three-way ANOVA which
revealed a main effect of costs on sense of obligation to help
(F[1,232]=15.77; p<.001, 𝜂𝑝2 =.06), indicating that
participants reported feeling more strongly obligated to help
at zero costs than at high costs. Moreover, there was a main
effect of informational directness (F[1,232]=4.53; p<.05;
𝜂𝑝2 =.02), showing that participants reported feeling more
strongly obligated to help if they witnessed the incident with
their own eyes. Crucially, there was no main effect of
distance (F[1,232]<1), nor were any of the interactions
between the three independent variables statistically
significant.
Mean Sense of Obligation

6,0

Method
Participants 240 Göttingen University students (133
women) with a mean age of 24 years participated
voluntarily after being approached individually on campus.
Design, materials, and procedure We orthogonally
manipulated three independent variables, yielding a 2
(distance between agent and victim: Near vs. Far) × 2
(informational directness: Direct vs. Mediated) × 2 (costs:
Zero vs. High) between-subjects design (each n=30). The
case vignettes were closely matched to Near and Far in
Experiment 1, but to control for informational directness we
made some changes. To be able to construe a case in which
the agent has direct information despite large physical
distance (by means of binoculars), we decided to move the
victims somewhat closer to the agent, so that now the
distance was about five kilometers in all Far conditions. In
all Mediated cases, the information was again transmitted
via cell phone in the form of a video (to keep the visual
modality constant). In the Near/Mediated conditions, there
was a high wall between agent and victims to avoid direct
visual contact. Moreover, the pond was replaced by a
thunderous river in all conditions to prevent participants in
this condition from assuming that the agent could hear the

5,8
5,6
5,4

Distance

5,2

Near
Far

5,0
4,8
5.80 5.87

5.60 5.80

5.57 5.40

5.23 5.00

Direct
Mediated
Direct
Mediated
Informational Directness Informational Directness
Zero
High
Costs for Agent

Figure 2: Mean ratings of sense of obligation in
Experiment 3. Error bars indicate SEM.

Discussion
The findings from this experiment indicate that the assumed
distance effect from Experiment 1 can be attributed to an
effect of informational directness. If directness is kept
constant, distance does not have an effect anymore. The fact
3

This difference remains significant if the t-test is based
exclusively on the two compared groups and corrected for their
unequal variances (t[dfcorr=45.95]=1.88, one-tailed, p<.05, d=.48).

2599

that we were able to exactly replicate the mean ratings of
Experiment 1 in the corresponding conditions of Experiment
3 makes it seem unlikely that any of the small changes we
introduced to the material (e.g., slightly lower costs, videomediated information, more abstract question wording) is
responsible for the absence of a distance effect. Thus, we
are confident that informational directness also caused the
effect in Experiment 1.
The strongest effect we found was that our subjects’ sense
of obligation to help was lowered when there were
substantial costs for the agent. None of our subjects may
have actually believed that a child’s life is not worth $300.
Rather, some of them may have felt that a shady machine
taking $300 to rescue a child is itself immoral. More
interestingly, we did not find an interaction of costs and
distance, as Kamm would have predicted. Distance indeed
did not affect the ratings when there weren’t any costs for
the agent, but neither did it when there were.

General Discussion
Kamm supports her claim that distance per se matters
morally with her intuitions regarding her sense of obligation
to help needy strangers in well equalized scenarios.
Experiment 1 showed that laypersons share her intuitions on
one of her central set of cases. Experiment 2 indicated, as
Kamm has proposed, that not only distance between agent
and victim, but also distance between an agent’s means and
the victim may affect our moral intuitions. It seems likely,
though, that distance effects here were mediated by
assumptions about different amounts of social
responsibility. The interpretation that distance effects may
be generally reducible to other confounded factors is
bolstered by Experiment 3, which additionally controlled for
informational directness. This experiment revealed that the
assumed distance effect from Experiment 1 disappears if the
compared cases are properly deconfounded. Thus, while we
find that our participants’ responses to specific cases are
largely in line with Kamm’s intuitions, we also find,
contrary to what Kamm argues, that these intuitions are
informed by factors typically confounded with distance
rather than by distance per se. In this sense, our data are
more in line with Unger’s (1996) behavioral predictions.
Moreover, they align nicely with recent findings by Greene
et al. (2009) who did not find spatial distance to influence
judgments of moral dilemmas when this factor was carefully
separated from related factors such as personal force or
physical contact.
This pattern of results indicates that a purely spatial
notion of distance does not seem to affect moral judgment
of laypersons. That, of course, is not to say that what is
commonly experienced as spatial distance in everyday life
does not influence people’s moral judgments. In fact, as
Experiment 2 has shown, in naturalistic settings, people are
sensitive even to very subtle manipulations of distance.
However, psychologically relevant distance seems to be a
broad concept naturally enriched with many covariates, such
as informational directness or personal involvement. The

difficulty of isolating spatial distance from its typically
associated dimensions becomes evident in the highly
artificial scenarios that result from our attempts to hold the
confounded variables constant.
Future research could aim at investigating psychological
mediators of effects of (enriched) distance. Previous studies
in the framework of Construal Level Theory (CLT) have
demonstrated the impact of psychological distance on the
intensity of moral judgments (Eyal, Liberman, & Trope,
2008). The present findings constitute an interesting
anomaly from the perspective of CLT, which predicts the
impact of abstract, high-level moral values (such as “it is
good to help others in need”) on the intensity of moral
judgment to increase with increasing psychological
distance. While this seems to be true for temporal distance
(Eyal et al., 2008), our results indicate that sense of
obligation is not affected by spatial distance per se, and that
it, if anything, decreases with increasing enriched distance.
This might indicate that, at least in the realm of morality, the
processes through which different distance dimensions
operate are not as similar as CLT commonly assumes.

Acknowledgments
We thank Claudia Schwarz and Carina Suhr for their help
with data collection.

References
Baron, J. & Miller, J. G. (2000). Limiting the scope of
moral obligations to help: A cross-cultural investigation.
Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 31, 703-725.
Eyal, T., Liberman, N., & Trope, Y. (2008). Judging near
and distant virtue and vice. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 44, 1204-1209.
Gillis, A. R. & Hagan, J. (1983). Bystander apathy and the
territorial imperative. Sociological Enquiry, 53, 449-460.
Greene, J. D., Cushman, F. A., Stewart, L. E., Lowenberg,
K., Nystrom, L. E., & Cohen, J. D. (2009). Pushing moral
buttons: The interaction between personal force and
intention in moral judgment. Cognition, 111, 364-371.
Kamm, F. M. (2007). Intricate Ethics. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Latané, B. & Darley, J. M. (1970). The unresponsive
bystander: Why doesn’t he help? Englewood Cliffs:
Prentice-Hall.
Levine, M. & Thompson, K. (2004). Identity, place, and
bystander intervention: Social categories and helping after
natural disasters. Journal of Social Psych., 144, 229-245.
Milgram, S. (1965). Some conditions of obedience and
disobedience to authority. Human Relations, 18, 57-76.
Miller, J. G., Bersoff, D. M., & Harwood, R. L. (1990).
Perceptions of social responsibilities in India and in the
United States: Moral imperatives or personal decisions?
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 58, 33-47.
Singer, P. (1972). Famine, affluence, and morality.
Philosophy and Public Affairs, 1, 229-243.
Unger, P. (1996). Living high and letting die. New York:
Oxford University Press.

2600

