UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Desirable Difficulties in Cross-Situational Word Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2151507t

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Vlach, Haley
Sandhofer, Catherine

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Desirable Difficulties in Cross-Situational Word Learning
Haley A. Vlach (haleyvlach@ucla.edu)
Catherine M. Sandhofer (sandhof@psych.ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles
1285 Franz Hall, Los Angeles, CA 90095 USA

Abstract
The world offers learners a seemingly infinite number of
word-to-world mappings (Quine, 1960). In order to account
for how learners manage to accomplish such a difficult task,
theories of word learning have proposed different tools that
make the task of learning words easier. However, we propose
that reducing difficulty may be detrimental—difficulty may
promote long-term word learning. We tested this hypothesis
in a cross-situational paradigm in which object-label
mappings were ambiguous during each learning event. The
three conditions of learning (2 x 2, 3 x 3, and 4 x 4) varied in
the degree of difficulty. Results revealed that, although
difficulty deterred immediate performance, difficulty
promoted long-term performance. We suggest that theory and
research should shift from focusing on in-the-moment
learning to examining both immediate and long-term
learning. A complete theory of word learning not only
accounts for word learning in the moment and on each time
scale, but also integrates them in order to understand how
they influence each other over time.
Keywords: word and category learning; statistical learning;
cross-situational learning; long-term memory

Introduction
The world offers learners a seemingly infinite number of
word-to-world mappings (Quine, 1960). Thus, an essential
question for research on word learning is: How do learners
manage to accomplish the difficult task of mapping words
to objects, actions, and events in the world?
Theories of word learning typically focus on tools that
learners use to make word learning easier. In this study, we
examine word learning from the radical perspective that
reducing difficulty may be detrimental. This study explores
the idea that some difficulty may promote word learning,
even in difficult tasks in which learners must track
mappings across events, such as cross-situational word
learning.
Theories of Word Learning. Three main classes of
theories have sought to explain word learning: the
Constraints/Principles theories, the Social-Pragmatic
theories, and the Domain-General theories. All three of
these theories propose tools that make word learning easier
but differ in the nature of the task simplification tools.
The Constraints/Principles theories suggest that word
learning is made easier and more feasible by constraints that
narrow the search space for possible word-to-world
mappings, such as mutual-exclusivity (e.g., Markman,
1989) and the novel-name nameless-category assumption
(e.g., Golinkoff, Mervis, & Hirsh-Pasek, 1994). These

constraints guide learners‟ interpretations of new words and
thus reduce the degree of indeterminacy. For example; the
mutual-exclusivity principle (Markman, 1989) proposes
words have mutually-exclusive meaning—one object can
have only one referent. Consequently, when learners hear
an unfamiliar label, they will assign an unfamiliar label to
an unfamiliar object rather than an object that has already
been named.
A second class of theories, the Social-Pragmatic theories,
propose that word learning is simplified because learners are
embedded in a social world in which they are guided by
expert word learners (e.g., Bloom, 1993; Tomasello &
Barton, 1994). Adults, as expert word learners, resolve the
ambiguity of the word-learning scenario by guiding
children‟s attention and thus make the task of word learning
easier. For example, adults commonly talk about objects,
events, and actions that learners are already focused on and
consequently make it easier for learners to make word-toworld mappings (Bloom, 1993).
A final class of theories, the Domain-General theories,
assert that general cognitive mechanisms such as perceptual
saliency, association, and frequency make word learning
straightforward (e.g., Smith, 1995)—learners notice objects
and actions that are most salient in their environment and
pair them with the most frequently associated label. For
example, in one study (Samuelson & Smith, 1998), children
were able to learn a novel word-novel object link by using
saliency cues in the absence of other cues, suggesting that
saliency cues alone guided children‟s word learning.
Word Learning and Memory. Although the three classes
of theories make different predictions about many aspects of
word learning, in this study we investigated a cognitive
mechanism that is inevitably a critical part of each theory:
memory. For example; the Constraint/Principles theories
argue that constraints promote memory for words—if
everything had a multiple unique labels it would be
impossible to store and recall all of these words from
memory. Social-Pragmatic theories rely on processes of
memory and attention for establishing joint attention among
two people—learners must attend and remember what
others are focusing on in order to adequately label words
and actions (e.g., Bloom, 1993). Domain-General theories
assert that word learning is guided by global principles of
attention, association, and frequency, which are basic
cognitive mechanisms associated with memory (e.g., Smith,
1995). In sum, memory is a critical component to word
learning theories because it supports every part of the word
learning process—learning words requires attending to

2470

words, encoding the properties of the word, binding words
to objects in the world, and recalling words when needed in
order to communicate with others.
Although it is clear that memory matters for learning
words, relatively little work has investigated the role of
memory and retention in word learning. In fact, only a
handful of studies have imposed a delay between learning
and testing (see Horst & Samuelson, 2008, for a discussion
of this issue). Consequently, the vast majority of word
learning theories are based upon immediate performance
rather than performance over time.
Examining word learning both immediately and over time
is essential for two reasons. First, a complete theory of
word learning accounts for developmental changes in word
learning and retention abilities. Moreover, such a theory not
only accounts for word learning and retention on each time
scale, but also integrates them in order to understand how
they influence each other over time.
Second, immediate performance may not be a reflection
of long-term performance. The few studies that have
examined word learning and retention have yielded mixed
results as to whether performance remains constant over
time (e.g., Horst & Samuelson, 2008; Markson & Bloom,
1997). Alternatively, the memory literature has provided
countless examples of how the factors that promote
immediate learning do not necessarily promote long-term
learning (e.g., Bjork, 1994). Immediate performance may
not predict long-term performance because the degree of
difficulty in learning influences long-term performance.
Desirable Difficulties in Learning. There has been a long
history of research that has investigated the conditions under
which long-term memory is enhanced. The principle goals
of this research have been to discover factors that promote
adults‟ ability to (1) produce and store a representation of
knowledge and (2) create a representation that remains
accessible and recallable over extended periods of time.
Research has revealed that several manipulations of learning
events can enhance long-term memory, such as varying the
conditions of practice (e.g., Smith & Rothkopf, 1984),
providing contextual interference (e.g., Mannes & Kintsch,
1987), distributing practice and the spacing effect (e.g.,
Cepeda et al., 2006), and reducing feedback to the learner
over time (e.g., Schmidt, 1991).
These manipulations promote long-term memory because
they introduce difficulty for learners while knowledge is
being acquired (e.g., Bjork, 1994). Although learning tasks
that are designed to make learning easy initially show
greater learning, retention tests reveal that more difficult
learning tasks promote more long-term memory and
learning (and hence the term „desirable‟ difficulty is
commonly used). Thus, the memory literature suggests that,
instead of making tasks easy for learners, the best way to
promote long-term memory is to create difficulty for
learners during learning.
An example of a desirable difficulty in learning is the
spacing effect (e.g., Cepeda et al., 2006). The spacing effect

describes the robust phenomenon whereby memory is
enhanced when learning events are distributed across time
(i.e., spaced), instead of being presented in immediate
succession (i.e., massed). Spaced learning is more difficult
than massed learning because the time between learning
events creates greater opportunities for forgetting (e.g.,
Bjork & Allen, 1970). Massed presentations prevent
forgetting because presentations are in immediate
succession. In fact, upon immediate testing, massed
presentations lead to a greater amount of learning than
spaced presentations. However, if a test is administered
following a delay, a spaced presentation schedule will yield
more learning than the massed presentation schedule.
Several researchers have long suggested that, although
introducing difficulty during memory tasks is beneficial,
these difficulties may be detrimental in more difficult
cognitive tasks (e.g., Gagne, 1950). For example, spaced
learning was thought to be particularly detrimental in
generalization tasks. In fact, spaced learning was coined the
“enemy of induction” (e.g., Gagne, 1950; see Kornell &
Bjork, 2008, for a discussion).
Desirable Difficulties in Word Learning.
Despite
speculations that desirable difficulties may be the “enemy of
induction”, recent research suggests that imposing difficulty
during learning promotes long-term word learning and
generalization (e.g., Kornell & Bjork, 2008; Vlach et al.,
2008). For example, one study (Vlach et al., 2008)
presented children with novel objects and labels in an object
category learning paradigm. Category exemplars were
presented on two schedules, massed and spaced. Children
were tested after a three minute delay and were required to
generalize a word to a novel instance of a category. The
results revealed that spaced presentations promoted more
learning than massed presentations. Thus, a spaced learning
schedule, a more difficult learning schedule, promoted word
learning and generalization.
One limitation of research on desirable difficulties in
word learning is that all of the studies have been artificially
simplistic—a linguistic label could only be mapped onto
one object. In real word learning contexts, mapping words
to objects is generally not this straightforward. Word
learners must figure out what words map onto in the world
(Quine, 1960). Thus, because learners must track possible
mappings across learning events, real world word learning
is much more difficult than tested in recent research on
desirable difficulties in word learning.
Research on cross-situational learning has indicated that
the more objects and labels in each learning event, the more
difficult it is for learners to determine mappings (e.g., Smith
& Yu, 2008; Yu & Smith, 2007; Yurovsky & Yu, 2008).
For example, when adult learners are presented with two
words and two objects in learning events, they demonstrate
relatively high performance, ~90% correct mappings on an
immediate test. However, when learners are presented with
four objects and four labels in each word learning event,
learners perform significantly lower, ~55% correct

2471

mappings on an immediate test (Yu & Smith, 2007). Thus,
it appears that the more objects and labels in each learning
event, the more difficult it is to track mappings across
learning situations.
The memory literature would suggest that increasing the
number of objects and labels in each word learning event
presents several forms of desirable difficulty.
First,
increasing the number of object and labels in each learning
event creates more spaced learning because each objectlabel pairing is interleaved between more possible pairings
(e.g., Cepeda et al, 2006; Vlach et al., 2008). Second, an
increase in the number of objects and labels in each learning
event creates more contextual variation and interference
between word learning events (e.g., Mannes & Kintsch,
1987). Both of these factors have been shown to promote
long-term retention (e.g., Bjork, 1994).
Although recent research suggests that difficulty may
promote word learning, this hypothesis has only been tested
in artificially simple tasks where object-label mappings are
straightforward. It may be the case that adding more
difficulty to an already difficult task of mapping words to
objects is not beneficial. Consequently, too much difficulty
may deter both in-the-moment and long-term word learning.
The current study investigates this possibility.
Current Study. The current study investigated the role of
difficulty during word learning in a cross-situational word
learning paradigm. Participants were presented with word
learning events in which determining the object-label
mappings were increasingly difficult. In the 2 x 2 condition,
each trial presented two words and two objects. In the 3 x 3
condition, each trial presented three words and three objects.
Finally, in the 4 x 4 condition, each trial presented four
words and four objects. There were also three testing delay
conditions: immediate, 30 minute delay, and one week
delay. These conditions allowed for a direct comparison of
the effects of varying degrees of difficulty in both in-themoment and long-term word learning.

Method
Participants
Participants were 95 undergraduates at University of
California, Los Angeles. Participants received course credit
for their participation.

computer‟s speakers. As Figure 1 shows, the objects were
pictures of novel objects. There were a total of 18 objects.
The labels were novel words following the phonotactic
probabilities of English (e.g., „blicket‟, „dax‟). There were a
total of 18 labels. Objects and labels were randomly paired
together, for a total of 18 object-label pairs. In all
conditions, there were a total of 6 presentations of each of
the 18 object-label pairs. There were also an additional four
objects and four labels presented during the training trial.
These objects and labels were not used during the learning
phase of the experiment.
In the 2 x 2 condition, two objects and two words were
presented in each learning trial (see Figure 1). In the 3 x 3
condition, three objects and three labels were presented. In
the 4 x 4 condition, four objects and four labels were
presented.
Labels

Trial #2

“Wug”…“Lorp”

Trial #3

“Blicket”…“Spog”

Trial #4

“Gazzer”…“Wug”
•
•
•

•
•
•

Figure 1. Example stimuli from the 2 x 2 condition.
Because the same number of object-label pairs (18 pairs)
were presented in each condition, the same number of times
(6 presentations each), other presentation factors varied
across conditions in order to ensure equivalent exposure to
the object-label pairs. Table 1 outlines these variations,
which were adapted from Yu and Smith (2007). Although
the number of trials and time per trial varied, the total
exposure time remained constant across the conditions (see
Table 1).
Table 1. Three Learning Conditions
Condition

This study used a 3 x 3 design. Learning Condition (2 x 2, 3
x 3, and 4 x 4) and Testing Delay (immediate, 30 minutes,
and one week) were both between-subjects factors.
Participants were randomly assigned to one of the nine
conditions of the study.

Pictures of objects were presented on a 15-inch computer
screen and the sound for the labels was presented by the

“Blicket”…“Dax”

•
•
•

Design

Stimuli

Trial #1

Computer Screen

2x2
3x3
4x4

Number
of Trials
54
36
27

Time per
Trial (in secs)
6
9
12

Total Time
(in secs)
324
324
324

Procedure
Participants were told that they would be shown children‟s
toys and it was their job to figure out which word went with
which toy. They were also instructed that it would be

2472

ambiguous as to which words went with which objects on
each trial. Participants were then given a brief training
exercise to demonstrate what the experiment would be like.
The training consisted of three learning trials, each with two
objects and two labels, immediately followed by a forcedchoice test. Objects and labels used during training were
not included during the rest of the experiment.
After the training trial, participants were informed that
they would now be beginning the learning phase of the
experiment. Participants were presented with learning trials
according to the condition in which they were assigned (2 x
2, 3 x 3, or 4 x 4). The number and length of trials was also
set according to the condition (see Table 1).
After viewing all of the trials, participants were given a
forced-choice test, depending upon the testing condition in
which they were assigned. In the immediate condition,
participants were given a test immediately following
learning. In the 30 minute delay condition, participants
were asked to play tetris for 30 minutes, and then were
given a test. In the one week delay condition, participants
were asked to come back exactly 7 days after the learning
session and complete a test.
The test consisted of four force-choice questions. Each
question presented one label and asked participants to
identify the corresponding object among four objects. The
three foil objects were other objects used in the experiment.
No one object was repeated in the tests. Thus, 16 of the 18
objects were used in the test. The labels and objects used
during the test were randomly assigned.

Results
We asked whether difficulty would promote learners‟ longterm word learning in a cross-situational learning paradigm.
If difficulty promoted word learning, we would expect to
see lower performance immediately, but stronger
performance long-term. However, if difficulty did not
promote word learning, we would expect to see lower
performance regardless of testing delay.
We first conducted a 3 (Learning Condition) x 3 (Testing
Delay) ANOVA, with the number of correct responses as
the dependent measure. Results of this test revealed a
significant main effect of learning condition, F(2, 86) =
20.582, p < .001, a significant main effect of testing delay,
F(2, 86) = 17.294, p < .001, and a significant interaction of
learning and testing delay, F(4, 86) = 2.542, p = .045.
First, three univariate ANOVAs were conducted within
each testing condition. We then computed three planned
comparisons using t-tests with Bonferroni corrections (p <
.05) to determine the nature of the differences between
learning conditions within each testing delay condition. If
difficulty promoted word learning, we expected there to be
differences in performance between learning conditions
across the testing conditions.
When the immediate testing condition, there was a main
effect of learning condition, F(2, 32) = 10.997, p < .001.
Participants in the 2 x 2 condition (M = 3.85 correct
mappings out of 4, SD = .376) had significantly higher
performance than in the 4 x 4 condition (M = 2.00 correct
mappings out of 4, SD = 1.195), p < .001. Performance was
also marginally higher in the 2 x 2 condition than the 3 x 3
condition (M = 3.07 correct mappings out of 4, SD = .997),

Figure 2. Average number of correct responses (out of 4) by learning condition (2 x 2, 3 x 3, 4 x 4) and testing
condition (immediate, 30 minute delay, one week delay). The dashed line represents chance performance.

2473

p = .086. Finally, performance in the 3 x 3 condition was
significantly higher than the 4 x 4 condition, p =.029. Thus,
greater the number of object-label pairings in each learning
trial, the lower the performance.
However, there was a different pattern of results in the 30
minute delay condition. There was a main effect of learning
condition, F(2, 28) = 5.304, p = .011. Participants in the 2 x
2 condition (M = 3.11 correct mappings out of 4, SD =
1.167) had similar performance to participants in the 3 x 3
condition (M = 3.00 correct mappings out of 4, SD =.784), p
> .05. Participants in the 2 x 2 and 3 x 3 conditions both
had significantly higher performance than participants in the
4 x 4 condition (M = 1.75 correct mappings out of 4, SD =
1.035), p = .022 and p = .021.
In the one week testing delay condition there was a
particularly interesting pattern of results. There was a main
effect of learning condition, F(2, 26) = 11.286, p < .001.
Participants in the 3 x 3 condition (M = 2.54 correct
mappings out of 4, SD = 1.127) had higher performance
than both the 2 x 2 condition (M = 1.62 correct mappings
out of 4, SD = .518), p = .071, and 4 x 4 condition (M = .75
correct mappings out of 4, SD = .463), p < .001.
Participants in the 4 x 4 condition performed similarly to
participants in the 2 x 2 condition, p > .05. Thus, although
initially participants in the 3 x 3 condition had lower
performance than the 2 x 2 condition, one week later
participants in the 3 x 3 condition had higher performance
than participants in the 2 x 2 condition.
In addition to examining the differences within each
testing condition, we also examined differences in each
learning condition across the testing conditions using
ANOVAs and three planned comparisons with Bonferroni
corrections (p < .05). In the 2 x 2 condition, there was a
main effect of testing delay, F(2, 27) = 12.255, p < .001.
Immediate performance was marginally higher than
performance in the 30 minute delay condition, p = .085, and
the performance in the 30 minute delay condition was
significantly higher than performance in the 1 week
condition, p = .001. Thus, there was significant decrease in
retention across each of the testing delay conditions.
There was also a main effect of testing delay in the 4 x 4
condition, F(2, 21) = 3.868, p = .037. There was not a
significant difference in performance between immediate
and 30 minute delay conditions, p > .05, or the 30 minute
delay and one week delay conditions, p > .05. However,
there was a significant difference in performance between
the immediate and one week delay condition, p = .047.
Thus, there was a significant decrease in retention between
the immediate test and one week delayed test. Finally, in
the 3 x 3 condition, there was not a main effect of testing
delay, F(2, 38) = 1.172, p > .05. Thus, there was not a
significant decrease in retention between the immediate and
delayed tests.

Discussion
The results of this study support the idea that difficulty
imposed during learning can promote long-term word

learning (e.g., Vlach et al., 2008). Moreover, difficulty
promoted word learning in the already difficult task of
cross-situational word learning, in which learners must track
mappings across events. We found that, when tested
immediately, learners had the highest performance in the 2 x
2 condition and the lowest performance in the 4 x 4
condition. Performance in the 3 x 3 condition was
somewhere in between. These findings replicate that of Yu
& Smith (2007). However, when tested 30 minutes later,
there were no differences in the performance between the 2
x 2 and 3 x 3 conditions. Finally, when tested a week later,
performance in the 3 x 3 condition was higher than
performance than in both the 2 x 2 and 4 x 4 conditions.
Thus, although difficulty yielded lower immediate
performance (i.e., the 2 x 2 condition had higher
performance than the 3 x 3 condition), there was a benefit of
difficulty for long-term performance (i.e., one week later the
3 x 3 condition had higher performance than the 2 x 2
condition). This study demonstrates that, even in the
seemingly difficult task of mapping words to objects
(Quine, 1960), adding difficulty promoted long-term word
learning.
The findings from this study also have implications for
research on cross-situational word learning and, more
generally, statistical word learning. Recent research on
statistical word learning has focused on the factors that
promote immediate performance in order to discover the
mechanisms by which words are acquired over time (e.g.,
Kachergis, Yu, & Shiffrin, 2009; Lany & Saffran, 2010).
However, this study suggests that this may not be the best
approach for describing long-term trajectories of word
learning. This study clearly demonstrates that immediate
performance does not always reflect long-term performance.
Thus, in order to assert that a mechanism promotes word
learning over time, evidence should be provided from not
just an immediate test, but an immediate and delayed test.
The broader impact of this study is that it highlights the
intimate relationship between word learning and memory.
Learning new words and categories requires perceiving an
object, attending to relevant features, mapping a label to the
object, binding this mapping to other instances of the label
and object, abstracting across instances, and, finally,
generalizing to novel objects. Memory is a critical factor in
this process, both during category formation (e.g.,
remembering relevant features and binding instances and
labels) and recall (e.g., retrieving stored instances and
categories).
Despite the clear relationship between word learning,
memory, and retention, we have failed as word learning
researchers and developmentalists to explore the
mechanisms underlying this relationship. Fundamental
questions have remained unexamined. For example, the few
studies that have asked whether children retain words over
time have provided conflicting evidence. While one study
finds children retain words for a month (e.g., Markson &
Bloom, 1997), other studies have found that children forget
words in a matter of minutes (e.g., Horst & Samuelson,

2474

2008; Vlach et al., 2008). What are the implications of our
research if participants do not remember words after a few
minutes? Why are we speculating about long-term word
learning from immediate performance, rather than
empirically investigating word learning over time? Are we
really uncovering the mechanisms of word learning?
In sum, future research should investigate both in-themoment and long-term word learning. Exploring in-themoment word learning is essential for understanding how
words and categories are initially encoded. However, in
theories of word learning, the common assumption is that
performance will remain constant over time. This study
clearly demonstrates that this is not always the case.
In order to account for real-world word learning, research
should incorporate testing over longer time-scales—over the
course of weeks, months, and years. A complete theory of
word learning not only accounts for word learning in the
moment and on each time scale, but also integrates them in
order to understand how they influence each other over
time.

Acknowledgments
We thank the undergraduate research assistants of the
Language and Cognitive Development Lab at UCLA for
their assistance in collecting the data for this study.

References
Bjork, R. A. (1994).
Memory and metamemory
considerations in the training of human beings. In J.
Metcalf and A. P. Shimura (Eds.), Metacognition:
Knowing about knowing (pp. 185-205). Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Bjork, R. A., & Allen, T. W. (1970). The spacing effect:
Consolidation or differential encoding? Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 9, 567-572.
Bloom, L. (1993). The transition from infancy to language:
Acquiring the power of expression. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University press.
Bloom, P. (2000). How children learn the meaning of
words. Cambridge, MA. MIT Press.
Cepeda, N. J., Pashler, H., Vul, E., Wixted, J. T., & Rohrer,
D. (2006). Distributed practice in verbal recall tasks: A
review and quantitative synthesis. Psychological Bulletin,
132, 354-380.
Gagne, R. M. (1950). The effect of sequence of presentation
of similar items on the learning of paired-associates.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 40, 61-73.
Golinkoff, R. M., Mervis, C. B., & Hirsh-Pasek, K. (1994).
Early object labels: The case for a developmental lexical
principles framework. Journal of Child Language, 21,
125-155.
Horst, J. S., & Samuelson, L. K. (2008). Fast mapping but
poor retention by 24-month-old infants. Infancy, 13, 128157.
Kachergis, G., Yu, C., & Shiffrin, R. M. (2009). Frequency
and contextual diversity effects in cross-situational word

learning. In N. Taatgen, H. van Rijn, J. Nerbonne, & L.
Schomaker (Eds.) Proceedings of the 31st Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society . Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Kornell, N., & Bjork, R. A. (2008). Learning concepts and
categories: Is spacing the "enemy of induction"?
Psychological Science, 19, 585-592.
Lany, J., & Saffran, J. R. (2010). From statistics to
meaning.
Psychological Science, published online
January 2010.
Mannes, S. M., & Kintsch, W. (1987). Knowledge
organization and text organization. Cognition and
Instruction, 4, 91-115.
Markman, E. M. (1989). Categorization and naming in
children: Problems of induction. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Markson, L., & Bloom, P. (1997). Evidence against a
dedicated system for word learning in children. Nature,
285, 813-815.
Quine, W.V.O. (1960). Word and object. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Samuelson, L. R., & Smith, L. B. (1998). Memory and
attention make smart word learning: An alternative
account of Akhtar, Carpenter, and Tomasello. Child
Development, 69, 94-104.
Schmidt, R. A. (1991). Frequent augmented feedback can
degrade learning: Evidence and interpretations. In G. E.
Stelmach & J. Requin (Eds.), Tutorials in motor
neuroscience (pp. 59-75). Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Smith, L. B. (1995). Self-organizing processes in learning
to learn words: Development is not induction. In C. A.
Nelson (Ed.), Basic and applied perspectives on learning,
cognition, and development: The Minnesota Symposia on
Child Psychology (Vol. 28, pp. 1-32). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Smith, L. B., & Yu, C. (2008). Infants rapidly learn wordreferent mappings via cross-situational statistics.
Cognition, 106, 333-338.
Smith, S. M., & Rothkopf, E. Z. (1984). Contextual
enrichment and distribution of practice in the classroom.
Cognition and Instruction, 1, 341-358.
Tomasello, M., & Barton, M. (1994). Learning words in
non-ostensive contexts. Developmental Psychology, 30,
639-650.
Vlach, H. A., Sandhofer, C. M., & Kornell, N. (2008). The
spacing effect in children‟s memory and category
induction. Cognition, 109, 163-167.
Yu, C., & Smith, L. B. (2007). Rapid word learning under
uncertainty via cross-situational statistics. Psychological
Science, 18, 414-420.
Yurovsky, D. & Yu, C. (2008). Mutual Exclusivity in
Cross-Situational Statistical Learning. In B. C. Love, K.
McRae, & V.M. Sloutsky (Eds.). Proceedings of the 30th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.

2475

