UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Development in the Estimation of Degree Measure: Integrating Analog and Discrete
Representations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0p44k8v1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Vitale, Jonathan
Black, John
Eric, Carson
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Development in the Estimation of Degree Measure: Integrating Analog and Discrete
Representations
Jonathan Michael Vitale (JMV2125@Columbia.Edu)

Department of Human Development, Teachers College, 525 W. 120th Street
New York, NY 10027 USA

John B. Black (Black@Exchange.TC.Columbia.Edu)

Department of Human Development, Teachers College, 525 W. 120th Street
New York, NY 10027 USA

Eric O. Carson (EOC2102@Columbia.Edu)

Department of Mathematics, Science and Technology, Teachers College, 525 W. 120th Street
New York, NY 10027 USA

Chun-Hao Chang (Seedmic@Gmail.com)

Department of Human Development, Teachers College, 525 W. 120th Street
New York, NY 10027 USA
Abstract
We examined adult and child performance on two numerical,
geometric estimation tasks. In both tasks adults demonstrated
greater accuracy than children as well as more mature
representations, in general. Furthermore, evidence from
mouse tracking data demonstrates that adult strategy includes
the application of discrete landmark values while child
strategy, generally, does not. This evidence suggests that
adults construct mental representations of landmark values
and successfully integrate them into analog tasks.
Implications for future intervention studies are discussed.
Keywords: numerical estimation, embodied cognition,
mathematical development, cognitive assessment

Introduction
Numerical estimation tasks provide researchers with a
powerful means of assessing individuals’ mental
representation for number. Evidence from brain scans
demonstrates that approximate numerical tasks, such as lessthan/greater-than judgments, activate cortical regions
associated with spatial processes, while activities that rely
exclusively upon recall, such as single-digit multiplication,
do not (Dehaene, Piazza, Pinel, & Cohen, 2003). According
to Dehaene (1997) our ability to map numerical values to
spatial magnitudes is what is commonly referred to as
“number sense,” and grounds all mathematical reasoning.
Yet, the study of number sense extends beyond theoretical
interest as recent evidence suggests a link between
estimation and mathematical achievement. Along these
lines Halberda, Mazzocco, and Feigenson (2008) discovered
that 14-year-old’s ability to discriminate between dot
displays of varying cardinalities was highly correlated with
achievement scores extending back to kindergarten.
Likewise, Siegler and Booth (2004) found that individual
differences on a number line estimation task are correlated
with standardized test scores.

In the case of number line estimation individual
differences may embody large, qualitative shifts in
representation (Siegler & Opfer, 2003). Dehaene (1997)
asserts that numerical symbols implicitly recruit a
logarithmic representation that is more precise at smaller
values. Siegler and Opfer (2003) found that young children,
especially with larger numerical ranges, tend to apply this
kind of logarithmic representation while estimating the
position of a given value on a number line. Specifically,
data of estimated magnitude over actual magnitude are best
fit by a logarithmic function for these younger children. On
the other hand, older children’s data, in many cases, is best
fit by a straight line.
The emergence of a linear representation has several
possible causes and implications. In particular, Siegler and
Opfer (2003) differentiate between two models of linear
representation. In the accumulator model, adopted from
Gibbon and Church (1981), noise in the mental
representation for a numerical value increases in proportion
to the mean.
This representation implies increasing
variability in the estimates as the magnitude increases. In
the linear-ruler model – which was found to be a better fit
for the data – variability in estimates has a constant relation
to magnitude.
The authors suggest that the mature, linear representation
is developed through cultural, particularly school-based,
experience. Furthermore, evidence of less variability near
landmark values along the number line (e.g. quartiles)
demonstrates a specific means for implementing the linearruler model. One may even speculate that at the lowestlevel number representation may be logarithmic or
accumulator in nature, but at the level of conscious-level
processing number concepts are modulated for specific
tasks.
If the appeal of number line estimation tasks is due, in
part, to its high ecological validity, one might then find it

2242

surprising that although number lines are a ubiquitous
feature of elementary school classrooms, many students
maintain immature, logarithmic representations. Yet, recent
evidence suggests that the development of mature
representations may be promoted through simple,
economical interventions, such as playing linear board
games (Siegler & Ramani, 2008) or providing corrective
feedback (Opfer & Siegler, 2007) on values that maximize
the logarithmic-linear difference. In the latter case many
children demonstrated a logarithmic to linear shift within a
few feedback trials.
Yet, the ease with which some children transition from a
logarithmic to linear representation begs the question of
whether these children already maintain a linear
representation of whole numbers and simply learn to recruit
it for the given task. From this perspective, “development”
of a linear representation in these interventions may capture
only the tail end of this learning process, only made possible
through years of informal experience with numerical
concepts (Ginsberg, 1983).
At the cost of ecological validity, an alternative approach
to cognitive developmental research might imply the
adoption of a task utilizing a novel, unique spatial
representation of number.
Within such a paradigm
researchers would observe as children (or adults) struggle to
construct meaning out of the task, although the task may be
meaningless beyond the research setting. This research
model would afford psychological researchers with a level
of control that is unobtainable with common concepts.
As a compromise between ecological validity and control
this study applies the numerical estimation paradigm to
degree measure, which is an important element of
mathematics, but is under-utilized in elementary school
curriculum and therefore relatively unfamiliar to children
(Clements & Battista, 1992). Considering that degree
measure does not become a major component of curriculum,
generally, until high school, research with degree measure
provides an opportunity to study numerical development of
older children.
Yet, degree measure is not a unitary concept, but is rather
composed of two psychologically distinct spatial
representations: degree as angle of intersection between
lines and degree as rotation. While some tasks, such as
LOGO programming, may confound the two concepts
(Clements, Battista, & Sarama, 2001), other activities
clearly demonstrate that children perceive physical models
of each concept distinctly (Mitchelmore, 1998).
Given the unique spatial qualities of each representation,
we should expect courses of development for rotation and
angle concepts that may differ from whole number concepts.
For example, Clements and Burns (2000) found that fourth
grade students physically modeled angle values and
curtailed the degree of embodiment with increasing
expertise.
Furthermore, both students and instructors
focused on the representation of “benchmark” (or landmark)
magnitudes, such as 90°. Although one might perform a
degree estimation task by applying the same linear

representation developed for the number line, albeit in a
circular form, the emphasis on standard landmarks for
degree measure suggests that performance with number
lines and degree measure is likely to be quite different.
Specifically, the mental representation for degree measure
might rely upon the integration of continuous models of
numbers and discrete abstractions of landmark values.
While the nature of a mental abstraction is a constant
source of debate, the grounded or embodied cognition
framework (Barsalou, 2008) asserts that all mental
representations are composed of sensory-motor elements of
experience. Specifically, perceptual symbols develop from
frequent encounters with a meaningful type of object. In
turn perceptual simulators develop to provide individuals a
means of representing a concept in its perceptual absence
(Barsalou, 1999).
In the case of angle and rotation, perceptual symbols are
likely to embody landmark values. Given the perceptual
salience of perpendicular lines – which can be discriminated
from non-perpendicular lines by Amazonian tribesman
(Dehaene & Izard, 2006) – we should expect that 90° angles
are represented in this form. However, the perceptual
symbol encoding 90° angles may only account for a limited
range of valid right angles, such as right angles with sides
oriented horizontally and vertically from the ground. Thus,
perceptual symbols may develop in both robustness for
particular symbols, and in number, overall.
In the case of rotation, the spatial mapping of language
may play an important role in the embodiment of this
numerical concept (Lakoff & Nunez, 2000). For example,
the directives “turn around” or “turn to your right” may
ground landmark values of 180° and 90°, respectively.
Older students may develop other landmark values for
common spatial transformations, such as a rotation of 45°.
Yet, all numerical tasks involving degree measure do not,
explicitly, require landmark values. An angle measure of
117°, for example, is unlikely to have its own unique
representation. However, individuals may shuttle between
analog, continuous models and discrete, abstract models
(Schwartz & Black, 1996). In this case one is likely to
apply this process to numerical estimation by searching for
relevant landmarks (e.g. 90°) and then applying an analog
procedure, in a form of divide-and-conquer. As stated
above, Siegler and Opfer (2003) suggest that this is the
specific mechanism used by adults to implement a linearruler representation on the number line. However, since
number lines may utilize an arbitrary range of values, linear
representation may reflect the online development of
landmarks, rather than the application of perceptual symbols
from memory.
Although evidence for the application of landmark
strategies is suggested by the pattern of variability in
accuracy across numerical range, these accuracy measures
reflect only the final judgment of the participant and may
hide strategy-relevant features of the estimation process. On
the other hand continuous, online measures of performance
afford researchers a view of the specific process undertaken

2243

by a participant (Spivey, 2007). In this study we adapt a
mouse-tracking paradigm in which mouse position and time
is recorded at continuous, fine intervals. Specifically, as
participants perform the estimation task the mouse’s
rotational orientation about the center of the screen is
recorded to facilitate the analysis of inflections near
landmark values.
In the following study we analyze estimation performance
of relative experts (graduate students in education) to
novices (middle-to-upper elementary school students).
Given the adults likely experience with relevant geometric
concepts, we expect that these participants are likely to use
apply a process of shuttling between landmark and analog
representations, which should result in a high proportion of
mouse stops near landmark values and an overall linear
representation.
The children, on the other hand, are less likely to be
familiar with landmark values and may struggle to integrate
them into the estimation task. Therefore we suspect that
linear representations will be rare. Although these students,
mostly in fourth grade, should clearly maintain a linear
representation on the number line, we expect that, given the
novelty of this task, they are likely to adopt a logarithmic
representation. Furthermore, we expect there to be clear
differences between adults and children in overall accuracy.

Method
Participants
Sixteen adults (mean age = 28.9, SD = 8.7) were recruited
from an introductory cognitive psychology course as part of
a research requirement. Sixteen children (mean age = 9.5,
SD = .73) were recruited from an after-school program
located in a low-SES neighborhood of a large city. The
children consisted of two third-graders, one fifth-grader, and
thirteen fourth graders.

Tasks
Both adults and children performed two distinct numerical
estimation tasks on Apple MacBooks. Both tasks were
programmed with Adobe Air 1.1 in the Adobe Flash CS3
development suite. The application covered the entire height
of the screen (23 cms) and approximately 87% of the width
(32.5 cms).
Both tasks required a single click (and release) on a circle
within the display to initiate each trial. Upon completing
each trial participants were required to click-and-hold the
mouse button for a half second to “lock-in” their answer to
reduce the frequency of accidental clicking. Although there
was no time limit, if the participant made no motion with
the mouse for more than ten seconds the trial was
terminated.
In angle construction (Figure 1) the participant
maneuvers the mouse to rotate one leg (9.2 cms long) of an
isosceles triangle clockwise about a fixed vertex, while the
other leg remained motionless – opening and closing the
triangle. Participants were asked to manipulate a target

angle, marked with a red arc, to reflect a target number of
degrees. At 0° and 180° the figure becomes a straight line.
Motion beyond 180° maintained the appearance at 180° and
was recorded as 180°. Participants could move directly from
0° to 180° by moving the mouse counter-clockwise from the
initial position.

Figure 1: The top pane shows the initial display for an angle
construction trial. Participants clicked within the circle to
begin the trial. The lower pane shows a triangle that has
been formed to match the target value. The arced arrow is
superimposed here to demonstrate the vector of motion of
the non-stationary vertex from its original position.
In triangle rotation (figure 2) the participants maneuvered
the mouse to rotate an isosceles triangle about the center of
the triangle. Participants were asked to rotate the triangle,
clockwise, a target number of degrees from the triangle’s
initial orientation. A light gray triangle in the initial
orientation of the triangle remained throughout the trial to
provide a reference. The shape of the triangle was varied
between trials by randomizing the angle measure at
intersection of the triangles legs from 10° to 170°, although
the length of the legs was constant (9.2 cms). Varying the
shape was necessary to avoid the use of strategies involving
static relationships between the moving triangle and the
gray reference triangle. Participants could maneuver the
triangle between 0° and 180°. Motion beyond 180° did not
affect the appearance of the figure. Like angle construction,
in some cases participants moved directly from 0° to 180°
by moving the mouse counter-clockwise.

2244

Figure 2: The top pane shows the initial display for a
triangle rotation trial. Participants clicked within the circle
at the vertex to begin. The lower pane shows how the
triangle has been rotated to match the target value.

Procedure
Both children and adults were split into two groups of eight,
varying task order. The children received a block of 20 nonfeedback trials in both angle construction and triangle
rotation. The adults received 120 trials, organized into six
blocks, for each task. However, for the purpose of directly
comparing adult and child performance, only the adults’
first block for each task were analyzed here. The task was
individually administered to adults in a private room.
Children performed the task in a dedicated section of a
classroom as their classmates completed homework.
Prior to the first block of each task participants received 5
practice trials. Each practice trial required the participant be
within 15° of the target and displayed written, verbal
feedback suggesting an increase or decrease. The practice
values of 90°, 45°, 135°, 15°, and 180° were selected to
represent a wide distribution of the range. However, in
angle estimation the 180° trial was replaced with a 165° trial
to maintain a triangular appearance of the display.
Each block was populated with target values in the range
of 10° to 170°. Target values were selected randomly from
20 intervals of 8° over this range. In the interest of directly
comparing the two tasks, angles greater than 180° were not
used as they cannot form internal angles of a triangle.

Data Analysis
Prior to all analyses outlier trials were removed to eliminate
cases of accidental clicks, which prematurely terminated

trials. From observation of performance accidental clicks
generally occurred near either extreme value (0° or 180°) or
within a short time period (e.g. double-clicking). Therefore
trials in which the participant moved the mouse less than 5°
from the initial position, ended the trial within a degree of
the 180° endpoint, or completed the trial in less than one
second were removed from analysis. To reduce the
likelihood that subjects intended degree measures in the
outlier range we only used targets between 10° and 170°.
During each trial the current value of the manipulated
degree measure was sampled at approximately every 40
msecs. Degree over time data was fit to a function and
smoothed using the ‘fda’ package within R (Ramsay,
Wickham, Graves, & Hooker, 2009). The first derivative of
smoothed data, degree change over time, was then searched
for values at or near zero for an extended period of time
(500 msecs), indicating a stop point.
Stop points within 10° of specific landmark values were
tallied and are referred to as landmark stops. Likewise stop
points in 10° ranges just above and below the landmark
ranges were tallied and are referred to as near-landmark
stops. For example, 90° landmark stops included all stops
between 80° and 100°, while 90° near-landmark stops occur
in the ranges 70° to 80° and 100° to 110°. For 180°
landmark stops were tallied between 170° and 180°, while
near-landmark stops range between 160° and 170°.
Although stops in a landmark or near-landmark range
could represent random behavior, subjects consistently
applying a landmark strategy are more likely to stop within
landmark than near-landmark range, while subjects stopping
at random should be equally likely to stop within either
range. Therefore we suggest that a high proportion of
landmark to near-landmark stops indicates the explicit use
of a landmark strategy. This landmark-to-near-landmark
proportion was calculated as a statistic ranging from -1 (all
near-landmark) to 1 (all landmark) by subtracting the count
of near-landmark stops from the count of landmark stops
and dividing by their total. For example, three landmark
stops to one near landmark stop is a value of .50 [i.e. (31)/(3+1)]. On the other hand, one landmark stop to two
near-landmark stops is a value of -.33 [i.e. (1-2)/(1+2)]. A
value of zero indicates either an equal number of landmark
and near-landmark stops or no stops.

Results
To determine the nature of a participant’s representation of
estimated magnitude vs. actual magnitude data was fit to a
linear and logarithmic model. Participants were classified to
“linear” or “log” representation to indicate the model that
accounted for a larger proportion of their variance. In the
case where neither model was a significant predictor of
estimates participants were classified as “other.” Also, the
absolute deviations (residuals) from estimated to actual
magnitudes of “linear” participants were fit to a linear
model to determine the presence of scalar variability. Those

2245

participants with a positive slope, significantly different
from zero (p < .05) were classified as “accumulator”, while
those with no trend of increasing deviations were classified
as “linear-ruler.” Table 1 indicates the distribution of
models for adults and children in each task.

Table 3: Mean ratios of landmark to near-landmark stops
and associated p-values.
Angle
Construction
Adult – 90°
Q2-Q3
Child – 90°
Q2-Q3
Adult – 180°
Q4
Child – 180°
Q4
+ p < .1

Table 1: Model frequencies across task and age.
Model:
Adult–
Angle
Child –
Angle
Adult–
Rotation
Child–
Rotation

Linearruler
11

Linear
accum.
5

Log

Other

0

0

4

2

5

5

10

2

4

0

4

1

1

10

A chi-square test of this distribution indicates that adults
and children vary significantly in both angle construction
and triangle rotation [χ2(3, N=32) = 14.55 and 14.7,
respectively, ps < .01]. Model frequencies between tasks,
within age groups, did not differ significantly, ps > .05.
Furthermore, the means of all absolute deviation from
estimated magnitude to target magnitude (error), indicating
overall accuracy, showed a similar pattern (Table 2).
Table 2: Mean and standard deviation of absolute
deviations from estimated and actual magnitudes.

Adult–
Angle
Child –
Angle
Adult–
Rotation
Child–
Rotation

Mean
Error
9.78°

SD

35.7°

16.7

16.5°

4.93

41.0°

13.9

2.69

A two-way ANOVA with task-type as a within subjects
factor and age as a between subjects factor reveals a strong
main effect for age [F(1,31)=29.8, p<.000] and a weaker,
yet significant, effect for task type [F(1,31)=4.6, p<.05],
indicating better performance for angle construction.
Interaction between task and age was non-significant.
To analyze the use of landmarks each participant’s trials
were divided into 4 quadrants with target values in the
ranges 0°-45°, 46°-90°, 91°-135°, and 136°-180°. For each
participant the 180° landmark to near-landmark statistic was
calculated for trials in quadrant four (136°-180°) and 90° in
quadrant two and three (46°-135°). We then applied t-tests
to determine whether these values differed significantly
from zero, suggesting explicit use of the landmark. The
means and p-values are shown in Table 3 below.

Mean
Ratio
.37*
-.06
.25+
-.06

Triangle
Mean
Rotation
Ratio
.19
Adult – 90°
Q2-Q3
.25
Child – 90°
Q2-Q3
.48**
Adult – 180°
Q4
.25*
Child – 180°
Q4
* p < .05
** p < .01

For the rotation task both children and adults applied the
180° landmark strategy, while neither did so in the angle
construction task. In angle construction only adults utilized
a 90° landmark strategy. We applied two ANOVA models
to compare age and task for each landmark within its
associated region. With 90° landmarks there was a
significant main effect of age [F(1,31)=5.0, p < .05], but not
task-type (p > .05). With 180° landmarks there was a
significant main effect for task-type [F(1,31)=4.9, p < .05],
but not for age.

Discussion
Clearly, there is a large difference between adult and child
performance in both tasks. This is certainly not surprising,
given the difference in experience between the adults and
children in the domain of geometry. Yet, considering that
10 of the 16 children’s data for the rotation task could not be
fit by either a linear or logarithmic function, the extent of
this difference was surprising.
The graphs for individual subjects who were classified as
“other” show either general randomness, crowding towards
some arbitrary magnitude, or (in one case) a negative linear
relationship. For these students, the mapping between
numerical value and the chosen spatial representation was
either meaningless or completely misconceived.
Another explanation is that these children simply refused
to “play the game” correctly, and were simply applying their
own, idiosyncratic rules. Yet, considering that only half as
many children were classified as “other” for angle
construction, it is unlikely that this behavior emerged from
general disinterest. Rather, many students expressed their
frustrations, especially during the rotation task, by telling
test administrators that, “I don’t know how to do this.”
Furthermore, in both tasks, several students were unsure as
to which direction represented an increase in value.
Adults and children also differed greatly in the application
of landmarks. While adults clearly used 90° landmarks for
targets ranging from 45° to 135° in angle construction,
children showed little evidence of this strategy. In fact, the
children were slightly more likely to stop at near-landmark
values (albeit at non-significant level). Both adults and

2246

children used the 180° landmark in the rotation task, but this
may be an effect of the particular environment as 180°
represents a clear physical boundary.
One may also reasonably claim that near-landmark stops
were, in some cases, attempts at using specific landmarks.
Yet, due to a general lack of precision, and difficulty with
mouse control, children often stopped outside of the
accepted landmark range suggesting that, with practice,
landmark stops may replace near-landmark stops.
While, this data demonstrates relative extremes in
numerical representation it cannot inform us about the path
of development from novice to expert. Rather, we are left to
ask whether adult performance result from a wealth of
exposure to degree measures in particular or from a flexible
understanding of the linear nature of numbers? From the
latter perspective one might imagine that adults are able to
imagine a curved number line with endpoints at 0° and 180°
– which would enable linear performance with relatively
little experience with degrees, specifically. Furthermore,
given the important role that landmark values holds in adult
performance, should child instruction focus on strategies
incorporating
landmark
values
or
will
mental
representations for these landmarks emerge from exposure
to the entire range of magnitudes?
Such questions suggest the potential of intervention
studies to elucidate paths of development.
Possible
interventions to promote understanding of degree measure
may include measuring angles, playing games aimed
specifically at these numerical constructs, or situated
activities such as LOGO programming. In particular our
research team is currently investigating the latter two means
of developing numerical understanding.
In a preliminary intervention study applying a LOGO-like
environment and geometry curriculum with thirteen children
(from this study), we have found a trend towards
improvement in overall accuracy measure for angle
construction [t(12)= 2.1, p = .059]. Furthermore, of these
13 students the number of students demonstrating a linear
representation increased from four to nine.
Although the study of relatively novel numerical concepts
is of theoretical interest, one might argue that if these
concepts are so under-represented in curriculum then
interventions at this level may be unnecessary or
inappropriate. However, the National Council of Teachers
of Mathematics (2000) stresses the important of geometric
and spatial reasoning for children of all ages. We suspect
that mastery of basic concepts, such as angle measure,
serves as a grounding for higher-level conceptual skills,
such as geometric constructions and proofs

References
Barsalou, L. W. (2008). Grounded Cognition. Annual
Review of Psychology , 59, 617-645.
Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 22, 577-609.
Clements, D. H., & Battista, M. T. (1992). Geometry and
spatial reasoning. In D. A. Grouws (Ed.), Handbook of

research on mathematics teaching and learning (pp. 420464). New York: Macmillan.
Clements, D. H., & Burns, B. A. (2000). Students'
development of strategies for turn and angle measure.
Educational Studies in Mathematics , 41, 31-45.
Clements, D. H., Battista, M. T., & Sarama, J. (2001). Logo
and geometry. Journal for Research in Mathematics
Education Monograph Series , 10, i-177.
Dehaene, S. (1997). The number sense: How the mind
creates mathematics. New York: Oxford University Press.
Dehaene, S., & Izard, V. (2006). Core knowledge of
geometry in an Amazonian indigene group. Science , 311
(5759), 381-384.
Dehaene, S., Piazza, M., Pinel, P., & Cohen, L. (2003).
Three parietal circuits for number processing. Cognitive
Neuropsychology , 20 (3/4/5/6), 487-506.
Gibbon, J., & Church, R. M. (1981). Time left: Linear
versus logarithmic subjective time. Journal of the
Experimental Analysis of Behavior , 7, 87-107.
Ginsberg, H. P. (1983). The development of mathematical
thinking. New York: Academic Press.
Halberda, J., Mazzocco, M. M., & Feigenson, L. (2008).
Individual differences in non-verbal number acuity
correlate with maths achievement. Nature , 455 (2), 665668.
Lakoff, G., & Nunez, R. E. (2000). Where mathematics
comes from: How the embodied mind brings mathematics
into being. New York: Basic Books.
Mitchelmore, M. (1998). Young students' concepts of
turning and angle. Cognition and Instruction , 16 (3), 265284.
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (2000).
Principles and standards for school mathematics. Reston,
VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Ramsay, J. O., Wickham, H., Graves, S., & Hooker, G.
(2009). fda: Functional Data Analysis. Retrieved from R
package
version
2.1.3.
http://CRAN.Rproject.org/package=fda.
Schwartz, D. L., & Black, J. B. (1996). Shuttling between
depictive models and abstract rules: Induction and
fallback. Cognitive Science , 20, 457-497.
Siegler, R. S., & Booth, J. L. (2004). Development of
numerical estimation in young children. Child
Development , 75, 428-444.
Siegler, R. S., & Opfer, J. E. (2003). The development of
numerical
estimation:
Evidence
for
multiple
representations of numerical quantity. Psychological
Science , 14, 237-243.
Siegler, R. S., & Ramani, G. B. (2009). Playing linear
number board games - but not circular ones - improves
low-income preschoolers' numerical understanding.
Journal of Educational Psychology , 101 (3), 545-560.
Spivey, M. (2007). The continuity of mind. New York:
Oxford University Press.

2247

