UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Development of Relational Reasoning with Semantically Similar Labels

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2p1618kv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Ramesh, Sheela
Matlen, Bryan
Fisher, Anna

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Development of Relational Reasoning with Semantically Similar Labels
Sheela Ramesh (sheelar@andrew.cmu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Baker Hall 342c, 5000 Forbes Ave
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Bryan J. Matlen (bmatlen@andrew.cmu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Baker Hall 445b, 5000 Forbes Ave
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Anna V. Fisher (fisher49@andrew.cmu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Baker Hall 342c, 5000 Forbes Ave
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
Abstract
The present study explored children’s ability to utilize
synonymous labels during relational reasoning. In Experiment
1, 4- to 5-year-old children and adults were presented with a
base pair of related words (e.g., Castle:Rock) and then were
given a partially completed target word-pair (Castle:?) that
they could complete with a label that made the target wordpair relationally identical to the base word-pair (e.g., Stone).
Additional response options included a label thematically
related to the first word in the target pair (e.g., King) or an
unrelated word (e.g., Milk). Results indicated that adults and
5-year-olds successfully completed the task, whereas 4-yearolds exhibited difficulty. In Experiment 2, 4-year-old children
were presented with the same task, however relations were
conveyed by identical rather than synonymous labels. Under
these conditions, 4-year-old children exhibited no difficulty in
either lure condition. These findings are discussed with
regards to the theories of learning early in development.
Keywords: Synonyms; Language Acquisition; Word
Learning; Relational Reasoning; Cognitive Development.

Introduction
Many objects in the world can be referred to by more than
one label, a phenomenon called polyonomy. For example,
one could accurately refer to a pet as Fluffy, kitty, cat, and
animal. It is well-documented that in the beginning stages
of language acquisition children struggle with this
phenomenon; however by three years of age children are
able to learn multiple labels in reference to the same object,
both in the form of taxonomically-related labels (such as
cat-animal) and semantically similar labels at the same level
of taxonomic hierarchy (i.e. synonyms, such as kitty-cat)
(Banigan & Mervis, 1988; Blewitt, 1994; Deák & Maratsos,
1998; Haryu & Imai, 1999; Johnson, Scott, & Mervis, 1997;
Liitschwager & Markman, 1994; Mervis et al., 1994).
Learning to refer to an object by more than one label may
signify development of understanding that labels denote
categories rather than individual objects. However, mature
understanding of labels as category markers requires that
one not only can use multiple labels in reference to the same
object, but is also able to rely on related labels to perform a
variety of reasoning tasks, such as categorization, inductive
reasoning, and analogical reasoning.

Research investigating development of the ability to use
hierarchically-related labels in reasoning tasks indicates that
this ability does not mature until 7- to 8-years of age
(Gelman & O’Reilly, 1988; Johnson, et. al., 1997).
However, research into children’s ability to use semantically
similar labels at the same hierarchical level – or synonyms –
in reasoning tasks has produced mixed results. In particular,
Gelman and Markman (1986) observed that 4-year-old
children can perform inductive reasoning tasks at above
chance level with identical labels (e.g., generalizing a
property from one rabbit to another rabbit, rather than from
a squirrel to a rabbit) as well as semantically similar labels
(e.g., generalizing a property from a bunny to a rabbit,
rather than from a squirrel to a rabbit).
However, while Gelman and Markman’s study provides
valuable insight into children’s reasoning with semantically
similar labels, several factors warrant further investigation
of this phenomenon. First, some stimuli used in this study
included taxonomically-related labels (e.g. rose-flower and
cobra-snake) rather than synonyms. Second, some of the
semantically similar labels used in this study are likely to
co-occur in the speech of children and their caregivers as
compound noun-phrases (e.g., bunny-rabbit and puppy-dog)
according to the CHILDES database (MacWhinney, 2000).
For example, the word “bunny” occurred in CHILDES 803
times, the word “rabbit” occurred 579 times, and these
words co-occurred 103 times. At the same time, other
semantically similar labels used in the Gelman and
Markman (1986) study (e.g., rock-stone) never co-occurred
in the CHILDES database. It is possible that effects of
semantic similarity of labels on inductive reasoning in 4year-old children were amplified by co-occurrence
probability of some of the label pairs used in this research.
In support of this hypothesis, Matlen and Fisher (2008)
found that 4-year-old children successfully relied on
semantically similar labels in a property induction task only
if these labels were likely to co-occur in child-directed
speech, whereas children’s performance with non-cooccurring semantically similar labels was not different from
chance. Therefore, the extent to which young children can
rely on semantically similar labels in the course of reasoning
tasks remains unclear.

1499

The goals of the research reported below were two-fold.
The first goal was to explore to what extent young children
are capable of using semantically similar labels that span the
same level of taxonomic hierarchy as a basis for reasoning.
Prior research on this topic has primarily been concerned
with children’s reasoning within property induction tasks
(Gelman & Markman, 1986; Matlen & Fisher, 2008). To
assess the robustness of children’s reasoning with
semantically similar labels, we employed a relational
reasoning task where relations were conveyed by synonyms.
In contrast to property induction tasks, relational reasoning
tasks have typically been utilized in research aimed at
assessing children’s analogical thinking (see Goswami 1991
for review). These tasks tend to follow the format of
A:B::C:?. For example, Goswami and Brown (1990)
assessed 4- and 5-year-olds’ ability to perform analogical
reasoning tasks with familiar relations by presenting them
with a base word-pair (e.g., Spider-Web) and an incomplete
target word-pair (e.g., Bee-?). Children could complete the
target word-pair with a relational choice (e.g., Hive), or with
a word that did not preserve the relation specified in the
base word-pair: a thematic lure (e.g., Honey). Goswami and
Brown found that by four years of age children could
correctly complete these analogies based on the relational
choice, even in the presence of a thematic lure. It follows
then that if young children possess the ability to reason with
semantically similar labels, then they should be able to
correctly complete relational reasoning tasks when
semantically similar labels convey the relations.
The second goal of the present research was to examine
children’s understanding of linguistic labels as markers of
category membership. It has been suggested that
understanding of labels as category markers develops as
early as two years of age (Gelman & Coley, 1991; Welder
& Graham, 2001). Therefore, children realize that objects
referred to by the same label – or by semantically similar
labels – refer to objects of the same kind, and that objects of
the same kind are likely to have many properties in
common. However, it has recently been argued that
understanding of labels as referents to categories may have a
more protracted developmental course than previously
believed (Sloutsky, Lo, & Fisher, 2001; Sloutsky & Fisher,
2004). In particular, children may rely on identical labels in
reasoning tasks because labels are features contributing to
the overall similarity of presented entities, and identical
labels increase the perceived similarity of compared objects.
At the same time, children may not rely on semantically
similar labels in the course of reasoning tasks, unless there
are factors other than shared meaning (such as cooccurrence probability) that promote label-based inference.
To achieve the goals outlined above, the present study
utilized a modified analogical reasoning task of the type
employed by Goswami and Brown (1990). Specifically,
participants were presented with a base word-pair relation
(e.g. Castle:Rock), and a partially completed target wordpair relation (Castle: ?). Participants could complete the
target word-pair with a label that preserved the relationship

specified in the base word-pair (i.e., a label semantically
similar to the second term in the base word-pair, such as
“Stone”) or with a word that did not preserve the relation
specified in the base word-pair: a word thematically related
to the first term in the target word-pair (e.g., King; in the
Thematic Lure condition) or an unrelated word (e.g., Milk;
in the Unrelated Lure condition). Thus, this task followed an
A:B::A:B’ format (where B’-term was semantically similar
to the B-term). Children’s ability to perform the relational
reasoning A:B::A:B’ task using semantically similar labels
was compared to their ability to perform this task using
identical labels.
If children have acquired mature understanding that
identical as well as semantically similar labels refer to
objects of the same kind (Gelman & Markman, 1986;
Gleman & Coley, 1991; Jaswal, 2004), then children should
have little difficulty in completing the relational reasoning
A:B::A:B’ task using identical as well as semantically
similar labels. However, if understanding that labels refer to
categories has a protracted developmental course and is not
yet complete by four years of age (Fisher, in press; Matlen
& Fisher, 2008; Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004) then 4-year-old
children, unlike adults, may have difficulty in completing
relational reasoning tasks using semantically similar labels.
At the same time, children should succeed in completing
relational reasoning tasks using identical labels.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants
Participants were 35 four-year-old children (M = 4.43 years,
SD = .30 years; 19 females and 16 males), 30 five-year-old
children (M = 5.5 years, SD = .32 years; 12 females and 18
males), and 45 adults (M = 19.94 years, SD = 1.14 years; 26
females and 19 males).
Design
For the purpose of brevity, semantically similar labels will
be referred to as “synonyms” henceforth. Experiment 1 had
a two (Lure type: Thematic vs. Unrelated) by four (Age: 4year-old, 5-year-olds, and adults) between-subjects design.
Participants were randomly assigned to one of the two
experimental conditions: the Thematic Lure or the Unrelated
Lure condition.
Materials
Materials consisted of 12 picture sets presented on a
computer screen, accompanied by 12 label sets provided by
the experimenter (see Table 1 for the list of labels used in
the experiment). Each picture set consisted of a series of
four pictures: the first picture contained four doors in two
rows of two. One by one, the first three doors disappeared
to reveal objects hidden behind them (see Figure 1 for a
schematic depiction of the task). As the doors disappeared
to reveal hidden objects, the experimenter labeled each
object. The objects behind the first and second doors had a

1500

clear relationship, and the object behind the third door was
identical in picture and label to the object behind the first
door. The fourth door revealed no hidden object, but instead
the experimenter provided two response options for the
participant to guess the final object.
Table 1: Labels provided during task.
A-term
Bread
Hand
Castle
Cat
Fly
Cheese
Apple
Duck
Vacuum
Water
Beach
Car

B-term
Jam
Mitten
Stone
Couch
Toad
Rat
Belly
Lake
Carpet
Ship
Ocean
Road

B’-term:
Synonym
Choice
Jelly
Glove
Rock
Sofa
Frog
Mouse
Tummy
Pond
Rug
Boat
Sea
Street

Thematic
Lure
Crumbs
Foot
King
Milk
Ant
Cracker
Banana
Feathers
Mop
Fish
Sand
Steering
Wheel

Unrelated
Lure
Foot
Ant
Milk
Banana
Phone
Dress
Puppy
TV
Lion
Cookie
Chair
Clock

Figure 1: Schematic depiction of the A:B::A:B’ task.

In both the Unrelated Lure and the Thematic Lure
conditions the relational choice was communicated by a
label that was synonymous to the B-term of the base wordpair. For example, in the trial where the base word-pair
consisted of the words “Castle:Rock”, the relational choice
consisted of the word “Stone”. Note that half of the
participants received the base word-pair of “Castle-Rock”
with the word “Stone” being the relational response option,
whereas the other half of the participants received the base
word-pair of “Castle-Stone” with the word “Rock” being the
relational choice (the B- and B’-terms alternated in this
manner for all of the trials in this and other experiments
described in this paper). To avoid the potential confound of
co-occurrence probability influencing children’s responses,
only synonyms that never co-occurred in child-directed
speech according to the CHILDES database (MacWhinney,
2000) were chosen for this study. Thus, common synonym
pairs used in prior research, such as puppy-dog and bunnyrabbit, were not utilized. The outcome measure was the
proportion of relational responses (i.e. choosing
synonymous labels over thematic and unrelated lures) across
the 11 experimental trials.
Calibration of Experimental Materials Experimental
materials used in this research were calibrated in several
separate studies to establish that (1) 4-year-old children
were familiar with all of the labels used in this research and
were willing to apply synonymous labels to the same object,
(2) 4-year-old children were familiar and could identify the
relationship specified by the A-term and the B-term labels,
and (3) 4-year-olds children perceived labels chosen as
thematic lures to be thematically related to the A-term
labels.

Label Calibration A group of four-year-old children, none of
whom participated in the experiment proper (N = 12, M =
4.28 years) was presented with a picture-naming task
analogous to the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (Dunn &
Dunn, 1997). Participants were presented with a series of
pictures on a computer screen, four pictures at a time, with
one target picture for children to identify (location of all
target pictures was counterbalanced across multiple
presentation of the same picture) and three distracters.
Children were asked to select the target picture according to
the label spoken by the experimenter (e.g., “Can you point
to the rock?”). Each of the 12 target pictures was presented
to children in two separate picture sets, resulting in a total of
24 trials. The target pictures were identified by different
synonymous labels during the first and second presentation
of each target picture Children correctly identified pictures
referred to by the B- and B’-terms used in Experiment 1 (see
Table 1) with the overall accuracy of 97%. Therefore, the
synonym labels used in Experiment 1 were familiar to fouryear-old children. Importantly, four-year-old children were
willing to accept the synonymous labels used in Experiment
1 as referents to the same objects.
A:B Relationship Calibration The same group of 4-year-old
children who participated in the Label Calibration were
presented with the relation familiarity check (the order of
these tasks was counterbalanced across participants).
Children were presented with a series of triads depicting
objects that can be referred to by an A-term, an unrelated
lure, and a B-term or a synonymous B’-term (see Table 1).
Children were provided verbal labels for all three objects
and asked to select the two objects that “go together.” Half
of the participants were asked about a B-term (e.g., a rock)
and the other half about the synonymous B’-term (e.g., a
stone). For instance, participants could be shown a triad
consisting of pictures of a ‘rock’, a ‘castle’, and ‘milk’, and
asked which objects go together. Additionally, children
were asked to explain why the two pictures they had chosen
“go together,” and their explanations were recorded. All of
the B- and B’- presented in Table 1 were judged to be
identifiably related to the A-terms by 4-year-old children:
children selected the B- or the B’-term over the unrelated
lure and correctly specified the nature of the A:B

1501

relationship with the average accuracy of 95% (all
individual item Ms were above 83%, above chance, all onesample ts > 4.4, ps < .001).
Calibration of Thematic Lures A separate group of 4-yearold children (N = 12, M = 4.77 years) was presented with a
series of triads depicting objects referred to by the A-term,
thematic lures, and unrelated lures (see Table 1) and asked
to select the two objects that “go together.” For instance,
participants could be shown a triad depicting a ‘castle’, a
‘king’, and ‘milk’, and asked which objects go together.
Children selected the thematically related lure as the objects
that “goes with the target” over the unrelated lure with the
mean accuracy of 94% (all individual item Ms were above
91%, above chance, all one-sample ts > 7.0, ps < .001).

Procedure
Children were tested individually in a quiet room in their
preschools and adults were tested in a laboratory on campus.
Participants were presented with pictures of four doors in
two rows of two on a computer screen. The experimenter
explained that there were objects hiding behind all of the
doors, and that after showing the objects behind the first
three doors, the participant would have to guess what was
hiding behind the last door. The word-pair “Bread:Jam”
served as a practice trial (see Table 1) and thus was always
presented first. The order of the rest of the trials was
randomized for each participant. When pictures of bread and
jam were revealed during the practice trial, participants were
told, “bread and jam go together because jam goes on
bread to make a sandwich.” Participants were then asked to
guess what object was hiding behind the fourth door and
presented with two response options; participants were
asked to choose the option that “goes with the bread the
same way that jam goes with the bread”. Upon completing
the practice trial children were provided with corrective
feedback. No feedback was provided after the experimental
trials. At the conclusion of the practice trial children were
told that they would keep playing the game, and that to
solve the task they needed to think how the objects behind
the first two doors go together.

Results
Proportions of relational responses in each condition are
presented in Figure 2. A 2 x 2 Analysis of Variance was
performed on the proportions of relational responses with
experimental condition (Thematic Lure vs. Unrelated Lure)
and age (4-year-olds, 5-year-olds, and adults) as betweensubject factors. The results indicated the main effect of
condition, F (1, 104) = 10.9, p = .001, and age, F (2, 104) =
50.7, p < .001. Performance was significantly higher in the
Unrelated Lure condition (M = 89.8%) than in the Thematic
Lure condition (M = 80.1%), F (1, 104) = 10.9, p = .001.
These main effects were qualified by a condition by age
interaction, F (2, 104) = 3.4, p < .05.
Post hoc Tukey tests indicated that performance increased
significantly from 4- to 5- years of age (p < .001), and again
from 5-years of age to adulthood (p < .05). Planned

comparisons revealed that performance of adults was
equivalent in the Thematic Lure and Unrelated Lure
conditions (both means over 99%). However, 5-year-old
children exhibited a higher level of performance in the
Unrelated Lure condition compared to the Thematic Lure
condition (97% and 83% of relational responses,
respectively), independent samples t(28) = 2.98, p < .01.
This difference in performance between the lure conditions
was marginally significant in 4-year-old children (73% and
58% of relational responses, respectively), independentsamples t(33) = 1.9, p = .07.
Follow-up comparisons to chance indicated that in the
Unrelated Lure condition participants in all age groups
responded at a level above chance (chance = 50%), all onesample t’s > 4.5, p’s < .001. However, in the Thematic Lure
condition only 5-year-olds and adults responded at above
chance level, both one-sample t’s > 7.6, p’s < .0001,
whereas responses of 4-year-old children were not different
from chance, one-sample t(16) =1.2, p = .25.

Figure 2: Proportions of relational responses in Experiment
1. Error bars represent standard errors of the mean.
To further understand the source of differences among
conditions, we conducted analysis of the individual patterns
of responses. Participants were judged to be relational
responders if they selected the synonymous choice on at
least 8 out of 11 trials (binomial p < .05). Proportion of
relational responders in each condition is presented in
Figure 3. All adult participants in both lure conditions were
deemed to be relational responders. Among 5-year-old
children, all participants in the Unrelated Lure condition
were deemed to be relational responders, and 12 out of 15
(or 80%) participants in the Thematic Lure condition were
classified as relational responders (marginally different from
the pattern observed in adults, Fisher’s exact p = .058).
Among 4-year-old children, 10 out of 18 (56%) participants
exhibited the relational pattern of responding in the
Unrelated Lure condition, and only 5 out of 17 (29%)
participants exhibited the relational pattern of responding in
the Thematic Lure Condition. Proportion of relational
responders in the 4-year-old group was significantly lower
than that of participants in both older age groups in both
experimental conditions, all Fisher’s exact ps < .006).

1502

Figure 3: Individual patterns of responses in Experiment 1.
Overall, results of Experiment 1 suggest that the ability
to utilize synonymous labels in the course of reasoning may
follow a more protracted developmental course than it has
been previously believed. Experiment 2 was designed to
investigate 4-year-olds’ performance in the A:B::A:B’ task
when identical labels were used. If by 4 years of age
children realize that labels refer to kinds, then children’s
performance with identical labels should be similar to that
with synonymous labels in Experiment 1 (Gelman &
Markman, 1986). However, if 4-year-old children do not yet
treat labels as category markers, their performance with
identical labels may be superior to that with synonymous
labels.

Experiment 2
Method
Participants
Participants in Experiment 2 were 27 four-year-old children
(M = 4.48 years, SD = .27; years; 9 females and 18 males).
Design, Materials, and Procedure
Similar to Experiment 1, there were two between-subject
conditions in Experiment 2: a Thematic Lure condition and
an Unrelated Lure condition. Children were randomly
assigned to one of the two experimental conditions. The
order of trials was randomized for each participant.
Materials used in Experiment 2 were identical to those in
Experiment 1, with the exception that relational choices
were communicated by a label identical to the B-term,
rather than by a synonymous label. The B- and B’-terms in
Table 1 were counterbalanced across participants, such that
half of the participants received the “Castle:Rock” base
word-pair, whereas the other half of the participants
received the “Castle:Stone” base word-pair.

Results
In both the Thematic Lure condition and the Unrelated Lure
condition children averaged 94% of relational choices,
above chance (chance = 50%), both one-sample ts > 16.7, ps
< .0001). Analysis of the individual patterns of responses

revealed that in both experimental conditions, 100% of
participants successfully chose identical labels over
unrelated as well as thematic lures.
Responses of 4-year-old children in Experiment 2 were
compared to those in Experiment 1 in a 2 (Label condition:
Identical vs. Synonymous labels) by 2 (Lure Type:
Unrelated vs. Thematic Lures) ANOVA. This analysis
revealed a main effect of the Label condition, F(1, 58) =
34.17, p < .001. The labeling condition by lure type
interaction did not reach significance, F (1, 58) = 2.55, p =
.11, possibly due to unequal variances in the Synonymous
and Identical labels condition, Levene’s test of equality of
error variances: F(3, 58) = 8.98, p < .0001.
Overall, children performed significantly better when they
could rely on identical labels rather than synonymous labels
in both the Thematic Lure condition (94% and 73% of
relational responses, respectively) and the Random Lure
condition (94% and 58% of relational responses,
respectively), both independent-sample ts > 3.2, ps < .005.
This conclusion was supported by the analysis of the
individual patterns of responses. In the Thematic Lure
condition all 13 4-year-old children were classified as
relational responders when children could rely on identical
labels (Experiment 2), whereas only 5 out of 17 4-year-olds
(29%) in the Thematic Lure condition exhibited this pattern
of responding with synonymous labels (Experiment 1),
Fisher’s exact p < .001. Similarly, in the Unrelated Lure
condition 13 out of 14 4-year-olds (93%) exhibited the
relational pattern of responding with identical labels,
whereas only 10 out of 18 4-year-olds (56%) exhibited this
pattern Unrelated Lure condition with synonymous labels,
Fisher’s exact p < .05.

Discussion
The primary goal of the present study was to examine
development of the ability to utilize semantic similarity of
labels in a relational reasoning task. Results of the two
experiments reported above point to several novel findings.
First, adult participants successfully utilized semantic
similarity of labels in the Semantic Completion (A:B::A:B’)
task and their performance was not affected by the type of
lure. Importantly, all adult participants exhibited the same
pattern of responding on this task. Second, 5-year-old
children exhibited a decrease in performance in the
Semantic Completion task in the presence of thematic lures
compared to unrelated lures. At the same time, proportion of
relational responses was well above chance level in 5-yearold children with both types of lures. Furthermore, the
majority of 5-year-old children, similar to adults, were
classified as relational responders in both lure type
conditions. Third, 4-year-old children reliably made
relational choices in the Semantic Completion task
regardless of the type of lure when relational responses were
communicated by identical labels; when relational choices
were communicated by synonymous labels, 4-year-old
children performed above chance only if correct responses
were pitted against unrelated lures, but not thematic lures.

1503

Finally, less than a third of 4-year-old children were
classified as relational responders when response
competition was strong (in the Thematic Lure condition)
and only half of 4-year-olds reliably provided relational
responses in the absence of response competition (in the
Unrelated Lure condition).
Great care was taken to calibrate stimulus materials used
in this research, therefore the reported results cannot be
explained by children’s unfamiliarity with the words or the
relations used in the Semantic Completion and Semantic
Substitution tasks. Instead, it appears that less than half of 4year-old children spontaneously realize that synonymous
labels refer to objects of the same kind and can use this
knowledge in a reasoning task. This finding has important
implications for different theoretical approaches to
development of induction. In particular, successful
performance on the Semantic Completion task with identical
labels does not require that children realize that identical
labels refer to objects of the same kind – children could
have successfully performed the task based on simple
matching of identical labels. However, successful
performance on the task with synonymous labels (that do
not co-occur in child-directed speech) can only be achieved
if children understand that semantically similar labels refer
to objects of similar kind. A large decrease in performance
on the Semantic Completion task with synonymous labels
compared to near ceiling performance with identical labels
suggests that at four years of age many children do not yet
treat labels as referents to object kind. Therefore, these
results pose a challenge to the theoretical accounts of early
induction that assume such understanding in very young
children (Gelman & Coley, 1991; Welder & Graham, 2001)
and suggest that children’s understanding that labels refer to
kinds continues to develop beyond toddlerhood.

Acknowledgments
We thank children, parents, and teachers for their
participation in this research. This project was funded by a
Small Undergraduate Research Grant at Carnegie Mellon
University awarded to Sheela Ramesh.

References
Banigan, R. L. & Mervis, C. B. (1988). Role of adult input
in young children’s category evolution: An experimental
study. Journal of Child Language, 15, 493-504.
Blewitt, P. (1994). Understanding categorical hierarchies:
The earliest levels of skill. Child Development, 65, 127998.
Deák, G. O., & Maratsos, M. (1998). On having complex
representations of things: Preschoolers use of multiple
words for objects and people. Developmental Psychology,
34, 224-240.
Dunn, L. M., & Dunn, L. M. (1997). Peabody Picture
Vocabulary Test-Third Edition: Manual. Circle Pines,
MN: American Guidance Services.

Gelman, S. A. (1988). The development of induction within
natural kind and artifact categories. Cognitive Psychology,
20, 65-95.
Gelman, S. A., & Markman, E. M. (1986). Categories and
induction in young children. Cognition, 23, 189-209.
Gelman, S. A., & Coley, J. (1991). Language and
categorization: The acquisition of natural kind terms. In S.
A. Gelman, S. & J. P. Byrnes (Eds.), Perspectives on
language and thought: Interrelations in development (pp.
146-196). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Gelman, S. A., & O’Reilly, A. W. (1988). Children’s
inductive inferences within superordinate categories: the
role of language and category structure. Child
Development, 59, 876-87.
Goswami, U. (1991). Analogical reasoning: What develops?
A review of research and theory. Child Development, 62,
1-22.
Goswami, U. & Brown, A. L. (1990). Higher-order structure
and relational reasoning: Contrasting analogical and
thematic relations. Cognition, 36, 207-26.
Haryu, E. & Imai, M. (1999). Reorganizing the lexicon by
learning a new word: Japanese children’s interpretation of
the meaning of a new word for a familiar artifact. Child
Development, 73, 1378-91.
Jaswal, V. K. (2004). Don’t believe everything you hear:
Preschoolers’ sensitivity to speaker intent in category
induction. Child Development, 75, 1871-85.
Johnson, K. E., Scott, P. & Mervis, C. B. (1997).
Development of children’s understanding of basicsubordinate
inclusion
relations.
Developmental
Psychology, 33, 745-763.
Liittschwager, J. C., & Markman, E. M. (1994). Sixteenand 24-month-old’s use of mutual exclusivity as a default
assumption in second-label learning. Developmental
Psychology, 30, 955-968.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES Project: Tools for
analyzing talk. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Matlen, B. J., & Fisher, A. V. (2008). Development of
synonym-based induction. Poster presented at the
Cognitive Science Society, July 28th.
Mervis, C. B., Golinkoff, R. M. & Bertrand, J. (1994). Twoyear-olds readily learn multiple labels for the same basiclevel category. Child Development, 65, 1163-77.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Fisher, A. V. (2004). Induction and
categorization in young children: A similarity-based
model. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 133
(2), 166-188.
Sloutsky, V. M., Lo, Y., & Fisher, A. V. (2001). How much
does a shared name make things similar? Linguistic
labels, similarity, and the development of inductive
inference. Child Development, 72, 1695-1709.
Welder, A. N., & Graham, S. A. (2001). The influences of
shape similarity and shared labels on infants' inductive
inferences about nonobvious object properties. Child
Development, 72, 1653-1673.

1504

