UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Do Baseball Fans Experience the Fan Effect?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/59b863m4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Ricks, Travis
Wiley, Jennifer

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Do Baseball Fans Experience the Fan Effect?
Travis R. Ricks (tricks2@uic.edu)
Jennifer Wiley (jwiley@uic.edu)
1

Department of Psychology
1007 W. Harrison St. M/C 285
University of Illinois, Chicago
Chicago, IL 60607 USA
varies between one and three.
For example, participants could be presented with the
following sentences:

Abstract
A set of studies examines whether domain
knowledge for baseball will enable participants to
overcome the fan effect from baseball-related
sentence sets. In a first study, neither high nor low
knowledge participants overcame the fan effect when
baseball positions and locations were randomly
paired together. In a second study, when positions
and locations were consistent with baseball
expectations, both high and low knowledge
participants overcame the fan effect on target
sentences. However only high knowledge
participants showed no effect on foils. The results
suggest that prior knowledge can affect both
representation and decision phases underlying
recognition memory.

The lawyer is at the school.
The lawyer is at the park.
The lawyer is at the theater.
The doctor is at the museum.
In this example, the lawyer has a fan size of three and
the doctor has a fan size of one. Participants are
required to memorize these sentences to some criterion
during the study phase. Then, after reaching criterion,
participants move to a recognition test phase where
they are asked to decide as quickly as possible whether
or not sentences appeared in the study list. Typically,
participants take longer to verify that the statement
“The lawyer is at the school” appeared in the study list
than “The doctor is at the museum,” due to the larger
fan of lawyer in this set.

Domain-related Knowledge and Memory
Research on expertise has generally found that
possession of domain-related knowledge or experience
leads to superior problem solving, learning, and
memory performance (see Feltovich, Prietula, &
Ericsson, 2006 for review). The superior performance
is thought to be due to extensive, easily accessible and
well-connected knowledge structures in long-term
memory (Bedard & Chi, 1992; Ericsson & Kintsch,
1995; Ericsson & Staszewski, 1989) which allows for
more connections or associations to be made with
incoming stimuli. Interestingly, another body of
research suggests that increasing the number of
associations among incoming stimuli can lead to a
detriment in memory performance (See Reder et al.,
2007 for review). This phenomenon, called the fan
effect, refers to the slowdown in verification time that
occurs as a function of the number of associations with
a presented concept (e.g., Anderson & Bower, 1973;
Lewis & Anderson 1976; Reder, Donavos, &
Erickson, 2002).

There are two main accounts that have been offered
for the fan effect: the propositional network theory
(Anderson, 1974; Reder et al., 2007) and the situation
model theory (Radvansky, Spieler & Zacks, 1993;
Radvansky, 1999).
The propositional theory suggests that the fan effect is
a function of the number of pathways that branch from
a target concept in a memory network and a
corresponding reduction in the spread of activation. To
illustrate this, imagine that nodes exist in memory that
correspond to the presented concepts (e.g. lawyer,
park, doctor, school, park, theater, museum). When
participants are required to verify if they have seen a
sentence such as “The lawyer is in the park,” the nodes
“lawyer” and “park” are activated. As shown in the
top of Figure 1, activation spreads along all connecting
pathways that exist, represented by the arrows. For
the “lawyer,” with the fan of three, activation is
diffused among the pathways connected to “school,”
“park,” and “theater.” Similarly, if three statements
are presented involving “park”, as shown in the
bottom of Figure 1, then activation would also be
diffused in that case.

What is the Fan Effect?
Typically the fan effect is demonstrated by having
participants study sets of sentences that vary in the
number of associations stated between concepts such
as objects and locations (Anderson, 1974; Reder et al.,
2007). The number of associations that each object or
location is paired with is the “fan” size, and it usually

2176

In the fan of three examples, the partitioning of
activation among associations decreases the amount of
activation that spreads to each connecting pathway,
which increases the amount of time it takes
participants to become aware of the target pathway
(Jones & Anderson, 1987). In this model, the
distribution of activation to irrelevant pathways is
called interference (Anderson, 1974), and indeed the
empirical results have generally supported that the
number of associations predicts verification time
(Reder et al., 2007).

Figure 1:
Two models with fan sizes of three

Lawyer
Node

School

Theatre

Node

Node

Park

However, one exception in previous empirical results,
has been the observation that not all fans of three are
equal. The situation model account suggests that the
type of fan represented by the bottom network in
Figure 1 will experience less interference than the type
of fan represented in the top panel. The situation
model account posits that when people can integrate
incoming information into a single representation then
they will not be susceptible to the interference due to
multiple associations (Radvansky, 1999). In this
explanation, slower verification times are not the result
of the number of associations that are present, but
rather the number of models that need to be searched.
From this perspective, one can imagine all three
sentences in the second example could refer to a single
situation in the park, perhaps with the lawyer meeting
the hippie and the doctor. If these three sentences are
integrated into one representation in memory, then
even though there are three items associated with park,
there is only one model to search. Consistent with this
approach, several studies have demonstrated that the
ability to integrate sentences into a single
representation or model can eliminate the fan effect
(Gomez-Ariza & Bajo, 2003;Moeser 1979; Myers,
O’Brien, Balota & Toyofuku, 1984; Radvansky,
Spieler & Zacks, 1993; Smith, Adams & Schorr,
1978).

Node

Lawyer
Node

Doctor

Hippie

Node

Node

Park
Node

In contrast, the sentence, “The doctor is at the
museum,” has a fan size of one. As shown in Figure
2, there will be no diffusion of activation in this
representation because there is only one pathway
branching from each of the nodes “doctor” and
“museum.”
Figure 2:
A model with fan size of one

Although it has not yet been tested, one implication of
this model is that participants may be able to
overcome the fan effect for domain-related
information, as prior knowledge may allow readers to
represent and integrate sets of sentences into a single
model. Thus, the goal of this research was to
investigate if the possession of prior knowledge
related to the topic of the sentences would eliminate
the fan effect in recognition memory.

Doctor
Node

Museum

Experiment 1

Node

Method
Participants. Participants were 110 students in
introductory psychology classes at University of
Illinois at Chicago who received course credit for their

2177

participation.

low baseball knowledge) on correct verification RT.
Similar to Radvansky, Spieler, and Zacks (1993)
responses that were faster than 500 ms and slower than
10,000 ms were considered errors. The pattern of
results is shown in Figure 1. The ANOVA revealed a
main effect for Fan Size, F(2, 216) =7.36, p <
.001,η²=.06, and Expertise, F(1, 108)=8.24,
p<.01,η²=.06, but not a Fan Size X Expertise
interaction, F(2,216) < 1,η²=.01.
As expected,
participants experienced a slowdown in the
recognition test as the number of associations
increased from 1 to 3. There was also a main effect
such that high knowledge participants made faster
decisions than low knowledge participants. However,
neither high knowledge nor low knowledge
participants overcame the fan effect. Both high and
low knowledge participants experienced increasing
verification times as fan size increased. The same
pattern of results was observed for the studied and foil
sentences in this study.

Procedure. Participants were administered a baseballrelated fan task in groups ranging in size between 1 to
12. The sessions last approximately 1 hr. The stimuli
were created by randomly pairing a type of baseball
player (e.g., catcher) with a location on a baseball field
(e.g., second base) to create sentences (e.g., The
catcher is at second base). The task was analogous to
the fan task used by Radvansky and Zacks (1991) with
participants being presented 18 sentences and being
asked to memorize them. The 18 sentences contained
4 at fan size 1, 4 at fan size 2 and 10 at fan size 3.
Each participant was seated at their own computer.
During the study phase, the sentences were presented
on a computer screen one at a time for 7-seconds each.
After the study phase, participants we retested for their
memory of the sentences. If participants were unable
to remember 90 percent of the sentences correctly they
repeated the study and test phase. Feedback was
provided for incorrect answers during the test phase.
This cycle was continued until participants reached the
90 percent criterion.
After the participants reached the 90 percent criterion,
the completed a speeded recognition task. Twelve
target sentences were presented from the studied
materials (four sentences at each of the fan sizes of
one, two, and three; Similar to Radvansky and Zacks
(1993), studied sentences that had both a player and a
location with more than one association were not
used.).

Figure 1: Verification time per syllable (ms) with
random pairings in Experiment 1. Error bars represent
standard errors.

Twelve foils were created by repairing the studied
players and locations. The re-pairing was done within
the fan size so fan 1 player/locations were re-paired
with fan 1 player/locations. Participants pressed the
“Z” key if the sentence was not studied and “M” if it
was studied.

These results provide a replication of the basic fan
effect finding.
As fan size increased, so did
verification times. Simply having prior knowledge for
the topics of the sentences did not change this pattern.
However, because the pairings were random, it is
possible that this task did not test the situation model
account. In order to support the construction of a
single model, one may need sentences that “make
sense” within the domain. According to the situation
model theory, the fan effect should not be eliminated
unless participants are able to integrate the multiple
players and locations into a single model. Randomly
pairing the players and locations together made pairs
that were not consistent with baseball experience and
which may not have made it any easier for high
knowledge participants to integrate sentences into
single situations. Thus, in Experiment 2, we presented
sentences that were more consistent with baseball
situations.

At the end of the study, participants completed a 45item baseball knowledge questionnaire (Spilich,
Vesonder, Chiesi & Voss, 1979).
Average
performance on the baseball questionnaire was 16.47
(SD 12.66) Range was 0 to 41. Two levels of domain
knowledge were defined by a median split at 15. All
participants’ accuracy was above 90% on the speeded
recognition task and there was no significant
difference for accuracy between high and low
knowledge participants.

Results
A 2 X 3 mixed ANOVA was used to assess the effects
of Fan Size (one, two or three), and Expertise (high,

2178

a Fan Size X Expertise interaction, F (2, 216) = 7.16, p
< 01, η²=.07.

Experiment 2
The goal of this second study was to use sentences that
were more consistent with real baseball situations, and
to test whether prior knowledge might affect
performance under those circumstances. For this
study, players and positions were paired to reflect
plausible situations, such as:
The reliever is at the mound.
The manager is at the mound.
The catcher is at the mound.
These sentences could represent a pitcher conference,
an event that happens in the majority of baseball
games.

Figure 2: Verification time per syllable (ms) with
plausible pairings in Experiment 2. Error bars
represent standard errors.

Method

As in Experiment 1, participants experienced an
overall slowdown in verification time as the number of
associations increased from 1 to 3.

Participants. Participants were 110 students in
introductory psychology classes at University of
Illinois at Chicago who received course credit for their
participation. These were new participants that had
not participated in Experiment 1.

However, this effect was qualified by a significant Fan
Size by Expertise interaction, with low knowledge
participants showing the typical fan effect, and high
knowledge participants showing a diminished fan
effect. On the face of it, these results can be seen as
consistent with the situation model account. They
suggest that, now that the sentences are plausible,
participants with prior knowledge may be able to
create a single model for each set of sentences, which
allows for efficient search of memory, regardless of
the number of overlapping associations.

Procedure. Participants were administered a baseballrelated fan task almost identical to the one
administered in Experiment 1. The only difference
was that that the players and positions were not
randomly paired together, but were paired to create
plausible sentences by the researcher.
The 12 foils were also consistent with baseball
expectations. Some example foil sentences were:
The pinch runner is at second base.
The reliever is at first base.
The pitcher is at the bullpen.

What is responsible for the elimination of the fan
effect among high knowledge participants? To further
examine this question, we performed some additional
analyses and in particular we examined whether
performance improved on both target and foil trials. If
the better performance among high knowledge
participants is due to the efficiency of needing to
search only a single model, then this account would
predict facilitation for both correct acceptance of
targets and rejections of foils. However, as can be
seen in Figure 3, different patterns were found across
target (top panel) and foil (bottom panel) decisions.

Participants again completed a 45-item baseball
knowledge questionnaire at the end of the study.
Average performance was 14.53 (SD = 13.35). Range
was 0 to 41. A median split of 15 was used similar to
Experiment 1. All participants’ accuracy was above
90% on the recognition task and there was no
significant difference between high and low
knowledge participants.

Results:
A 2 X 3 mixed ANOVA was used to assess the effects
for Fan Size and Expertise on correct verification RT.
Again responses that were faster than 500 ms and
slower than 10,000 ms were considered errors. The
pattern of means can be seen in Figure 2. The
ANOVA revealed a main effect for Fan Size, F(2,
216) = 7.82, p<.01, η²=.07, but no main effect for
Expertise F (1, 108) < 1, η²=.01. However, there was

2179

effect should be eliminated when participants are able
to integrate multiple associations from a set of
sentences within a single situation model. Consistent
with this approach, it appears that presenting
participants with sentence sets representing plausible
combinations of baseball players and positions
enabled both high and low knowledge participants to
respond quickly to studied sentences, regardless of the
number of associations among them. This finding is
consistent with the situation model account. It is also
reminiscent of findings that have demonstrated that the
fan effect is diminished when participants are able to
integrate the sentence sets into stories (Ariza & Bajo,
2003; Myers, O’Brien, Balota & Toyofuku, 1984;
Smith, Adams & Schorr, 1978).
In addition, the further analysis of the studied and foil
sentences separately revealed the interesting result that
the non-studied foils showed a different pattern of
verification times than the studied sentences. When
participants were presented with foil sentences that
were also consistent with realistic baseball situations,
the performance of high and low knowledge
participants diverged. High knowledge participants
experienced a diminished fan effect. However, low
knowledge participants foil response times were more
affected by fan size. Thus, it does not appear that the
low knowledge participants were able to efficiently
reject the foils. If both low and high knowledge
participants were able to form single models from the
sentence sets, decisions on foils should have been as
easy as on targets.
Only the high knowledge
participants showed this advantage.

Figure 3: Reaction times per syllable (MSec) for
studied sentences (top panel) and foils (bottom panel) .
Error bars represent standard errors.
First, looking at performance on the studied sentences,
here we can see that in fact, no fan size effect was
found for either knowledge group. A 2 X 3 mixed
ANOVA showed that there were no significant effects
for Fan Size, F (2, 216) = 1.91, p <.15, η²=.05, or
Expertise, F (1, 108) = 1.31, p < .27, η²=.01. Nor was
there a Fan Size X Expertise interaction, F (2,216) =
1.60, p < .21, η²=.03. Thus, neither high nor low
knowledge participants experience a fan effect on
correct verifications for plausible sentences.

DISCUSSION

Thus, this result highlights another recent perspective
from the fan effect literature which emphasizes that
recognition memory results need to be thought of as
both being a function of differential representation in
memory, as well as being a function of decision
making processes (Anderson, 1999). In essence,
making a recognition judgment requires not just
memory retrieval or search, but also an evaluative
assessment or decision. This current dissociation
between performance on targets and foils suggests that
high and low knowledge participants may be
achieving fast verification times to studied sentences
via different means. While high-knowledge
participants may have the advantage of a single model
which allows for fast, direct retrieval for each set of
sentences, the low-knowledge participants may have
used some sort of plausibility heuristic during the
verification task. This improved their performance for
the studied items, but made it difficult for them to
reject the foils.

According to the situation model account, the fan

An alternative explanation is that the quality of the

Quite a different picture is seen when one examines
the response times for the foils. Here another 2 X 3
mixed ANOVA revealed a main effect for Fan Size, F
(2, 216) = 20.16, p<.01, η²=.23. Although there was
no main effect for Expertise, F (1, 108) < 1, η²=.02,
there was a Fan Size X Expertise interaction, F (2,216)
= 8.17, p < 01, η²=.07. Low knowledge participants
were especially vulnerable to the slowdown on foils as
fan size increased.
The results show that the fan effect was diminished for
experts on both correct verifications and rejections,
while novices experienced a fan effect, and this was
driven by decision times on the foils.

2180

Studies of expertise from psychological perspective. In
K.A. Ericsson, N. Charness, P. Feltovich, & R. Hoffman
(Eds.), Cambridge Handbook of Expertise and Expert
Performance (41-67). New York: New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Gómez-Ariza, C. J., & Bajo, M. T. (2003). Interference and
integration: The fan effect in children and adults.
Memory, 11, 505-523.
Hunt, H. R., & Einstein, G. O. (1981). Relational and itemspecific information in memory. Journal of Verbal
Learning & Verbal Behavior, 20, 497-514.
Jones, W. P., & Anderson, J. R. (1987). Short-and long-term
memory retrieval: A comparison of the effects of
formation load and relatedness. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 116, 137-153.
Lewis, C. H., & Anderson, J. R. (1976). Interference with
real world knowledge. Cognitive Psychology, 8, 311-335.
Moeser, S. D. (1979). The role of experimental design in
investigations of the fan effect. The Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory,
5, 125-134.
Myers, J. L., O’Brien, E.J., Balota, D. A., & Toyofuku, M.
L. (1984). Memory search without interference: The role
of integration. Cognitive Psychology, 16, 217-242.
Radvansky, G. A. (1999). The fan effect: A tale of two
theories. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
128, 198-206.
Radvansky, G. A., & Zacks, R. T. (1991). Mental models
and the fan effect. Journal of Experimental Psychology
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 17 (5), 940-953.
Radvansky, G. A., Spieler, D. H. & Zacks, R. T. (1993).
Mental model organization. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 19, 95114.
Rawson, K. A., & Van Overshelde, J. P. (2006). How does
knowledge promote memory? Contribution of
organizational and item-specific processing. Journal of
Memory and Language, 58(3), 646-668
Reder, L. M., Paynter, C., Diana, R. A., Ngiam, J., &
Dickison, D. (2008). Experience is a double-edged
sword: A computational model of the on
encoding/retrieval tradeoff with familiarity. In Ross, B. &
Benjamin, A. S. (Eds.), The Psychological of Learning
and Motivation, Academic Press.
Reder, L.M., Donavos, D.K., & Erickson, M.A. (2002).
Perceptual match effects in direct tests of memory: The
role of contextual fan. Memory & Cognition, 30(2), 312323.
Ricks, T. R., & Wiley, J. (2009). The influence of domain
knowledge on the functional capacity of working memory.
Journal of Memory and Language, 59, 519-537.
Smith, E. E., Adams, N., & Schorr, D. (1978). Fact retrieval
and the paradox of interference. Cognitive Psychology,
10, 438-464.
Spilich, G. J., Vesonder, G. T., Chiesi, H. L., & Voss, J. F.
(1979). Text processing of domain-related information
for individuals with high and low domain knowledge.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 14, 506522.

memory representations for the sentence sets differed
among the low and high knowledge participants. It is
possible that the high knowledge participants were
able to create more detailed or distinctive traces for the
sentence sets, which improved their ability to decide
both what was studied and what was not (Hunt &
Einstein, 1981). Low knowledge participants on the
other hand, may have had “good enough”
representations to aid performance on the studied
items, but perhaps these traces were not detailed
enough to aid them on the foils. Such a result would
be consistent with a few recent findings that expertise
can confer advantages in episodic memory (i.e.
memory for words and order in domain-related word
lists) (Rawson & Van Overshelde, 2006; Ricks &
Wiley, 2009).
While most previous studies have suggested that
reductions in the fan effect are due to unitized
representations, thepresent results suggest that effects
on decision processes are critical to consider.
However, decision processes can only be explored
when one uses plausible foils that require detailed
memory for the studied sentences. In present study,
thematic materials allowed all participants to avoid fan
effects for the studied sentences, but only high
knowledge participants were better able to detect foils.
Thus the present design allowed for a clearer
understanding of how prior knowledge may support
both better integration and discrimination in
recognition memory.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Allison Jaeger and Kari
Andrews for their diligent data collection. Travis
Ricks also thanks his wife for her support while
running subjects and preparing the manuscript.

References
Anderson, J. R. (1974). Retrieval of propositional
information from long-term memory. Cognitive
Psychology, 6, 451-474.
Anderson, J. R., & Bower, G. H. (1973) Human associative
memory. Washington DC: Winston.& Sons.
Anderson, J. R., & Reder, L. M. (1999). The fan effect:
New results and new theories. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 128(2), 186-197.
Bedard, J. & Chi, M. T. H. (1992) Expertise. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 1(4), 135-139.
Ericsson, K. A., & Kintsch, W. (1995). Long-term working
memory. Psychological Review. 102(2), 211-245.
Ericsson, K. A., Staszewski, J. J. (1989). Skilled memory
and expertise: Mechanisms of exceptional performance.
In Complex Information Processing: The Impact of
Herbert Simon (183-208). Hillsdale, New Jersey:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Feltovich, P. J., Prietula, M. J., & Ericsson, K. (2006).

2181

