UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effects of Anticipatory Coarticulation on Lexical Access

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1j9717rt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Tobin, Stephen
Cho, Pyeong Whan
Jennet, Patrick
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effects of Anticipatory Coarticulation on Lexical Access
Stephen J. Tobin (stephen.tobin@uconn.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269-1020 USA
Haskins Laboratories, 300 George St., New Haven, CT 06510 USA

Pyeong Whan Cho (pyeong.cho@uconn.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269-1020 USA
Haskins Laboratories, 300 George St., New Haven, CT 06510 USA

Patrick M. Jennett (pjennett@engr.uconn.edu)
Cognitive Science Program, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269-2054 USA

James S. Magnuson (james.magnuson@uconn.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269-1020 USA
Haskins Laboratories, 300 George St., New Haven, CT 06510 USA
Abstract

In order to make progress in studying spoken word
recognition, psycholinguists have made the temporary
simplifying assumption that the input to word recognition
can be approximated by a phonemic transcription (as
though this were the product of a speech perception
mechanism). This allows one to sidestep the lack of
invariance problem and related complications due to
coarticulation. Coarticulation refers to the fact that the
articulatory gestures of adjacent and even nonadjacent
segments overlap, and therefore, so do their acoustic
realizations. That is, as you produce one speech sound,
you are simultaneously preparing your articulators for
upcoming segments, and still experiencing effects of
preceding articulations. Coarticulation is often viewed as
destructive, as in Hockett's (1955) metaphor of a wringer
squishing together a line of easter eggs on a conveyor
belt, and a major contributor to lack of invariance.
Even when a scientist is cognizant of the fact that the
phonemic input assumption is almost certainly incorrect,
and she explicitly considers it provisional (until we solve
the lack of invariance problem at the phonological level),
it has the potential to hide constraints on word recognition
(Magnuson, 2008). For example, Salverda, Dahan and
McQueen (2003) reported that listeners use subtle
prosodic cues (e.g., vowel duration) to anticipate word
length and constrain lexical competition. They tracked
eye movements as subjects followed spoken instructions
to click on pictures on a computer display. When initial
vowel duration was consistent with a bisyllabic word,
subjects immediately began looking preferentially at
items with bisyllabic names.
A phonemic transcription also abstracts away from
coarticulatory information, which can specify qualities of
upcoming segments. Dahan, Magnuson, Tanenhaus, and
Hogan (2001) demonstrated that listeners are extremely
sensitive to such information. They cross-spliced words
(e.g., neck and net) to provide misleading coarticualtory
cues to final consonants. Using the visual world
paradigm, they found fast, robust effects of such
mismatches on lexical activation and competition.
These examples are inconsistent with suggestions that
coarticulation has a destructive impact on phonetic

One of the most challenging unsolved problems in
cognitive science is lack of invariance in spoken language.
We take the view that variability due to coarticulation is
systematic and beneficial. Several recent eye tracking
experiments have demonstrated listeners' sensitivity to
local coarticulatory cues between adjacent phonemes. We
examined sensitivity to longer-range, anticipatory vowelto-vowel coarticulation, which can spread across multiple
syllables. Using a variant of the Visual World eye tracking
paradigm (Tanenhaus et al., 1995), we conducted the first
on-line test of whether lexical access is sensitive to such
subtle, long-range cues, and whether the impact of such
cues is modulated by the coarticulation resistance of
intervening segments. Lexical access was delayed when
misleading anticipatory coarticulation was available in
cross-spliced materials. This significantly extends the
nature and temporal range of subcategorical cues known to
influence
on-line
sentence
comprehension,
and
demonstrates that lexical access is simultaneously
constrained by information at multiple temporal grains.
Keywords: Coarticulation; anticipation; garden path; eye
tracking.

Introduction
One of the hardest unsolved problems in cognitive
science is lack of invariance in speech. There is a manyto-many mapping between acoustics and percepts, such
that the same acoustic information can map to different
speech sounds, while different acoustic information can
map to the same speech sounds (depending on phonetic
context, speaking rate, physical or indexical
characteristics of talkers, etc.). This is true of production
and perception even for clearly articulated segments and
syllables (Ladefoged & Broadbent, 1957; Liberman,
Delattre & Cooper, 1952; Peterson & Barney, 1952). The
problem is compounded in mapping to words and beyond
in conversational speech, where even more variation
occurs. For example, Hawkins (2003) describes radical
changes in the acoustics of the message "I do not know"
in a progression from careful speech to casual speech ("I
dunno", and even more reduced forms). The puzzle, then,
is how we reliably map acoustics to words despite (or
perhaps with the aid of) all this variation.

2200

information. Instead, coarticulation systematically
provides anticipatory and redundant cues that afford rapid
information transmission in speech. This optimistic view,
that coarticulation is lawful and informative (Elman &
McClelland, 1986; Fowler, 1986), is consistent with
evidence that listeners compensate for coarticulation,
taking into account the predictable structure of an ongoing
speech event at the gestural (Fowler, 1980; Browman &
Goldstein, 1992), phonological (Gow, 2001), lexical
(Ganong, 1980; Magnuson et al., 2003), and sentential
(Gaskell & Marslen-Wilson, 2001) levels.
All of these examples involve cases of local
coarticulation, that is, coarticulation between adjacent
segments. Subsequent work on speech production has
revealed the existence of long-range coarticulation, in
some cases spanning multiple segments or even syllables
(Heid & Hawkins, 2000; Recasens, 1984; West, 2000).
This raises the possibility that listeners have even richer
information at their disposal -- cues specifying qualities of
upcoming sounds even several segments in advance.
However, these effects are subtle and subject to strong
constraints. Among these constraints is coarticulation
resistance, a finding of Bladon and Al-Bamerni (1976),
who observed that intervening consonants could modulate
the effects of vowel-to-vowel coarticulation. Specifically,
light, palatal [l]s reduced coarticulation between
surrounding vowels in comparison to dark, velarized [l]s.
The articulatory and perceptual effects of coarticulation
resistance has been investigated in some detail (Fowler,
2005; Fowler & Brancazio, 2000; Recasens & Espinosa,
2009). Consonants with high coarticulation resistance
prevent coarticulation between surrounding vowels.
Typically, high coarticulation resistance consonants
involve tongue body or tongue tip articulations (e.g., [t],
[d]) and/or fine motor control (e.g., [s], [z]). That is,
strong constraints on tongue tip or tongue body damp
long-range, vocalic coarticulation. Low coarticulation
resistance consonants allow coarticulatory information to
spread further, as they do not involve the tongue body or
tip and do not require particularly fine motor control (e.g.,
[p], [b], [f], [v]).
The current study is the first on-line study, to the best of
our knowledge, to examine whether lexical access is
sensitive to long-range coarticulatory information, and
whether the impact of such information is modulated by
the coarticulation resistance of intervening segments. If
so, this will represent a substantial increase in the amount
of detail listeners are known to use in order to constrain
speech perception and word recognition.

cross-spliced (e.g., "pick up a pole" and "pick up a pail").
This provides a potentially more powerful window on
sensitivity to long-range coarticulation; the Mismatch
stimuli should slow lexical access of the final target word,
since the coarticulation is consistent with another word,
which should compete more strongly for lexical access.
The second factor was (Coarticulation) Resistance.
After low coarticulation resistance consonants such as [p],
the full vowel in the final word in the utterance, "pick up
a pole", is likely to influence the realization of the
reduced vowels in “up” and “a.” In contrast, [t] is high
coarticulation resistant, so anticipatory coarticulation
from the vowel would be less likely if the final word were
“toll.” Therefore, we selected words beginning with High
Resistance ([t, s, S]) or Low Resistance ([p, f]) segments.

Predictions
We used a variant of the visual world paradigm with two
printed words as response choices (e.g., pole, pail), as
subjects heard sentences like, "pick up a pole". Our first
question is exploratory: whether and when subjects might
begin to favor one word based on anticipatory
coarticulatory cues. Given a low resistance consonant, it
is possible that subjects could begin to pick up
information about the final vowel as early as the vowel in
"up." When Match and Resistance are crossed, an
interaction is predicted: the effect of Match should be
most apparent at the Low level of Resistance.

Methods
Participants Thirty-one undergraduate students at the
University of Connecticut participated in this experiment
for course credit. All were native English speakers with
normal or corrected-to-normal vision and reported normal
hearing.
Table 1: Low and High Coarticulation resistance items.
Numbers indicate quadruple set membership.
Low Coarticulation
Resistance Pairs
1.pail,pole
2.pea,porch
3.paste,post
4.pan,pool
5.peak,pork

6.fake,folk
7.fail,foal
8.feel,fault
9.feet,fog
10.feed,ford
11.field,fall
12.feet,fort

High Coarticulation
Resistance Pairs
1.tail,toll
2.tea,torch
3.taste,toast
4.tan,tool
5.teak,torque

6.sake,soak
7.sail,sole
8.seal,salt
9.seat,sauce
10.seed,sword
11.shield,shawl
12.sheet,short

Materials Twelve quadruples of words were chosen for
the study. Each was composed of a pair of words starting
with a low coarticulation resistance consonant (e.g.,
pail/pole), and a pair starting with a high coarticulation
resistance consonant (e.g., tail/toll; see Table 1 for the full
set). A number of constraints were observed in the
selection of these quadruples. (1) The phonemes /p/ or /f/
were used as low coarticulation resistance consonants,
and /t/, /s/, or /S/ were used as the high coarticulation
resistance consonants. (2) Highly discriminable front or
back vowels were used to maximize acoustic differences

Experiment
We examined whether coarticulatory effects would
influence lexical access by manipulating two factors. The
first was (Coarticulatory) Match. At the Match level, two
instances of one utterance (e.g., "pick up a pole") were
cross-spliced after the word "a". In the Mismatch
condition, two utterances with different final vowels were

2201

between words and also allow for maximal acoustic
difference in anticipatory vocalic coarticulation. The front
vowels used were: /i/, /eI/ and /æ/. The back vowels were:
/әU/, /A/, /o/ and /u/. (3) When possible, we used the same
final consonant in all words in a quadruple, while also
varying length and frequency as little as possible. These
constraints had to be relaxed in a few cases in order to
find enough items. However, the most critical portion of
any noun in our design is the initial consonant and vowel,
which constrain the potential for long-range
coarticulation. ANOVAs confirmed that items did not
differ reliably in any of these characteristics.
Each word in a quadruple was recorded with the same
sentence frame (e.g., “Pick up a”). This particular
sentence frame was selected to be as naturalistic as
possible, while also containing neutral vowels (/ә/ in “up”
and “a”), thereby maximizing the chance of observing
long-range coarticulatory effects. A male, native English
speaker recorded all of the sentences at a moderately fast
speaking rate, which produced observable long-range
coarticulation. The auditory stimuli were recorded and
presented in 16-bit resolution at a 44.1 kHz sampling rate.
The spoken sentences were all cross-spliced at the onset
of the noun-initial consonant. In the Match condition, two
tokens of the same recording were spliced together, to
ensure that any effects in the Mismatch condition were
not due to artifacts of cross-splicing. In the Mismatch
condition, the carrier phrase from one recording (e.g., the
“pick up a” portion of “pick up a pail”) was cross-spliced
with the noun from another recording (e.g., the “pole” of
“pick up a pole”). Average durations were 121 ms for
"pick", 171 ms for "up a", and 317 ms for nouns.
Table 2: Mean F2-F1 (Hz) for up and a by condition.

providing long-range anticipatory coarticulation cues in
the materials.
Procedure Participants were seated at a comfortable
distance from a computer screen (approximately 60 cm).
Eye movements were monitored with an SR Research
EyeLink 1000 desktop-mounted (remote) system,
sampling at 500 Hz. Spoken sentences were presented to
participants through headphones.
Each trial started with a drift correction procedure
(participants briefly fixated a central dot). Then, a central
fixation cross appeared. Participants clicked on it to begin
the trial. When the cross was clicked, the members of a
word pair appeared on the screen, one on the left and one
on the right, with target and distractor position counterbalanced and pseudo-randomized. (We did not use
pictures because we were unable to find enough highly
imageable words meeting our phonological constraints;
see McMurray, Tanenhaus & Aslin, 2009, and Huettig &
McQueen, 2007, for precedents of using printed words in
the visual world paradigm to obtain fine-grained time
course measures of speech perception and spoken word
recognition.) After a delay of 500 ms, the spoken sentence
was presented over headphones. Participants were
instructed to click on the final word of each sentence. The
trial ended when the participant clicked on a printed word.
Each participant was presented with all 48 experimental
trials and 44 filler trials. Twenty-two fillers consisted of
rhyming pairs (to direct attention away from the onset
similarity of critical items), and the remaining twenty-two
were non-rhyming pairs. Half of each of these sets were
presented with an auditory sentence cross-spliced to
produce mismatching coarticulation, and the other half
were spliced with another token of the same sentence,
using exactly the same procedure as for the experimental
stimuli (due to space constraints, we do not report
analyses of filler items here). Experimental and filler
trials were presented in random order following four
(filler) practice trials. Half the experimental trials were
presented in the Match condition and half were presented
in the Mismatch condition. Half the trials in the Match
and Mismatch conditions were Low Coarticulation
Resistance words and the others were High. Thus,
participants were given 12 trials in each of the four
possible conditions. The word pairs (pail/pole) were
counterbalanced between participants, such that a
participant heard one of the pair (pail) in the Match
condition, and the other (pole) in the Mismatch condition.
Across participants, each word pair was presented the
same number of times in Match and Mismatch conditions,
and each word appeared equally often on the left or right.

Coarticulation Resistance
Low

High

up

a

up

a

Front Vowels

789

793

811

1064

Back Vowels

772

612

808

938

∆V

17

181

3

126

Acoustic analysis The formants of vowels of ‘up’ and
‘a’ of each target sentence were measured. Vowel formant
center frequencies were measured using LPC and FFT
spectra with reference to a wideband spectrogram.
Measurements were made at the most stable portion of the
middle of the vowel. Following Ladefoged (1993) we
used F2-F1 (second formant - first formant) as a measure
of vowel backness. The results are summarized in Table
2, collapsing over Front (/i, eI, æ/) and Back (/әU, A, o, u/)
vowels. F2 and F1 are more widely spaced for front than
back vowels, so F2-F1 should be greater for front vowels.
High Resistant consonants should yield smaller vowel
backness differences than Low Resistant consonants. All
of these differences were observed in the mean F2-F1
values at both 'up' and 'a'. Thus, we were successful in

Results
Data from two participants was excluded from analyses
because of poor eye tracker calibration. Mean accuracy
was at least 0.99 in all conditions. Figure 1 shows the
average time course of target and competitor fixation
proportions (at 20 ms intervals). Qualitatively, one

2202

Table 3: Growth curve analysis of competitor fixation proportions. See text for details.
Model fit

Match

Coarticulation Resistance

Match x CR

-2LL

ΔD

p

Estimate

t

p

Estimate

t

p

Estimate

t

Base

5996.8

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

p
-

Intercept

6013.8

17.1

0.001

0.074

4.39

<0.001

0.011

0.63

0.528

-0.058

-2.43

0.017
0.149

Linear

6018.9

5.1

0.166

-0.138

-2.16

0.031

-0.043

-0.68

0.500

0.130

1.44

Quadratic

6097.1

78.2

<0.001

-0.122

-7.57

<0.001

-0.001

-0.04

0.971

0.067

2.94

0.003

Cubic

6151

53.9

<0.001

0.111

6.92

<0.001

0.033

2.04

0.041

-0.082

-3.60

<0.001

Figure 1: Mean fixation proportions to targets (top) and competitors (bottom). Symbols show observed data.
Lines show growth curve fits for the 371-800 ms analysis window. Note different y-axis ranges.
condition stands out. The target is fixated most slowly in
the Mismatch, Low Resistance condition, and a
complementary increase in competitor fixations is also
observed. The effect is not apparent until midway through
the noun; however, the difference can only be due to
coarticulatory detail available prior to word onset, since

the signal in that condition was identical to that in the
Match, Low Resistance condition from noun onset
onward. There was also a slight trend towards an effect of
Match at the High level of Coarticulation Resistance.
For the statistical analyses, we applied growth curve
analysis (GCA; Mirman, Dixon, & Magnuson, 2008).

2203

GCA is a variant of multi-level modeling that fits
orthogonal power polynomial terms to over-time data.
Conceptually, curves are fit to subject mean proportions
at the lowest level of condition combinations (e.g., the
Match level at the Low level of Resistance), and GCA
assesses whether the curve parameters differ. Notably,
this approach is dynamically consistent: the average of
subject-level fits is equivalent to the fit to averaged data.
It is clear from Figure 1 that there were no differences
between conditions until midway through the noun.
Therefore, we constrained the GCA to a window
beginning 200 ms after noun onset, the approximately
earliest point where noun-driven changes in fixation
proportions could be observed (371 ms after "up" onset),
and ending at target asymptote (800 ms).
While any order polynomial can be used, the first three
terms are conceptually easiest to link to visual world data.
The intercept is recentered, such that it is analogous to
mean proportion in the analysis window, and so directly
analogous to an ANOVA on mean fixation proportion
(indeed, although standard ANOVAs are less powerful
than the multi-level modeling afforded by GCA,
ANOVAs on mean proportion in this analysis window
converge with the GCA intercept analyses). The linear
term is the mean slope over the analysis window, the
quadratic term reflects bowing of the primary curve
inflection, and the cubic term capture inflections at the
tails (necessary for fitting the s-like curves here).

Mismatch was only reliable in the context of Low
Coarticulation Resistance consonants.

Discussion
This study addresses the question of whether long-range
coarticulatory information influences the time course of
lexical activation and competition. We systematically
varied (a) the Coarticulation Resistance (high vs. low) of
the onset consonant of a monosyllabic target noun and (b)
Coarticulatory "Match", i.e., whether the long-range
anticipatory coarticulation matched or mismatched the
vowel of the target noun that was ultimately heard.
While we observed trends associated with
Coarticulatory Match and Resistance, the effects were
driven largely by a difference in one condition: responses
were slowed in the Mismatch, Low Resistance condition
(though there was also a slight trend toward an effect of
Mismatch at High Coarticulation Resistance).
The fact that the influence of anticipatory coarticulation
was most apparent at low Coarticulation Resistance is
consistent with phonetic analyses of long-range
coarticulation, as those effects are simply more likely to
propagate over segments (like [p]) that do not impose
strong constraints on the position of the tongue tip or
tongue body. The fact that influences of anticipatory
coarticulation were most apparent in the Mismatch
conditions is consistent with our expectation that these
would be subtle effects and that misleading cues might be
required to elicit detectable changes in lexical access (cf.
Dahan, Magnuson, Tanenhaus & Hogan, 2001).
Notably, the effects do not emerge until midway
through the final noun. This is surprising, as these effects
must be due to anticipatory coarticulatory effects, since
the nouns in the Match and Mismatch conditions were
identical; those conditions differed only the "pick up a"
portion of the instruction. It may be that anticipatory
effects are detected as they occur, but require combination
with confirmatory bottom-up evidence before they have a
detectable impact. If front or back vowel qualities are
detected on the vowel in 'up', this indicates that such a
vowel is forthcoming, but it may still be several syllables
away. This could prime appropriate phonological
representations without driving strong lexical activation.
We do not mean to imply that lexical access initially
proceeds based on local, bottom-up cues and other
constraints are integrated after a delay (cf. Swinney,
1979). Instead, we note that when constraints are gated by
bottom-up information but are integrated continuously,
weak effects can appear to be late effects (Dahan,
Magnuson & Tanenhaus, 2001; Shillcock & Bard, 1993).
Even though the effects we observed were relatively
late and relatively modest, we did find a reliable influence
of long-range coarticulatory anticipation. This reveals
how extraordinarily sensitive listeners are to the rich sea
of subphonemic details (some strong, some subtle) in
which the islands of stability we describe as "phonemes"
are embedded. This reinforces the view that coarticulation
and other sources of variability in speech are not noise or

Table 4: Mean competitor fixation proportions in the
371-800 ms analysis window by condition.
Coarticulation Resistance
Low

High

Match

0.198

0.209

Mismatch

0.271

0.225

Because effects on targets and competitors are logically
complementary (since these categories represent the two
primary objects of fixation), we will present just the
competitor analysis. The analyses are summarized in
Table 3, with main effects of Match on intercept (greater
mean proportion in Mismatch than Match conditions),
linear slope and quadratic curvature (due to more negative
slope and greater curvature in Mismatch conditions that
follows from the greater lag preceding the drop-off in
competitor fixations), and the cubic term (due to the early
initial rise in the Mismatch, Low condition). There were
no main effects of Coarticulation Resistance, but there
were interactions of Match and Coarticulation Resistance
on intercept, quadratic, and cubic terms. The intercept
interaction is crucial (and space does not permit
discussion of the other interactions); simple effects
analyses reveal a significant effect of Match at Low
Resistance (t=19.5, p<0.001) but not at High (t=1.5).
Relevant means are presented in Table 4. Thus, the
predicted interaction was observed: the effect of

2204

problems listeners must overcome. Rather, variability is
largely lawful, enabling rapid rates of information
transmission (Elman & McClelland, 1986; Fowler, 1986)
due to local and anticipatory constraints it provides at
multiple temporal scales.

II). Baltimore: Waverley Press.
Huettig, F., & McQueen, J. M. (2007). The tug of war
between phonological, semantic and shape information
in language-mediated visual search. Journal of Memory
and Language, 57(4), 460-482.
Ladefoged, P. (1993). A Course in Phonetics (3rd ed.).
NY: Harcourt Brace Jovanvich Inc.
Ladefoged, P., & Broadbent, D. E. (1957). Information
conveyed by vowels. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 29, 98–104.
Liberman, A. M., Delattre, P. C., & Cooper, F. S. (1952).
The role of selected stimulus variables in the perception
of unvoiced stop consonants. American Journal of
Psychology, 65, 497.
Magnuson, J. S. (2008). Nondeterminism, pleiotropy, and
single word reading: Theoretical and practical concerns.
In E. Grigorenko & A. Naples (Eds.), Single Word
Reading, pp. 377-404. Mahweh, NJ: Erlbaum.
Magnuson, J. S., McMurray, B., Tanenhaus, M. K., and
Aslin, R. N. (2003). Lexical effects on compensation
for coarticulation: The ghost of Christmash past.
Cognitive Science, 27, 285-298.
McMurray, B., Tanenhaus, M., & Aslin, R. (2009).
Within-category VOT affects recovery from "lexical"
garden paths: Evidence against phoneme-level
inhibition. J. of Memory and Language, 60 (1), 65-91.
Mirman, D., Dixon, J.A., & Magnuson, J.S. (2008).
Statistical and computational models of the visual
world paradigm: Growth curves and individual
differences. J. of Memory and Language, 59, 475-494.
Peterson, G. E., & Barney, H. L. (1952). Control methods
used in a study of vowels. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 24, 175–184.
Recasens, D. (1984b). V-to-C coarticulation in Catalan
VCV sequences: An articulatory and acoustical study.
Journal of Phonetics, 12, 61-73.
Recasens, D. & Espinosa, A. (2009). An articulatory
investigation of lingual coarticulatory resistance and
aggressiveness for consonants and vowels in Catalan. J.
Acoustical Society of America, 122(4), 2228-2298.
Salverda, A. P., Dahan, D., & McQueen, J. M. (2003).
The role of prosodic boundaries in the resolution of
lexical embedding in speech comprehension. Cognition,
90, 51-89.
Shillcock, R. C., & Bard, E. G. (1993). Modularity and
the processing of closed class words. In G.T.M.
Altmann & R. C. Shillcock (Eds.), Cognitive models of
speech processing (pp. 163–185). Erlbaum.
Swinney, D. A. (1979). Lexical access during sentence
comprehension: (Re)consideration of context effects. J.
of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 18, 645–659.
Tanenhaus, M. K., Spivey-Knowlton, M., Eberhard, K., &
Sedivy, J. C. (1995). Integration of visual and linguistic
information is spoken-language comprehension.
Science, 268, 1632–1634.
West, P. (2000). Perception of distributed coarticulatory
properties of English /l/ and /r/. Journal of Phonetics,
27, 405-425.

Acknowledgments
Supported in part by NIH HD-40353 to Haskins Labs, and
NSF grants CAREER 0748684 and 0642300 to JSM.

References
Bladon, R. A., & Al-Bamerni, A. (1976). Coarticulation
resistance in English /l/. J. of Phonetics, 4, 137-150.
Browman, C., & Goldstein, L. (1992). Articulatory
phonology: An overview. Phonetica, 49, 155-180.
Dahan, D., Magnuson, J. S., and Tanenhaus, M. K.
(2001). Time course of frequency effects in spokenword recognition: Evidence from eye movements.
Cognitive Psychology, 42, 317-367.
Dahan, D., Magnuson, J. S., Tanenhaus, M. K., & Hogan,
E. M. (2001). Subcategorical mismatches and the time
course of lexical access: evidence for lexical
competition. Language & Cog. Processes, 16, 507-534.
Elman, J. L. & McClelland, J. L. (1986). Exploiting the
lawful variability in the speech wave. In J. S. Perkell &
D. H. Klatt (Eds.), Invariance and variability of speech
processes. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Fowler, C. A. (1980). Coarticulation and theories of
extrinsic timing. Journal of Phonetics, 8, 113-133.
Fowler, C. A., (1986). An event approach to the study of
speech perception from a direct-realist perspective.
Journal of Phonetics, 14, 3-28.
Fowler, C. A. (2005). Parsing coarticulated speech in
perception: Effects of coarticulation resistance. Journal
of Phonetics, 33(2), 199-213.
Fowler, C. A., & Brancazio, L. (2000). Coarticulation
Resistance of American English Consonants and its
Effects
on
Transconsonantal
Vowel-to-Vowel
Coarticulation. Language and Speech, 43 (1), 1-41.
Ganong, W.F. (1980). Phonetic categorization in auditory
word perception. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception & Performance, 6, 110-125.
Gaskell, M. G. & Marslen-Wilson, W. D. (2001). Lexical
ambiguity and spoken word recognition: bridging the
gap. Journal of Memory and Language, 44, 325-349.
Gow, J. D. (2001). Assimilation and anticipation in
continuous spoken word recognition. Journal of
Memory and Language, 45, 133-159.
Hawkins, S. (2003). Roles and representations of
systematic fine phonetic detail in speech understanding.
Journal of Phonetics, 31, 373-405.
Heid, S., & Hawkins, S. (2000) An acoustical study of
long-domain /r/ and /l/ coarticulation. Proc. 5th
Seminar on Speech Production: Models and Data.
(ISCA). Kloster Seeon, Bavaria, Germany. 77-80.
Hockett, C. F. (1955). A Manual of Phonology.
International Journal of American Linguistics (Memoir

2205

