UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effects of Maternal Input on Language in the Absence of Genetic Confounds: Vocabulary
Development in Internationally Adopted Children

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2p72v4xw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Shafto, Carissa L.
Geren, Joy
Snedeker, Jesse

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effects of Maternal Input on Language in the Absence of Genetic Confounds:
Vocabulary Development in Internationally Adopted Children
Carissa L. Shafto1, Joy Celeste Geren2, & Jesse Snedeker2
1
2

(carissa.shafto@louisville.edu) Dept. of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY 40292
(geren@fas.harvard.edu, snedeker@wjh.harvard.edu) Dept. of Psychology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138
Abstract

Variability in Maternal Language Input

Parents provide children with both genes (nature) and
linguistic input (nurture). A growing body of research
demonstrates that individual differences in children‘s
language are correlated with differences in parental speech.
Although this suggests a causal link between parental input
and the pace of language development, these correlations
could reflect effects of shared genes on language, rather than
a causal link between input and outcome. We explored effects
of maternal input on English vocabulary development in
internationally-adopted (IA) children—a population with no
genetic confound. IA preschoolers demonstrated some of the
same correlations with input as in previous studies;
specifically, measures of input quality were significantly
correlated with vocabulary. However, IA infants did not
demonstrate this pattern. Differences between the age groups
may be related to the pace of acquisition; more rapid
vocabulary development in the preschoolers suggests that
access to, and children‘s ability to make use of input, may be
a limiting factor for the infants.

Introduction
There is a growing body of research demonstrating that
individual differences in children‘s linguistic abilities are
correlated with differences in parental speech (e.g., Hart &
Risley, 1992, 1995; Hoff, 2003b; Zimmerman et al., 2009).
While these studies and others strongly suggest that
variation in parental language input contributes to
variability in language development, such studies have an
unavoidable confound: biological parents provide children
with linguistic and genetic input. In fact, twin studies
consistently find that language skills have moderate to high
heritability (Stromswold, 2001) and Plomin and Dale go so
far as to say ―a case could be made that verbal measures are
among the most heritable traits‖ (2000, p. 39). Rather than a
direct causal link between input and outcome, these
correlations between parental input and child outcomes
could potentially reflect direct effects of shared genes on the
verbal abilities of both parties. Here we investigate the role
of maternal input in children‘s vocabulary acquisition when
the influence of genetics is absent.
We start by discussing the existing literature on variability
in maternal input and evidence for relations between input
and child language outcomes. Then we present two
experiments with IA children adopted at different ages to
explore potential differences in uptake related to different
paces of language acquisition. Then we conclude by
discussing recent findings on the role of genetics in
language development and how our results reconcile the
gene-environment confound present in previous studies.

An early study of differences in caregiver input (Elardo,
Bradley, & Caldwell, 1977) investigated the home
environment and language abilities of 74 typically
developing children living in an urban setting. The majority
of the children were African-American and one-third were
on welfare at the time of the study. Caregiver input was
measured via a home environment assessment (the Home
Observation for Measurement of the Environment;
Caldwell, Heider, & Kaplan, 1966) and children‘s language
abilities were assessed with the Illinois Test of
Psycholinguistic Abilities (Kirk, McCarthy, & Kirk, 1968).
The study found that maternal involvement, maternal
responsiveness, and providing appropriate play materials
had the strongest correlations with children‘s language.
This study is part of a growing body of research linking
individual differences in caregiver demographics to
differences in their speech (e.g., Hart & Risley, 1992, 1995;
Hoff, 2003b). In their seminal paper, Hart and Risley (1992)
described the qualitative aspects of parental speech in 40
diverse families. The qualitative aspects of the parents‘
speech to their children were strongly related to socioeconomic status (SES); parents of higher SES were more
verbal and had higher quality verbal interactions with their
children. Hoff (2003b) found that mothers‘ mean length of
utterance, number of word types, and number of tokens
were each uniquely correlated with SES. Hoff also found
that mothers‘ speech to adults varied with SES (2003a).
More recently Huttenlocher and colleagues examined
caregiver speech to young children from 50 ethnically and
economically diverse families via home video recordings
(Huttenlocher, Vasilyeva, Waterfall, Vevea, & Hedges,
2007). Data were presented from 5 different time points
collected when the target children were between 14 and 30
months old. The authors analyzed the composition of
speech, the diversity of speech, and the quantity of speech.
The results suggest that caregivers‘ education levels were
significantly predictive of the quantity of spoken language
and that this relation was more predictive than family
income level. They also found that the complexity and
diversity of caregiver speech increased linearly over time,
while input quantity remained relatively stable.

Effects of Input on Language Development
One might expect such significant SES-related differences
in maternal speech to affect children‘s language
development; this is precisely what is found (see
Whitehurst, 1997 for review). In an early study with middle-

2775

class mothers Huttenlocher et al. found that the quantity of
maternal language spoken significantly correlated with
children‘s vocabulary growth from age 14 to 26 months
(Huttenlocher, Haight, Bryk, Seltzer, & Lyons, 1991).
In a study of 22 mother-child dyads varying in SES HoffGinsberg (1986) found several aspects of mothers‘ speech to
correlate with children‘s language outcomes during the third
year of life. Both functional and structural characteristics of
maternal speech were predictive of children‘s language
outcomes (e.g., the average number of noun phrases per
utterance in maternal speech was predictive of the same
feature in children). Another study by Hoff-Ginsberg (1998)
found differences between siblings relating to birth order,
though genetic influences are similar among siblings.
More recently, in a study of 33 high-SES families and 30
low-SES families Hoff (2003b) found that maternal mean
length of utterance, number of word types, and number of
word tokens were each uniquely predictive of children‘s
vocabulary size. SES-related differences in maternal speech
mediated children‘s language development such that
children with low-SES mothers heard (on average) less rich
language input and consequently had less developed
language abilities. This finding is supported by a recent
review of the literature on how SES relates to brain
development (Hackman & Farah, 2009). Hackman and
Farah reviewed studies of SES effects on neurocognitive
development and found the strongest effects of SES on the
brain areas associated with language and executive
function.1
In a more recent study focused on children learning
Spanish as a first language, Hurtado and colleagues found
that maternal input correlated with children‘s vocabulary
growth from 18 to 24 months (Hurtado, Marchman, &
Fernald, 2008). In addition, speed of word recognition at 24
months was related to quantity of maternal input. The
effects of maternal speech on vocabulary size and word
recognition speed overlapped considerably, suggesting that
these abilities work together in lexical acquisition. Taken
together these findings suggest that the observed
correlations between parental input and child output may
reflect a causal role of the input in language development
(see also Weizman & Snow, 2001).

The Current Study
The current study extends this work by exploring the effects
of maternal input on early vocabulary development in
internationally-adopted (IA) children—a population which
eliminates genetic confound. We previously demonstrated
that early language acquisition in this population shows the
same qualitative patterns that characterize typical language
development, suggesting that similar learning processes
may be at work (Snedeker, Geren, & Shafto, 2007).
In a more recent study (Snedeker, Geren, & Shafto, in
press) we found that the rate of vocabulary acquisition in IA
1

These findings are preliminary and do not preclude effects of
SES on other cognitive domains.

infants was explained primarily by chronological age, while
the rate of acquisition in IA preschoolers was explained
primarily by time spent learning (i.e., months in the U.S.).
Additionally, the preschool-aged IA children acquired
English significantly faster than the IA infants, suggesting
that for children adopted at older ages the developmental
patterns in the early stages of English acquisition occur on
an accelerated time table. The quantity and nature of
language input may be even more critical to the pace of
acquisition in older learners. The current study explored this
possibility through experiments with children adopted in
two distinct age groups.
In Experiment 1 we assessed English vocabulary in IA
children adopted during the preschool years. In Experiment
2 we assessed English vocabulary in IA children adopted as
infants, who may not learn English at such an accelerated
rate due to less advanced cognitive abilities (e.g., memory).
We tested two age groups to explore potential differences in
the effects of maternal input due to differences in the pace
of language development.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants Twenty-nine children aged 2;9 to 5;2 years
who were adopted from Eastern Europe and China between
the ages of 2;5 and 4;11 (M: 3;1 years) and had been in the
U.S. for 0.5–6 months (M: 3.4 months) at the first
assessment. All children were adopted by monolingual
English speakers and were typically developing. 2
All of the children were adopted into upper-middle class
homes, with the majority of mothers having earned graduate
or professional degrees (N=17). The other mothers earned a
college degree (N=9) or attended some college (N=3).
Materials & Procedure Parents participated in monthly
sessions until their child had been in the U.S. for 6 months;
thus each child had 1–6 sessions (total=63). For each
session parents completed the Words and Sentences form of
the MacArthur-Bates CDI3 (CDI-2; Fenson et al., 2006) and
recorded a language sample in their home. Families were
sent a standard box of toys to use for the language sample,
which were an average of 27 minutes long and were
transcribed and analyzed using the CLAN program
(MacWhinney, 2000).

Measures Once the language samples were transcribed,
maternal utterances were coded for quantitative and
qualitative features. The maternal input quantity variable
was the number of words spoken per minute. Maternal input
quality variables included: mean length of utterance (MLU),
the number of word types spoken per minute (a measure of
input diversity), percentage of utterances that were yes/no
2

According to a parent report.
We validated the use of the CDI-2 with this population in a
previous study (Snedeker et al., in press).
3

2776

questions (Is that your crayon?), percentage of utterances
that were wh-questions (What color is that?), and the
percentage of utterances that were alternative questions (Do
you want to play with the truck or the car?).
Because children had varying numbers of sessions, the
maternal input variables were calculated for each session,
and the average values for each variable were used as the
predictors for that child. This means that for children with
more than one recording session, no particular data point
was chosen for use (which could have biased the results),
and no data points were represented more than once in the
analyses.

Percentage of maternal utterances that were yes/no
questions accounted for additional variance (adjusted
R2=.07, p<.001) suggesting that mothers who asked more
yes/no questions had children with higher SRSs. This
suggests that higher levels of prompting or engagement
facilitated vocabulary growth.
Contrary to previous findings, words per minute
(quantity) was not a reliable predictor of SRS (partial
R2=.002, p=.70). However, this may be due to the high
correlation between words per minute and word types per
minute (see Table 1).

Experiment 2

Results
CDI-2 ‗norms‘ were calculated using data from a larger
study of IA preschoolers (N=182). Stepwise regressions
were conducted on CDI-2 vocabulary score with Time in the
U.S. (R2=.54, p<.001) and Age of Arrival (R2=.03, p<.001)
as predictors.4 Results were used to calculate standardized
residual scores (SRSs) for vocabulary for the final session
of the 29 participants in the current study. Specifically, the
SRSs were used as a measure of how different children‘s
reported vocabularies were from their predicted vocabulary.
Thus a negative SRS would indicate that a child‘s reported
vocabulary was lower than would be predicted by their Age
of Arrival and Time in the U.S.
As a first pass raw correlations were conducted between
the maternal input variables and children‘s SRS (see Table
1). Then step-wise regressions were conducted on children‘s
SRSs using the maternal input variables (averaged across
sessions) as predictors. At Step 1 maternal word types per
minute was a significant predictor of SRS (adjusted R2=.56,
p<.001; see Figure 1). This suggests mothers with more
diverse input had children with higher SRSs; their children
exceeded their predicted vocabulary by larger amounts.

Method
Participants Seventeen children aged 1;7 to 2;8 who were
adopted from China between 8 and 16 months old (M: 12
months) and had been in the U.S. for 7–20 months (M: 15
months) at the first session. All children were adopted by
monolingual English speakers and were reported to be
typically developing.
All children were adopted into upper-middle class homes,
with the majority of mothers having earned graduate or
professional degrees (N=11). The other 6 mothers had all
earned a college degree.
Materials & Procedure Parents completed monthly
sessions until their child was 32 months old; thus each child
had 1–12 sessions (total=71). Three of the children had
some of their language samples recorded with their father
instead of their mother. In order to maximize homogeneity
across the language samples for all participants, individual
sessions that were recorded with the father were excluded
from analyses. This left a total of 64 sessions for analyses.

Measures The same as in Experiment 1.
Results

Figure 1: IA Preschoolers‘ Vocabulary SRSs by Diversity of
Maternal Input (Experiment 1).
4

Children‘s Age at Test was not used as a predictor because it was
significantly positively correlated with both Age of Arrival (r=.95,
p<.001) and Time in the U.S. (r=.19, p<.05).

First CDI-2 ‗norms‘ were calculated for the IA infants using
data from a larger study of IA infants (N=223). Step-wise
regressions were conducted on CDI-2 vocabulary score with
Age at Test (R2=.45, p<.001) and Age of Arrival (R2=.03,
p<.001) as the predictors.5 Results were used to calculate
standardized residual scores (SRSs) for the final session of
the 17 IA infants in the current study. As a reminder, a
child‘s SRS represents the difference between their reported
and predicted English vocabulary (i.e., a z score).
As in Experiment 1, raw correlations were first conducted
to determine the relations between the maternal input
variables and children‘s SRSs (see Table 2). Step-wise
regressions were then conducted on children‘s SRSs using
maternal input variables (averaged across sessions) as
predictors. The percentage of alternative questions
5

Time in the U.S. was not used as a predictor because it was
significantly correlated with both Age at Test (r=.89, p<.001) and
Age of Arrival (r=-.28, p<.001).

2777

Table 1: Correlation matrix for Experiment 1 (IA preschoolers).

Measure
Words per minute (word tokens)
MLU
Word types per minute
Yes/no questions (% of utterances)
Wh-questions (% of utterances)
Alternative questions (% of utterances)
Standardized residual vocabulary score (SRS)
**p<.01

Words
per
minute
--.56**
.82**
.04
-.29
-.14
.64**

MLU

Word
types per
minute

Yes/no
questions
(% of
utterances)

Wh-questions
(% of
utterances)

Alternative
questions
(% of
utterances)

--.57**
.14
-.03
.02
.53**

--.06
-.05
-.03
.76**

--.50**
.51**
.33

--.65**
.01

--.07

Table 2: Correlation matrix for Experiment 2 (IA infants).

Measure
Words per minute (word tokens)
MLU
Word types per minute
Yes/no questions (% of utterances)
Wh-questions (% of utterances)
Alternative questions (% of utterances)
Standardized residual vocabulary score (SRS)
т
p<.06, *p<.05, **p<.01

Words
per
minute
--.61**
.57*
-.14
-.12
.48т
.40

(e.g., ―Do you want to play with the truck or the car?‖) was
the only significant predictor of SRS (adjusted R2=.47,
p<.01). Mothers who asked more alternative questions had
children with higher SRSs—children who exceeded their
predicted vocabulary by greater amounts (see Figures 2 and
3).
Contrary to Experiment 1, maternal word types per
minute and percentage of yes/no questions were not reliable
predictors of SRS (adjusted R2=-.03, p=.51; adjusted R2=.001 p=.33, respectively). This suggests that the features of
maternal speech that seem to influence English vocabulary
growth in IA children adopted as preschoolers might be less
influential for IA children adopted as infants. Alternatively,
the smaller sample size in the infant group may have made
any additional effects of maternal input variables
undetectable.6 As in Experiment 1, but contrary to previous
findings, words per minute (input quantity) was not a
reliable predictor of SRS (incremental R2=.005, p=.72).
Unlike in Experiment 1, the raw correlation with words per
minute was not significant either (see Table 2). However,
the correlation value was moderate (.40), so one possibility
is that the effect was suppressed by the variability present in
our small sample.

MLU

Word
types per
minute

Yes/no
questions
(% of
utterances)

Wh-questions
(% of
utterances)

Alternative
questions
(% of
utterances)

--.62**
-.19
.00
.41
.16

---.09
-.26
.09
.18

--.52*
.02
.20

---.12
-.21

--.70**

General Discussion
There were significant relations between some qualitative
aspects of maternal input—maternal word types and yes/no
questions—and English vocabulary ability for the
preschool-aged IA children. This is in accord with previous
findings of a positive relation between maternal input and
children‘s vocabulary development. Curiously, the relation
between input and outcome differed in the two age groups.
This difference occurred despite the fact that both age
groups were adopted into families with similar SES (high),
and thus were like the professional families from Hoff
(2003b) who received quite rich language input.
One possible explanation for the difference between age
groups is that perhaps older children are more sensitive to
variation in input. IA children in both age groups are
receiving input that is likely greater in quantity and quality
than the general population (due to their high SES
environment). However, the IA infants may be immersed in
such a rich language environment that their maturational
status may be limiting their ability to take advantage of the
high quality and quantity of the input they are receiving.
Specifically, the IA preschoolers may be more ready to
make use of the input because their other cognitive skills
(e.g., memory) are more fully developed. They can learn

6

For a moderate correlation (r=.5) with power of 80% a minimum
sample size of 28 children is needed.

2778

Waldron, D'Onofrio, & Gottesman, 2003).
However, there is an important difference between the
current study and previous ones. Previous studies have an
unavoidable confound of environmental (often indicated by
SES) and genetic influences on children‘s language
development. Variation in parental language input may
contribute to variability in language development, but
biological parents provide their children with both linguistic
and genetic input. Thus it is possible that correlations
between parental input and child outcomes in previous
studies reflect direct effects of shared genes on verbal
abilities, and not a direct causal link between input and
outcome. So what is the role of genetics in language
development?
Figure 2: IA Infants‘ Vocabulary SRSs by Diversity of
Maternal Input (Experiment 2).

The Role of Genetics in Language Development

Figure 3: IA Infants‘ Vocabulary SRSs by Alternative
Questions in Maternal Input (Experiment 2).
faster so input is more likely to be a rate-limiting factor. It
may also feel more natural to speak more to an older child
(IA preschooler) and more input likely results in greater
variability in input that the child can exploit. There may be
less variation in the input for the IA infants, providing less
for the child to exploit.
Contrary to previous studies, we did not find a significant
effect of maternal input quantity on vocabulary. However,
the raw correlations between input quantity and vocabulary
were significant for the IA preschooolers. The correlation
likely disappears when put into the regression due to the
high correlation between number of words and number of
word types, with number of word types soaking up all the
variance in children‘s SRS. This suggests that the amount of
input may have an effect, but it is suppressed by effect of
the input diversity. Another possible explanation for the
discrepancy between the IA children in this study and prior
findings is that there is a ceiling effect for the effect of
environment. Specifically, there is evidence suggesting that
environmental contributions may be greater in low-SES
samples where environment is likely to be the limiting
factor, and smaller in high-SES samples where it is less
likely to be the limiting factor (Turkheimer, Haley,

As part of the Twins‘ Early Development Study (TEDS)
thousands of twins were studied to investigate the roles of
environmental and genetic factors in children‘s language
development (Oliver & Plomin, 2007; Plomin & Dale,
2000). One motivation for TEDS was a consistent set of
findings from adoption and twin studies suggesting a
significant effect of genetics on language ability. Although
the early findings suggest that nonverbal and verbal abilities
have a similar genetic correlation and are moderately
correlated with each other (Plomin & Dale, 2000), later
studies suggest a stronger environmental influence (Spinath,
Ronald, Harlaar, Price, & Plomin, 2003). The myriad of
studies published on TEDS data also suggest that the
relative potency of genetic and environmental influences
changes over time (Oliver & Plomin, 2007).
The genetic confound present in many studies of the
effect of input on children‘s language development was
removed in another recent study, which explored effects of
teacher input on syntactic development (Huttenlocher,
Vasilyeva, Cymerman, & Levine, 2002). The study
measured children‘s syntactic growth over a school year and
found it was predicted by qualitative aspects of their
preschool teacher‘s syntactic input, suggesting a direct
effect of input on acquisition. According to the authors, this
pattern of findings suggests that observed correlations
between language input and output in prior research may
reflect a causal role of input in language acquisition. While
it is true that these results cannot be explained by genetic
factors, the focus was only on syntax. Also, when thinking
about the effects of input over time it is likely that any effect
of input would be compounded and thus we should expect
significant predictive links with overall ability as well.

Conclusions
Like populations of children learning their first language
from birth, maternal input (nurture) significantly correlated
with English vocabulary development in IA children. These
relations were strong despite the fact that IA children share
no genetic influence (nature) with their adoptive parents.
This reconciles the gene-environment confound present in
previous studies and provides additional support for the role

2779

of maternal input in children‘s vocabulary development. In
addition, the inclusion of two different age groups provided
insight into the contexts in which effects of language input
are likely to be largest.
The development of language depends on many things
including input, general cognitive skills (e.g., memory), etc.
When cognitive skills are well developed and language
acquisition is rapid, then the pace of language development
is most likely to depend on the variation in input. Thus we
see maternal input effects in the preschool-aged IA children
even though the amount of (and variation in) input for all
children was quite high. In contrast, when the pace of
language acquisition is slower because cognitive skills are
still developing, then language input may be less likely to be
a limiting factor—particularly for children who are in inputrich environments (i.e., IA children).

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Abbie Claflin, Nicole Gavel, Ellen
Godena, Candice Ishikawa, Corinne Jones, Eva Liggett, Angela
Lou, John Ste Marie, Ryan Sykora, Cathy Tillman, and K. Yvonne
Woodworth for assistance with data collection and transcription;
Katie Felkins for her endless assistance over the years; and the
families who participated for their altruism. This project was
generously supported by a grant from the NSF (No. 0418423) to
the third author.

References
Caldwell, B., Heider, J., & Kaplan, B. (1966, September). Home
observation for measurement of the environment. Paper
presented at the meeting of the American Psychological
Association.
Elardo, R., Bradley, R., & Caldwell, B. (1977). A longitudinal
study of the relation of infants' home environments to language
development at age three. Child Development, 4, 595-603.
Fenson, L., Marchman, V., Thal, D., Dale, P. S., Bates, E., &
Reznick, J. S. (2006). MacArthur-Bates communicative
development inventories (CDIs) (2nd ed.). Baltimore, MD:
Brookes Publishing.
Hackman, D. A., & Farah, M. J. (2009). Socioeconomic status and
the developing brain. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 13(2), 6573.
Hart, B., & Risley, T. R. (1992). American parenting of languagelearning children: Persisting differences in family--child
interactions observed in natural home environments.
Developmental Psychology, 28, 1096-1105.
Hart, B., & Risley, T. R. (1995). Meaningful differences in the
everyday experiences of American children. Baltimore, MD:
Brookes Publishing.
Hoff-Ginsberg, E. (1986). Function and structure in maternal
speech: Their relation to the child's development of syntax.
Developmental Psychology, 22, 155-163.
Hoff-Ginsberg, E. (1998). The relation of birth order and
socioeconomic status to children's language experience and
language development. Applied Psycholinguistics, 19, 603-629.
Hoff, E. (2003a). Causes and consequences of SES-related
differences in parent-to-child speech. In M. H. Bornstein & R.
H. Bradley (Eds.), Socioeconomic status, parenting, and child
development (pp. 147-160). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Hoff, E. (2003b). The specificity of environmental influence:
Socioeconomic status affects early vocabulary development via
maternal speech. Child Development, 74, 1368-1378.
Hurtado, N., Marchman, V. A., & Fernald, A. (2008). Does input
influence uptake? Links between maternal talk, processing
speech and vocabulary size in Spanish-learning children.
Developmental Science, 11, F31-F39.
Huttenlocher, J., Haight, W., Bryk, A., Seltzer, M., & Lyons, T.
(1991). Early vocabulary growth: Relation to language input and
gender. Developmental Psychology, 27, 236-248.
Huttenlocher, J., Vasilyeva, M., Cymerman, E., & Levine, S.
(2002). Language input and child syntax. Cognitive Psychology,
45, 337-374.
Huttenlocher, J., Vasilyeva, M., Waterfall, H. R., Vevea, J. L., &
Hedges, L. V. (2007). The varieties of speech to young children.
Developmental Psychology, 43, 1062-1083.
Kirk, S., McCarthy, J., & Kirk, W. (1968). Examiner's manual:
Illinois test of psycholinguistic abilities (Rev. ed.). Urbana, IL:
University of Illinois Press.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES project: Tools for
analyzing talk. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Oliver, B. R., & Plomin, R. (2007). Twins' Early Development
Study (TEDS): A multivariate, longitudinal genetic investigation
of language, cognition and behavior problems from childhood
through adolescence. Twin Research and Human Genetics, 10,
96-105.
Plomin, R., & Dale, P. S. (2000). Genetics and early language
development: A UK study of twins. In D. V. M. Bishop & B. E.
Leonard (Eds.), Speech and language impairments in children:
Causes, characteristics, intervention and outcome. (pp. 35-51).
Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Snedeker, J., Geren, J., & Shafto, C. L. (2007). Starting over:
International adoption as a natural experiment in language
development. Psychological Science, 18, 79-87.
Snedeker, J., Geren, J., & Shafto, C. L. (in press). Disentangling
the effects of cognitive development and linguistic expertise: A
longitudinal study of the acquisition of English in
internationally-adopted children. Cognitive Psychology.
Spinath, F. M., Ronald, A., Harlaar, N., Price, T. S., & Plomin, R.
(2003). Phenotypic g early in life: On the etiology of general
cognitive ability in a large population sample of twin children
aged 2 - 4 years. Intelligence, 31, 195-210.
Stromswold, K. (2001). The heritability of language: A review and
meta-analysis of twin, adoption and linkage studies. Language,
77, 647-723.
Turkheimer, E., Haley, A., Waldron, M., D'Onofrio, B., &
Gottesman, I. I. (2003). Socioeconomic status modifies
heritability of IQ in young children. Psychological Science, 14,
623-628.
Weizman, Z. O., & Snow, C. E. (2001). Lexical input as related to
children's vocabulary acquisition: Effects of sophisticated
exposure and support for meaning. Developmental Psychology,
37, 265-279.
Whitehurst, G. J. (1997). Language processes in context: Language
learning in children reared in poverty. In L. B. Adamson & M.
A. Romski (Eds.), Research on communication and language
disorders: Contribution to theories of language development
(pp. 233-266): Brookes Publishing.
Zimmerman, F. J., Gilkerson, J., Richards, J. A., Christakis, D. A.,
Xu, D., Gray, S., et al. (2009). Teaching by listening: The
importance of adult-child conversations to language
development. Pediatrics, 124, 342-349.

2780

