UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effects of Problem Context on Strategy Use within Functional Thinking

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6cq604jx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
McEldoon, Katherine L.
Cochrane-Braswell, Caroline
Rittle-Johnson, Bethany

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effects of Problem Context on Strategy Use within Functional Thinking
Katherine L. McEldoon (Katherine.L.McEldoon@Vanderbilt.Edu)
Caroline Cochrane-Braswell (Caroline.E.Cochrane-Braswel@Vanderbilt.Edu)
Bethany Rittle-Johnson (Bethany.Rittle-Johnson@Vanderbilt.Edu)
Department of Psychology & Human Development, Vanderbilt University, Peabody College #0552, 230 Appleton Place
Nashville, TN 37203-5701 USA

complex, presumably because these students had expertise
interpreting the symbolic notation (Koedinger, Alibali &
Nathan, 2008). Based on these findings, the ideal problem
context seems to be dependent on the student’s relative
familiarity with linguistic and mathematic symbol systems.
When introducing early algebra concepts to elementary
school students, mathematics education researchers stress
the importance of rich and intuitive background contexts.
These are thought to ground students’ understanding of the
new mathematic concepts they are learning (Carraher,
Martinez, & Schliemann, 2008). Story contexts were found
to help third grade students solving arithmetic problems
over comparable symbolic contexts (Baranes, Perry, &
Stigler, 1989). These ideas are in line with learning theories
that have emphasized the role of contextual knowledge in
supporting the development of symbolic knowledge (e.g.,
Greeno, Collins, & Resnick, 1996; Vygotsky, 1978).
Problem context can be varied in ways other than adding
a story. The presentation of numeric information can be
changed in ways which might alter how much attention is
given to surface features versus the deep structure of the
problem (Bassok, 1996). Having an understanding of the
deep structure of a problem is important for fully
understanding and correctly solving a problem.
This study investigates the effect of problem context on
problem solving strategy within functional thinking, a type
of early algebraic reasoning. Functional thinking tasks are
appropriate for students that range in age from early
elementary, where story context has been shown to hurt, to
early middle, where story context has been shown to help.
Giving the same task to students in this age range will help
elucidate the effect of problem context on problem solving
strategy use.

Abstract
The effect of problem format on problem solving strategy
selection is investigated within the early algebra domain of
functional thinking. Functional Thinking is a type of algebraic
reasoning appropriate for elementary students, in which a
relationship exists between two sets of values. Three function
table problems were given to students in grades two through
six (N=232) in three different problem contexts. Problem
context affected student strategy selection. Presenting the
problem with non-indexical X values elicited the most correct
strategy use, whereas the format with indexical X values
elicited the most naïve and incorrect strategy use. Presenting
the problem in a story context did not help correct strategy
selection, but it decreased incorrect strategy use. Findings
highlight factors influencing strategy selection, and have
implication for instructional design and problem solving.
Keywords: Problem Solving; Context; Strategy Use;
Mathematics; Functional Thinking; Algebra.

Problem Format and Problem Solving
The format a problem is presented in can affect how well a
student understands the underlying concepts and skills the
item is tapping (Collins & Ferguson, 1993; Day, 1988;
Kirshner, 1989; Zhang, 1997). One problem context is a
story context. Teachers and researchers often believe that
story problems are harder for students than symbolic
problems (Nathan & Koedinger, 2000; Nathan, Long,
Alibali, 2002). National assessment data support this notion.
Elementary student performance on story problems is
generally worse than symbolic problems in the US
(Carpenter, Corbitt, Kepner & Reys, 1980; Koba, Carpenter
& Swafford, 1989). However, linguistic difficulties seem to
account for younger children’s poor performance on
arithmetic story problems rather than inadequate knowledge
of mathematics (Briars & Larkin, 1984; Cummins et al.,
1988; de Corte, Verschaffel, & de Win, 1985; Hudson,
1983; Kintsch & Greeno, 1985; Riley et al. 1983).
Once students have proficient linguistic skills, story
contexts can have an advantage. In high school students, a
verbal advantage of story problems has been found with in
algebra and arithmetic. The advantage of story problems
was not only a consequence of situated world knowledge
facilitating understanding. This advantage was also due to
difficulties
comprehending
the
formal
symbolic
representations of the symbolic problem formats (Koedinger
& Nathan, 2004). The effect of problem context was further
clarified in college students. A story context was
advantageous when the underlying problem was simple, but
a symbolic context was best when the problem was

Functional Thinking
Functional Thinking is a type of mathematical thinking
which focuses on the relationship between two (or more)
varying quantities, specifically the kinds of thinking that
lead from specific relationships to generalizations of that
relationship across instances (Smith, 2008). The
understanding of functions is also one of the core strands of
the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics
expectations for mathematics curriculum. At the heart of
functional thinking is a relationship between two particular
quantities that can be described by a rule of correspondence
(Blanton & Kaput, 2005). This rule of correspondence can

145

be used to find other sets of particular quantities that adhere
to the same rule.
Functional Thinking encapsulates some of the most
important core components of early algebraic reasoning,
such as generalization and covariation, and provides a
developmentally appropriate way to scaffold these ways of
thought through elementary mathematics education.
X
Y

1
5

2
6

3
7

4
8

are considering the relationship between multiple input and
output values (Schliemann et al., 2001). In this way,
students are less likely to utilize a shallow recursive
strategy. These instructional techniques help guide students
away from the initial recursive strategy and into the correct
functional strategy.
There is much writing as to which problem contexts are
best for learning, but no systematic investigation for
elementary level functional thinking problems. This study
investigates the effect of problem context on strategy use
within function table problems.

5
9

Figure 1: Function Table (Y = X + 4).
X

Y

X

Y

Cost of
Present

Cost of
Present
with Gift
Wrapping

2
3
4
5
6
14

6
7
8
9

2
4
5
7
8
14

6
8
9
11

2
3
4
5
6
14

6
7
8
9

Difficulties in Functional Thinking
A critical aspect of functional thinking is understanding the
functional relationship between XY pairs. Functional
thinking problems can be represented in a function table
(Figure 1). A function table has an X and a Y column, filled
with values that are all related by a function (e.g., Y = X +
4). This is the functional relationship of the table (Carraher
et al., 2008). An understanding the functional relationship
requires considering the relationship across the columns;
between the X and Y values. However, the table can be
interpreted another way, by only looking at the relationships
within one column, such as between Y1 and Y2. This is the
recursive relationship within the table (Carraher et al.,
2008). Considering this recursive relationship is often
temping, particularly when the X values are arranged
indexically, with regular intervals, and therefore there are
also regular intervals between the Y values. When the
problem is presented in this format, to find later Y values in
the function table, all one would have to do is extend the
pattern within the Y values. However, this relationship is
only useful when the X values increase at a constant rate.
Additionally, this relationship cannot be efficiently used to
predict a Y value for new X value.
Children tend to begin with this recursive strategy,
particularly when they are unfamiliar with problems of this
type (Carrahar et al., 2008). Broadly speaking, the power of
functions is in the functional relationship between X and Y
values, so a focus on the recursive relationship is misguided.
Mathematics educators have suggested different problem
presentation contexts to help students get out of using the
recursive strategy and into using the functional XY strategy.
One way is to present the function table with an X axis that
has irregular intervals between values (Carraher & Earnest,
2003; Warren & Cooper, 2005), or even clearly defined
visual breaks in the table structure itself (Carraher et al.,
2008; Schliemann, Carraher, & Brizuela, 2001). These
break up the regular pattern in the Y values, thus
discouraging children’s strategy of simply looking to only
the pattern in the Y values to determine the missing Y
values later in the table.
Another way this can be overcome is to present the
function problem with a story context, so the student can
have an intuitive understanding of the underlying functional
relationship. A story context can help ensure that students

25
41

25
41

25
41

Story Context: At a gift shop, you can pay extra to have your
present gift-wrapped, as shown in the table below. What is the
total cost of the present with gift-wrapping if the cost of the
present is $6? $14? What about $41? If the total cost of a present
with gift-wrapping is $36, what was the cost of the present itself?

Figure 2: Function Table Formats. Indexical, Non-Indexical,
and Story Context.

Method
An assessment on functional thinking was given to students
in grades two through six. Three function table items were
included, which asked the students to fill in missing Y
values in a function table, and to find the rule of
correspondence. The underlying functions for these items
were additive (Y = X + 4), multiplicative (Y = 3X), and a
combination (Y = 3X + 2). These three items were
presented in three contexts: a function table with indexically
increasing X values and no story context (indexical), a
function table with non-indexically increasing X values and
no story context (non-indexical), and a story problems with
indexically increasing X values (story) (see Figure 2). The
items in these three conditions were kept as similar as
possible, with the only differences being the factors that we
were manipulating. The story contexts were about the cost
of having a present gift-wrapped, saving money for a
bicycle, and how many people could be seating at different
arrangements of dinner tables. These story contexts were
adapted from instructional materials created by math
education researchers (e.g. Schliemann et al., 2001). The
rule was not articulated in the story context and had to be
deduced from the function table values. Each individual
assessment contained the additive, multiplicative, and
combination function table problems in the same context
condition. All problems on a given assessment were in the

146

same format, therefore there were three versions of the
assessment; indexical, non-indexical, and story.
The assessments were randomly distributed to 232 2nd
through 6th grade students in a middle class suburban
elementary and middle school in the southeastern United
States. The general instructions for the assessment were read
aloud to the second grade students, but they read the
individual problems themselves.
Coding The students’ work was coded for strategy use.
The student’s strategy was determined from the values they
wrote in the function tables. Students’ strategy use was
coded as correct if they used the correct functional strategy,
recursive if they used a recursive strategy, and other. If the
student gave the correct entries, regardless of a correctly
written rule of correspondence, or gave an incorrect entry
for one blank, but gave a correct rule of correspondence,
they were coded as correct. Students were given a recursive
code if they had filled in the table by looking at the pattern
in one column, instead of the relationship between the two
columns. Students often used other strategies, such as an
incorrect functional strategy, a mix of a functional and
recursive strategy, an indiscernible strategy, or if the student
left the table blank. There were no systematic differences in
other strategy use of these types between conditions, and so
they were collapsed in all further analyses. See Table 1 for a
breakdown of strategy use by condition. Only correct and
recursive strategy use was considered in this analysis.
Strategy Description Sample Student
Response

Frequency
Index

Correct

Used correct Y = 3X
39.1%
functional rule X: 2 3 4 5 6 12 52
to fill in table Y: 6 9 12 15 18 36 156

Recursive Filled in table Y2 = Y1 + 3

(See Figure 3). The effect of problem context on correct
strategy use was evaluated through a series of ANCOVAs
with correct strategy use as a dependent variable, condition
and grade as between subjects factors and a grade by
condition interaction term. Grade was treated as a
continuous variable. The initial model tested for a grade by
condition interaction, which was not significant, and
therefore the interaction term was dropped from all further
analyses. Problem context had a significant effect on correct
strategy use, F(2, 225) = 3.23, p = .042, η2 = .028. A post
hoc analysis of correct strategy use revealed that differences
between conditions were significant when comparing the
non-indexical and story problem contexts, F(1,151) = 5.74,
p=.018, η2 = .037. The difference between the indexical and
non-indexical was marginal, F(1,149) = 2.778, p=.098, η2 =
.018. There was no difference in correct strategy use in the
indexical and story contexts F(1,146) = .523, p = .47, η2 =
.004. This pattern of results was the same when students
were split into younger (2nd and 3rd) and older (4th through
6th) groups, showing that this effect was not dependent on
grade. Average accuracy performance was similar within
these groupings, and so were collapsed for summative
analyses. The younger students used the correct strategy in
the non-indexical condition the most (29.1%), and less in
the indexical and story contexts (15.5% and 11.6%). The
older students used it 66.7% in the non-indexical context,
and 55.8% and 61.2% in the indexical and story contexts.
Overall, the non-indexical context was the most conducive
to the correct problem solving strategy, and there was no
difference in strategy use in the indexical and story contexts.

16.4%

Story

Non
Index
39.4% 48.3%

9.1%

Recursive Strategy Use
The recursive strategy was utilized less often, with it being
used 16% of the time in the indexical context, 6% of the
time in the non-indexical context, and 9% of the time in the
story context. Problem context had a significant effect on
recursive strategy use F(2, 225) = 3.49, p=.032, η2 = .03.
There was a significant difference in strategy use between
the indexical and non-indexical contexts F(1,149) = 6.217,
p=.014, η2 = .04. There was no significant difference when
directly contrasting the other conditions (story vs. nonindexical, F(1,151) = 1.003, p=.318, η2 = .007; story vs.
indexical, F(1,146) = 2.28, p=.133, η2 = .015). Again, this
pattern of results was the same when students were split into
younger (2nd and 3rd) and older (4th through 6th) groups. The
younger students used the recursive strategy in the indexical
condition the most (28.2%), and less in the non-indexical
and story contexts (13.6% and 13.6%). The older students
used it 6.2% in the indexical context, and 2.3% and 5.4% in
the non-indexical and story contexts. This effect was not
dependent on grade. Interestingly, there was a trend towards
a stronger effect of problem context on recursive strategy
use when the type of underlying function (i.e.,
multiplicative) was difficult for the student. The indexical
context elicited the most recursive strategy use, and there
was no difference in strategy use in the non-indexical and
story contexts.

6.25%

X: 2 3 4 5 6 12 52
following Y
pattern, instead Y: 6 9 12 15 18 21 24
of between X
and Y
Incorrect
44.5% 51.5% 45.5%
Functional,
Mixed
Functional and
Recursive,
Unclear, and
Blank
Coded as strategy even if one entry in the table was incorrect or blank

Other

Table 1: Strategy Use Percentages by Condition

Results
We compared the effect of problem context (indexical, nonindexical, and story) on strategy use (correct or recursive).
There was an overall effect of problem format on both
correct and recursive strategy use.

Correct Strategy Use
The correct strategy was utilized the most overall, with it
being used 39% of the time in both the indexical and story
context, and 48% of the time in the non-indexical context

147

those of the older students. This suggests that reading
difficulties were not an issue, and that there was no verbal
disadvantage for younger students. Standardized state test
data was available for a subset of the 3rd through 6th grade
students, and performance on our whole functional thinking
assessment did not highly correlated with reading scores
(r(89) = .613, p < .01). The story context seemed to reduce
the tendency to focus on the Y1Y2 recursive relationship.
This may be because the familiar and semantic information
contained in the story helped form the students’
understanding of the underlying problem structure.
However, this story context was not enough to encourage
correct strategy use, by considering the XY relationship.
This effect of story context may be different from previous
research findings, as the domain of functional thinking does
not, at this elementary level, involve any mathematic
symbolic notation. The problems only contain whole
numbers, and the new concept is the focus on the XY
relationship. As such, story contexts might not have as great
a benefit as they do in arithmetic and algebra.
In this study, we wanted to isolate the effects of
indexicality of the X values and a story context. How the
two problem presentation features would interact was an
open question. Given the results of this study, it is clear that
future investigations should include story contexts with nonindexical X values. Perhaps the combination of both the
real world context and numeric values without tempting
surface patterns will be the most powerful in facilitating
correct functional strategy use.
This study shows that seemingly small changes in
problem context can affect the strategies a learner uses to
solve a problem.

Discussion
Problem context had an effect on problem solving strategy
use. Particularly, the non-indexical context encouraged the
use of the correct strategy relative to other formats, and the
indexical context encouraged the use of the recursive
strategy relative to other formats. Interestingly, the story
context discouraged use of the recursive strategy, but it did
not encourage use of the correct strategy.
These findings have direct implications for the teaching
and learning of function tables. In pedagogical contexts,
function table problems should be presented with nonindexical X values to facilitate student understanding.
Strategy Use by Context
60%
50%
Non-Indexical

40%

Indexical

30%

Story

20%
10%
0%
Recursive

Correct

Figure 3: Problem Solving Strategy Use by Problem
Context.
The indexicality of the X values had a large effect on
student strategy use. Particularly, the indexical context
encouraged the use of the naïve and incorrect recursive
strategy. This could be the case because the students may
have utilized the surface feature of the constant pattern in
the Y values, and found it sufficient to determine the
missing values. Specific aspects of content, context, and
phrasing of a problem often play a crucial role in helping
people determine the structure of a problem. Because of
this, different structures may be abstracted from formally
isomorphic problems that have different surface features
(Bassok, 1996). The differences in surface features between
function tables with indexical and non-indexical X values
seemed to have been enough to invoke different structural
interpretations in students. By arranging surface features of
a problem, the learner’s attention can be directed in more or
less efficient manner to the underlying structure.
The story context did reduce the use of the naïve
recursive strategy, but it did not support use of the correct
strategy. Previous research suggests that the benefits of
story contexts are dependent on the learner’s relative
familiarity with the linguistic and mathematic symbol
systems (Koedinger, Alibali & Nathan, 2008; Rittle-Johnson
& Koedinger, 2005). Our population included a range of
students whose reading ability varied from novice to
proficient, allowing us to address the effect of story context
on students with different reading skill. The second and
third grade students read the story context to themselves, yet
the pattern of results between conditions was the same as

Acknowledgments
The first author is supported by a predoctorial training grant
provided by the Institute of Education Sciences, U.S.
Department
of
Education,
through
Vanderbilt’s
Experimental Education Research Training (ExpERTII)
grant (David S. Cordray, Director; grant number
R305B080025). The opinions expressed are those of the
authors and do not represent views of the U.S. Department
of Education. This work was also supported by an NSF
CAREER Grant (#DRL0746565) awarded to Dr. Bethany
Rittle-Johnson.

References
Baranes, R., Perry, M., & Stigler, J. W. (1989). Activation
of real-world knowledge in the solution of word
problems. Cognition and Instruction, 6, 287–318.
Bassok, M. (1996). Using Content to Interpret Structure:
Effects on Analogical Transfer. Current Diections
in Psychological Science, 5(2), 54-58.
Blanton, M., & Kaput, J.J. (2005). Characterizing a
classroom practice that promotes algebraic
reasoning. Journal for Research in Mathematics
Education, 36(5), 412-446.

148

Briars, D. J., & Larkin, J. H. (1984). An integrated model of
skill in solving elementary word problems.
Cognition and Instruction, 1, 245–296.
Carpenter, T. P., Corbitt, M. K., Kepner, H. S., & Reys, R.
E. (1980). Solving verbal problems: Results and
implications from national assessment. Arithmetic
Teacher, 28(1), 8–12.
Carraher, D., Martinez, M., & Schliemann, A. (2008). Early
algebra and mathematical generalization. ZDM
Mathematics Education, 403-422.
Carraher, D.W., & Earnest, D. (2003). Guess my rule
revisited. Proceedings of the 27th International
Conference for the Psychology of Mathematics
Education, Honolulu, HI.
Collins, A., & Ferguson, W. (1993). Epistemic forms and
epistemic games: Structures and strategies to guide
inquiry. Educational Psychologist, 28, 25–42.
Cummins, D., Kintsch, W., Reusser, K., & Weimer, R.
(1988). The role of understanding in solving word
problems. Cognitive Psychology, 20, 405–438.
Day, R.S. (1988). Alternative representations. In G.H.
Bower (Ed.), The psychology of learning and
motivation (Vol. 22). San Diego, CA: Academic
Press.
de Corte, E., Verschaffel, L., & deWin, L. (1985). Influence
of rewording verbal problems on children’s
problem representations and solutions. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 77, 460–470.
Greeno, J.G., Collins, A.M., & Resnick, L.B. (1996).
Cognition and learning. In D. Berliner & R. Calfee
(Eds.), Handbook of educational psychology. New
York: Macmillan.
Hudson, T. (1983). Correspondences and numerical
differences between disjoint sets. Child
Development, 54, 84–90.
Kirshner, D. (1989). The visual syntax of algebra. Journal
for Research in Mathematics Education, 20, 274–
287.
Koedinger, K.R., & Nathan, M.J. (2004). The Real Story
Behind Story Problems: Effects of Representations
on Quantitative Reasoning. Journal of the Learning
Sciences, 13(2), 129-164.
Koedinger, K.R., Alibali, M. W., & Nathan, M.J. (2008).
Trade-Offs Between Grounded and Abstract
Representations: Evidence from Algebra Problem
Solving. Cognitive Science, 32(2), 366-397.
Kouba, V.L., Carpenter, T.P., & Swafford, J.O. (1989).
Number and operations. In M.M. Lindquist (Ed.),
Results from the fourth mathematics assessment of
the national assessment of educational progress
(pp. 64–93). Reston, VA: National Council of
Teachers of Mathematics.
Nathan, M.J., & Koedinger, K.R. (2000). Teachers’ and
researchers’ beliefs of early algebra development.
Journal of Mathematics Education Research,
31(2), 168–190.

Nathan, M.J., Long, S.D., & Alibali, M.W. (2002). Symbol
precedence in mathematics textbooks: A corpus
analysis. Discourse Processes, 33, 1–21.
Riley, M.S., Greeno, J.G., & Heller, J.J. (1983).
Development of children’s problem-solving ability
in arithmetic. In H. Ginsburg (Ed.), The
development of mathematical thinking. New York:
Academic.
Rittle-Johnson, B., & Koedinger, K.R. (2005). Designing
Knowledge Scaffolds to Support Mathematical
Problem Solving. Cognition and Instruction, 23(3),
313-349.
Schliemann, A.D., Carraher, D.W., & Brizuela, B.M.
(2001). When tables become function tables.
Proceedings of the XXV Conference of the
International Group for the Psychology of
Mathematics Education, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
Smith, E. (2008). Representational Thinking as a
Framework for Introducing Functions in the
Elementary Curriculum. Algebra in the Early
Grades. J. J. Kaput, Carraher, D. W., Blanton, M.
L. New York, NY, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Vygotsky, L.S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of
higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Warren, E., & Cooper, T. (2005). Introducing Functional
Thinking in Year 2: a case study of early algebra
teaching. Contemporary Issues in Early Childhood
6, 150-162.
Zhang, J. (1997). The nature of external representations in
problem solving. Cognitive Science, 21, 179–217.

149

