UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Executive Control in Analogical Mapping: Two Facets

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/60g416zk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Author
Chuderska, Anna

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Executive Control in Analogical Mapping: Two Facets
Anna Chuderska (ania.chuderska@gmail.com)
Institute of Psychology, Jagiellonian University
al. Mickiewicza 3, 31-120 Krakow, Poland

Abstract
In recent studies, analogy-making has been shown to
depend on the ability to resist interference within working
memory (WM). Less evidence refers to the other facets of
executive control (EC), especially to the goal-directed
selection of relational information. In this study, the load on
two above mentioned EC functions and on WM capacity
was manipulated in a single picture mapping task. Next to
replicating the previous findings on the importance of
dealing with distracter interference within WM, the current
results demonstrate that the efficiency of relational mapping
also depends on the goal-directed search for WM input, and
that these two EC functions may be dissociable in mapping.
Moreover, it was found that the impact of distraction can be
linked to whether relations, in which distracters occur, have
not exceeded WM capacity.

Introduction
Analogical reasoning is a flagship example of the
human ability to flexibly form and manipulate explicit
representations of structure (Hummel & Holyoak, 2003).
Making an analogy requires identifying systematic
relational correspondences between two analogs (e.g.,
situations), irrespective of superficial similarities (if they
conflict with relational ones) or differences (especially, if
they are huge) between them (e.g., Gentner, 1983). This
structure-mapping process allows one to infer new goalrelevant information about one analog (target) from the
second analog (source). Thus, analogy is an important
tool for dealing with novelty and one of the major
vehicles of human intelligence (e.g., Holyoak, 2005).
The inherent computational challenges of processing
relational representations (Doumas & Hummel, 2005),
and the fact that variance in the efficiency of analogical
reasoning is only partially explicable by knowledge
accretion (e.g., Doumas, Morrison & Richland, 2009), has
made many researchers and theorists postulate that the
emergence of analogy is underlain by the efficiency of
some constitutional cognitive capacities (or parameters).
Of these, working memory (WM) was considered to be
the most important (see Morrison, 2005 for review). Yet,
explaining analogy-making by WM constraints seems to
be quite intricate.

More than WM Capacity
WM is a capacity-limited system responsible for active
maintenance, rapid access and easy updating of goalrelevant information (Cowan, 2005). If WM is overloaded
by a parallel task (Waltz, Lau, Grewal & Holyoak, 2000),
impaired by brain damage (Waltz et al., 1999), or if the
number of variables interacting in relational representtation grows (Halford, Baker, McCredden, & Bain, 2005),
relational reasoning becomes less efficient. According to
relational complexity theory, the load of relational representation on WM increases exponentially with the number
of interacting variables that must be concurrently manipu-

lated (i.e., relationally integrated). Human WM is probably typically limited to the parallel processing of up to one
quaternary relation, that is a relational representation with
four variables (Halford, Wilson & Phillips, 1998).
However, when reflecting on the limited nature of WM
capacity, it is important to understand internal cognitive
constraints on the proper selection of WM input, by
means of which humans single-handedly, but with various
degrees of success (e.g., Chuderska & Chuderski, 2009),
abstract structural similarity between analogs from other
structural and (sometimes very compelling) semantic
information. It seems plausible that relational integration
might be influenced by the efficiency of earlier goaldriven attentional selection (see Awh, Vogel & Oh, 2006
for a discussion of attention as the “gatekeeper” for WM),
or by the efficiency of managing subsequent reasoning
steps (e.g., Carpenter, Just & Shell, 1990), which are
necessarily isolated out for reduction of complexity
(Halford et al., 1998).
On the other hand, the content of variables integrated in
WM may perceptually or semantically conflict with the
structural information they convey (e.g., Markman and
Gentner, 1993). Since processing many distracters leads to
no success, the need to deal with distraction within WM,
while analogizing, seems indispensible (e.g., Viskontas,
Morisson, Holyoak, Hummel, & Knowlton, 2004).
The potential causes for processing irrelevant information by WM, or doing it inefficiently, are delineated in
LISA – an artificial neural network model of relational
reasoning (Hummel & Holyoak, 2003). LISA dynamically
binds roles (i.e., variables) and fillers (i.e., their content)
into relations by the synchrony of firing their distributed
semantic (featural) and localist (structural) representations. The model contains an intrinsic capacity limit,
since only a confined number of such role-filler bindings
can oscillate cleanly asynchronously in one processing
cycle. The weaker the inhibitory competition between
active units, the less role-filler bindings are cleanly discriminated. The strength of inhibitory competition between
propositions in problem representation also determines
which of them will enter WM and in what order; this is
critical for mapping performance (Kubose, Holyoak &
Hummel, 2002). The weaker the inhibition, the less reliance LISA has on the importance assigned to propositions,
and the less accurate will be its eventual mapping.
Thus, an important source of cognitive constraints in
relational reasoning might come from the effectiveness of
executive control. Executive control (EC) can be defined
as a set of cognitive processes that, instead of representing
mental states directly, influence and organize such states
in the context of some internal goal. Recent theories
assume that EC is an emergent process arising from the
dynamic interaction of several independent, elementary
control mechanisms (Braver, Gray, & Burgess, 2007;
Engle & Kane, 2004). There is some evidence that these
functions significantly correlate with abstract reasoning
(see Chuderski & Nęcka, 2010, for a review).

2749

Executive Control in Analogical Reasoning
The fact that the maintenance and proper application of
a reasoning goal is critical for analogical reasoning might
be inferred from findings which show that the frequency
of recognizing relational similarity is higher when
multiple, instead of single, objects are to be mapped
across analogs (Markman and Gentner, 1993; Waltz et al.,
2000). Such a manipulation might make the goal of
relational processing more salient to participants and aid
(or substitute) selection of what should enter WM for
structural alignment. It could also be hypothesized that the
overriding initial mappings, if they turn out to be incorrect
(Keane, 1997), might call not only for inhibition, as
proposed in LISA, but also for some goal management
mechanisms. More directly, it was shown that mapping
performance correlates with most of the proposed
executive functions, with three of them (WM updating,
switching, and dual-tasking) being accounted for through
the monitoring and application of goal and through
response inhibition (Chuderska & Chuderski, 2009).
Another function of control within analogical reasoning
relates to resolving conflicts and coping with (distracter)
interference. For example, Gray, Chabris, and Braver
(2003) observed that brain activity in neural structures,
recruited by a high-interference condition of a WM
updating task, correlated with relational reasoning
performance. Some evidence for links between abstract
reasoning tests and response inhibition and interference
resolution was reviewed by Dempster and Corkill (1999).
If superficially similar objects are placed in different
relational roles (i.e., are cross-mapped) in structures that
are to be mapped, effective interference resolution seems
necessary to overcome the observed relational mapping
impediment, (e.g., Markman & Gentner, 1993). Cho,
Holyoak, and Cannon (2007) manipulated the level of
internal complexity and interference of a simple
analogical mapping task, demonstrating that young
participants’ reaction times overadditively increased with
relational complexity and interference. Similar decreases
in performance by manipulating these two factors were
observed in older adults (Viskontas et al., 2004).
Richland, Morrison and Holyoak (2006) found that as
children get older they are more efficient in dealing with
both relational complexity and distraction, which was
computationally accounted for by inhibitory competition
in LISA (Morrison, Doumas and Richland, 2006).
It seems that goal-driven selection of relevant
information for relational processing, as well as the
inhibition of irrelevant information, constitute two sides
of a “control coin” in analogical reasoning. No study to
date has addressed both sides of the coin within a single
task. For example, in the studies by Viskontas et al.
(2004) and Cho et al. (2007) subjects were provided with
all the relevant dimensions and were required to integrate
them in WM while ignoring unequivocally irrelevant
dimensions. In studies where similar relations were to be
induced by the subjects themselves (e.g. Markman and
Gentner, 1993; Waltz et al., 2000; Richland et al. 2006),
no manipulation of the need for selectiveness occurred.
The goal of the presented study is to extend the
empirical data on the role of EC in managing WM content
in analogical reasoning with semantically meaningful
material, which lacks the predetermination of a relevant
relational structure. This will be done by attempting to

manipulate experimentally the processing requirements
for the above two mentioned aspects of EC. The load of
WM capacity will also be varied. Unlike in any previous
study known to the author, the needs for attentional
selection, interference resolution and relational integration
will all be varied in a single analogical mapping task. This
procedure should allow one to explore, whether the two
postulated EC faculties have dissociable or interacting
effects on WM performance in analogical mapping.

The Study
The picture-mapping paradigm was used, as introduced
by Markman and Gentner (1993) together with a crossmapping procedure, advanced by Richland et al. (2006)
inter alia by relational complexity manipulation, and
applied in numerous other studies of analogical mapping
(e.g., Tohill and Holyoak, 2000; Waltz et al., 2000). The
task consists in analyzing the two scenes, presented to
participants at once, and then deciding which object from
the target scene best goes with the indicated object from
the source scene. The subjects are instructed to search for
a common “pattern” in the two pictures. The scenes
usually depict simple causal relations, such as “towing”
(see example in Fig. 1 from the current study).
The relational complexity (RC) was operationalized as
the number of relational arguments (i.e., objects forming a
relevant relational structure) to be processed in parallel for
successful mapping. Thus, it was slightly different from
the study of Richland et al. (2006), where RC was
manipulated by necessarily repeating the same relation in
a scene. There were either binary (involving two objects)
or quaternary (four objects) relations to be mapped.
Unlike in any previous study, the total number of
objects in the scene, and therefore the saliency of relevant
relations, was factorially varied. It was thought of as an
operationalization of the need for a goal-directed selection
of structure mapping input. The relevant relations were
“hidden” among five or ten objects in total. All other relations than those that were relevant ones, which could be
possibly identified among the objects in a scene, were
unique to only one scene. Assuming that more overt
relational similarity in relatively semantically impoverished analogs constitutes a cue for engaging in relational
mapping (i.e., it reminds task’s goal), respective enriching
the scenes (independently of relational complexity) seems
to be a clear-cut way to make this cue less direct and thus
more dependent on internal activation. Moreover, having
to search for a relevant structure through the number of
propositions, clearly exceeding WM capacity, seems to be
more dependent on the quality of goal monitoring over the
necessarily sequenced reasoning steps.
Since Cho et al. (2007) demonstrated that distracting
information is detrimental only if attended to and actively
maintained in WM, the manipulation of the need for
interference was constrained to the cross-mapping
procedure. That is, the presence of semantically (and to
some, but never to the full, extent also featurally) similar
object in different relational roles was varied always
within relevant relations - like in the studies by Markman
and Gentner (1993), but unlike in those by Richland et al.
(2006). This objective was to ensure that the subjects’
attention was not diverted from the relevant relational
structure by a distracter external to it, but rather to
increase the probability that distraction will affect the
attempted structure mapping.

2750

Figure 1. The example of one set of pictures of the analogical mapping task. The towed passenger car (with the boatwagon object as a counterpart), and the towing lorry (pairs No 1-4) or the loading lorry (No 5-8) were highlighted for
mapping. Odd numbers label pairs with a distracter (the towing passenger car in bs). Pairs in third and fourth rows
contain quaternary relations (towing and loading are to be integrated). First and third row present high-saliency pairs.
It was expected that all three above manipulations will
decrease the subjects’ ability for relational mapping, but
that their impact would be differential due to tapping into
qualitatively distinct, although highly intertwined, cognitive capabilities. Viskontas et al. (2004) and Cho et al.
(2007), from their results obtained in a similar, relatively
simple mapping task, argued that the overadditive effects
of RC and distraction suggest that relational integration
and inhibition depend on the common pool of WM resources. However, some researchers suggest there is no reason
for EC to operate more or less strongly in different WM
load conditions (e.g., Embretson, 1995; Unsworth and
Engle, 2005). Also, in the scene-mapping study on
children by Richland et al. (2006) RC x distraction interaction occurred only in a group of 3-4 year olds. Thus, it
seemed worth re-examining the RC - distraction relationship in a picture mapping task of more realistic complexity and administered to adults. As to the manipulation of
relevant relations’ (goal’s) saliency, it was hypothesized

that it will result in relational mapping decrements due to
the worse discriminability of relevant relations.
However, no interaction between RC and saliency was
expected. Although it appears that the whole scene has to
be initially placed in WM to screen out irrelevant
information, the impact of the difficulty of this selection
process should not be different when more or less
complex relations have to be integrated in WM for
structure mapping. This is because the selection of input
can be done incrementally, while RC taps into the exact
WM capacity limits (Halford et al., 1998). Yet, RC and
need for more rigid selection should additively affect the
overall mapping performance.
Also, no interaction between saliency and distraction
was expected due to the assumption that they reflect two
different facets of EC, which are functionally distinct
although highly related faculties (Braver et al., 2003).
Thus, both EC manipulations in this study were expected
to have additive influence on mapping performance.

2751

The experiment reported here was a part of a bigger
study to be reported elsewhere. Each participant solved
the task reported here as their first in the whole session.

Method
Participants The participants were 122 inhabitants of
Częstochowa, Poland (age = 16-44 years, M = 22.15, S.D.
= 3.77, 62 females) recruited by flyers, newspaper and
Internet ads. Each participant was paid 50 PLN (~10
EUR) and received a CD gift for their participation.
Materials and design. The scene mapping test contained
a set of fifty-six picture pairs depicting every-day
instances of common relations (e.g., destroying, giving)
among conventional objects (e.g. a ceiling, money). All
test items were similarly colorful and detailed, and were
chosen from one hundred and three pilot items according
to the items’ reliability. No relation or object was repeated
across the test. The quaternary (or equivalent) relations
were created from the binary ones by extending the critical structure by two more objects necessary to be included
in successful mapping. For instance, the relation of towing
one object by another was extended by the third object,
which remained behind for some reason, being loaded for
transport by a fourth object (Fig. 1. 5-8). The example of
distraction manipulation might be the changing role of a
passenger car in a towing relation (Fig. 1., odd numbers).
The spatial location of the corresponding objects was
carefully varied within and across the pairs so as not to
cue mapping. The pictures contained either five (Fig. 1.,
1,2,5 & 6) or ten (Fig. 1., 3, 4, 7 & 8) objects in total. 2 ×
2 × 2 repeated-measures design, with three factors:
relational complexity (bi- vs. quaternary relations),
relational saliency (five vs. ten objects within a scene),
and distraction (absent vs. present), resulted in eight fully
balanced experimental conditions. In order to control for
the difficulty of specific scenes, like in the Richland et al.
(2006) study, counterbalanced versions of each scene
were created to match each experimental condition. The
assignment of an item’s versions to a test’s version, as
well as of test’s versions to participants, was randomized.
Each participant solved 56 different scene pairs, seven per
condition, and the other twelve items in the training set
representative for all conditions. The items’ presentation
order was fully randomized.
Procedure The task was administered on laptop
computers (1280 × 800 pix. display resolution) in a group
of four to five participants accompanied by the experimenter. The pairs of pictures were presented horizontally,
each 5×5 inches large, with the source picture always on
the left. The administration software allowed for visual
separation of objects to be taken into account by the
participants. This was done by covering the rest of the
picture, apart from a particular object, with a semitransparent filter, when a mouse cursor was over this
object. Objects sometimes were elements of bigger
objects. For example, a hand was separated from “the
rest” of a person in a relation where soiling a hand, was
critical; or it allowed to impose consideration of a pair of
people as one entity, where the relation between pairs of
people was a part of the to-be-mapped structure. Two
objects were to be mapped for each pair of scenes.
Each participant received the same oral, detailed selfpaced written and movie instructions. Each of the

subsequent training items were followed by precise
feedback. The instruction was to carefully explore pairs of
pictures in order to first analyze what links exist between
objects within each scene, and then to search for repeated
pattern of these links across two scenes. The concept of
the same relational role was carefully explained to
participants and they learned that they will be required to
indicate objects in the same roles in the other picture.
They also learned that there might be two or four objects
involved in a pattern, so that they should always search
for the most complex pattern. Participants were instructed
to first detect objects that need to be taken into account
and then to verify if they recognized them correctly. A
one-word name of an object appeared in the panel right
under the picture when the cursor was over this object.
The time for exploration was limited to 100 s, which had
been validated as sufficient in pilot study. However,
participants were encouraged to press a space bar as soon
as they knew what the common pattern and object
correspondences were. Once the time limit was reached or
the space bar pressed, the first object in the source scene
was highlighted and this picture became “frozen” for
further exploration. The participants were to quickly click
on this object with their mouse in the target scene, if they
believed it played the same role as the highlighted one. As
soon as they clicked in their chosen target object, a second
object in the source scene was highlighted and its best
counterpart in the target scene was also to be mouseclicked. The choice of the first object excluded it from
options for the second choice. There was a five second
limit for a particular object’s choice. Which relational role
(i.e., agent or patient) was to be first placed in corresponddence was randomized; in the distraction condition, however, the distracting object was always highlighted first.
One object was highlighted across all versions/
conditions, but the other object varied between RCconditions of a scene, in the way that in quaternary
relations the second highlighted object was always from
the “extended” part of the structure. The participants took
one refreshment break (max. seven minutes) after
completing 28 test items. Together with instruction and
training, the task took up to two hours, depending on
participant speed and the duration of the break.
The dependent variable was correct choice for both
objects counted on an all-or-none basis.

Results
All analyses were done with Statistica 8.0 software.
Nondirectional null hypothesis significance tests (with α
value adopted at .05) and their p values are reported.
Mean correct responses for all conditions are depicted
in Table 1. Paired t-tests showed that performance in all
conditions was above chance level, conservatively defined
as .2. In the high RC/low saliency/distraction condition,
the value of this statistic was: t (121) = 4,83, p < .001.
Table 1. Mean correct responses in all exp. conditions
Relational Complexity
Saliency
Distraction
Binary
Quaternary
No
.62
.50
High
(5 objects)
Yes
.40
.36
No
.58
.40
Low
(10 objects)
Yes
.32
.28

2752

Each factor yielded a main effect, thus validating the
experimental manipulation. A 2 (RC) × 2 (saliency) × 2
(distraction) MANOVA revealed that accuracy of
relational mapping decreased: as RC increased (F [1, 121]
= 88.14, p < .001, η2 = .42), as saliency decreased (F [1,
121] = 50.89, p < .001, η2 = .30), and when distraction
occurred (F [1, 121] = 292.98; p < .001, η2 = .71). The
only reliable interaction was two-way RC × distraction
interaction, F (1, 121) = 28.872, p < .001, η2 = .19. Post
hoc tests (Tukey’s HSD) indicated that differences between all means of this interaction were reliable, p < .01.
As illustrated in Figure 2., the mapping accuracy dropped
when distraction occurred, but the detrimental effect of
cross-mapped foil was smaller in the high relational complexity than in the low relational complexity condition.

Figure 2. Interaction between Relational Complexity and
Distraction. Error bars indicate standard error of the mean.

Discussion
Using a modification of Richland et al. (2006) scene
mapping task the role of EC and WM as constraints on
structure mapping was examined in adults. Unlike in any
previous study the requirements for goal maintenance and
application, for dealing with distraction and for relational
integration were factorially varied in a single task.
First of all, the results replicate the previous findings in
children that with increasing number of variables to be
integrated and with similar objects appearing in different
relational roles the level of mapping performance drops
(Richland et al., 2006). Importantly, however, the
presented study extends this evidence by showing that
decreasing the saliency of relevant relational structure in a
task also reliably impedes structure mapping. Together,
these outcomes clearly exemplify the role of two EC
faculties in relational mapping. Namely, EC might not
only be reflected in interference resolution (Cho et al.,
2007) or inhibition (Viskontas et al., 2004) within WM. It
seems that EC is also involved during prior goal-directed
search through structurally and semantically complex
information to select WM input, as relevant for mapping.
The reason that the need for goal management and
application was pronounced in this study was probably
due to the lack of the predetermination of relevant
relational structure and to minimizing the probability of
non-relational cues to correct objects’ correspondences.
This explanation seems to be in line with LISA incrementtal mapping algorithm (Hummel & Holyoak, 2003), which
makes the mapping in the model very dependent on the
importance assigned to propositions (Kubose et al., 2002).
The internal activation of a task’s goal and proper
application of this goal to the necessarily incremental

reasoning steps seems to be critically in play during
selection and encoding of relational information, thus also
before structure mapping is initiated within WM. The
partial support for this conjecture comes from Gordon &
Moser’s (2007) study of eye movements’ paths in a
picture scene mapping task, in which people first scanned
each scene in a given pair for meaningful relations and
engaged in structure mapping only thereafter. The strong
effect of distraction obtained in this study, together with a
lack of reliable interaction between distraction and
saliency of relevant relations, suggest that the two
manipulated control requirements imposed qualitatively
separate constraints on WM during relational mapping.
These constraints pertain to the ability to select
information for the purpose of identifying relevant
relations to reason with, and to the ability to deal with
interference when processing these relations.
Further, the lack of reliable interaction between
relational complexity and saliency of relevant relations
gives a hint that the ability to select relations for analogy
might be qualitatively distinct from the ability to integrate
these relations within WM. Although both processes are
about abstraction, which definitely requires WM
resources, only the second seems critically dependent on
the capacity of this system. Further research is needed to
resolve this issue.
Finally, the reliable underadditive interaction between
relational complexity and distraction was a surprise. This
finding counters previous results of the opposite direction
of this interaction in (Cho et al., 2007; Viskontas et al.,
2004 and Richland et al., 2006). It is neither in line with
LISA, in which WM capacity and efficiency of dealing
with distraction both depend on the same inhibitory
competition algorithm (Hummel & Holyoak, 2003), nor
does it support the hypotheses that EC operates equally
strong in different WM load conditions (e.g. Embretson,
1995). The possible explanation for this result could relate
to the limitation of WM capacity (Cowan, 2005).
Accordingly, since critical processing takes place only in
the highly limited, most active part of WM, it could be
speculated, that the strength of the detrimental effect of
distraction on mapping is linked to the probability of
distracters entering WM. Thus, the interference, which
was caused by the “reversed” object-role bindings in the
distraction-conditions of this experiment, should have
been stronger, if the distracters were a part of the structure
successfully accommodated into WM. This was surely
more the case for easier (i.e. binary), than for more
complex (quaternary) relations.

Summary and Future Directions
The current study sheds some new light on the nature of
EC constraints in relational reasoning. The results demonstrate that next to dealing with distraction within WM, the
goal-directed selection of information to enter structure
mapping is an important, and to some extent, maybe a
dissociable constraint. They also hint at a possibility that
cross-mapping is only detrimental when affected structure
is successfully accommodated within WM. Further
research on the intricate contributions of EC to relational
reasoning could combine measuring of individual
differences in EC functions with experimental
manipulation of their load in relational reasoning task.
This could provide precise tests of plausibility of
computational models of analogy-making.

2753

Acknowledgments
This work was sponsored by the Polish Ministry of
Science
and
Higher
Education
(grant
1422/B/H03/2009/36, years 2009-2010, awarded to
Edward Nęcka and Anna Chuderska). The author wishes
to thank Katarzyna Musiał for her assiduous help in data
collection, Jarosław Kwiatkowski for implementing the
test and Maciej Bernaś for reliable IT support in the lab.

References
Awh, E., Vogel, E.K., Oh, S.-H. (2006). Interactions
between attention and working memory. Neuroscience,
139, 201-208.
Braver, T. S., Gray, J. R., & Burgess, G. C. (2007).
Explaining the many varieties of working memory
variation: Dual mechanisms of cognitive control. In A.
R. A. Conway. C. Jarrold, M. J. Kane, A. Miyake, & J.
N. Towse, Variation in working memory (pp. 76-108).
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Carpenter, P. A., Just, M. A., & Shell, P. (1990). What
one intelligence test measures: A theoretical account of
the processing in the Raven Progressive Matrices test.
Psychological Review, 97, 404-431.
Cho, S., Holyoak, K.J., & Cannon, T.D. (2007). Analogical reasoning in working memory: resources shared
among relational integration, interference resolution,
and maintenance. Memory and Cognition, 35, 14451455.
Chuderska, A., Chuderski, A. (2009). Executive control in
analogical reasoning: Beyond interference resolution. In
N. Taatgen, & H. van Rijn (Eds.), Proceedings of the
31st Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 1758-1763). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Chuderski, A., & Nęcka, E. (2010). Intelligence and
cognitive control. In A. Gruszka, G. Matthews, & B.
Szymura (Eds.), Handbook on individual differences in
cognition. New York: Springer Verlag.
Cowan, N. (2005). Working memory capacity. New York:
Psychology Press Taylor & Francis Group.
Dempster, F. N., & Corkill, A. J. (1999). Individual differences in susceptibility to interference and general
cognitive ability. Acta Psychologica, 101, 395-416.
Doumas, L.A.A., Hummel, J.E. (2005). Approaches to
modeling human mental representations: what works,
what doesn’t and why. In K.J. Holyoak, R.G. Morrison
(Eds.), The Cambridge Handbook of Thinking and
Reasoning. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Doumas, L.A.A., Morrison, R.G., & Richland, L.E.
(2009). The development of analogy: Task learning and
individual differences. Proceedings of the Thirty-First
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 3133-3138). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum
Embretson, S. E. (1995). The role of working memory
capacity and general control processes in intelligence.
Intelligence, 20, 169–189.
Engle, R. W., & Kane, M. J. (2004). Executive attention,
working memory capacity, and a two-factor theory of
cognitive control. In B. Ross (Ed.), The psychology of
learning and motivation, 44, (pp. 145-199). New York,
NJ: Elsevier.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.

Gordon, P.C., Moser, S. (2007). Insight into analogies:
Evidence from eye movements, Visual Cognition, 15,
20-35.
Gray, J. R., Chabris, C. F., & Braver, T. S. (2003). Neural
mechanisms of general fluid intelligence. Nature
Neuroscience, 6, 316-322.
Halford, G. S., Baker, R., McCredden, J. E., & Bain, J. D.
(2005). How many variables can humans process?
Psychological Science, 16, 70-76.
Halford, G. S., Wilson, W. H., & Phillips, S. (1998).
Processing capacity defined by relational complexity:
Implications for comparative, developmental, and
cognitive psychology. Behavioral & Brain Sciences, 21,
803-864.
Holyoak, K. J. (2005). Analogy. In K.J. Holyoak, R.G.
Morrison (Eds.), The Cambridge Handbook of Thinking
and Reasoning. New York: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (2003). A symbolicconnectionist theory of relational inference and
generalization. Psychological Review, 110, 220-264.
Keane, M. T. (1997). What makes analogy difficult? The
effects of order and causal structure on analogical
mapping. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 23, 946-967.
Kubose, T. T., Holyoak, K. J., & Hummel, J. E. (2002).
The role of textual coherence in incremental analogical
mapping. Journal of Memory and Language, 47, 407–
435.
Markman, A., & Gentner, D. (1993). Structural alignment
during similarity comparisons. Cognitive Psychology,
25, 431-467.
Morrison, R.G. (2005). Thinking in Working Memory. In
K.J. Holyoak, R.G. Morrison (Eds.), The Cambridge
Handbook of Thinking and Reasoning. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Morrison, R. G., Doumas, L. A. A., & Richland, L. E.
(2006). The development of analogical reasoning in
children: A computational account. In Proceedings of
the twenty-ninth annual conference of the cognitive
science society. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Richland, L.E., Morrison, R.G., & Holyoak, K.J. (2006).
Children’s development of analogical reasoning:
Insights from scene analogy problems. Journal of Exp
Child Psychology, 94, 249–273.
Tohill, J. M., & Holyoak, K. J. (2000). The impact of
anxiety on analogical reasoning. Thinking & Reasoning,
6, 27-40.
Unsworth, N., & Engle, R. W. (2005). Working memory
capacity and fluid abilities: Examining the correlation
between Operation Span and Raven. Intelligence, 33,
67-81.
Viskontas, I. V., Morrison, R. G., Holyoak, K. J.,
Hummel, J. E., & Knowlton, B. J. (2004). Relational
integration, inhibition and analogical reasoning in older
adults. Psychology and Aging, 19, 581-591.
Waltz, J. A., Knowlton, B. J., Holyoak, K. J., Boone, K.
B., Mishkin, F. S., de Menzes Santos, M. et al. (1999).
A system for relational reasoning in human prefrontal
cortex. Psychological Science, 10, 119–125.
Waltz, J. A., Lau, A., Grewal, S. K., & Holyoak, K. J.
(2000). The role of working memory in analogical
mapping. Memory & Cognition, 28, 1205–1212.

2754

