UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Explanations make inconsistencies harder to detect

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4d37b7w1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Khemlani, Sangeet
Johnson-Laird, Phil

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Explanations make inconsistencies harder to detect
Sangeet Khemlani and P.N. Johnson-Laird
{khemlani, phil}@princeton.edu
Department of Psychology
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540 USA
Abstract

they judge how well concepts cohere with one another
(Murphy & Medin, 1985; Palatano, Chin-Parker, & Ross,
2006). We propose that an additional function of
explanatory reasoning is to resolve inconsistencies.

What role do explanations play in reasoning about
inconsistencies? We postulate that when people create
explanations, they use them to resolve conflicting
information. This hypothesis predicts that inconsistencies
should be harder to detect once individuals have in mind an
explanation of the inconsistency. We report four experiments
that tested this prediction. Experiments 1a and 1b
corroborated the effect when participants made inferences
from inconsistent assertions. Experiment 2 compared the
effect of explanations of inconsistencies with those of a
similarly demanding task. Experiment 3 ruled out a potential
confound.

Explanations resolve inconsistencies

Keywords: inconsistency, explanations, belief revision,
reasoning, principle of resolution

Introduction
The word ‘why’ is used to elicit explanations for the
mysteries of daily life. Why is my car making that noise?
Why didn’t the Redskins win last Sunday? Why isn’t my
experiment working? Indeed, a central feature of human
rationality is the ability to construct explanations of
observed behaviors and phenomena (Harman, 1965). Recent
research has explored the function and developmental
trajectory of explanatory reasoning (Keil, 2006; Wellman,
Hickling, & Schult, 1997). There is consensus among
researchers that explanations are related to causal inference
(Johnson-Laird, Girotto, & Legrenzi, 2004; Sloman, 2005;
Walsh & Johnson-Laird, 2009), and that explanations
impact reasoning, categorization, and learning (Lombrozo,
2006). Less is known about the contexts under which
explanations are generated, i.e., it is unclear when and how
individuals decide to produce explanations.
How do you reveal what a person understands about some
subject matter? One way is to ask the person to explain it,
because explanations require individuals to communicate
their knowledge and beliefs about the phenomenon in
question. Explanations can also occur in other tasks that
draw upon general knowledge. For instance, explanations
are useful when you are learning new information
(Amsterlaw & Wellman, 2006; Chi, De Leeuw, Chiu, &
Lavancher, 1994; Crowley & Siegler, 1999; Rittle-Johnson,
2006), and they help to predict future behaviors (Anderson
& Ross, 1980; Einhorn & Hogarth, 1986; Lombrozo &
Carey, 2006; Ross, Lepper, Strack, & Steinmetz, 1977).
Individuals spontaneously produce explanations when they
try to form categories (Shafto & Coley, 2003) and when

Consider the following:
If people are tired then they go to sleep.
A person was tired, but he did not go to sleep.
The two assertions are inconsistent, i.e., they cannot both be
true. Given such an inconsistency, it is felicitous to ask:
“why not?” But the same question is infelicitous when the
assertions are obviously consistent with one another:
If people are tired then they go to sleep.
A person was not tired, and he did not go to sleep.
It seems strange to elicit an explanation for consistent
assertions, and reasoners are likely to balk at such a request.
Thus, an inconsistency calls for people to search for
explanations, while an explanation is less appropriate when
expectations are met.
We hypothesize that individuals resolve a set of
inconsistent causal assertions by using an explanation to
interpret each assertion, a view we call the principle of
resolution. The principle assumes that when an
inconsistency is detected among a set of assertions,
reasoners construct explanations to restore consistency to
the set (Johnson-Laird et al., 2004). They then interpret the
assertions based on the consequences of the explanations.
Consider the inconsistency above. One explanation for the
person not going to sleep is that he was under some
deadline, and so pursued his work despite his fatigue. The
explanation provides an exception to the generalization that
if people are tired they go to sleep. However, instead of
abandoning it, reasoners are likely to construe it as an
idealization that holds by default: it is true in many cases,
but tolerates exceptions. The assertion may be interpreted as
something akin to the generic assertion, i.e., ‘people who are
tired go to sleep’ (Khemlani, Leslie, Glucksberg, & RubioFernandez, 2007; Leslie, 2008). The principle of resolution
thus allows individuals to use explanations to resolve
inconsistencies by weakening the initial interpretation to
that of an idealization rather than a universal truth.
One potential side effect of the principle is that when
reasoners have an explanation of an inconsistency in mind,
they may overlook the inconsistency on subsequent
assessments of the assertions. If they interpret the
conditional as an idealization, their new interpretation may

2900

prevent them from detecting the conflict between the two
assertions. Indeed, they may even forget that the reason for
constructing the explanation in the first place was to resolve
an inconsistency. To test this prediction, participants in four
experiments were asked to detect an inconsistency after they
had carried out various tasks.

Experiments 1a and 1b
Experiments 1a and 1b examined whether reasoners
spontaneously construct explanations when faced with
inconsistent scenarios, and whether those explanations made
it more difficult to detect inconsistencies. They were
presented with problems such as:
If a person is bitten by a viper then the person dies.
Someone was bitten by a viper, but did not die.
The participants in Experiment 1a evaluated the consistency
of two assertions, either before or after they stated what
follows from the assertions. The participants in Experiment
1b evaluated the consistency of the assertions before or after
they responded to the question, “why not?” When
individuals make an inference from inconsistent assertions,
they should tend to infer explanations. The principle of
resolution posits that when people create explanations, they
interpret the assertions in the light of their explanation. It
predicts an interaction: when individuals create an
explanation first, they should be less accurate subsequently
at detecting inconsistencies in comparison with those who
have not created an explanation.

Method
Participants. 36 participants were recruited for Experiment
1a, and 40 participants were recruited for Experiment 1b.
They volunteered through an online platform hosted through
Amazon.com, and they completed the study for monetary
compensation. None of the participants had received any
training in logic.
Design and Procedure. On each trial, participants were
given a set of consistent or inconsistent assertions (see
Appendix A). Half of the problems presented a
generalization (1) that was inconsistent with a categorical
assertion (2), e.g.,
1. If someone is very kind then he or she is liked by
others.
2. Someone was very kind but was not liked by others.
For the remaining problems, the inconsistency was
eliminated by dropping the first clause in the categorical
assertion (4), e.g.,
3. If someone is very kind then he or she is liked by
others.
4. Someone was not liked by others.
Participants received an equal number of consistent and
inconsistent problems, and carried out two tasks in
succession for each problem, a consistency task and a task
designed to elicit explanations. For the consistency task,

participants had to answer the question, “Can both of these
statements be true at the same time?” They responded by
pressing one of two buttons marked “Yes” or “No”. In
Experiment 1a, participants also performed an inferential
task, i.e., they answered the question, “What, if anything,
follows from the statements above?” In Experiment 1b, they
performed a more orthodox explanation task, i.e., they
answered the question, “Why not?” They typed their
responses into a text box provided on the screen. They were
unable to see their response to the first task when they
carried out the second task. In Experiment 1a, 20
participants performed the inferential task before the
consistency task, and 16 participants performed the two
tasks in the opposite order. In Experiment 1b, 20
participants performed the explanation task before the
consistency task, and 20 performed the two tasks in the
opposite order. All of the problems were similar to the two
examples above, and participants received each set of
contents only once. Each participant received the problems
in a different random order.

Results and Discussion
Table 1 reports the proportions of trials on which
participants correctly evaluated the assertions as consistent
or inconsistent in Experiment 1a. Overall, participants were
more accurate on consistent problems than inconsistent
problems (77% vs. 50%, Wilcoxon test, z = 3.27, p < .005,
Cliff’s d = .42), and the group that carried out the
consistency task first was marginally more accurate than the
group that initially made an inference about the assertions
(70% vs. 58%, Mann-Whitney test, z = 1.66, p = .10, Cliff’s
d = .32). These main effects were a consequence of the low
rate of accuracy on inconsistent problems observed for the
group that carried out the inferential task first. Their
responses corroborated the principle of resolution, and the
predicted interaction was significant: the group that initially
carried out the inferential task was less accurate at detecting
inconsistencies than consistencies, while the group that
initially carried out the consistency task was just as accurate
at detecting either type of problem (Mann-Whitney test, z =
3.03, p < .005, Cliff’s d = .59). Accuracy in the evaluation
of consistency in Experiment 1a therefore depended on
whether or not participants initially made an inference about
the assertions. The effect is likely to reflect the use of
inferences that explain the inconsistency.
Table 1: The percentages of correct evaluations of consistency in
Experiment 1a depending on whether participants carried out the
evaluation or the inferential task first.

Inconsistent Consistent
problems problems
Group that carried out the
consistency task first
Group that carried out the
inferential task first

2901

73

68

33

84

Table 2 reports the proportions of correct responses in
Experiment 1b. Participants were far more accurate at
detecting consistencies than inconsistencies (89% vs. 45%,
Wilcoxon test, z = 4.00, p < .0001, Cliff’s d = .69). The
group that initially evaluated the consistency of the
assertions was more accurate than the group that initially
provided an explanation (79% vs. 56%, Mann-Whitney test,
z = 3.07, p < .005, Cliff’s d = .66). And the predicted
interaction was significant: the difference between
accuracies on inconsistent vs. consistent problems was
greater for the group that carried out the explanatory task
first (Mann-Whitney test, z = 2.02, p < .025, Cliff’s d = .48).
As in Experiment 1a, participants in Experiment 1b were
less accurate at detecting inconsistencies when they initially
provided an explanation.
These results support the principle of resolution, which
predicted that explanations would make it more difficult to
detect inconsistencies. However, it is possible that the
difficulty to detect inconsistencies could have occurred
because the explanation and inferential tasks were
inherently more difficult. In other words, there may not have
been anything unique about the explanation task, and the
same effects could have been observed had reasoners
performed any task that increased processing load. The
evidence for such an account is mixed: in Experiment 1a,
participants who initially made an inference were more
accurate at detecting consistencies than participants who
initially carried out the consistency task (84% vs. 68%).
Table 2: The percentages of correct evaluations of consistency in
Experiment 1b depending on whether participants carried out the
evaluation or the explanation task first.

Inconsistent Consistent
problems problems
Group that carried out the
consistency task first
Group that carried out the
explanation task first

64

93

27

86

Hence, a difference in processing load cannot readily
explain this pattern of results. It should have decreased
performance on both sorts of problem, but in fact the
participants did better on the consistent problems. In
contrast, a difference in processing load could explain the
results of Experiment 1b, because in this case the
participants who answered the question ‘why not?’ first,
went on to evaluate the consistency of both sorts of problem
worse than those participants who began with this
evaluation task. Experiment 2 therefore sought to determine
whether any demanding task could dull reasoners’
sensitivity to inconsistencies, or whether explanations are
unique in decreasing accuracy.

Experiment 2
To test whether explanations uniquely contribute to low
rates of accuracy when individuals have to detect
inconsistencies, the participants in this experiment evaluated
the consistency of a set of assertions after carrying out one
of two tasks: one group provided an explanation of the
assertions and the other group decided whether some
clauses of the assertions were more surprising than others.
The surprisingness task was chosen because it required
reasoners to take into account all the assertions, but it did
not require them to construct explanations of
inconsistencies. Those participants who performed the
surprisingness task received trials such as the following one:
If the aperture on a camera is narrowed, then less light
falls on the film
The aperture on this camera was narrowed but less
light did not fall on the film
In light of these statements, which of the following is
more surprising?
1. It's more surprising that the aperture on this camera
was narrowed.
2. It’s more surprising that less light did not fall on the
film.
They received the same instructions for consistent trials, and
responded by choosing between one of two alternative
responses. Once their responses were registered, they
carried out the consistency task. The other group of
participants typed out their response to the question “Why
not?” before completing the consistency task.

Method
Participants. 40 participants from the same online platform
as in the previous studies and completed the experiment for
monetary compensation.
Design and Procedure. Participants received an equal
number of consistent and inconsistent problems, and
received the same set of problems used in the previous
study. Half the participants carried out the explanation task
before the consistency task and the other half carried out the
surprisingness task before the consistency task. They were
unable to see their responses to the initial task when they
carried out the consistency task. Participants received each
set of contents only once, and each participant received the
problems in a different randomized order.

Results and Discussion
Table 3 reports the proportions of correct responses in
Experiment 2. The results again corroborated the principle
of resolution. Participants were less accurate for inconsistent
than consistent problems when they carried out the
explanation task than when they carried out the
surprisingness task (Mann-Whitney test, z = 1.64, p = .05,
Cliff’s d = .30). No decrease in accuracy was observed for
consistent problems between the two groups (86% vs. 84%,

2902

Mann-Whitney test, z = .63, p = .53). The results rule out
the possibility that the effects reflected differences in
processing load.
Table 3: The percentages of correct evaluations of consistency in
Experiment 2 depending on whether participants carried out the
surprisingness task first or the explanation task first.

Results and Discussion

Inconsistent Consistent
problems problems
Group that carried out the
surprisingness task first
Group that carried out the
explanation task first

75

86

47

84

The experiment replicated the previous effect: participants
who created explanations often went on to evaluate an
inconsistent set of assertions as consistent, but the
surprisingness task had no such effect. The study ruled out
the possibility that any demanding mental task would yield
the same results, because participants who rated how
surprising the assertions were did not go on to err in their
evaluation of the inconsistent problems. And both groups
went on to evaluate consistent problems with no reliable
difference in accuracy between them.
In Experiment 2, reasoners either carried out the
surprisingness task or else the explanation task before
judging the consistency of the assertions. That is, no
participant was exposed to the two different task orders.
Experiment 3 sought to extend the results to a context in
which each participant carried out both tasks.

Experiment 3
Experiment 3 tested whether explanations impair
evaluations of consistency more than judgments of
surprisingness. On each trial, participants either provided an
explanation, a judgment of surprisingness, or neither, before
they evaluated the consistency of the assertions.

Method
Participants. 25 participants from the same online platform
as in the previous studies completed the experiment for
monetary compensation. None had received any training in
logic.
Design and Procedure. Participants served as their own
controls, and received an equal number of consistent and
inconsistent problems. The materials consisted of those used
in the previous studies. For a third of the trials, participants
carried out only the consistency task; on another third, they
carried out the surprisingness task before the consistency
task; and on the remaining trials they carried out the
explanation task before the consistency task. The three

conditions were intermingled, and each participant received
the problems in a different randomized order. Participants
received each set of contents only once, and the contents
were rotated over the three conditions so that each content
occurred equally often in each condition in the experiment
as a whole.

Table 4 provides the proportions of correct responses in
Experiment 3. Participants were more accurate on consistent
problems than inconsistent problems (71% vs. 52%,
Wilcoxon test, z = 2.38, p < .01, Cliff’s d = .26), and
accuracy varied by the three types of trials (Friedman
analysis of variance, !2 = 6.20, p < .05). These main effects
can be attributed to the drop in accuracy on inconsistent
problems when participants had provided explanations.
The study yielded the predicted interaction between the
type of trial and the consistency of the problem, i.e.,
participants were less accurate on inconsistent problems
when they had carried out the explanation task than when
they had carried out the surprisingness task or no prior task,
whereas their accuracies for consistent problems were
comparable to one another across the different tasks (Page’s
L = 304.5, z = 2.55, p < .001).
Table 4: The percentages of correct evaluations of consistency in
Experiment 3 depending on whether participants carried out only
the consistency task, the surprisingness task first, or the
explanation task first.

Inconsistent Consistent
problems problems
Consistency task only
Surprisingness task,
then consistency task
Explanation task,
then consistency task

60

70

56

76

40

68

As in the previous studies, Experiment 3 showed that
explanations increased the likelihood that participants
evaluated inconsistent assertions as consistent. The effect
cannot be explained as a function of task demand, because
participants did no better after they carried out the
surprisingness task than after they had carried out no prior
task. The study also extended the findings to a study in
which the participants carried out all the different sorts of
task. We conclude that the effect of explanations on
consistency ratings is robust.

General Discussion
Across four experiments, participants erroneously
evaluated inconsistent assertions as consistent after they had
created an explanation for the inconsistency. Experiment 1a
found that people produced the effect when they were asked
to make inferences from the assertions, and Experiment 1b

2903

extended the effect by directly eliciting explanations.
Experiment 2 reproduced the effect by comparing those who
formulated explanations with those who performed an
unrelated task. Experiment 3 extended the effect to a context
in which participants carried out the tasks in different
orders. If participants had focused only on the assertions
they were asked to read, the creation of an explanation
should have had no effect on the evaluation of consistency
in any of our experiments. Instead, the participants failed to
detect inconsistencies as a result of creating explanations.
When individuals resolve an inconsistency by explaining it,
they are likely to establish a consistent interpretation of the
facts of the matter and the original assertions. They have
reasoned from inconsistency to consistency (see JohnsonLaird et al., 2004), and this newfound consistency makes it
harder to detect the original inconsistency of the assertions.
Two gaps in the present account remain. First, the quality
of the explanations that the participants created appeared to
vary, but further research is need to interrelate this quality,
say, to the latency of a correct evaluation of the inconsistent
assertions. Second, the precise mechanism underlying the
phenomenon has yet to be pinned down. When individuals
explain an apparent inconsistency among a set of assertions,
their explanation may sometimes rule out one of the
assertions as false, and it may sometimes yield an idealized
interpretation of a conditional generalization. For example,
is the conditional assertion:
If a person is bitten by a viper then the person dies.
true or false? Given the further premise, say, that Viv was
bitten by a viper, many people are likely to make the
inference that Viv died. Yet, in answer to the preceding
question, they might respond, “there are exceptions”. In
other words, the conditional expresses a truth that holds by
default, i.e., a counterexample does not overturn it. In
contrast, individuals are likely to judge that the conditional
assertion:
If a person’s brain is deprived of oxygen for 1 hour then
the person dies.
is true unequivocally. And they might not be prepared to
believe a description of an apparent counterexample.
The results of our experiments corroborate the principle
of resolution, which states that when individuals detect an
inconsistency, they formulate explanations to restore
consistency. They subsequently can interpret the
inconsistent assertions according to the consequences of
their explanations. As a result they may treat conditional
assertions as tolerating exceptions, which they can explain
by invoking disabling conditions (Cummins, 1995). For
example, consider the following problem:
If a person pulls the trigger then the pistol fires.
Someone pulled the trigger but the pistol did not fire.
If, like many of our participants, you explain the
inconsistency by believing that there were no bullets in the
pistol’s chamber, then you have qualified the first assertion.
It is true only when bullets are in the pistol’s chamber, i.e.,
an enabling condition is satisfied. When bullets are not in

the pistol’s chamber, the conditional no longer hold
(Johnson-Laird et al., 2004).
The present studies demonstrate the power and purpose of
explanatory reasoning. Reasoners can draw inferences or
answer the question ‘why not?’ without realizing that the set
of assertions they reason about is inconsistent. The
explanations they construct make it less likely that they will
subsequently detect the inconsistency, because a plausible
explanation serves to resolve the inconsistency. In some
situations, this behavior is sensible and practical, because it
allows individuals to revise their beliefs. In other situations,
however, the behavior may account for striking lapses in
reasoning. When a plausible explanation is available,
regardless of whether it is true, reasoners may overlook
glaring inconsistencies and behave in accordance with the
explanation.
The present studies demonstrate the power and purpose of
explanatory reasoning. Reasoners can draw inferences or
answer the question ‘why not?’ without realizing that the set
of assertions they reason about is inconsistent. The
explanations they construct make it less likely that they will
subsequently detect the inconsistency, because a plausible
explanation serves to resolve the inconsistency. In some
situations, this behavior is sensible and practical, because it
allows individuals to revise their beliefs. In other situations,
however, the behavior may account for striking lapses in
reasoning. When a plausible explanation is available,
regardless of whether it is true, reasoners may overlook
glaring inconsistencies and behave in accordance with the
explanation.
In sum, individuals who construct explanations of
inconsistent assertions have difficulty evaluating those
assertions as inconsistent. They do so erroneously, as the
assertions remain in conflict with one another regardless of
whether an explanation is available.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a National Science Foundation
Graduate Research Fellowship to the first author, and by National
Science Foundation Grant No. SES 0844851 to the second author
to study deductive and probabilistic reasoning. We are grateful for
helpful criticisms from Jeremy Boyd, John Darley, Sam
Glucksberg, Adele Goldberg, Geoffrey Goodwin, Matt Johnson,
Olivia Kang, Niklas Kunze, Max Lotstein, and Laura Suttle.

References
Amsterlaw, J., & Wellman, H.M. (2006). Theories of mind in
transition: a microgenetic study of the development of false
belief understanding. Journal of Cognitive Development, 7, 139172.
Anderson, C.A., & Ross, L. (1980). Perseverence of social
theories: The role of explanation in the persistence of discredited
information. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 39,
1037-1049.
Byrne, R.M.J. (2005). The rational imagination. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.

2904

Chi, M., De Leeuw, N., Chiu, M.H., & Lavancher, C. (1994).
Eliciting self-explanations improves understanding. Cognitive
Science, 18, 439-477.
Crowley, K., & Siegler, R.S. (1999). Explanation and
generalization in young children’s strategy learning. Child
Development, 70, 304-316.
Cummins, D.D. (1995). Naive theories and causal deduction.
Memory & Cognition, 23, 646-658.
Einhorn, H. J., & Hogarth, R. M. (1986). Judging probable cause.
Psychological Bulletin, 99, 3-19.
Harman, G. H. (1965). The inference to the best explanation.
Philosophical Review, 74, 88-95.
Johnson-Laird, P.N. (2006). How we reason. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., Girotto, V., & Legrenzi, P. (2004).
Reasoning from inconsistency to consistency. Psychological
Review, 111, 640-661.
Keil, F.C. (2006). Explanation and understanding. Annual Review
of Psychology, 57, 225-254.
Khemlani, S., Leslie, S.J., Glucksberg, S., & Rubio-Fernandez, P.
(2007). Do ducks lay eggs? How people interpret generic
assertions. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Leslie, S.J. (2008). Generics: Cognition and acquisition.
Philosophical Review, 117, 1-47.

Lombrozo, T. (2006). The structure and function of explanations.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10, 464-470.
Lombrozo, T., & Carey, S. (2006). Functional explanation and the
function of explanation. Cognition, 99, 167-204.
Murphy, G.L., & Medin, D.L. (1985). The role of theories in
conceptual coherence. Psychological Review, 92, 289-316.
Patalano, A. L., Chin-Parker, S., & Ross, B. H. (2006). The
importance of being coherent: Category coherence, crossclassification, and reasoning. Journal of Memory and Language,
54, 407-424.
Rittle-Johnson, B. (2006). Promoting transfer: the effects of direct
instruction and self-explanation. Child Development, 77, 1-15.
Ross, L., Lepper, M.R., Strack, F., Steinmetz, J. (1977). Social
explanation and social expectation: Effects of real and
hypothetical explanations on subjective likelihood. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 35, 817-829.
Shafto, P., & Coley, J.D. (2003). Development of categorization
and reasoning in the natural world: novices to experts, naïve
similarity to ecological knowledge. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 29, 641-649.
Sloman, S.A. (2005). Causal models: how we think about the
world and its alternatives. New York: Oxford UP.
Walsh, C., & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (2009). Changing your mind.
Memory & Cognition, 37, 624-631.
Wellman, H.M., Hickling, A.K., & Schult, C.A. (1997). Young
children’s psychological, physical, and biological explanations.
New Directions for Child Development, 75, 7-25.

Appendix A
The assertions used in the experiments (generalizations were paired with consistent or inconsistent categorical assertions).
Domain

Generalization

Biology/physiology If a person is bitten by a viper then they
die
Biology/physiology If a person does regular aerobic exercises
then that person strengthens his or her
heart
Mechanical
If a car's engine is tuned in the special
way then its fuel consumption goes down
Mechanical
Mechanical
Mechanical
Natural
Natural
Psychological
Psychological
Social/economical
Social/economical

Consistent Categorical

Inconsistent Categorical

Someone did not die

Someone was bitten by a viper but did not
die
Someone did regular aerobic exercises but
did not strengthen his or her heart

Someone did not
strengthen his heart

This car's fuel
consumption did not go
down
If graphite rods are inserted into a nuclear The nuclear reactor’s
reactor, then its activity slows down
activity did not slow down
If the aperture on a camera is narrowed,
Less light did not fall on
then less light falls on the film
the film
If a person pulls the trigger then the pistol The pistol did not fire
fires
If a substance such as butter is heated then This piece of butter did
it melts
not melt
If these two substances come into contact There was no explosion
with one another then there is an
explosion
If someone is very kind then he or she is Someone was not liked by
liked by others
others
If a person receives a heavy blow to the
Pat did not forget any
head then that person forgets some
preceding events
preceding events
If people make too much noise at a party The neighbors did not
then the neighbors complain
complain
If the banks cut interest rates then the
The economy did not
economy increases
increase

2905

This car's engine was tuned in the special
way but its fuel consumption did not go
down
Graphite rods were inserted into this nuclear
reactor but its activity did not slow down
The aperture on this camera was narrowed
but less light did not fall on the film
Someone pulled the trigger but the pistol did
not fire
This piece of butter was heated but it did not
melt
These two substances came into contact with
one another but there was no explosion
Someone was very kind but was not liked by
others
Pat received a heavy blow to the head but
did not forget any preceding events
People made too much noise at a party but
the neighbors did not complain
The banks cut interest rates but the economy
did not increase

