UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Extending Beyond Space

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8n2027g8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Breaux, Brooke
Feist, Michele

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Extending Beyond Space
Brooke O. Breaux (brookebreaux@louisiana.edu)
Institute of Cognitive Science, University of Louisiana at Lafayette,
Lafayette, LA 70504 USA

Michele I. Feist (feist@louisiana.edu)
Institute of Cognitive Science, University of Louisiana at Lafayette,
Lafayette, LA 70504 USA

Abstract
Investigations into the semantics of the spatial and non-spatial
uses of in and on have tended to assume that a type-level
similarity exists between these two prepositions. However,
their syntactic distributions, while overlapping, are not equal
in scope (Navarro, 1998). In this paper, we ask whether these
distributional differences might be related to semantic
differences between the two terms. The preliminary evidence
collected here suggests that in and on have slightly different
levels of interpretability, even in their prepositional uses.
Thus, both semantically and syntactically, the assumption of
type-level similarity may need to be qualified.
Keywords: Semantics; prepositions; metaphor; language

Introduction
Investigations into the semantics of prepositions such as
English in and on have tended to treat these lexical items as
though they are different tokens of the same semantic and
syntactic type. Such treatment seems to follow from the
generative grammar tradition in which lexical category –
rather than meaning – determines syntactic behavior. For
example, Cook and Newson (2007) suggest ―that arguments
are interpreted in a particular way due to the structural
positions they occupy‖ (p. 263). This assumption is also
reflected in introductory linguistics and psycholinguistics
text books, which state that words belonging to the same
lexical category, or word class, are typically interchangeable
syntactically (cf., Carroll, 2004; O’Grady, Archibald,
Aronoff, & Rees-Miller, 2005). Together these suggest that
different lexical items drawn from the same word class may
interact with the rest of language in very similar ways.
Even in more cognitive views of language, we find
evidence that prepositions are treated as a lexical category
without indication that the individual differences between
the prepositions will have important repercussions for the
functions of the individual lexical items within the linguistic
system. As a case in point, type-level equivalence has been
assumed in examinations of the semantics of prepositions
(e.g., Coventry & Garrod, 2004; Feist, 2000, 2008, in press;
Feist & Gentner, 2003; Tyler & Evans, 2003; Vandeloise, in
press). Much of this work focuses on the criteria that
distinguish the meaning of one preposition from that of
another, without discussion of the possibility that
prepositions may differ in additional ways beyond their

meanings. For example, while Tyler and Evans (2003) do
acknowledge the importance of context in establishing the
meaning of a lexical item and the fact that different
prepositions will occur in different contexts, such contextual
factors do not lead to different proposals regarding the
nature of the meanings of individual prepositions.
However, evidence from corpus-based studies of
prepositions challenges this assumption of distributional
equivalence. For example, in his investigation into the
semantic structure of English topological prepositions,
Navarro (1998) found a differentiation between in and on
based not only on their meanings but also on their syntactic
distributions. While on tends to occur primarily in
prepositional constructions, in is also quite prevalent within
―a wide range of morphosyntactic usages that make it
controversial to categorise it on behalf of a single syntactic
construction‖ (Navarro, 1998, p. 273), including use as a
full adverb, as an adverbial particle of a phrasal verb, and as
a prefix for nouns, adjectives, and adverbs. This difference
in syntactic distribution suggests that, despite their
similarity as topological prepositions, in and on may behave
quite differently within the language system as a whole.
Following up on these observations, we searched for uses
of in and on in the more than 400 million word Corpus of
Contemporary
American
English
(COCA;
www.americancorpus.org). Our first observation was that
the frequencies of occurrence of in and on are highly
unequal overall, with in (7,333,378 instances) appearing
more than 2½ times more frequently than on (2,723,768
instances). Secondly, and more importantly, we examined
the combinatorial possibilities for both in and on across a set
of naturally occurring uses within a limited syntactic context
(i.e., prepositional phrases containing the preposition
immediately followed by a noun). Within the hundred most
frequent collocations for each preposition, we observed an
inequality in the distribution of uses, χ2(1, N = 200) = 21.34,
p = .0003 (see Table 1).
Table 1: Noun types collocating with in and on

In
On

1601

Proper
Nouns
2
2

Noun
Phrases
6
23

Idioms
5
2

Concrete
Nouns
33
45

Abstract
Nouns
54
28

Taken together, these results suggest an imbalance between
in and on that has yet to be thoroughly investigated.
Clearly, in and on have different meanings, which will
result in the two prepositions collocating with different sets
of nouns. However, these differences have not thus far led
to a challenge to the assumption of type-level similarity
based on their shared lexical category. As such, the
differences in distribution and in combinatorial possibility
that have been observed in corpus-based studies of in and on
remain unexplained by the current state of thinking
regarding their meanings.
There are two possible explanations for the observed
differences between in and on. First, it may be that the
differences are an artifact of the searches that yielded them,
and that these differences would disappear given a large
enough sample drawn from the corpus. In this case, the
assumption of type-level similarity would remain intact,
with the differences, which would be attributable to
differences in meaning, limited to differences in the sets of
nouns that collocate with each, but not to differences in the
sizes of the sets or in the ranges of meaning types within the
sets.
The second possibility is that in and on differ not only in
meaning, but in meaning potential, with in able to collocate
with a wider range of nouns than can on. In this case, the
particular semantics of in and on will have a direct influence
on their potential to combine with other lexical items, rather
than that potential being determined by their belonging to
the lexical class of prepositions, and the assumption of typelevel similarity inherited from generative grammar will need
to be abandoned.
In order to discriminate between these two explanations,
we will seek evidence regarding the reality of the noted
imbalance using a separate methodology. If the evidence
gathered from an experimental investigation of the
combinatorial possibilities of in and on fails to replicate the
corpus evidence, this would support a type-level similaritybased explanation wherein the noted imbalance is an artifact
of the corpus searches performed. If, on the other hand, the
experimental data replicates the imbalance noted in the
corpus, this would support the explanation that the range of
combinatorial possibilities of a lexical item is not
determined by its lexical class. Rather than having their
influence limited to the specific referential situations within
which prepositions are deemed appropriate, meaning
differences may significantly determine prepositions’ ranges
of combinatorial possibilities.
In order to experimentally examine the combinatorial
possibilities displayed by the prepositions in and on, we
asked English speakers to interpret prepositional uses of in
and on presented in the same novel syntactic and semantic
contexts (i.e., the same novel sentence frames). If there is
an imbalance in the combinatorial possibilities of these
prepositions, then we should see different levels of
interpretability for the two prepositions. To be clear, while
we anticipate their different meanings to result in different
interpretations of the sentences, if there are indeed

differences in interpretability these should be evident in the
rates at which participants attempt to provide interpretations
for the novel sentences. Such an imbalance in
interpretability between these lexical items when presented
in identical sentence frames would suggest that the
assumption of type-level similarity within lexical classes is
unwarranted.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 tested whether novel non-spatial uses of the
preposition in would be more easily interpretable than
matched non-spatial uses of the preposition on. If so,
participants should make more attempts to interpret
sentences containing in than sentences containing on.

Method
Participants
A total of 82 UL Lafayette students
participated in this experiment in exchange for course credit.
One student, a native speaker of Vietnamese, was
subsequently removed from further analysis; a second
participant was removed for not following the task
instructions. The 80 remaining participants were all native
speakers of English. Of these, 39 took part in the in
condition and 41 took part in the on condition.
Materials
The stimuli consisted of forty sentences
constructed from twenty sentence frames. Sentence frames
were in the form These Xs are Y; each Y was a non-spatial
prepositional phrase (i.e., in or on followed by an abstract
noun), and each X, a concrete noun. Each sentence frame
had both an in variant and an on variant (see Table 2).
In order to provide the prepositions with a neutral playing
field, the sentence frames needed to constitute unfamiliar
contexts for both prepositions under consideration. At the
same time, we wanted the interpretability of each sentence
as a whole to hinge on the interpretability of its
prepositional phrase. Thus, in constructing our sentences,
we (1) selected abstract nouns that would be considered
unfamiliar prepositional objects for both in and on and (2)
chose as the sentential subjects nouns which would be as
stable in their meanings as possible.
To accomplish these goals, we searched for twenty
abstract nouns that do not frequently occur as objects of
either in or on. Francis & Kučera’s (1982) rank list of
lemmas was used to formulate a list of highly frequent
nouns from which we could extract 100 that could
potentially serve as abstract prepositional objects. Beginning
with the most frequent lemma, one of us (B.B.) categorized
each noun as either concrete or abstract. Nouns were
categorized as concrete if they could refer to a concrete
object, a concrete set of objects, a part of a concrete object,
or the location of a concrete object; otherwise, they were
labeled as abstract and set aside for potential use as a nonspatial prepositional object. Two-hundred and twenty-eight
nouns had to be categorized in order to find 100 that fit the
abstract criterion.

1602

Table 2: The twenty sentence frames used to construct the
experimental stimuli.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

considered by the experimenters to normally refer to
inanimate concrete objects – especially when considered as
a group of objects (i.e., when the noun is preceded by the
adjective these) – were selected for use as sentential
subjects.
Finally, to ensure that the in variants and the on variants
of our resultant sentences were equally novel, a frequency
search was conducted in COCA for each of the subject
noun-prepositional phrase combinations (e.g., house
together with in system). This search revealed that none of
the final combinations appeared in the corpus.

Sentence frames
These houses are in/on system.
These rooms are in/on reason.
These cars are in/on idea.
These streets are in/on result.
These lights are in/on month.
These books are in/on hour.
These roads are in/on sense.
These tables are in/on moment.
These pictures are in/on voice.
These walls are in/on century.
These buildings are in/on situation.
These plants are in/on term.
These windows are in/on difference.
These floors are in/on statement.
These radios are in/on feeling.
These boats are in/on organization.
These parks are in/on basis.
These mountains are in/on event.
These blocks are in/on opportunity.
These apartments are in/on association.

Procedure
Participants were randomly assigned to
interpret either the in variants or the on variants. They were
presented with all twenty sentences in their assigned
condition in a randomized order on a computer screen. For
each sentence, they were asked to either explain its meaning
in the text box provided or, if they were unable to formulate
a meaningful interpretation, to simply type uninterpretable
in the text box instead of an interpretation.
Design We used a 2 (Preposition: in or on) x 20 (Sentence
Frame) design with preposition as a between-subjects factor
and sentence frame as a within-subjects factor.

Analysis and Results
We then compared our concreteness categorization with
concreteness judgments collected from the MRC
Psycholinguistic
Database
(Wilson,
1988;
http://www.psy.uwa.edu.au/mrcdatabase/uwa_mrc.htm) for
each of the 228 categorized nouns. Of the 201 queries that
resulted in concreteness ratings (concrete, n = 117; abstract,
n = 84), the mean concreteness rating for the nouns we
labeled as concrete (M = 507.99) was significantly higher
than for the nouns we labeled as abstract (M = 357.51; F
(1,199) = 175.52, p < .0001).1
Next, we searched COCA for combinations of in and on
with each abstract noun. The 20 abstract nouns chosen for
the experiment were those for which (1) combinations with
both in and on produced frequency totals lower than 100
and (2) the absolute differences between the frequencies of
combinations with in and on was at a minimum. A post-hoc
one-way ANOVA revealed that the average frequency of in
combinations (M = 32.70) was not significantly different
from the average frequency of on combinations (M =
23.75), F (1, 38) = 2.77, p = .1040.
Because we wanted the interpretability of our sentences to
hinge on the prepositional phrase and, hence, the
compatibility of the preposition and the abstract noun, we
needed the other content words to be more stable in their
meanings. Previous research has suggested that object terms
may be more stable in their meanings than other terms (Feist
& Cifuentes Férez, 2007; Gentner & Asmuth, 2008; Gentner
& France, 1988). Thus, only count nouns that were
1

Of the 27 noun queries that did not result in concreteness ratings,
11 were labeled as concrete and 16 as abstract.

Stimuli Check Before turning to our results, we ask
whether the sentential subjects were less likely to shift in
meaning within the context of the sentences than were the
objects of the prepositions, as required by the design. To
test this, we calculated for each sentence (e.g., These houses
are in/on system.) the proportion of times the nouns used as
sentential subjects (e.g., houses) and those used as
prepositional objects (e.g., system) in the stimulus sentences
were reproduced in the participants’ interpretations. A oneway ANOVA revealed that sentential subjects were
reproduced in interpretations significantly more often (M =
.74, SD = .12) than their prepositional object counterparts
(M = .29, SD = .17; F (1, 38) = 94.25, p < .0001),
suggesting that any differences in the interpretability of the
sentences would have more to do with interpretation of the
prepositional phrases than with interpretation of the subjects
within the wider context of the sentence, as was required by
our experimental design.
Interpretability A repeated measures ANOVA on sentence
interpretability revealed a significant main effect of sentence
frame, F (19, 60) = 10.89, p < .0001, indicating that
participants found some sentence frames to be more
interpretable than others. Because the interpretability of the
sentences was dependant on the interpretability of the
prepositional phrases, this result suggests that the abstract
nouns were not equally interpretable as objects of the
prepositions.
Of greater relevance to the question of differences in
combinatorial possibilities between the two prepositions, we
observed a marginally significant sentence frame by

1603

preposition interaction, F (19, 60) = 1.72, p = .0574. Posthoc t-tests comparing the proportion of participants willing
to provide interpretations between conditions for each
sentence frame, individually, revealed four significant
differences in which interpretability was higher for
participants in the in condition than for participants in the on
condition and no significant differences in the opposite
direction.
Although the ANOVA did not reveal a significant main
effect of preposition, we did observe a trend in the predicted
direction whereby participants who interpreted in sentences
were more likely to provide interpretations (M = .58, SD =
.19) than participants who interpreted on sentences (M =
.51, SD = .28). Furthermore, we note that the lack of a
significant difference between the two conditions may have
been driven, in part, by the large variances in interpretability
of the two groups. Therefore, we were interested in any
broader patterns in the data that might be hidden within or
beneath this high variability.
We turn first to the variances of interpretability for the
two groups of participants. While a significant difference
between the variances of interpretability for the in condition
and the on condition would not be the original effect we
were looking for, it would suggest an imbalance, or
difference, between how the different groups responded to
the prepositions in question. The data show that the
interpretability of the in variant sentences resulted in lower
standard deviations (SD = .19) than the on variant sentences
(SD = .28). When interpretability was averaged across
sentence frame, Levene's test for homogeneity of variances
revealed that the mean interpretability of the in condition
was significantly less variable than the mean interpretability
of the on condition (F (1, 78) = 11.79, p = .0010). This
difference in interpretation variability, while subtle, is
suggestive of a difference between the two prepositions.
To see whether any broader patterns were underlying this
high variability, we next categorized each of the participants
as either high-percentage interpreters or low-percentage
interpreters. Since overall interpretations were provided for
54.06% of the sentences, participants who provided
interpretations for ten or fewer of the twenty sentences were
considered low-percentage interpreters and participants who
provided interpretations for more than ten sentences were
considered high-percentage interpreters. In the in condition,
29 participants were categorized as high interpreters and 10
as low interpreters; in the on condition, 20 participants were
categorized as high interpreters and 21 as low interpreters.
This difference between conditions was significant, χ2 (1, N
= 80) = 5.60, p = .0179. Taken together, these results hint at
an effect of preposition on interpretability.

Discussion
Although the data hint at an imbalance between the potential
interpretability of the prepositions in and on, we did not find
the main effect of preposition that we had originally
predicted. The lack of a result is particularly curious
because, in a separate attempt to create novel non-spatial

uses of in and on that would be considered by participants to
be nonsensical, we had the subjective experience that
nonsense on metaphors were easier to construct than
nonsense in metaphors. While this phenomenological
experience was reflected in the trends from Experiment 1,
the lack of a significant main effect of preposition suggests
one of two possibilities. One possibility is that our
phenomenological experience may simply be different in
kind from the phenomenological experience of our
participants. In fact, Sandra and Rice (1995) warn
researchers against relying exclusively on their own
linguistic intuitions since these might differ dramatically
from the intuitions of the general population.
Another possibility is that our subjective experience was
driven by the task at hand. It may be that attempting to
gauge the interpretability of both prepositions within the
same semantic and syntactic contexts is what highlights
their differences in interpretability. This difference –
between the task leading to our subjective experience and
the experimental task performed by our participants – is not
unlike the difference between a within-subjects
experimental design and a between-subjects experimental
design. Birnbaum (1999) argues that participants are
exposed to different contexts depending on whether they are
taking part in a within-subjects experiment or a betweensubjects experiment, and it is this difference in context that
could result in widely divergent results from the two kinds
of experiments. For example, in the between-subjects design
of Experiment 1, the context for each sentence was a set of
sentences involving novel prepositional phrases built upon a
single preposition. In contrast, the context of our subjective
experience was the creation of novel prepositional phrases
built upon both in and on, facilitating a comparison between
them. This comparison is more like the everyday experience
of using language, in which novel sentences are encountered
in the context of similar structures built around a variety of
lexical items. Similarly, a within-subjects design in which
participants would be exposed to both in sentences and on
sentences would allow for an implicit comparison of the two
prepositions, akin to the range of contexts which speakers
are exposed to in everyday language use. As a result of
these differences in context, the lack of a between-subjects
effect for preposition might reflect more about variation in
the interpretability of the novel sentence frames than about
similarity in the interpretability of novel in and on
prepositional phrases.
Thus, Experiment 2 was designed to test whether the lack
of a strong result in Experiment 1 was due to differences
between the linguist and the language user or to differences
between a task involving consideration of multiple
prepositions and one involving consideration of a single
preposition.

Experiment 2
Using a completely within-subjects design, Experiment 2
tested whether novel non-spatial uses of the preposition in
would show higher interpretability than matched non-spatial

1604

uses of the preposition on. If so, participants should make
more attempts to interpret sentences containing in than
sentences containing on.

Method
Participants A total of 20 University of Louisiana at
Lafayette students participated in this experiment in
exchange for course credit. Two students were removed
from further analysis because they identified themselves as
native speakers of Igbo and Arabic, respectively. The 18
remaining participants were native speakers of English.

sentences when participants were asked to interpret both
kinds of sentence, suggesting that it was the task itself that
masked the differences in interpretability in Experiment 1.
In line with the observed distributional differences from
the corpus-based work (see Introduction), Experiment 2
revealed that in can more easily appear in novel
combinations with other lexical items than on can. This
difference in interpretability between in and on suggests that
the two prepositions may be operating at slightly different
semantic levels.

Materials The materials were the same as those used in the
first experiment.
Procedure The procedure was the same as in the first
experiment, except that participants saw all 40 of the
stimulus sentences.
Design We used a 2 (Preposition: in or on) x 20 (Sentence
Frame) design. Both were treated as within-subjects factors.

Analysis and Results
Interpretability Unlike in the between-subjects design of
Experiment 1, a two-way repeated measures ANOVA on the
results of Experiment 2 revealed a main effect of preposition
(F (1, 17) = 11.87, p = .0031), whereby participants were
significantly more likely to attempt interpretations of in
sentences (M = .64, SD = .48) than interpretations of on
sentences (M = .54, SD = .50), as predicted.
In addition, as in Experiment 1, we observed a significant
main effect of sentence frame (F (19, 323) = 3.45, p <
.0001), confirming that the sentence frames were not all
equally interpretable. Furthermore, as in Experiment 1, we
observed a significant preposition by sentence frame
interaction, F (19, 323) = 1.64, p = .0453 (see Figure 1). In
support of our prediction, post-hoc contrasts revealed that
for six sentence frames the in variant sentence was more
interpretable than the on variant sentence, while for no
sentence frame did participants find the on variant sentence
to be more interpretable than the in variant sentence.

Discussion
In contrast to our own subjective experiences considering
the interpretability of novel prepositional phrases headed by
in and on, in Experiment 1 we failed to find a significant
difference in the interpretability of sentences utilizing the
preposition in and sentences utilizing on. The question we
wanted to address in Experiment 2 was whether the
difference between our experiences and the results of
Experiment 1 were due to differences between the analyst
and the language user (cf., Sandra & Rice, 1995) or due to
differences between considering the interpretability of two
prepositions and considering the interpretability of just one.
In contrast to Experiment 1, in Experiment 2 we observed a
difference in interpretability between in sentences and on

Figure 1: Proportion of participants providing
interpretations for each sentence frame paired with each
preposition. Each sentence frame is represented in the graph
by its prepositional object.

General Discussion
Corpus-based studies of in and on have yielded observations
of differences in morphosyntactic distribution (Navarro,
1998), overall frequency, and the range of non-spatial uses
of the prepositions, calling into question the validity of the
type-level similarity suggested by traditional treatments of
prepositions in linguistics. In this study, we asked whether
these differences correspond to differences in
interpretability between the two prepositions, suggesting
that the noted imbalance is in fact real and supporting the
interpretation that the observed differences are due to a
difference in meaning potential between in and on.
Across two studies, we found that in and on did evidence
semantic differences in their combinatorial potentials. When
participants were asked to interpret both novel in
prepositional phrases and novel on prepositional phrases, we
found that they were more likely to reject as uninterpretable
sentences involving on phrases than sentences involving in
ones, echoing the trend in interpretability found when
participants were asked to interpret just one kind of
sentence. In addition, we found that all sentences for which
there was a significant difference in interpretability were
more often interpreted in the in variant than in the on
variant. In no case did we find the on variant to be more
interpretable than the in variant in our novel contexts.

1605

Taken together, this pattern of results suggests that, in
addition to having different meanings, the prepositions in
and on have different semantic combinatorial possibilities.
While this result is suggestive, further investigation is
necessary to understand the strength and scope of the
differences between in and on. For example, in balancing
the frequency of co-occurrence of the abstract nouns and the
two prepositions, we considered only the frequency of the
collocations between the prepositions and the abstract nouns
with no intervening lexical items, leaving aside cooccurrences at greater distances (e.g., in a sense, which is
very high in frequency). However, our participants could
potentially have used these phrases, if familiar, to interpret
the novel sentences (e.g., These roads are in a sense.).
Alternatively, participants may simply have been more
likely to attempt an interpretation because of the high
frequency of co-occurrence between the preposition and the
noun at two-step (e.g., in a sense) and three-step positions
(e.g., in the traditional sense). In order to gain a clearer
understanding of the differences between in and on, we are
planning a follow-up experiment in which these frequencies
will also be balanced.

Conclusions
Taken together, the differences in distribution, frequency,
and semantic combinatorial possibility argue against the
assumption of a type-level similarity between in and on. In
addition, the fact that all three types of data point toward in
having a wider range of applicability than on suggests that
these three phenomena may be linked.
Our results suggest that the overall combinatorial
possibilities for in may be higher than those for on. In
particular, this might result in a wider range of metaphorical
extensions for in than for on. As a result, investigations into
the semantics of non-spatial uses of these prepositions
would benefit from taking into account the differences in
meaning potential between these prepositions and the
possibility that the structure of the extensions and their
relations to spatial uses may similarly differ.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Marlene Burke for help with data
collection, Carmen Comeaux for help recruiting
participants, and the Language and Cognition Lab at UL
Lafayette for comments and helpful discussion.

References
Birnbaum, M. (1999). How to show that 9 > 221: Collect
judgments in a between-subjects design. Psychological
Methods, 4(3), 243-249.
Carroll, D.W. (2004). Psychology of language (4th ed.).
United States: Thomson Wadsworth.
Cook, V., & Newson, M. (2007). Chomsky’s Universal
Grammar: An introduction (3rd ed.). United States:
Blackwell Publishers.

Coventry, K.R. & Garrod, S.C. (2004). Saying, seeing, and
acting: The psychological semantics of spatial
prepositions. New York: Psychology Press.
Feist, M.I. (2000). On in and on: An investigation into the
linguistic encoding of spatial scenes. (Doctoral
dissertation, Northwestern University).
Feist, M.I. (2008). Space between languages. Cognitive
Science, 32 (7), 1177-1199.
Feist, M.I. (in press). Inside in and on: Typological and
psycholinguistic perspectives. In V. Evans & P. Chilton
(Eds.), Language, cognition, and space. London:
Equinox.
Feist, M.I. & Cifuentes Férez, P. (2007). The objectrelation continuum in language. Proceedings of the
Twenty-Ninth Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society.
Feist, M.I., & Gentner, D. (2003). Factors involved in the
use of in and on. Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifith Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
Francis, W.N., & Kučera, H. (1982). Frequency analysis of
English usage: Lexicon and grammar. Boston: Houghton
Mifflin.
Gentner, D., & Asmuth, J.A. (2008). Can relationality be
distinguished from abstractness in noun mutability?
Proceedings of the Thirtieth Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society.
Gentner, D., & France, I. M. (1988). The verb mutability
effect: Studies of the combinatorial semantics of nouns
and verbs. In S. L. Small, G. W. Cottrell, & M.K.
Tanenhaus (Eds.), Lexical ambiguity resolution:
Perspectives from psycholinguistics, neuropsychology
and artificial intelligence (pp. 343-382). San Mateo, CA:
Kaufmann.
Navarro i Ferrando, I. (1998). A Cognitive Semantics
analsyiss of the lexical units AT, ON, and IN in English.
(Doctoral dissertation, University Jaume I, 1998) .
Retrieved from http://www.tesisenxarxa.net/TESIS_UJI/
AVAILABLE/TDX-0804103-133233//navarro.pdf
O’Grady, W., Archibald, J., Aronoff, M., & Rees-Miller, J.
(2005). Contemporary linguistics: An introduction (5th
ed.). New York: Bedford/St. Martin’s.
Sandra, D. & Rice, S. (1995). Network analysis of
prepositional meaning: Mirroring whose mind—The
linguist’s or the language user’s? Cognitive Linguistics, 6,
89-130.
Tyler, A. & Evans, V. (2003). The semantics of English
prepositions: Spatial sciences, embodied meaning, and
cognition. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Vandeloise, C. (in press). Genesis of spatial terms. In V.
Evans & P. Chilton (Eds.), Language, cognition, and
space. London: Equinox.
Wilson, M.D. (1988). The MRC Psycholinguistic Database:
Machine Readable Dictionary, Version 2. Behavioural
Research Methods, Instruments and Computers, 20(1), 611.

1606

