UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Facilitating Low-Achieving Students’ Diagram Use in Algebraic Story Problems

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4hx0p6h2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Booth, Julie
Koedinger, Kenneth

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Facilitating Low-Achieving Students’ Diagram Use in Algebraic Story Problems
Julie L. Booth (julie.booth@temple.edu)
Department of Psychological Studies in Education, 1301 W. Cecil B. Moore Avenue
Philadelphia, PA 19122 USA

Kenneth R. Koedinger (koedinger@cmu.edu)
Human Computer Interaction Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
recommends that teachers include multiple forms of
representations when teaching mathematical concepts
(NCTM, 2000).
Indeed, evidence abounds on the cognitive benefits of
external representations, including diagrams. For example,
students learn better when a diagram is added to text than if
they are studying the text alone (Mayer, 1989; 2009), likely
because learners are able to build two mental
representations of multimedia material, a verbal
representation and a visual one, and build connections
between them (Mayer, 2005). Diagrams may also be
beneficial because the spatial organization and grouping of
related components that are characteristic of diagrams better
enables users to search, recognize relevant pieces in, and
draw inferences about the represented information (Larkin
& Simon, 1987). Diagrams may also be beneficial because
they promote users to engage in self-explanation, which is
in itself beneficial for learning (Ainsworth & Loizou, 2003).

Abstract
Recent research indicates that when solving algebraic story
problems, adding a diagram is beneficial for seventh and
eighth grade students, however, sixth graders—particularly
low-achieving ones—do not benefit from the diagrams. In
the present study, we further investigate the diagrammatic
advantage in low-achieving pre-algebra students and examine
whether and how picture algebra instruction improves
diagram comprehension and use in the target population.
Results replicate the lack of diagrammatic advantage in this
population for two types of diagrams. Picture algebra
instruction on mapping information in word problems to one
type of diagrams yields improvement in both diagrammatic
forms, but not story problems without diagrams; a
diagrammatic advantage emerges following this instruction.
Though low-achieving students may fail to use diagrammatic
representations to their benefit when solving word problems,
instruction on the use of one specific form may be sufficient
to facilitate a more general diagrammatic advantage.
Keywords: Multiple representations; Algebraic problem
solving; mathematics education

Are diagrams universally helpful?

Introduction
Problem representation is a critical issue in education, as
the way that information is conveyed to students can have a
great impact on the degree to which they learn. (e.g.,
Cummins, Kintsch, Reusser, & Weimer, 1988). In the
domain of mathematics, use of more grounded
representations rather than more abstract ones (e.g., verbal
descriptions of situations as opposed to equations), has been
found to be useful for presenting simple algebra problems
(Koedinger, Alibali, & Nathan, 2008); this practice may be
especially useful for making problems concrete when
students are early in their transition to algebraic thinking
and are not yet capable of the abstract thinking necessary to
comprehend equations (Koedinger & Nathan, 2004).
Another way that instructors often attempt to make
problems or situations more concrete is to include external
representations. External representations are an important
part of mathematics education (Seeger, 1998), and are
intended to increase understanding of mathematical
concepts by allowing children to build relations between
mathematical ideas (Hiebert & Carpenter, 1992). Pictorial
representations, such as diagrams, charts, graphs, and tables,
are often used in math classrooms because they are thought
to be useful for helping students communicate and reason
about mathematical concepts (Greeno & Hall, 1997), and
the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics

Despite the intention of these tools to help students
succeed, the use of diagrams is not always beneficial. Larkin
and Simon (1987) posited that diagrammatic representations
of any sort are only useful if they are constructed in a way
that groups information and facilitates inference in a better
way than is possible with text. Further, even a wellconstructed diagram will not be useful unless the user
knows the computational processes that are necessary for
taking advantage of them. Ainsworth (2006) also cautions
that the usefulness of diagrams is influenced by
characteristics of the user such as expertise in the content
domain and familiarity with the structure and components of
the representation, as well as characteristics of the diagram
and interactions between the two.
Consistent with these assertions, recent research on using
diagrams with algebraic story problems suggests that not all
students benefit from the addition of diagrams. Booth &
Koedinger (2007) found that older and higher-achieving
middle school students do benefit from the diagrams as
intended—they solve more diagram problems correctly than
problems without a diagram. However, low-achieving
students do not benefit from the diagrams; they perform
better on story problems that do not have accompanying
diagrams. In fact, the diagrams may actually hurt their
performance—they perform just as poorly on the diagram
problems as they do when solving the problems as symbolic
equations.

1649

For students that do experience a diagrammatic
advantage, results suggested that the benefit comes from
protecting those students from making common conceptual
errors in interpreting the problem (Booth & Koedinger,
2007). For example, for a problem where students are given
a sale price and asked to determine the original price if the
buyer purchased it at 1/5 off, having a diagram showing the
pieces of the equation makes it less likely that higherachieving students solve the problem by multiplying the
original price by 5, which is a common strategy for students
solving the problem in story format. Of course, this benefit
can only be realized when students are able to effectively
use diagrams to understand the problem.
For lower-achieving students, there appear to be two
barriers to successful diagram use. One is that they are less
likely than higher-achieving peers to attempt diagram
problems. This is perhaps unsurprising, as low-ability
students generally perceive problems to be more difficult
than high or average ability students, and are more likely to
shut down and not attempt the problems as a result
(Ericcson & Simon, 1980). The real or perceived need to
attend to more than one representation at a time causes split
attention demands on working memory (Chandler &
Sweller, 1991), making the problem seem overwhelming,
and these students’ limited diagram comprehension skills
preclude the realization that the problem could be solved by
simply ignoring the diagram and working from the story
alone.
The other barrier to success with diagrams was the failure
to glean a correct conceptual understanding of the problem
from looking at the diagram. Young and low-achieving
students were more likely to make conceptual errors in
problems that included diagrams than ones with stories
alone. This is likely due to either misinterpretation of the
diagram itself or, more crucially, failure to accurately map
the story problem to the diagram. How can we help lowachieving students to better comprehend the diagrams?

Using instruction to improve diagram use
Research from the fields of cognitive development and
mathematics education suggests that effective instruction on
external representations is necessary for correct student use
(Sowell, 1989; Fueyo & Bushell, 1998; Uttal, Scudder, &
DeLoache, 1997). Brief instruction on a particular visual
representation may not suffice (Rittle-Johnson &
Koedinger, 2001), but more involved representation-specific
instruction could consume a significant amount of precious
classroom time, and may not transfer well to other
representations.
An alternative to instruction on utilizing particular types
of diagrams is having students construct diagrams to
represent story problems themselves. Middle school
students can use self-created representations to successfully
solve algebraic story problems they wouldn’t ordinarily be
able to solve (Koedinger & Terao, 2002), and both
constructing diagrams from scratch or filling in partially
completed diagrams have yielded increases in student

learning in a variety of domains (Lewis & Mayer, 1987; see
Van Meter & Garner, 2005 for a review). Constructing
diagrams has the potential to help students learn to
coordinate and integrate text with visual representations
(Ainsworth, 2006; Easterday, Aleven, & Scheines, 2007).
In the present study, we directly target low-achieving prealgebra students to determine whether guided experience
constructing one type of diagram from simple story
problems facilitates broader use of diagrams for more
complex problems.
We also aim to investigate the
mechanism underlying any resulting benefit by testing
students on more than one type of diagram. If improvement
is due to increased familiarity with the type of diagram used
during instruction, benefits should manifest as increased
willingness to attempt familiar-looking problems and
improved performance on those items. However, if, as
intended, the instruction provides students with the
necessary tools for mapping between story problems and
diagrams, benefits should be more likely to transfer to the
other type of diagram as well.

Methods
Participants
Participating in this study were four classrooms of nonhonors Pre-Algebra students (N = 73 eighth grade students;
typically age 13) from a school in which only 8.5% of
students reach the required state level of math proficiency.
Eighty-nine percent of students at the participating school
were economically disadvantaged; the ethnic breakdown of
the school was approximately 95% Hispanic, 5% AfricanAmerican, and < 1% Caucasian or other. Three additional
students participated in the study, but were excluded
because they were not given the correct version of the
posttest.
All four classrooms used the Bridge to Algebra Cognitive
Tutor curriculum. The Cognitive Tutor is a computer-based
intelligent tutoring system which provides on-demand, stepspecific help at any point in the problem-solving process
and feedback on errors (Koedinger, Anderson, Hadley, &
Mark, 1997).

Procedure
Prior to beginning the first Tutor unit in the curriculum
(approximately three weeks after the beginning of the
school year), participants completed a written pretest on
which they were asked to solve algebraic story problems in
three presentation formats: story alone, story with a vertical
diagram, or story with a horizontal diagram. The test
included six problem situations, each representing one of
two underlying algebraic equations: 1) ax + b = c, and 2) x
+ (x + a) + (x + b) = c. Both equation types were
represented in each of the three presentation formats on
every test (See Figure 1 for examples of each presentation
format for the second equation). There were three
counterbalanced forms of the test, such that each problem

1650

situation appeared in each of the three presentation formats
on one of the three test versions. After completing the
pretest, students began the interactive Tutor unit on Picture
Algebra, in which they created, labeled, and used vertical
diagrams to solve simple story problems using
multiplication, addition, or subtraction The vertical training
problems were simpler than those included in the test, in
that they required the student to manipulate only two
components compared with three or more components in
test problems; thus, all test problems were transfer problems
(see Figure 2 for examples of a problem in the Picture
Algebra unit). Each student completed the unit at his or her
own pace. As each student completed the unit, he or she was
given a posttest by the classroom teacher; students were
given the same version of the test that they had taken at
pretest.

Results
Pretest and posttest scores for each of the three
presentation types can be found in Figure 3. A 3
(presentation format: vertical diagram, horizontal diagram,
Figure 1: Sample problem in each presentation format

Figure 2: Screenshots from a Picture Algebra problem in the Bridge to Algebra Tutor. Students stretch the blocks out to
represent the number of CDs owned by Louis and Christopher. Christopher’s CDs are represented using the same sized box
as for Louis and additional length to represent the 8 extra CDs.

1651

Figure 3: Percent correct at pretest and posttest for each
presentation format.
no diagram) x 2 (test time: pretest vs. posttest) repeated
measures ANOVA on the percent of problems answered
correctly yielded a main effect of test time, F(1, 72) = 5.10,
p < .05, ηp2 = .07. There was no main effect of presentation
format F(2, 144) = 1.56, ns. However, the interaction
between presentation format and test time was significant,
F(2, 144) = 5.25, p < .01, ηp2 = .07. To interpret this
interaction, we conducted follow-up repeated measures
ANOVAs on presentation format, separately for pretest and
posttest scores. No significant differences among
presentation types were found at pretest F(2, 144) = 1.91,
ns. In contrast, at posttest, a main effect of presentation
format was found, F(2, 144) = 3.95, p < .05, ηp2 = .05.
Follow-up pairwise comparisons with Bonferroni correction
indicated that students scored higher on problems with
vertical diagrams than those with no diagrams (p < .05). No
differences were found between scores on horizontal
diagrams problems compared with either of the other
presentation formats.
Students solved more vertical problems correctly on the
posttest after receiving training on creating and using
simpler versions of those diagrams (t(72) = 2.83, p< .01).
Students also improved on horizontal diagrams problems
after vertical diagram training (t(72) = 2.80, p< .01), but no
improvement was found on problems that did not contain
diagrams (t(72) < 1, ns). A repeated measures ANOVA on
the amount of improvement shown yielded a main effect of
presentation type, F(2, 144) = 5.7, p < .05, ηp2 = .07.
Follow-up pairwise comparisons with Bonferroni correction
indicated that students improved more on problems with
vertical diagrams (11%) and horizontal diagrams (10%) than
those with no diagrams (both p’s < .05). No difference was
found between improvement on vertical and horizontal
problems.

the no diagrams problems; these incidences were thus
excluded from the subsequent response and error analysis.
One possible source of improvement was that exposure to
the diagrams could have made students more comfortable
with, and thus more likely to attempt, diagrams problems on
the posttest, leading to a higher possible number of
diagrams problems answered correctly. To examine this
hypothesis, we coded whether students attempted to solve
each problem or if they failed to respond to it. We then
computed the percentage of each type of problem that was
attempted at pretest and posttest. As can be seen in Figure
4, students attempted more problems of each of the three
formats at posttest compared with the pretest. This suggests
that a higher response rate for diagrams problems is not a
viable explanation for the improvement.
A second, more plausible hypothesis was that students
better understood the mapping between the diagrams and
the stories as a result of instruction. Given that their
experience with the Picture Algebra unit trained them to
build components of diagrams to represent the information
in a story problem, this hypothesis seemed plausible. This
improved understanding should lead students to make fewer
errors in which they demonstrate failure to make sense of
the information in the problem. To test this, we coded
student responses in terms of whether they were correct,
contained an arithmetic error (e.g., adding 4 + 6 and getting
9), or contained a conceptual error—one that indicated a
misunderstanding of the role of the numbers in the problem
(e.g., for the problem pictured in Figure 1, solving the
problem as if 7th graders collected 17 fewer cans than 8th
graders, instead of 17 more cans). In previous work, adding
diagrams to story problems was shown to prevent older,
high-achieving students from making common conceptual
errors when solving the problems (Booth & Koedinger,
2007), but younger and lower-achieving students did not
receive this benefit. Results from the present study indicate
that after instruction it appears that fewer horizontal and
vertical diagrams problem attempts contained conceptual
errors than did at pretest whereas no reduction was apparent
for problems without diagrams (see Figure 5).

Error Analysis: The nature of the improvement
To investigate the source of this improvement in scores
on the diagrams problems, we conducted a qualitative
analysis of the types of errors made by students while
solving each type of problem on the pretest and posttest.
Four pretest and thirteen posttest problem attempts were
found in which students drew diagrams to help them solve

Figure 4: Percent of problems attempted at pretest and
posttest for each presentation format.

1652

Figure 5: Percent of pretest and posttest problem attempts
for each presentation format containing a conceptual error

Discussion
Results from the present study replicated the previous
finding that diagrams are not inherently beneficial for
solving algebraic word problems. At pretest, no
diagrammatic advantage was found for low-achieving prealgebra students. After instruction, however, the same
students experienced a diagrammatic advantage, and there
was evidence of transfer of instruction benefits to the noninstructed diagram format. Students made fewer conceptual
errors with both types of diagrams after instruction,
suggesting that increasing students’ skill at mapping
between story problems and supplemental diagrams can
afford low-achieving students the same benefits as those
enjoyed by their higher-achieving peers. Interestingly, no
improvement was found for the no diagram condition,
suggesting that students’ general word problem solving
abilities did not increase. Presumably, if students had drawn
diagrams to help them solve those problems, as they did in
their training, they would have had greater success.
One specific mechanism of the diagrammatic advantage is
that it has been shown to increase the likelihood that
students will achieve a conceptually sound understanding of
a problem, and avoid common conceptually flawed solution
paths (Booth & Koedinger, 2007). Consistent with this
finding, results from the present study indicated that
students reduced the number of conceptual errors made at
posttest on transfer problems with diagrams compared to
those without diagrams. The likely mechanism by which the
diagrammatic advantage emerges is through increased
experience coordinating information from two sources,
which helps students learn to create appropriate links
between the information (e.g., the components of the
diagram with the corresponding components of the text).
This general ability enables successful mapping between
sources in new diagrammatic problems, yielding a sound
representation of the overall problem, which leads to fewer
critical conceptual mistakes in solution. The process of
constructing the diagram facilitated this process by forcing
students to make connections explicit; this is consistent with
Van Meter & Garner’s (2005) assertion that the benefit of
diagram construction is that it necessitates integration

between text and diagram. The Picture Algebra lesson
provided practice opportunities with feedback for students
to gain the general mapping ability, which they were then
able to apply successfully to the test problems. Further
research is needed to determine whether and how
developing students naturally acquire this skill, whether
through cognitive maturation (and perhaps the development
of more formal reasoning skills), through certain types of
experiences that become more prevalent as children age, or
some combination thereof.
Results from this study suggest that, while low-achieving
students have difficulty interpreting diagrams and using
them to their benefit when solving problems, it may not be
necessary for students to have specific instruction or
experience with a given type of diagram in order to use it
effectively. Rather, acquiring more general diagram-parsing
skills that facilitate mapping between text and any sort of
diagram may be more beneficial. The instruction presented
in this study did not just increase comprehension of more
complex vertical diagrams; it helped cultivate a broader skill
which allowed them to also use complex horizontal
diagrams to solve the problem. Future research should
investigate the nature of broad diagram-parsing skills and
determine how best to teach them to help all students benefit
from diagrams and other external representations of
instructional information in Algebra.

Acknowledgments
Funding for this research was provided by the National
Science Foundation Grant Number SBE-0354420 to the
Pittsburgh Science of Learning Center (PSLC,
http://www.learnlab.org). Portions of this work were
previously presented at the annual meeting of the American
Educational Research Association in San Diego, CA.
Thanks are also due to the Los Angeles Unified School
District for allowing us to collect data in their classrooms.

References
Ainsworth, S. (2006). DeFT: A conceptual framework for
considering learning with multiple representations.
Learning and Instruction, 16(3), 183-198.
Ainsworth, S. E., & Loizou, A.T. (2003). The effects of
self-explaining when learning with text or diagrams.
Cognitive Science, 27, 669-681.
Booth, J.L., & Koedinger, K. (2007, March). Are diagrams
always helpful tools? The effect of presentation format on
students’ solutions of algebra problems. Poster presented
at the meeting of the Society for Research in Child
Development in Boston, MA.
Chandler, P. & Sweller, J. (1991). Cognitive load theory and
the format of instruction. Cognition and Instruction, 8,
293-332.
Cummins, D. D., Kintsch, W., Reusser, K., & Weimer, R.
(1988). The role of understanding in solving algebra word
problems. Cognitive Psychology, 20, 405-438.
Easterday, M., Aleven, V., & Scheines, R. (2007). 'Tis
better to construct than to receive? The effects of

1653

diagramming tools on causal reasoning. In R. Luckin, K.
Koedinger, & J. Greer (Eds.), Proceedings of the 13th
International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in
Education (pp. 93-100). Amsterdam, the Netherlands:
IOS Press.
Ericsson, K. A. & Simon, H. A. (1980). Verbal reports as
data. Psychological Review, 87, 215-251.
Fueyo, V., & Bushell, D. (1998). Using number-line
procedures and peer tutoring to improve the mathematics
computation of low-performing first graders. Journal of
Applied Behavioral Analysis, 31, 417-430.
Greeno, J. G., & Hall, R. P. (1997, January). Practicing
representation: Learning with and about representational
forms. Phi Delta Kappan, 78, 361–367.
Hiebert, J. & Carpenter, T.P. (1992). Learning and teaching
with understanding. In D.A. Grouws (Ed.), Handbook of
research on mathematics teaching and learning (pp. 6597). New York: Macmillan.
Koedinger, K.R., Alibali, M. W., & Nathan, M.J. (2008).
Trade-offs
between
grounded
and
abstract
representations: Evidence from algebra problem solving.
Cognitive Science: A Multidisciplinary Journal, 32:2,
366-397.
Koedinger, K.R., Anderson, J.R., Hadley, W.H., & Mark,
M.A. (1997). Intelligent tutoring goes to school in the big
city. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in
Education, 8, 30-43.
Koedinger, K. R., & Nathan, M. J. (2004). The real story
behind story problems: Effects of representation on
quantitative reasoning. Journal of the Learning Sciences,
13, 129 -164.
Koedinger, K.R. & Terao, A. (2002). A cognitive task
analysis of using pictures to support pre-algebraic
reasoning. In C.D. Schunn & W. Gray (Eds.),
Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society. Mawah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Larkin, J.H., & Simon, H.A. (1987). Why a diagram is
(sometimes) worth ten thousand words. Cognitive
Science, 11, 65-99.
Lewis, A. B., & Mayer, R. E. (1987). Students'
misconceptions of relational statements in arithmetic
word problems. Journal of Educational Psychology, 79,
363-371.
Mayer, R. E. (1989). Systematic thinking fostered by
illustrations in scientific text. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 81, 240-246.
Mayer, R. (2005). Cognitive theory of multimedia learning.
In R. Mayer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of
multimedia learning (pp. 31-48). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Mayer, R. E. (2009). Multimedia learning (2nd ed). New
York: Cambridge University Press.
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM)
(2000). Principles and standards for school mathematics.
Reston, VA: Author.

Rittle-Johnson, B., & Koedinger, K. (2001). Using cognitive
models to guide instructional design: The case of fraction
division. In J. Moore & K. Stenning (Eds.), Proceedings
of the 23rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society, (pp. 857-862). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Seeger, F. (1998). Representations in the mathematics
classroom: Reflections and constructions. In F. Seeger, U.
Waschescio, & J. Voight (Eds.), The culture of the
mathematics classroom (pp. 308-343).
New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Sowell, E.J. (1989). Effect of manipulative materials in
mathematics instruction. Journal for Research in
Mathematics Education, 20, 498-505.
Uttal, D.H., Scudder, K.V., & DeLoache, J.S. (1997).
Manipulatives as symbols: A new perspective on the use
of concrete objects to teach mathematics. Journal of
Applied Developmental Psychology, 18, 37-54.
VanMeter, P., & Garner, J. (2005). The promise and
practice of learner-generated drawing: Literature review
and synthesis. Educational Psychology Review, 17(4),
285-325.

1654

