UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Finding the Sweet Spot: Is There a Fixed Template for Culturally Successful Counterintuitive
Narratives?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/26z1x605

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Author
Upal, M. Afzal

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Finding the Sweet Spot: Is There a Fixed Template for Culturally Successful
Counterintuitive Narratives?
M. Afzal Upal (Afzal.Upal@drdc-rddc.gc.ca)
Adversarial Intent Section
Defence Research & Development Canada (DRDC) Toronto
1133 Sheppard Ave W, Toronto, M3M 3B9

Abstract
This article reports an investigation involving a series of
studies carried out to critically examine the hypothesis that
presence of 2 or 3 counterintuitive concepts in a story makes
it more memorable than stories containing fewer or more such
concepts. Our results paint a more complicated picture
involving a number of interacting factors with contribution of
the counterintuitive concepts to the global story cohesion
emerging as a key factor.
Keywords: Memory, culture, folktales, concept learning.

Introduction
A number of recent studies have found that minimally
counterintuitive concepts are recalled better than intuitive
and maximally counterintuitive ideas (Barrett & Nyhof,
2001; Boyer, 1994, 2001; Boyer & Ramble, 2001). Better
memorability for minimally counterintuitive concepts, these
researchers argue, explains why such concepts form part of
widespread religious beliefs and other widely shared
cultural beliefs. However, as Atran (2003) has argued, these
findings on their own are not sufficient to explain why most
of the widespread cultural folktales contain only a small
number of counterintuitive concepts1 and are mostly
composed of intuitive concepts. How and why do the
apparently less memorable intuitive concepts continue to be
successfully transmitted along with a small number of
counterintuitive concepts? Does the presence of
counterintuitive concepts improve overall recall for a story?
If so, would an even larger number of counterintuitive
concepts make the story even more memorable or would
memorability drop of if counterintuitive concepts are added
beyond a certain number?
Norenzayan, Atran, Faulkner, and Schaller (2006) report
on an investigation carried out to study these questions.
They selected 42 Grimm Brothers folktales such that half of
the stories were judged to be “culturally successful” (they
attracted more Google hits) and the other half were
considered to be “culturally unsuccessful” (because they
received fewer Google hits). Counterintuitive concepts
present in each story were then counted. They found that a
vast majority of the culturally successful folk tales had two
or three counterintuitive ideas whereas counterintuitive
ideas were more evenly distributed among the unsuccessful
1

The rest of the article uses the terms MCI concepts or simply
counterintuitive concepts when referring to minimally
counterintuitive concepts.

folktales. Subjects were then asked to read the stories and
answer a number of questions to determine if the subjects
thought that the stories were familiar, memorable, easy to
understand, easy to transmit, and interesting enough to tell
others. Their results show that stories with more Google hits
were judged by the subjects to be more memorable and
worth telling their friends. On the basis of this evidence,
Norenzayan et al. argued that stories that contain two or
three counterintuitive ideas enjoy memorability advantages
over stories that have fewer (0 or 1) or more (4, 5, 6, or
larger) counterintuitive ideas. They further argue that this
should be true for all stories and not just Grimm Brother’s
tales or just Northern European folktales from the 19th
century, or just for narratives of a certain length. They call
stories containing 2-3 counterintuitive concepts as MCI
narratives and state, “we propose that MCI narratives are
culturally successful partly because they enjoy a stronger
cognitive advantage in recall than other narrative templates”
(Page 549)(Norenzayan, Atran, Faulkner, & Scaller, 2006).
Let us call the hypothesis that stories containing 2 or 3
counterintuitive ideas are more memorable than stories
containing fewer or more concepts as the MCI-hypothesis.
The objective of this paper is to carefully examine the
MCI-hypothesis and its implications. This is accomplished
through a series of studies.
Initially, we replicate
Norenzayan et al.’s methodology but then complement it
with other techniques.

Study I
This study replicates Norenzayan et al.’s methodology for a
different set of folktales. Aesop’s fables are folktales
credited to a Greek slave named Aesop who is thought to
have lived from 620 to 560 BC. Most of the short stories
contain between 50 and 500 words and are organized around
moral themes. A number of stories contain counterintuitive
concepts such as anthropomorphic animals. While Aesop’s
fables have survived for hundreds (if not thousands) of years
and are widely known around the world, not all tales are
equally well known. This study used George Fyler
Townsend’s collection (1867) containing 350 fables. Using
Norenzayan et al.’s methodology, Google hits were
computed for all 350 fables by querying for “Aesop” and
the title of a story (e.g., “The Hare and the Tortoise”).
Besides Google’s initial estimate of the number of matching
documents (which was the only measure used by
Norenzayan et al.), this study also computed the actual

2733

number of documents returned once Google was asked to
retrieve all of the matching documents. Unfortunately, the
rankings on the two counts did not match. The present study
used the actual number of documents found as a more
reliable indicator of a fable’s popularity. The top 21 most
popular tales had an average of 488 actual and 6321
estimated hits while the bottom 21 least popular tales had 80
actual and 197 estimated hits.
14
12
s 10
e
ri
o
tS
f 8
o
r
e 6
b
m
u 4
N

Popular
Unpopular

2
0
0

1

2

3

Number of Counterintuitive Concepts

Figure 1: Distribution of counterintuitive concepts among
the popular and unpopular Aesop's fables.
Next, a hypothesis-blind coder and the author coded the
stories for the number of counterintuitive concepts in them.
We agreed on 100% of the initial coding shown in Figure 1.
It shows that contrary to predictions of the MCI hypothesis,
a majority of popular fables do not have 2 or 3
counterintuitive concepts. Instead, 11 of the 21 popular
stories contain 0 or 1 counterintuitive concept while
remaining 10 have 2 or 3 counterintuitive concepts. A
majority of unpopular stories (16 out of 21) also had 1-2
counterintuitive concepts and only 5 unpopular stories had
2-3 counterintuitive concepts.
A problem with studies reported so far is that they do not
directly measure the memorability and are therefore unable
to directly test the MCI hypothesis. The next study was
designed to directly test the hypothesis that having 2-3
counterintuitive concepts makes a story more memorable
than stories containing fewer or a larger number.

The balanced Latin square experiment required creation
of thirty six distinct packets. Thirty six University of Toledo
undergraduate and graduate students ranging in age from 18
to 24 were recruited to participate in the experiment.
Subjects were asked to carefully read all three stories so that
they could answer some questions about them. Next they
were asked to solve simple arithmetic problems for one
minute. Following that they were asked to write down as
much of each story as they could remember. Story recall
was measured by dividing each story into individual idea
units constituting each story. The ideas roughly
corresponded to the sentences in each story, although this
wasn’t always the case as some sentences were judged to
have multiple concepts in them. “The Trader” was
determined to have significantly smaller number of ideas
(around 30) than “The Journey Home” or “The Night” each
of which had roughly the same number of idea units (around
50 each).
Subject responses were coded using a binary coding
scheme to measure whether a subject had recalled an
element in the story or not. Story recall was measured by
dividing the number of ideas a subject recalled by the total
number of ideas in the story. Thus a perfectly recalled story
would be assigned the recall value of 1 while a story that is
not recalled at all would get the recall value of 0. The
author and a hypothesis blind coder created two initial
codings. We agreed on 89% of the initial coding.
Disagreements were resolved through discussion to create
one final coding.
Results
The recall rates for 1, 3, and 6 counterintuitive versions of
the stories (Figure 2) show that story recall does not
significantly vary as a function of the number of embedded
counterintuitive concepts. This is true for both the overall
story recall rates and also for each of the individual stories
we studied.
0 .3 5

0 .3 0

Study II
Material & Method
We decided not to use an existing set of stories (such as
Grimm Brother’s stories or Aesop’s fables) because we
wanted better control over (a) the number of concepts
embedded in each story, and (b) subject’s prior exposure to
the stories. We designed three short stories containing 300400 words each. Two of the stories, namely, “The Journey
Home” and “The Trader” had been used in previous
experiments (Barrett & Nyhof, 2001; Boyer & Ramble,
2001; Upal, 2005; Upal, Gonce, Tweney, & Slone, 2007)
while the third story “The Night” was designed specifically
for this experiment. Three versions of each story were
created. Version I had one counterintuitive idea, while the
second version had three and the third version had six
counterintuitive ideas in it. Six packet-groups were then
designed such that each packet-group contained all three
stories and all three story types.

recall
rate

0 .2 5

0 .2 0

0 .1 5

1

3

story version

6

Figure 2: Overall story recall rates for 1, 3 and 6 concept
versions of the stories.
Discussion
Our results not only call into question the MCI-hypothesis,
they also indicate the need to seek an alternative answer to
the question of what distinguishes memorable
counterintuitive stories from forgetful ones? Previously
(Upal, 2005, 2010; Upal, et al., 2007), I have argued that in
order to answer these questions, we need to pay attention to
cognitive processes involved in comprehension of text
(Graesser, Singer, & Trabasso, 1994; Kintsch, 1998).
Discourse analysis researchers and psycholinguists have

2734

identified global cohesion among the elements of a text as a
key factor in memorability (Halliday & Hasan, 1976).
Cohesion of a piece of text is defined as connections
among various elements of the text and is not just a function
of the text itself but also of the background knowledge that
the reader possesses. The connections that make a text more
or less cohesive include coreferences as well as causal and
logical connections among its various elements. A text is
better remembered by a reader if its constituents can be
made coherent by the reader (Trabasso, Suh, Payton, & Jain,
1995). Furthermore, the more effort a reader spends in
making a text coherent, the more memorable the text (Kim,
1999). Building on this and other work in cognitive science
(Schank, 1999; Schank & Abelson, 1977) and humour
research (Suls, 1983), I proposed a hypothesis that
emphasizes the role played by the context in which
counterintuitive concepts are embedded in making those
concepts more or less memorable. This account suggests
that, similar to other expectation-violating and schemaincongruent concepts, counterintuitive ideas are better
remembered because they attract a reader’s attention by
violating the reader’s expectations about what is to come
next in the text. When a reader’s expectations are violated,
she attempts to resolve the situation by reasoning to justify
the inclusion of expectation-violating information in the text
by invoking a variety of knowledge that the reader
possesses. If this postdiction effort is successful, the
expectation-violating concepts become richly linked to the
reader’s existing mental representations, which were
retrieved to explain the inconsistency to derive a coherent
theme. They also become richly connected to the derived
story theme itself. This may make counterintuitive elements
of a narrative more likely to be recalled when the story title
is provided as a cue.
This view suggests that memorability for a story should
be mediated through story cohesion. Thus counterintuitive
stories should only be remembered well if they can be made
coherent by a reader. If a counterintuitive story is too
incoherent (or judged too difficult to make coherent given a
reader’s motivation level) then it should not be well
remembered.
The next study was designed to test this hypothesis. I
wanted to know whether inclusion of various types of
counterintuitive
concepts
equally
affects
story
memorability. Depending on the context, inclusion of some
counterintuitive concepts may, for instance, increase
cohesion of a story while addition of other counterintuitive
concepts may decrease it. Would inclusion of both types of
concepts equally affect story memorability? The above
account would suggest that stories including cohesionenhancing concepts should be remembered better than
stories that contain cohesion suppressing concepts.

Study III
Material and Method
I designed three short (95-125 words) Aesop-like fables.
Each story involves two human or animal protagonists who

happen to meet. At the end, the moral lesson of the story
(the same as the story title) is uttered by one of the main
characters. Four versions of each story were designed: (1)
Coherent-Counterintuitive (CC), (2) Coherent-Intuitive (CI),
(3) Incoherent-Counterintuitive (IC), and (4) Incoherentintuitive (II).
In the coherent-counterintuitive version, both of the main
characters are counterintuitive but their counterintuitiveness
is causally relevant for making sense of the story and for
connecting various elements of the story and for deriving
the coherent theme that is the story title. For instance, in the
CC version of “obscurity brings safety”, the protagonists are
an invisible-man and an all-seeing-woman. The
counterintuitive property of each character is causally
relevant because it allows a reader to make sense of the
events to follow and to connect them to the moral lesson of
the story. For instance, all-seeing-ability of the woman
allows a reader to understand why she is able to see an
otherwise invisible man. Man’s invisibility is needed to
understand woman’s advice to him to become visible to
make his life more enjoyable and why he decides to paint
himself skin-tone and then why, on being mugged after
becoming visible, he regrets his actions and utters,
“obscurity brings safety.” These particular counterintuitive
properties are causally relevant because, without them, the
story and its title make little sense and are not as coherent.
In the coherent-intuitive version, the protagonists are
replaced by intuitive beings. However, their intuitive
properties are still causally relevant to explaining the events
in the story. For instance, in the CI version of “obscurity
brings safety”, the invisible-man is replaced by a reclusive
man and the all-seeing-woman is replaced by a kind-but
blunt woman. The man’s reclusiveness allows the reader to
understand why he is advised by the caring woman to go out
and why the man regrets following her advice.
In the incoherent-counterintuitive version, the main
characters are counterintuitive but their counterintuitiveness
is irrelevant to the events in the story and does not help a
reader in her attempt to derive a coherent theme from the
story. For instance, the IC version of “obscurity brings
safety” includes “a man who has feet for hands” and a
“woman who is made of iron”. These properties do not help
the reader to make sense of why the woman asks the man to
stop being invisible and why he decides to paint himself or
why he proclaims that “obscurity brings safety” upon
unfolding of the story’s events.
In the incoherent-intuitive version, the main characters are
intuitive beings whose explicitly mentioned intuitive
properties are irrelevant to the events in the story and do not
allow the reader to derive the moral lesson in the story’s
title. For instance, the II version of “obscurity brings safety”
features “a man with brown hair” and “a woman with dark
circles around her eyes.” Both properties have little to do
with the woman’s advice, the man’s actions, or the story
title/theme.
Each subject packet included three stories. Varying the
story order and story type yielded 192 possible packets. Out

2735

of these, 40 packets were randomly selected to be given to
40 Occidental College male and female Cognitive Science
and Psychology undergraduates who participated in the
experiments for extra credit. After reading all three stories,
subjects were instructed to solve simple arithmetic problems
for one minute. Following that they were asked to write
down as much of each story as they could remember. The
subject responses were coded for recall by the author and a
hypothesis blind coder following the same methodology as
in Study 2. We also measured the number of words recalled
and also recall rates for counterintuitive and intuitive
descriptions of the protagonists. The two coders agreed on
96% of the initial coding. Disagreements were resolved
through discussion to create one final coding.
Results & Discussion
The results are shown in Table 1. There was a significant
effect of story cohesion while there was no significant effect
of the number of counterintuitive concepts.
Table 1: (a) The first three tables show story recall data for
individual stories, (b) the last table shows the overall results.
The leftmost column shows the mean recall rates for
propositions describing story protagonsists. The middle
column shows the recall rate for all of the story elements
including the protagonists. The rightmost column shows the
recall rate for the rest of the story elements.
(a)
Obscurity Brings Safety
CoherentCounterintuitive
CoherentIntuitive
IncoherentCounterintuitive
IncoherentIntuitive

Protagonist
recall

Overall
Story Recall

Story
Minus
Protagonist recall

100

82

77.5

64.4

87.5

59.5

86.4

62.7

56.8

65

55

52.5

Never Laugh at Someone
Protagonist
recall
CoherentCounterintuitive
CoherentIntuitive
IncoherentCounterintuitive
IncoherentIntuitive

Overall
Story Recall

Story
Minus
Protagonist recall

100

100

100

100

100

100

57.1

57.1

57.1

54.5

54.5

54.5

No Gratitude From the Wicked
Protagonist
recall
CoherentCounterintuitive
CoherentIntuitive
IncoherentCounterintuitive
IncoherentIntuitive

Overall
Story Recall

Story
Minus
Protagonist recall

72

72

72

45.8

45.8

45.8

33.3

33.3

33.3

90

90

90

(b)
Overall
Protagonist
recall
CoherentCounterintuitive
CoherentIntuitive
IncoherentCounterintuitive
IncoherentIntuitive

Overall
Story Recall

Story
Minus
Protagonist recall

92.4

92.4

92.4

74.1

74.1

74.1

61.1

61.1

61.1

65

65

65

The coherent stories were significantly better recalled
than incoherent stories (F(1, 117) = 15.019 p = 0.00018).
Contrary to predictions of the MCI hypothesis, stories
containing 2 counterintuitive concepts were not better
recalled than stories containing 0 counterintuitive concepts
(F(1, 117) = 0.38129 p = 0.53811). In fact, while the
differences were not statistically significant, stories
containing 2 counterintuitive concepts were less well
recalled than stories without any counterintuitive concepts
in them. If we control for cohesiveness and vary the number
of counterintuitive ideas in a story, we get two distinct
trends. As shown in Error! Reference source not found.,
when counterintuitive ideas enhance cohesion, their addition
makes a story more memorable (although not significantly
so). However, when counterintuitive concepts cannot be
easily integrated to derive the story theme, their addition
results in lower recall (again differences are not
statisticallysignificant).
Table 3(b) shows that coherent-counterintuitive stories
were best recalled, followed by coherent-intuitive stories,
which were better recalled than incoherent-intuitive stories.
However, only recall for incoherent-counterintuitive stories
was significantly lower than recall for coherentcounterintuitive and coherent-intuitive stories (F(3, 115) =
6.3828 p = 0.00049). The subjects recalled only half of the
ideas from the stories in which incoherent protagonists were
not causally relevant to the story theme.
Incoherent stories also prompted some subjects to add
unsolicited comments to their written responses such as,
“the story was unclear”, “this was a weird story” and “I
didn't understand the story at all.” Incoherentcounterintuitive stories solicited more (2) comments than
incoherent-intuitive stories (1 comment). There was also
some evidence to suggest that subjects were attempting to
make sense of the incoherent stories. For instance, consider
the incoherent-counterintuitive version of Gratitude, where
the man decides to go home and mow his lawn and have
dinner with his family but the wolf is still mysteriously
saved. Two subjects inferred that the man saved the wolf by
helping it before going home while another subject said that
the man saw the wolf on his way back and saved it! Three
subjects made the incoherent version of Laugh coherent by
changing it. Instead of the man making fun of the woman’s
body and then surprisingly telling the woman never to laugh
at people’s body, two of the subjects changed the story so
that the man realizes on his own that he should never have

2736

laughed at the woman’s body. Another subject changed the
story to suggest that the woman made fun of the man!
Results of this study further call into question the notion
that inclusion of 2-3 counterintuitive concepts makes a story
more memorable and more transmissible. Our results
indicate that counterintuitive concepts only make a story
more memorable if they can be easily integrated to make the
story coherent. Having gathered some support for our
hypothesis that story cohesion is key to explaining story
recall, I wanted to see whether difference between story
cohesion could account for difference in popularity for
Aesop’s Fables. The final study was designed to investigate
this possibility.

labeling of the stories mentioned on more Google-indexed
websites as popular. This suggests that using Google to
measure popularity of an idea is a valuable tool identified by
Norenzayan et al. This should address lack of availability of
data and should prompt more research in this area.
The results also provide some justification for the
assumption that memorability had something to do with the
popularity of the widespread Aesop fables, as subjects rated
popular stories as more memorable than unpopular ones.
These results are similar to those of Norenzayan et al. who
also found that their subjects rated popular and unpopular
Grimm Brother’s tales to vary significantly along the
dimensions of memorability, understandability, and
likelihood of transmission.

Study IV
Material and Method
I designed 32 study packets by randomly ordering the 42
(21 popular and 21 unpopular) stories selected in Study I.
Each story was followed by seven randomly ordered
questions. Replicating Norenzayan et al.’s methodology for
their Study 2, I asked subjects to first rate each tale on the
following six attributes on 7-point scale (anchored by
endpoints labeled strongly disagree to strongly agree).
Subject responses were used to measure their perception of
each story’s:
•
familiarity (“I have heard this story before”),
•
memorability (“Right now if someone asked me to
close my eyes and tell them the story that I just
read, I think I could recall all or most of the critical
elements of the story” ),
• likelihood of transmission (“If I told a 7-year-old
this story, he or she would tell it to other
children”),
• interest value (“This story was interesting”),
• understandability (“This story was easy to
understand”), and
• moral lesson (“This story has a strong moral
lesson”).
In addition to the above six factors measured by
Norenzayan et al., I added the query “I could easily make a
few modifications to the story (such as changing the main
characters) to make the story’s moral lesson even more
apparent”. Believing that incohesive stories should be
judged by adult English readers as more amenable to a
change than cohesive stories, I thought that subject
responses to this question should be inversely related to
story cohesion.
Thirty two adult male and female subjects from DRDCToronto participated in this experiment for remuneration.
These experiments were individually conducted by a
Research Assistant.
Results & Discussion
As shown in Table 2, subjects rated popular and
unpopular stories differently on all of the dimensions we
measured. Subjects were more familiar with fables that
attracted a higher number of Google hits than those that
attracted fewer hits. This provided independent support for

Table 2: Mean subject ratings on various psychological
variables as a function of whether a fable is popular or not.
Subject
Ratings
Familiarity
Memorability
Likelihood of
transmission
Interest
value
Understanda
bility
Moral
Lesson
Cohesion

Unpopular

t

−1.08
2.02
0.06

−2.49
1.46
−0.68

14.51
9.57
10.16

<.001
<.001
<.001

0.77

-0.09

11.27

< .001

2.11

1.47

9.88

<.001

1.40

0.54

9.68

<.001

1.14

0.25

10.45

<.001

Popular

p

Unlike Norenzayan et al., who did not find significant
differences between subject’s ratings of the popular and
unpopular Grimm Brother’s tales along dimension of
interest value and moral lesson, our subjects rated popular
stories as significantly more interesting and as significantly
more likely to have “a strong moral lesson” than unpopular
stories. The difference between our results and theirs could
be due to the differences in the materials used (Aesop’s
fables versus Grimm Brother’s folks tales) or due the
experimental design factors such as differences in sample
size (32 subjects × 42 stories = 1342 sample points in our
experiment versus 65 subjects × 6 stories = 390 sample
points for their experiment).
Our results also support the hypothesis that motivated this
experiment, namely, that popular and unpopular stories
differ along the dimension of story cohesion. Subjects not
only rated popular stories higher on the dimension of
“having a strong moral lesson,” they also thought that
popular stories were harder to modify to make story’s
“moral lesson more apparent” as compared to unpopular
stories. To see whether differences in story cohesion can
account for differences in memorability between stories, we
computed an aggregated cohesiveness measure by
combining the subject ratings in response to the moral
lesson and “needing modification” questions, and performed
a correlational analysis of aggregated cohesiveness and
story memorability. We found that cohesiveness was

2737

strongly correlated with memorability (Pearson Correlation
Coefficient r = 0.71, N = 42, p < 0.001). This suggests that
cohesiveness of Aesop’s fables can explain most of the
difference in memorability among Aesop’s fables while the
number of counterintuitive concepts present in a story
cannot. Furthermore, correlation between cohesiveness and
memorability becomes even stronger when only
counterintuitive stories are considered.
For stories
containing at least one counterintuitive concept, the
correlation is stronger (r = 0.75, N=34, p < 0.001), it is even
stronger for stories containing at least 2 counterintuitive
concepts (r = 0.81, N = 16, p < 0.001), and it is higher still
for stories containing 3 counterintuitive concepts of which
there were only three (r=0.90, N = 3, p < 0.001). These
results suggest that counterintuitive elements added to a
story have to make sense in the context of the story for it to
be memorable and that this is especially true as more and
more counterintuitive concepts are added to a story. To the
extent that the inclusion of counterintuitive concepts can be
justified in the context of a story, there may not be a fixed
upper limit to the number of counterintuitive concepts that
can be included in a memorable story. A writer’s creative
ability to imagine counterintuitiveness-justifying contexts
may be the real limiting factor. If the context in which
counterintuitive concepts are embedded does not allow a
reader to justify the inclusion of those concepts and make
the story cohesive, then that story will not be remembered
well. This also answers Norenzayan et al.’s question as to
why despite all of their memorability advantages
counterintuitive concepts never appear alone and are always
communicated along with an even larger number of intuitive
concepts. The paper suggests that this may be because a
context built by intuitive concepts is needed to justify, make
sense of, and give meaning to the counterintuitive concepts.

Conclusion
The results of studies reported here call into question the
notions that (a) there is a single cognitively optimal template
for all narratives, and that (b) inclusion of 2-3
counterintuitive concepts makes a story more memorable
and hence more transmissible. This paper suggests that
relationship between inclusion of counterintuitive concepts
and memory for narratives may be more complicated than
previously suggested. The experiments reported here
support the hypothesis that inclusion of counterintuitive
concepts can make a story more memorable only if they
allow a reader to use her/his background knowledge to make
the story more coherent. These results have important
implications not only for those interested in understanding
how elements of culture become widespread but also for
those interested in designing memorable messages for
influencing target audiences. Thus, cultural scientists cannot
ignore the socio-cultural context at the time of diffusion if
they want to understand how certain folktales came to be
widely distributed in a population. Marketing professionals
cannot just throw in a certain number of counterintuitive
concepts (or more generally expectation violating or schema

incongruent elements) into a message to make it more
sticky. For such elements to add value to a message, one
must carefully consider all aspects of the context which
include both the cultural knowledge that members of the
target audience bring to the table and the structure and
content of the story to which these concepts are being
added.

References
Barrett, J., & Nyhof, M. (2001). Spreading non-natural
concepts. Cognition and Culture, 1, 69-100.
Boyer, P. (1994). The Naturalness of Religious Ideas: A
Cognitive Theory of Religion. Berkeley, CA: University
of California Press.
Boyer, P. (2001). Religion Explained: The evolutionary
origins of religious thought. New York, NY: Basic.
Boyer, P., & Ramble, C. (2001). Cognitive templates for
religious concepts. Cognitive Science, 25, 535-564.
Graesser, A. C., Singer, M., & Trabasso, T. (1994).
Constructng
inferences
during
narrative
text
comprehension. Psychological Review, 101, 371-395.
Halliday, M. A. K., & Hasan, R. (1976). Cohesion in
English London: Longman.
Kim, S. (1999). Causal bridging inference: A cause of story
interestingness. British Journal of Psychology, 90, 57-71.
Kintsch, W. (1998). Comprehension. Cambridge, MA:
Cambridge University Press.
Norenzayan, A., Atran, S., Faulkner, J., & Scaller, M.
(2006). Memory and Mystery: The Cultural Selection of
Minimally Counterintuitive Narratives. Cognitive Science,
30, 531-553.
Schank, R. C. (1999). Dynamic Memory Revisited. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Schank, R. C., & Abelson, R. (1977). Scripts, plans, goals,
and understanding: An inquiry into human knowledge.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Suls, J. (1983). Cognitive Processes in humor appreciation.
In P. E. McGhee & J. H. Goldstein (Eds.), Handbook of
Humor Research. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Townsend, G. (1867) Aesop's Fables, London, Routledge.
Trabasso, T., Suh, S., Payton, P., & Jain, R. (1995).
Explanatory inferences and other strategies during
comprehension and their effects on recall. In R. F. Larch
& E. J. O'Brien (Eds.), Sources of Coherence in Reading.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Upal, M. A. (2005). Role of Context in Memorability of
Intuitive and Counterintuitive Concepts. Paper presented
at the in Proceedings of the 27th Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society, Stressa, Italy.
Upal, M. A. (2010). An Alternative Account of the Minimal
Counterintuitiveness Effect. Cognitive Systems Research,
11(1), 194-203.
Upal, M. A., Gonce, L., Tweney, R., & Slone, D. J. (2007).
Contextualizing counterintuitiveness: How context affects
comprehension and memorability of counterintuitive
concepts. Cognitive Science, 31(3), 415-439.

2738

