UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Framed: Factors influencing reference frame choice in tabletop space

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/48m832qx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Robinette, Laurie
Feist, Michele
Kalish, Michael

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Framed: Factors influencing reference frame choice in tabletop space
Laurie E. Robinette (ler6578@louisiana.edu)
Institute of Cognitive Science, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
Lafayette, LA 70504 USA

Michele I. Feist (feist@louisiana.edu)
Institute of Cognitive Science, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
Lafayette, LA 70504 USA

Michael L. Kalish (kalish@louisiana.edu)
Institute of Cognitive Science, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
Lafayette, LA 70504 USA

perspectives: one whose origin is grounded on “ego” (a
speaker) and another whose origin has been transferred
from “ego” to a third party (an addressee) (Retz-Schmidt,
1988; Levinson, 1996; 2003). If the speaker and the
addressee share vantage points, locating one object with
respect to another is relatively straightforward; however,
if not, their viewpoints may conflict, with the result that
spatial term use relying on the VC frame may be
ambiguous.
Unlike the VC frame, an OC frame of reference – also
referred to as the intrinsic frame by Miller and JohnsonLaird (1976), Retz-Schmidt (1988), and Levinson (1996,
2003) – assigns spatial terms according to the ground
object’s inherent properties. With this frame, a viewer
attempting to locate the teacup would first determine
whether or not the teapot has its own left and right sides
and then judge that the teacup is to the left/right of the
teapot if the teacup’s occupied space corresponds with the
teapot’s left/right. Unlike the VC frame, the OC frame is
not affected by the locations of any external observers;
regardless of the viewpoints of the speaker and the
addressee, the teacup will remain intrinsically to the
teapot’s left as long as neither object is moved. However,
use of the OC frame will require mental rotation if the
vantage points of the viewer and ground object are not
aligned, and knowledge of the ground’s orientation
(Levelt, 1996). In addition, because many objects may
lack inherent left and right sides, the assignment of left
and right in this frame is ambiguous and is influenced by
functional properties of the object (Levelt, 1996) as well
as the vantage point from which the object is considered
(Retz-Schmidt, 1988). Contrary to the findings of Majid
et al. (2004), Miller and Johnson-Laird (1976) have
argued that interpretations based on the OC/intrinsic
frame actually dominate those based on the VC/deictic
frame, with VC/deictic interpretations requiring specific
qualifications from the speaker, such as “the teacup is to
the left of the teapot from my point of view.”
In order to better understand the semantics of projective
terms, many of which can be used with either a VC or an
OC frame of reference, we ask in this paper what factors

Abstract
While English speakers generally rely on a viewer-centered
frame of reference when interpreting table-top space, they
will also adopt an object-centered frame in certain
situations—prompting the question: What factors
determine which frame? The current research investigates
two possible contributors: the intrinsic “frontedness” of a
reference object involved in the scene and the syntactic
structure of the sentence used to describe the scene. If an
object possesses an “intrinsic front side,” then this side
should highlight the properties necessary for the object to
be capable of having its own distinguishable perspective.
Also, certain linguistic constructions may further increase
the salience of the reference object’s inherent geometrical
properties, leading to greater use of an object-centered
frame.
Keywords: Frame of reference; spatial language.

Introduction
English spatial terms can be ambiguous as to which area
of space they refer if a frame of reference is not
established before analyzing any spatial relation between
two or more objects. When interpreting descriptions of
table-top space, English speakers have been shown to rely
primarily on a viewer-centered (VC) frame of reference
(Majid, Bowerman, Kita, Haun, & Levinson, 2004);
however, interpretation may alternatively depend upon an
object-centered (OC) frame (Carlson-Radvansky & Irwin,
1993; 1994) when applicable.
The VC frame – also referred to by Levinson (1996,
2003) as the relative frame and by Miller and JohnsonLaird (1976), Retz-Schmidt (1988), and CarlsonRadvansky and Irwin (1993,1994) as the deictic frame –
assigns spatial terms according to the properties of an
observer located externally to the scene. For example, a
viewer attempting to determine the location of a teacup
with respect to a nearby teapot will transfer his or her own
left and right sides onto the scene and judge that the
teacup is to the left/right of the teapot if the space
occupied by the teacup corresponds with the viewer’s
own left/right side. Because the VC frame is relative to an
external observer, it can be based on different

1064

in a spatial scene determine which frame will be selected
for use.

Possible Contributing Factors to Frame of
Reference Selection
Vandeloise (1991) and Levinson (1996, 2003) suggest
that one way to resolve the ambiguity of spatial terms
may lie in the structure of the utterance used to describe
the scene (see also Levelt, 1996). They argue that
rephrasing “the teacup to the left of the teapot” as “the
teacup to the teapot’s left” should encourage use of an OC
frame because the possessive construction points out that
the teapot has its own “left side” that may be separate
from the “left side” that a viewer assigns to the scene.
Moreover, because this construction is specifically
possessive, it may suggest that “the teapot’s left side” is
the correct interpretation.
In addition, because use of an OC frame makes more
sense when the ground object possesses distinguishable
sides (Levelt [1996] argues that the OC frame is only
possible if this holds), this frame should be more salient
when the object possesses a high degree of “frontedness.”
Landau and Jackendoff (1993) argue that the ground
object’s inherent axial structure is its most important
property, and the more an object can be thought of as
possessing a front side, the more viewers should notice
that its two horizontal axes are different: one assigns an
object’s front and back while the other assigns its left and
right. For example, a ground object like a teapot, which
has an obvious front side, should encourage greater use of
the OC frame because its front side calls attention to its
possession of a perspective and orientation governed by
its intrinsic front, back, left, and right sides. A ball, on the
other hand, should not encourage use of an OC frame
because it lacks an inherent front, and therefore lacks
distinguishable sides; any sides assigned to it should be
more strongly based on a VC perspective.
In the current study, we ask whether these two factors –
the syntactic form of the spatial description and the
inherent frontedness of the ground object – facilitate use
of an OC frame of reference for English speakers’
descriptions of spatial relations in tabletop space.

Figure 1. Example of fronted object stimulus.
For the sentences, we considered the two locative terms
left and right, which could be aligned with one of the
horizontal axes. There were two levels of Sentence
Structure: non-possessive and possessive. Participants
either saw sentences of the form “The F is to the left/right
of the G,” (non-possessive) or the form “The F is to the
G’s left/right” (possessive). These two structures were
presented between-participants to forestall a strategy of
pairing each structure with a different reference frame.
The pictures each showed one figure - a black dot (a
black-painted wooden circle) - paired with one of 6
different ground objects that varied on two dimensions of
Frontedness, fronted and non-fronted. Stimuli in the
fronted group included a camera, a flower, and a jack o’
lantern; stimuli in the non-fronted group included a
balloon, a glass, and a watermelon1.
The final two variables were Figure Position (FP) and
Ground Rotation (GR), which were manipulated to vary
the frame of reference with which the picture-sentence
pairs were consistent (VC, OC, VC and OC, or none (cf.,
Carlson-Radvansky & Irwin 1993; 1994). The design
included 4 degrees of ground rotation (facing 0, 90, 180,
or 270 degrees), and four figure positions (at a 0, 90, 180,
or 270 degree arc). VC-consistent arrangements always
included FP 270 for left and FP 90 for right, regardless of
Ground Rotation; OC-consistent arrangements depend
upon both figure position and ground rotation for their
interpretation. Figure 2 shows VC-consistent and OCconsistent FP-GR pairings for left and right (with stimuli
at GR 180 being consistent with both frames) illustrated

Method
Participants
Twenty-five students from the University of Louisiana at
Lafayette who were enrolled in an introductory
psychology course received extra credit in return for their
participation.

1

Assignment to the fronted or non-fronted group was based
on two norming studies. In the first, viewers rated the extent to
which different objects were said to have an intrinsic “front
side;” objects with low ratings were considered non-fronted,
while objects with high ratings were considered fronted. In the
second, viewers attempted to select the “front side” of the two
types of objects. A chi-square analysis revealed that viewers
chose the intended front side significantly more often than the
other sides for the objects in the fronted group only.

Stimuli
The task took place on a computer using the E-Prime
software package. The stimuli used in the experiment
included photographs of a figure and ground taken at a
“3/4” angle (halfway between head-on and bird’s-eye).
Each scene was presented with a sentence including a
locative expression (see Figure 1 for an example).

1065

Figure 2. Viewer-centered (VC) and object-centered (OC) assignments of left and right for fronted objects. Non-fronted
objects were assigned similarly to facilitate comparisons between object types.
for clarity with fronted ground objects. Each Figure
Position-Ground Rotation combination was created for
each of the Ground objects, for a total of 96 pictures.
However, because non-fronted objects cannot truly be
said to face in a specific direction in a way that allows the
different Ground Rotations—and ultimately, the OC
frame of reference—to apply to them, attempting to
compare the non-fronted objects to fronted objects
becomes problematic. We resolved this issue by including
non-fronted objects that possessed a pattern that allowed
for their different sides to be discernable upon their
rotation, and an arbitrary side was designated as the
“front” side so that the objects could be said to “face” in
the different directions of Ground Rotation. This
designation also allowed for the object to possess “left”
and “right” sides. Then, in order to make comparisons
between non-fronted and fronted objects, we simply
compared ratings at the same Figure Positions and
Ground Rotations across object type.
The design of the experiment was 2 (Sentence
Structure: non-possessive and possessive) X 2 (Spatial
Term: left and right) X 2 (Frontedness: non-fronted and
fronted) X 4 (Figure Position: 0, 90, 180, 270) X 4
(Ground Rotation: 0, 90, 180, 270). Spatial Term,
Frontedness, Figure Position and Ground Rotation varied
within participants, while Sentence Structure varied
between participants.

(not acceptable at all) to 5 (very acceptable). The
variables for each trial were completely randomized.

Predictions
Acceptability of OC assignments should be higher when
the spatial description is in the possessive structure (“the
fork is to the knife’s left”) than when it is non-possessive
(“the fork is to the left of the knife”), if awareness of the
OC frame is made explicit by the possessive structure.
Also, the inclusion of a fronted ground object should lead
to higher acceptability of OC assignments than inclusion
of a non-fronted object.
Alternatively, implicit awareness of the OC frame may
lead to lower ratings of the VC assignments with a
possessive structure or fronted object—which would
suggest that viewers may at least recognize the possibility
of using a different reference frame, even if they are not
completely comfortable with it. Such a result might
further suggest that the two frames share conceptual space
and are simultaneously acceptable in a way that is similar
to the predictions of the multiple frame activation
hypothesis (Carlson-Radvansky & Irwin, 1994).
Furthermore, object frontedness and the structure of the
spatial description should cooperate; when the possessive
structure is combined with a fronted ground object, the
structure of the description should call attention to the
inherent frontedness of that object, maximally increasing
acceptability of the OC frame. In this case, we would
expect to see a situation in which acceptability of the OC
frame surpasses that of the VC frame.

Procedure
Participants were divided into two groups. One group saw
arrangements with corresponding sentences in the nonpossessive construction, while the other group saw
arrangements with corresponding sentences in the
possessive construction. For the first part of the
experiment, participants looked at pictures of the ground
objects (one picture per object) in order to introduce each
object before the rating task began.
For the rating task, each of the 96 pictures was
presented twice, once with a “left”-sentence and once
with a “right”-sentence, in random order on a computer
screen, for a total of 192 trials. In each case, the
participant was asked to rate the acceptability of the
sentence as a description of the picture, on a scale from 1

Results and Discussion
Because our interest is in how Sentence Structure and
Frontedness might influence spatial term acceptability
across the 16 figure position-ground rotation
combinations, we will focus our discussion on higherorder interactions with the variables of figure position and
ground rotation.

Sentence Structure
Figures 3a and 3b show that Sentence Structure
influenced the pattern of acceptability across the figure
position-ground rotation combinations, F (9, 207), =

1066

3a

3b
3a

3a

Figures 3a – 3b. Mean sentence acceptability ratings for the 16 figure position/ground rotation arrangements broken
down by Sentence Structure and collapsed across Term and Frontedness.
3.107, p < .05. At the two ground rotations where the VC
frame was out of alignment with the OC frame, the
average rating of all VC-consistent arrangements (FP 90GR 90, FP 270-GR 90, FP 90-GR 270, FP 270-GR 270)
(M = 2.922) was significantly higher than the average
rating of all OC-consistent arrangements (FP 0-GR 90, FP
180-GR 90, FP 0-GR 270, FP 180-GR 270) (M = 2.314)
for the non-possessive sentence structure, t (14) = 3.183, p
< .05. However, these average ratings did not differ
within the possessive condition (VC assignments, M =
2.593, vs OC assignments, M = 2.737, t (10) = -.641, ns).
This effect is in line with the prediction that the
possessive sentence structure may facilitate consideration
of an OC frame of reference by increasing ratings of OC
assignments and/or decreasing ratings of VC assignments
to the point at which the two frames are equally
acceptable.

rotation combinations, F (9, 207) = 13.555, p < .05, much
as Sentence Structure did. For non-fronted objects, the
average rating of all VC-consistent arrangements at the
two ground rotations where the VC frame was out of
alignment with the OC frame was significantly higher (M
= 3.218) than the average rating of all OC-consistent
arrangements (M = 2.342), t (24) = 5.054, p < .05;
however, for the fronted objects, no difference was found
(VC assignments, M = 2.336, vs OC assignments, M =
2.659, t (24) = -1.353, ns). As was the case for the
possessive sentence structure, the inclusion of a fronted
ground object appears to equalize the acceptability of a
VC interpretation and the acceptability of an OC
interpretation.

Sentence Structure and Frontedness
The combination of the influence of Sentence Structure
and Frontednes is evident in the five-way interaction of
Term, Sentence Structure, Frontedness, Figure Position
and Ground Rotation; F (9, 207) = 5.444, p < .05. For the
sake of brevity, and because results for the terms left and

Frontedness
Figures 4a and 4b show that Frontedness influenced the
pattern of acceptability across the figure position-ground
4a

4b

Figures 4a – 4b. Mean sentence acceptability ratings for the 16 figure position/ground rotation arrangements broken
down by Frontedness and collapsed across Term and Sentence Structure.

1067

5a

5b

5c

5d

Figures 5a – 5d. Mean sentence acceptability ratings for the 16 figure position/ground rotation arrangements
broken down by Sentence Structure and Frontedness for the term right.
right were similar, here we only describe the analysis of
right (see Figures 5a – 5d).

possessive, fronted vs. possessive, fronted, t (23) = 3.040,
p < .05).

The Viewer-centered frame. In order to further
understand the way in which the variables of Sentence
Structure and Frontedness influenced the acceptability of
right for arrangements consistent with a VC frame of
reference (FP 90), we examined changes in acceptability
ratings across the different levels of Sentence Structure
and Frontedness2. Looking at the acceptability ratings for
these points across the 4 conditions (Figures 5a – 5d), we
observe that VC points are rated as most acceptable for
the non-possessive, non-fronted condition (5a) and for the
possessive, non-fronted condition (5c), with lower
acceptability in the non-possessive, fronted condition
(5b), and with lowest acceptability in the possessive,
fronted condition (5d). These differences in acceptability
are significant (non-possessive, non-fronted vs.
possessive, non-fronted, M = 3.767, t (23) = 1.326, ns;
non-possessive, non-fronted, M = 4.301, vs. nonpossessive, fronted, M = 3.754, t (13) = 2.508, p < .05
one-tailed; non-possessive, non-fronted vs. possessive,
fronted, M = 2.252, t (23) = 4.463, p < .05; non-

The Object-centered frame. In order to further
understand how the variables of Sentence Structure and
Frontedness influenced the acceptability of right for
arrangements consistent with an OC frame of reference
(FP 270-GR 0, FP 0-GR 90, FP 180-GR 270) (see Figure
2 for representations of these arrangements), we examined
changes in acceptability ratings across the different levels
of Sentence Structure and Frontedness for these
arrangements. Looking at acceptability ratings across the
different conditions reveals that OC points received the
highest ratings in the possessive, fronted condition
(Figure 5d). Ratings were lower in the non-possessive,
fronted (5b) and possessive, non-fronted conditions (5c)
and lowest in the non-possessive, non-fronted condition
(5a). These differences in acceptability are significant
(possessive, fronted vs. non-possessive, fronted, M =
2.683, t (23) = -2.421, p < .05; possessive, fronted, M =
3.930 vs. possessive, non-fronted, M = 2.828, t (10) = 2.366, p < .05; non-possessive, fronted vs. possessive,
non-fronted, t (23) = -.296, ns; possessive, non-fronted,
vs. non-possessive, non-fronted, M = 2.015, t (23) = 2.184, p < .05).

2

For this and following analyses, we excluded data for GR
180, as at this ground rotation the VC and OC frames are in
alignment.

1068

Comparing the two types of reference frame. To test
our prediction that the combination of a possessive
sentence structure and fronted object would create a
situation in which OC assignments would be rated as
more acceptable than VC assignments—and that this
effect would be unique to this combination—we
compared ratings of OC assignments to ratings of VC
assignments in each condition. For the non-possessive,
non-fronted condition, the average rating of VC
arrangements (M = 4.301) was higher than the average
rating of OC arrangements (M = 2.015), F (1, 13) =
22.718, p < .05. For the possessive, fronted condition, the
average rating of the OC arrangements (M = 3.930) was
significantly higher than the average rating of the VC
arrangements (M = 2.252), F (1, 10) = 6.698, p < .05.
Average ratings of the VC arrangements and the OC
arrangements did not differ for either of the remaining
conditions.
Considered individually, both the possessive sentence
structure and the fronted objects appear to raise the
salience of the OC frame of reference as evidenced by an
increase in acceptability ratings for OC-consistent
arrangements and/or a decrease in acceptability ratings for
competing VC-consistent arrangements. Figures 3 and 4
show this effect. However, the lack of difference between
average ratings of the VC and OC assignments suggest
that the simple act of incorporating a possessive sentence
structure or a fronted object may only cause the OC frame
to be as acceptable as the VC frame. In contrast, the
combination of a possessive sentence structure and
fronted ground object both decreases acceptability of VC
assignments and increases acceptability of OC
assignments to the point in which English speakers prefer
an OC assignment to a VC assignment (at least when
these assignments are in competition).

just that. When a fronted object serves as the point of
reference, the asymmetries associated with this type of
object’s axial structure (Landau & Jackendoff, 1993) may
point out to the viewer that this object might have its own
perspective, different from that of the viewer, which can
also be used to assign space. Additionally, in support of
Vandeloise’s (1996), Levinson’s (1996), and Levelt’s
(1996) claims, the use of a possessive sentence structure
to describe the scene may also highlight any asymmetries
associated with the ground object and similarly cause
viewers to notice potentially competing perspectives.
However, neither of these factors alone leads to a
preference for one type of reference frame over the other.
Rather, the inclusion of either factor on its own only
seems to equalize the acceptability of the two reference
frames, while preference for an OC assignment appears
when there is a combination of a fronted ground object
and possessive sentence structure.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the members of the Language and
Cognition Lab at UL Lafayette for their comments.

References
Carlson-Radvansky, L.A. & Irwin, D.E. (1993). Frames
of reference in vision and language: Where is above?
Cognition, 46, 223-244.
Carlson-Radvansky, L.A. & Irwin, D.E. (1994).
Reference frame activation during spatial term
assignment. Journal of Memory and Language, 33, 646671.
Landau, B. & Jackendoff, R. (1993). “What” and “where”
in spatial language and spatial cognition. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 16, 217-265.
Levelt, W. J. M. (1996). Perspective taking and ellipsis in
spatial descriptions. In Bloom, P., Peterson, M.A.,
Nadel, L., & Garrett, M.F. (Eds.) Language and space
(pp. 77-107). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Levinson, S.C. (1996). Frames of reference and
Molyneaux’s question. In Bloom, P., Peterson, M.A.,
Nadel, L., & Garrett, M.F. (Eds.) Language and space
(pp. 109-170). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Levinson, S.C. (2003). Space in language and cognition:
Explorations in cognitive diversity. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Majid, A., Bowerman, M., Kita, S., Haun, D., &
Levinson, S. (2004). Can language restructure
cognition? The case for space. Trends in Cognitive
Science, 8, 108-114.
Miller, G.A. & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1976). Language
and perception. Oxford, England: Harvard University
Press.
Retz-Schmidt, G. (1988). Various views on spatial
prepositions. AI Magazine, 9 (2), 95-105.
Vandeloise, C. (1991). Spatial prepositions: A case study
from French. (A.R.K. Bosch, Trans.) Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Conclusions
In this paper, we examined two factors that may influence
how a reference frame is selected for a spatial description.
Taken together, the results from this study provide more
insight into the nature of viewers’ consideration of the VC
and OC frames of reference. When the non-possessive
sentence structure is used to describe a scene in which a
non-fronted object serves as the ground, viewers prefer a
VC assignment over an OC assignment. When either a
possessive structure or a fronted object is introduced, VC
and OC assignments appear equally appropriate. Finally,
when both a possessive structure and a fronted object are
introduced, a preference for OC assignments over VC
assignments arises. These results support our predictions
that, as Levinson (1996, 2003) argues, VC assignments
are the default for English speakers, but consideration of
other assignments may increase when certain elements of
the situation are changed in order to call attention to the
ground object’s inherent features (Carlson-Radvansky &
Irwin, 1993, 1994). The inclusion of a possessive
sentence structure and/or a fronted object appears to do

1069

