UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Generalized Event Knowledge Activation During Online Language Comprehension

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7231v166

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Metusalem, Ross
Kutas, Marta
Hare, Mary
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Generalized Event Knowledge Activation During Online Language Comprehension
Ross Metusalem (rmetusal@cogsci.ucsd.edu)
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Dr. #0515
La Jolla, CA 92093-0515 USA

Marta Kutas (kutas@cogsci.ucsd.edu)
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Dr. #0515
La Jolla, CA 92093-0515 USA

Mary Hare (mlhare@bgnet.bgsu.edu)
Bowling Green State University
Department of Psychology, BGSU
Bowling Green, OH 43403-0228 USA

Ken McRae (kenm@uwo.ca)
University of Western Ontario
Department of Psychology, UWO, Social Science Centre 7418
London, ON, Canada

Jeffrey L. Elman (elman@cogsci.ucsd.edu)
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Dr. #0515
La Jolla, CA 92093-0515 USA
Abstract
Online language comprehension is guided by knowledge
regarding real-world events. However, it remains unclear
whether activation of event knowledge during language
comprehension is constrained by the linguistic context or is
generalized, including a wide variety of information
associated with the event even if that information has not
been mentioned previously and does not satisfy constraints
imposed by the local linguistic context. The present study
addresses this issue by analyzing event-related brain
potentials recorded as participants read brief scenarios
describing typical real-world events. The amplitude of the
N400 elicited by a contextually anomalous word was reduced
if that word was related to the event described. This result
suggests that online language comprehension involves
construction of rich event representations that include
information beyond that which is relevant to the processing of
the current linguistic input.
Keywords:
event
knowledge;
online
language
comprehension; event-related potentials; ERP; N400

Background
Online language comprehension is a rapid and incremental
process guided by a wide variety of information sources.
Some researchers characterize this process as the
incremental mapping of linguistic structure onto real-world
event structure, mediated in part by the comprehender’s
prior knowledge associated with the described event (e.g.,
Altmann & Mirković, 2009). Recent research has
highlighted the importance of event knowledge to online

language comprehension. At the lexical level, priming
studies have shown, for example, that verbs activate agents,
patients, and instruments typically associated with the
specific actions denoted by the verbs (Ferretti, McRae, &
Hatherell, 2001), that agent, patient, instrument, and
location nouns activate verbs denoting the events in which
they typically participate (McRae, Hare, Elman, & Ferretti,
2005), and that word triplet priming with lexically
unassociated primes and targets reveals rapid activation of
script information (Chwilla & Kolk, 2005). Such findings
suggest that processing words in isolation activates event
knowledge, resulting in subsequent activation of other
entities and/or actions associated with the event.
At the sentential level, self-paced reading (Bicknell,
Elman, Hare, McRae, & Kutas, 2008) and eye-tracking
(Kamide, Altmann, & Haywood, 2003) studies have
demonstrated that comprehenders can rapidly integrate
information provided by a verb in combination with its
preceding agent in order to predict likely upcoming patients.
For example, Kamide et al. monitored participants’ eye
movements around a visual scene as the participants listened
to sentences such as The [man/girl] will ride the
[motorbike/carousel]. They found more anticipatory looks
to the picture of the motorbike when the agent of ride was
man than when the agent was girl (and similarly more looks
to the carousel for girl will ride than for man will ride), even
though both a motorbike and carousel are equally plausible
patients of the verb ride. This result demonstrates that
thematic role assignment is not guided by the verb alone,

1058

but crucially by knowledge associated with the event
denoted by the agent-verb combination. Online language
comprehension thus makes rapid use of event knowledge.
While event knowledge is clearly important to linguistic
processing, the specificity of the event knowledge activated
during comprehension remains an open question. Is the
activated event knowledge general, containing a wide
variety of salient features associated with the event? Or is
activation restricted to only what is relevant to the current
linguistic context? Consider the passage in (1):
(1)

A huge blizzard swept through town last night.
My kids ended up getting the day off from
school. They spent the whole day outside
building a big snowman in the front yard.

Given the previously discussed findings, it is likely the case
that at the point of reading building a, a comprehender’s
knowledge regarding “playing in the snow” events allows
for snowman to become activated as a likely patient (as
opposed to house, for example). Is activation of event
knowledge at this point limited to this feature of the
“playing in the snow” event? If this were the case, it would
indicate that event knowledge activation is constrained by
the linguistic context, limiting activation to those event
features that are relevant to the processing of the current
linguistic input. However, it is also possible that an entire
body of “playing in the snow” knowledge is activated in
reading this passage. This knowledge might include, for
example, the fact that the children are probably jackets, hats,
and mittens, even though this has not been explicitly
mentioned and is not directly relevant to comprehending the
passage. This study seeks to determine whether event
knowledge activation during comprehension involves rich,
generalized representations such as this, or if it is limited to
what is currently relevant given the linguistic context.
In the present study, participants read brief passages
describing typical real-world events. The final sentence of
each passage contained either a highly expected target word
(in the above example, building a snowman) or one of two
contextually anomalous target words: one related to the
event described (e.g., building a jacket) and one unrelated to
the event described (e.g., building a towel). Participants’
EEG was recorded as they read the passages, and the eventrelated brain potentials (ERPs) elicited by these three target
types were contrasted. The analysis focuses on the N400, an
ERP component whose amplitude is inversely proportional
to the degree to which a word is expected given the
preceding context (Kutas & Hillyard, 1984). It was
predicted that if language comprehension involves
generalized event knowledge activation, then the eventrelated anomalous target should become activated during the
reading of the passage, while the event-unrelated anomalous
target should not. This should then result in a graded N400
effect: the smallest N400 to the expected target, the largest
N400 to the event-unrelated target, and an intermediate
N400 to the event-related target. Such a result would
indicate that although both the event-related and event-

unrelated targets violate local linguistic constraints, the
event-related target becomes activated by virtue of its
association with the event described. More generally, this
result would support the notion that language
comprehension involves generalized event knowledge
activation.

Stimuli
Seventy-two experimental items (scenarios) were
constructed. Each scenario consisted of three sentences and
described a common real-world event. The first two
sentences established the event (e.g., playing in the snow).
The final sentence contained one of three sentence-medial
target words: a highly expected word, a contextually
anomalous word that was related to the established event
(event-related anomalous target; ERA), or an equally
anomalous word that was unrelated to the established event
(event-unrelated anomalous target; EuRA). Each
experimental item thus had three possible target words,
giving the experiment three conditions.

Expected Targets
The expected targets were obtained via a cloze task in which
participants read each scenario up to the word preceding the
target and were asked to provide the single word most likely
to come next. Participants completed the cloze task through
an online form. Scenarios were presented one at a time, with
all three sentences presented in paragraph format. The third
sentence left off at the word preceding the target, and
participants provided the most likely upcoming word in a
blank text field before moving onto the next scenario.
Responses could not be modified once entered.
Thirty undergraduates (twenty-three women) at the
University of California, San Diego participated for course
credit. All were native English speakers. Cloze probability
was calculated as the percentage of participants who
provided a particular response for the given scenario. The
response with the highest cloze probability was chosen as
the expected target word. Across the seventy-two items,
mean cloze probability of the expected target was 0.81, with
a standard deviation of 0.17.

Event-Related Anomalous Targets
To obtain the event-related anomalous targets (ERAs), a
new group of participants completed a norming task in
which they provided a list of people or things most likely to
be present at each event. Participants completed this task
through an online form. Scenarios were presented one at a
time in paragraph format, with the expected target word
obtained in the previous cloze task now filled in.
Participants were instructed to read each item and to paint a
mental picture of the event described. They were told that
their picture would likely include prominent people or
things that would participate in the event, but were not
explicitly mentioned in the text. They were asked to provide
up to five responses for each scenario. Responses could not
be modified once entered.

1059

Table 1: Norming results for the three rotation groups and the stimuli set overall1

Expected targets

Event-related targets

Event-unrelated targets

Group 1

Group 2

Group 3

Overall

Cloze probability

0.81

0.80

0.80

0.81

Log frequency

6.95

7.01

6.88

6.95

Orthographic length

5.58

5.71

5.75

5.68

Cloze probability

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

Log frequency

6.89

6.91

6.76

6.86

Orthographic length

5.96

5.96

5.71

5.87

Event-relatedness score

88.1

86.5

92.5

89.1

Cloze probability

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

Event-relatedness score

0.00

0.13

0.04

0.06

Forty-five undergraduates (twenty-six women) at the
University of California, San Diego participated for course
credit. All were native English speakers, and none had
participated in the cloze task. Each participant’s responses
for a particular scenario were given weighted scores based
on response order (i.e., 5 for the first response, 4 for the
second response, 3 for the third response, etc.). The highest
scoring response that was not provided as a response in the
previous cloze task (i.e., had a cloze probability of zero) was
chosen as the ERA for the item. In a small number of
instances, the highest scoring zero-cloze response was
deemed to be a contextually sensible continuation of the
scenario, despite having not been provided as a response in
the cloze task. In these cases, the next highest scoring zerocloze response was chosen. Across the seventy-two
scenarios, the mean event-relatedness score of the ERA was
89.1, with a standard deviation of 34.4.

Event-Unrelated Anomalous Targets
Event-unrelated anomalous targets (EuRAs) were obtained
by shuffling the ERAs across scenarios. Before this was
done, the seventy-two experimental items were split into
three rotation groups of twenty-four items each, allowing for
three experimental lists to be constructed by rotating each
group through the three conditions across the three lists. To
minimize variability across the experimental lists, the
rotation groups were matched on the following factors:
mean cloze probability, log frequency, and orthographic
length of the expected target; mean event-relatedness score,
log frequency, and orthographic length of the ERA.
ERAs were shuffled across the items within each rotation
group to obtain the EuRAs, thereby matching the ERAs and
EuRAs for lexical factors within each group. EuRAs were
1
Recall that the event-unrelated and event-unrelated targets
consist of the same lexical items. Mean log frequency and
orthographic length of the EuRAs is therefore equal to that of the
ERAs and is not reported in the Table 1.

chosen such that they were all zero-cloze, and in all but two
of the seventy-two scenarios, EuRAs had event-relatedness
scores of zero. (The two exceptions had extremely low
event-relatedness scores of 1 and 3.) In addition, the
shuffling was done in such a way as to match the ERAs and
EuRAs within each scenario for animacy and concreteness.
This was done so that if the ERA constituted an animacy or
concreteness violation with respect to preceding context, the
EuRA constituted the same violation. The norming results
for each rotation group and the stimuli set overall are
presented in Table 1.

Lexical Associations
One concern in constructing the stimuli was that the ERAs
might be significantly more likely than the EuRAs to be
lexically associated with the expected word. Such a
confound might undermine the experiment, as the predicted
graded N400 effect could then be accounted for by priming
of the ERA by the expected word, as opposed to the
activation of event knowledge. The University of South
Florida Free Association Norms (Nelson, McEvoy, &
Schreiber, 1998) were consulted to ensure that the ERAs
and EuRAs were on average associated to equal degrees
with their corresponding expected targets. Sixty-five of the
seventy-two scenarios’ expected targets appeared in the
Nelson norms; mean association scores for the ERAs and
EuRAs were calculated across these sixty-five items. The
mean association score for the ERAs was 0.0005, and for
the EuRAs was 0.0001.2 These extremely low mean
association scores and the small difference between them
were deemed acceptable for the purposes of the study.
2
The association score for a given word is calculated simply as
the proportion of participants that provided the word (ERA or
EuRA) in response to the cue word (expected target). The mean
scores for ERAs and EuRAs thus correspond to one response per
two thousand participants and one response per ten thousand
participants, respectively.

1060

Experiment
To examine the specificity of the event knowledge activated
during online language comprehension, participants’ EEG
was recorded as they read the carefully constructed
scenarios described in the previous section. To review, each
scenario consisted of three sentences. The first two
sentences established a typical real-world event. The third
sentence contained one of three possible target words: a
highly expected word, an anomalous but event-related word
(ERA), or an anomalous and event-unrelated word (EuRA).
It was hypothesized that the expected word would elicit the
smallest N400, the EuRA would elicit the largest N400, and
the ERA would elicit an intermediate N400. Such a finding
would indicate that although both the ERA and EuRA
violated local linguistic constraints, the ERA was activated
through the activation of generalized event knowledge by
the preceding context.

Methodology
Materials The materials consisted of seventy-two scenarios
constructed according to the previously discussed criteria.
Three experimental lists were created based on the grouping
of the seventy-two items into the three rotation groups, such
that each experimental item occurred exactly once in each

condition across the three lists and exactly once in each list.
In addition to the seventy-two scenarios, twenty-four fillers
were included. Like the experimental items, these were
three-sentence scenarios describing real-world events. None
contained any anomalous words. Presentation order of
experimental items and fillers was fully randomized for
each participant.
Participants Thirty undergraduates (twenty-two women) at
the University of California, San Diego participated for
course credit. All were right-handed native monolingual
English speakers with normal or corrected-to-normal vision.
None reported any history of learning or reading disabilities
or neurological or psychiatric disorders.
Procedure Participants sat in an electromagnetically
shielded chamber and read each scenario from a computer
monitor. The first two sentences of each scenario were
presented in paragraph format. Once participants understood
the two sentences, they pushed a button to advance to the
final sentence. The final sentence was presented via rapid
serial visual presentation (RSVP) with a stimulus onset
asynchrony (SOA) of 350ms and a stimulus duration of
200ms. After the offset of the final word, participants
answered a yes-no comprehension question before
advancing to the next trial. Response hand was

Figure 1: Grand average ERPs at all electrode sites

1061

counterbalanced across participants.
EEG was recorded from twenty-six electrodes distributed
evenly over the scalp, referenced online to the left mastoid
and re-referenced offline to the average of the left and right
mastoids. Electrodes were placed on the outer canthus and
infraorbital ridge of each eye to monitor eye movements and
blinks. All electrode impedances were kept below 5KΩ.
EEG was amplified with Nicolet amplifiers with a bandpass
of 0.016 to 100 Hz and digitized at a rate of 250 samples per
second.

Results
Before analysis, all epochs containing artifacts caused by
blinks, eye movements, muscle tension, channel drift, or
amplifier blocking were rejected offline. Participants’
responses to the comprehension questions were analyzed to
ensure that each participant was reading the scenarios for
comprehension. Only one participant scored below 90%
correct (88.9%), indicating that participants were
comprehending the scenarios.
EEG was time-locked to the onset of the target words and
was first averaged within participants to obtain individual
participant averages for each condition. These individual
participant averages were then averaged together to obtain a
grand average ERP waveform for each condition. Figure 1
contains the grand average ERPs at each electrode site,
arranged according to the distribution of electrodes over the
scalp (i.e., frontal electrodes at the top, posterior electrodes
at the bottom; midline electrodes in the middle, lateral
electrodes to the side); Figure 2 presents a close-up of the
grand average ERPs at the midline parietal recording site
(Pz). To conduct an analysis of N400 amplitude, mean
amplitudes from 200 to 500ms post-stimulus onset (relative
to a 500ms pre-stimulus baseline) at each electrode for each
participant were entered into a repeated measures ANOVA.
A main effect of Condition was obtained [F(2,58)=38.33,
p<0.0001], as was a Condition X Electrode interaction
[F(50,1450)=7.26, p<0.0001]. Planned comparisons
revealed the event-unrelated condition to be significantly
more negative than the event-related condition
[F(1,29)=13.00, p<0.01], which in turn was more negative
than the expected condition [F(1,29)=35.44, p<0.0001].
This result confirms the predicted graded N400 effect:
expected targets elicited the smallest N400, event-unrelated
anomalous targets the largest N400, and event-related
anomalous targets an intermediate N400. Analysis of the
distribution of the N400 effect revealed a significant
Condition X Hemisphere interaction [F(2,58)=9.69,
p<0.001], a significant Condition X Laterality interaction
[F(2,58)=15.14, p<0.0001], and a significant Condition X
Anteriority interaction [F(6,174)=4.96, p<0.01], indicating
that the N400 effect exhibited a posterior, slightly rightlateralized distribution across the scalp.

Discussion
Previous research has demonstrated the important role that
event knowledge plays in online language comprehension.

However, the specificity of event knowledge activation has
remained an open question. The results of the present study
suggest that activated event knowledge is general,
containing elements beyond what is relevant to the
processing of the current linguistic input. This conclusion is
supported by a reduction in N400 amplitude to a
contextually anomalous word when that word is related to
the event being described (and is crucially unrelated to the
most expected word, as determined by consulting the South
Florida Free Association Norms). This result shows that a
wide range of event-relevant information is activated during
online language comprehension, as opposed to only eventrelevant information that meets local linguistic constraints.
It is important to note that while an event-related
anomalous word elicits a reduced N400, it still elicits a
larger N400 than a highly expected word. In the present
study, the expected targets were more plausible patients of
the preceding verbs than were the event-related targets. It is
thus possible that event-related elements are activated in a
gradient fashion, with those that satisfy the constraints
imposed by the local linguistic context receiving greater
activation. As the aforementioned study by Ferretti et al.
(2001) suggests, verbs encode thematic roles in an eventspecific fashion. According to this view, expected targets
were closely related to the specific event denoted by the
verb itself, whereas the event-related targets were related to
the event described by the scenario as a whole but unrelated
to the specific event denoted by the verb. This suggests that
a word related to the event conveyed by the global linguistic
context will receive even greater activation if it is also
compatible with the event denoted by the verb.
While it is argued here that the N400 reduction for eventrelated targets results from activation of event knowledge, it
might be argued that such a finding could arise if the eventrelated targets were lexically associated with the words in
the preceding contexts to a greater degree than the eventunrelated targets. Associations between targets and their
contexts were quantified using Latent Semantic Analysis
(Landauer, Foltz, & Laham, 1998; http://lsa.colorado.edu/),
a method for assessing word associations through analysis
of the distribution of words in large-scale corpora. Each
target received an association score between 0 and 1, with
expected targets receiving a mean score of 0.276, eventrelated targets a mean score of 0.268, and event-unrelated
targets a mean score of 0.220. A paired t-test confirmed the
difference between event-related and event-unrelated targets
(p=0.002). While this result suggests that the event-related
targets were more strongly associated with the words in the
preceding contexts than were the event-unrelated targets,
this is in fact compatible the event knowledge account.
Language describing real-world events will undoubtedly
exhibit statistical regularities mirroring the structure of the
real-world events themselves, and thus lexical cooccurrence measures calculated over large corpora should
reflect the event structures encoded in event knowledge. In
addition, event knowledge presumably can be derived from
experience both in the real world and with language

1062

Traxler et al. do in fact stand in contrast with those reported
here, or if they are due to methodological differences.

Conclusion
Event knowledge plays an important role in online language
comprehension. The present study demonstrates that
activation of event knowledge is not constrained by the
linguistic context, but instead is highly general, including a
variety of information that is not necessarily relevant to the
processing of the current linguistic input. This finding
provides further support for the intimate link between
language comprehension and real-world experience.

Acknowledgments

Figure 2: Grand average ERPs at Pz
describing that world, meaning that co-occurrence patterns
in language likely result in part from the structure of real
world events and contribute to knowledge regarding those
events. Lexical co-occurrence, event structure, and event
knowledge are thus tightly linked, and it is unlikely that the
reported results stem from lexical co-occurrence
independent of event knowledge activation. This reasoning
raises interesting questions regarding the interplay between
knowledge of linguistic regularities and event knowledge
during online language comprehension, which is an area
worthy of future research.
The finding that event-related anomalous words elicit a
reduced N400 stands in contrast with a previous study by
Traxler, Foss, Seely, Kaup, and Morris (2000). In their
study, the authors examined whether facilitated word
processing during sentence comprehension might be
captured by a schema-based account in which linguistic
input activates a precompiled knowledge structure
pertaining to the event being described. In Experiment 1,
participants’ eye movements were monitored as they read
sentences such as The [lumberjack/young man] chopped the
axe early in the morning. First fixation and gaze durations
for the target word (axe) did not vary with the target’s
compatibility with the event denoted by the combination of
the agent and verb (i.e., axe was read equally fast following
The young man chopped as it was following The lumberjack
chopped), suggesting that reading The lumberjack chopped
did not activate a “lumberjacking” schema that contains an
axe as a prototypical instrument.
Given the present finding, the result reported by Traxler et
al. is quite surprising. According to the account put forth
here, reading the lumberjack chopped should activate
generalized “lumberjacking” knowledge that would likely
include an axe. The source of this apparent discrepancy is
unclear, although it is possible that the stimuli used here
activated event knowledge more strongly than the stimuli
used by Traxler et al. It is also possible that Traxler et al.’s
stimuli included target words that were on average less
strongly associated with the event being described, or it may
simply be the case that such eye movement measures are not
sensitive to the effect in question. Further examination is
necessary to determine whether the findings reported by

Special thanks goes out to the members of the Kutas
Cognitive Electrophysiology Laboratory at UCSD. This
research was supported by NICHD grants HD053136 and
HD022614, as well as NIA grant AG008313.

References
Altmann, G. T. M. & Mirković, J. (2009). Incrementality
and prediction in human sentence processing. Cognitive
Science, 33, 583-609.
Bicknell, K., Elman, J. L., Hare, M., McRae, K., & Kutas,
M. (2008). Online expectations for verbal arguments
conditional on event knowledge. In B. C. Love, K.
McRae, & V. M. Sloutsky (Eds.), Proceedings of the 30th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
2220-2225). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Chwilla, D. J. & Kolk, H. H. J. (2005). Accessing world
knowledge: Evidence from N400 and reaction time
priming. Cognitive Brain Research, (25), 589-606.
Ferretti, T., McRae, K., & Hatherell, A. (2001). Integrating
verbs, situation schemas, and thematic role concepts.
Journal of Memory and Language, 44(4), 516-547.
Kamide, Y., Altmann, G. T. M., & Haywood, S. L. (2003).
The time-course of prediction in incremental sentence
processing: Evidence of anticipatory eye movements.
Journal of Memory and Language, 49(1), 133-156.
Kutas, M. & Hillyard, S. A. (1984). Brain potentials during
reading reflect word expectancy and semantic association.
Nature, 307, 161-163.
Landuaer, T. K., Foltz, P. W., & Laham, D. (1998).
Introduction to Latent Semantic Analysis. Discourse
Processes, 25, 259-284.
McRae, K., Hare, E., Elman, J. L., & Ferretti, T. (2005). A
basis for generating expectancies for verbs from nouns.
Memory & Cognition, 33(7), 1174-1184.
Nelson, D. L., McEvoy, C. L., & Schreiber, T. A. (1998).
The University of South Florida word association, rhyme,
and
word
fragment
norms.
http://w3.usf.edu/FreeAssociation/.
Traxler, M. J., Foss, D. J., Seely, R. E., Kaup, B., & Morris,
R. K. (2000). Priming in sentence processing: Intralexical
spreading activation, schemas, and situation models.
Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 29(6), 581-595.

1063

