UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Gricean Brainwaves: Brain Responses to Pragmatic Violations in Dialogues

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3842j519

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Hoeks, John
Hendriks, Petra
Redeker, Gisela
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Gricean Brainwaves:
Brain Responses to Pragmatic Violations in Dialogues
John C. J. Hoeks (j.c.j.hoeks@rug.nl)
Center for Language and Cognition, University of Groningen,
PO Box 716, 9700 AS Groningen, The Netherlands.

Petra Hendriks (p.hendriks@rug.nl)
Center for Language and Cognition, University of Groningen,
PO Box 716, 9700 AS Groningen, The Netherlands.

Gisela Redeker (g.redeker@rug.nl)
Center for Language and Cognition, University of Groningen,
PO Box 716, 9700 AS Groningen, The Netherlands.

Laurie A. Stowe (l.a.stowe@rug.nl)
Center for Language and Cognition, University of Groningen,
PO Box 716, 9700 AS Groningen, The Netherlands.
Abstract
During conversation, speakers and listeners act on certain
basic assumptions, which enable them to communicate
swiftly and seemingly effortlessly (Grice, 1975). The speaker,
for instance, is supposed to say no more, but also no less than
is necessary in a given conversational context (Maxim of
Quantity). The present study looks at how language users
react when this pragmatic assumption is violated. Participants
were presented with written mini-dialogues while their ERPs
(Event-Related brain Potentials) were measured. Dialogues in
the violation condition, where the answer did not meet the
quantity requirements, differed from control dialogues in
three different time-windows, time-locked to the presentation
of a critical word. Violating the Maxim of Quantity was
signalled immediately and gave rise to effortful processing at
different levels of representation.

default set of assumptions - specifically the listeners’
assumptions about the speaker - of which all participants in
a communicative situation are aware (Horn, 2004). Grice’s
Maxim of Quantity, for example, describes how a listener
expects the speaker to say no more, but also no less than
necessary in a given conversational context. In the present
experiment we will investigate what happens when the
speaker does not comply to this conversational rule.
Consider, for instance, the mini-dialogue in (2). There, the
actions of two persons, John and Peter, are under discussion,
and the answer provides all the information that is needed
about these two protagonists, unlike dialogue (3).
2. Question: What did John and Peter do?
Answer: John kissed Annet and Peter kissed Hank.
3. Question: What did John and Peter do?
Answer: John kissed Annet and Peter on the cheek.

Keywords: Psycholinguistics; Gricean Maxims, Implicature,
Coordination, Pragmatics, Topic Structure, ERP.

Introduction
When taking part in a conversation, speaker and listener act
upon specific assumptions about shared and private
knowledge, and about the informativeness of the utterances
that are exchanged. Grice (1975) formulated a framework in
which these conversational assumptions are realized as four
maxims:
1 a. Quality: Be truthful
b. Quantity: Be as informative as required
c. Relation: Be relevant
d. Manner: Be clear
It is sometimes thought that the maxims are a kind of overly
detailed puritan recipe for successful conversation. Indeed,
Horn (2004) quotes a contemporary linguist exclaiming:
“Would we want to have dinner with such a person, such an
impeccably polite maxim observer?”. A more fruitful
approach, however, is to view these maxims as identifying a

It is obvious that crucial information is missing, namely an
answer to the partial question “What did Peter do?” By
withholding this information, the speaker is violating the
Maxim of Quantity.
There are different ways in which one can violate the
Maxim of Quantity. For instance, someone can answer the
question about how many children she has, with “two”,
when in fact she has three, or incorrectly say that the water
is “not cold”, while it is piping hot. These are called scalar
implicatures, as they involve the computation of the
intended meaning (i.e., what is implicated) from a semantic
hierarchy or scale (e.g., cold - warm - hot). In another
situation, a speaker wanting to refer to a specific object
should refrain from giving too much or too little information
describing it. For instance, Engelhardt, Bailey, & Ferreira
(2006) present eye-tracking evidence suggesting that
listeners are acutely sensitive to overdescription, even
though they are not consciously aware of any processing
problems.
The example that we are looking at in (3), however, takes
place at a different level, and is closely related to the

1325

pragmatic concept of ‘topic-structure’ (Hoeks, Vonk, &
Schriefers, 2002). A topic can be loosely described as the
entity about which the sentence imparts information
(Lambrecht, 1994). The question in (3) introduces two
entities in a way that makes them very likely topics of the
answer, either as a unit (“They did X”), or in a construction
with contrastive topics, in which each of the entities
performs a separate action (“John did X, and Peter did Y”).
Their results expectation of additional information due to
the Maxim of Quantity clearly played a role in the resolution
of the syntactic ambiguity seen in these sentences.
Until now there have only been very few investigations of
how conversational assumptions impact on-line language
processing. Most of these studies focus on scalar
implicatures, which are instances of the class of generalized
implicatures, that is, they can be computed without
reference to the preceding context. In contrast, our study
looks at the on-line processing of particularized
implicatures, where the pragmatic interpretation of an
utterance is crucially dependent on the preceding context.

resolved towards the non-preferred reading. These sentences
were embedded in two kinds of dialogue: - in the neutral
condition, the sentences were preceded by a ‘neutral’
question: “What happened?”, which does not give rise to
any specific expectation of the form or content of the answer
(see, e.g., (5)); in the violation condition (see e.g., (6))
sentences were preceded by a question like “What did the
mayor and the alderman do?”, which requires a more
specific answer pertaining to what both people actually did.
The adverb (“exuberantly”) unambiguously indicates (at
least in Dutch, the language used in this experiment) that the
answer is a sentence with only one topic (i.e., “the mayor”),
and not two, as would be expected from the question in the
violation condition. Thus, the NP “the alderman” turns out
not to be the expected topic, which constitutes a clear
violation of the Maxim of Quantity.
5. Neutral:
Q: What happened?
A: The mayor praised the councilor and the alderman
exuberantly.

Experiment
In this experiment, participants read short dialogues that
appeared word-by-word in the middle of a computer screen.
The sentences that are used in this experiment are all
grammatically correct and semantically intact; they only
differ in the extent to which the answer part of the dialogues
is pragmatically felicitous with respect to the preceding
question. During the reading of the mini-dialogues, brain
activity of the participants was monitored by the continuous
recording of ERPs (Event Related brain Potentials).
Dialogues were structured such that at the final word of the
answer sentence it became clear that the answer was
pragmatically anomalous, as it violated the Maxim of
Quantity (equals: give exactly as much information as
required, no more and no less!).

Method
Participants The participants were 18 undergraduate
students from the University of Groningen (6 male, 12
female, age-range 18-29, mean 20), who received payment
or course credits for taking part in the experiment. All were
right-handed native speakers of Dutch with normal,
uncorrected vision.
Materials In this experiment we used sentences containing
NP-coordinations that were based on materials taken from
Hoeks (1999). For example, see sentence (4):
4. The mayor praised the councilor and the alderman
exuberantly.
In the absence of a context, language users show a clear
preference for structures where the conjunct and conjoins
NPs, instead of sentences (as in e.g., “{the mayor praised
the councilor} and {the alderman laughed}”) (For English:
Frazier, 1987; Frazier & Clifton, 1997; for Dutch: Hoeks,
1999; Hoeks et al., 2006). Using NP-coordinations in our
experiment will thus avoid so-called ‘garden-path’ effects
that occur when ambiguous utterances are ultimately

6. Violation:
Q: What did the mayor and the alderman do?
A: The mayor praised the councilor and the alderman
exuberantly.
Besides these two kinds of experimental dialogues - 40 in
total, 20 per condition - where the answer sentence
contained an NP-coordination, there were also 40 filler
dialogues (half with a neutral and half with a two-topic
question) in which the answer consisted of an S-coordinated
sentence, so as to minimize the chance of participants
developing processing strategies. In addition, there were 100
filler items from an unrelated experiment on relative clause
processing; these will not be discussed further.
Design Experimental lists were created using a Latin
Square, with equal numbers of items occurring in each
condition on each list, and no list containing more than one
version of a given item. The order in which experimental
and filler items appeared was determined semi-randomly
(i.e., allowing maximally three experimental items in
consecutive order, but never two consecutive items in the
same condition) and was the same for all lists. Each list was
presented to an equal number of participants and each
participant only saw one list.
Procedure Participants were tested in a dimly lit, soundproof booth. They sat facing a computer screen at
approximately 60 cm distance; a chin-rest was used to
minimize movement artifacts. Participants were instructed to
read each sentence for comprehension, and to respond to the
occasional content question (35 in total, quasi-randomly
distributed over the experiment) in order to answer “yes” or
“no” by lifting the right or left index finger, respectively.
Content questions were always followed by filler items, so
that possible problems in answering the questions would not
influence the processing of experimental items.

1326

At the beginning of each trial, a fixation mark (an
asterisk) appeared for 1 second. After that, the dialogue
sentences were presented word-by-word in the centre of the
screen. Each word remained on screen for 243 mSec
(durations have to be a multiple of the screen refresh time),
and was followed by a blank screen with a duration of 243
mSec. Between the question-part of the dialogue and the
answer there was an interval of 729 mSec. At the end of an
experimental item, the word “Knipper” (= “Blink”) was
shown for 3 seconds, giving participants the opportunity to
blink; they were instructed to try and avoid blinking during
the presentation of the sentence to avoid eye-movement and
blink-related artifacts. After every 50 trials, the participant
could take a short break. The experiment took about 105
min, including preparation.

separately. Prior to averaging, trials with ocular or
amplifier-related artifacts were excluded from analysis.
The ambiguous NP in the answer sentence (e.g., “the
alderman”) was mentioned in the question of the Violation
condition (“What did the mayor and the alderman do?”) but
not in the question of the Neutral condition (“What
happened?”), which might have given rise to a reduction of
the N400 due to repetition priming (Kutas et al., 2007) or
other effects. To rule out the possibility that effects on the
preceding word influenced the pattern of results at the
critical adverb, a 100 mSec post-stimulus onset baseline was
used instead of a pre-stimulus baseline, time-locked to the
onset of the critical word (for a similar procedure, see
Philips, Kazanina, & Abada, 2005; Mueller, 2008).

EEG recording parameters The EEG activity was
recorded by means of 20 tin electrodes mounted in an elastic
cap (see Figure 1): FP1, FP2, FZA, F7, F3, FZ, F4, F8, T7,
C3, CZ, C4, T8, P7, P3, PZ, P4, P8, O1, and O2. Bipolar
horizontal EOG was recorded between electrodes at the
outer left and right canthus. Bipolar vertical EOG was
recorded for both eyes. Electrode impedances were kept
below 5 kΩ. EEG and EOG signals were sampled at 1000
Hz, amplified (EEG: 0.2 mV/V; EOG: 0.5 mV/V; time
constant: 10 sec.), and digitally low-pass filtered with a cutoff frequency of 30 Hz; effective sample frequency was 100
Hz.

Fp1

Fp2
Fza

F7

T7

F3

Fz

C3

Cz

F4

P4

P7
O1

T8

C4

Pz

P3

F8

P8

O2

Figure 2. ERP-waveforms starting at the presentation of the
disambiguating adverb for dialogues containing violations
(grey) and neutral dialogues (black) on a frontal (Fz) and a
posterior electrode (Pz).

Figure 1: Electrode placement
(triangle indicates nose of participant)

Results
Data Analysis Participants read attentively, answering on
average 85% (SD = 5.6) of the content questions correctly.
Visual inspection of the ERP waveforms following the
presentation of the critical adverb (‘exuberantly’) suggested
three effects of the violation condition as compared to the
neutral condition (see Figure 2): an early bipolar component
in the ELAN time-window (180-320 mSec post-onset),
which was followed by a positivity in the N400 timewindow (350-550 mSec post-onset), and a late positivity in
the early P600 time-window (550-750 mSec post-onset).
For each of those intervals, average ERPs were computed
for each electrode site, each participant, and each condition

For analysis purposes, three sets of electrodes were used: the
prefrontal electrodes FP1, FZA, and FP2; the occipital
electrodes O1 and O2; and the main set of electrodes. For
each of these sets (and for each of the three relevant timewindows) average ERPs were statistically analyzed using
Repeated-Measures ANOVA (Analysis of Variance) with
Violation (violation vs. neutral) as a within-participant
factor. In each of these ANOVAs topographical factors were
also included: 1) for the prefrontal set this was the factor
Laterality with 3 levels (i.e., left, midline, and right side of
the scalp); 2) for the occipital set Laterality only had 2 levels
(i.e., left and right); 3) for the main set of 15 electrodes,
Laterality had 5 levels (far left, left, middle, right, far right),

1327

and a second factor, Anteriority, had 3 levels (anterior,
central, and posterior). Where appropriate, the Huynh-Feldt
correction was applied to correct for violations of the
statistical assumption of sphericity. We will report the
corrected p-values with the original degrees of freedom.
Because only effects involving the factor Violation tell us
something about our pragmatic manipulation, other effects
will not be reported.
Early Bipolar Effect (180-320 mSec post-onset: ELAN
time-window)
In the analysis of the main set of electrodes, the interaction
of Violation x Anteriority was significant (F(2,30) = 5.34; p
< .05), but qualified by a significant three-way interaction of
Violation x Anteriority x Laterality (F(8,120) = 2.22; p <
.05).
Follow-up analyses showed significant and near to
significant interactions between Violation x Anteriority for
every level of Laterality, except for the electrodes on the far
right (far left: F(2,30) = 3.20; p = .07; left: F(2,30) = 7.36; p
< .01; middle: F(2,30) = 8.72; p < .01; right: F(2,30) = 3.18;
p = .07; far right: F < 1). Each of these interactions was
characterized by a frontal negativity (violation more
negative than neutral), coupled with a posterior positivity
(violation more positive than neutral), with central
electrodes falling in between. Table 1 displays the size of
the violation-effect as a function of Anteriority and
Laterality. Analysis regarding the occipital electrodes
produced a significant main effect of Violation (F(1,15) =
5.35; p < .01), where the violation condition was more
positive than the neutral condition (a difference of 0.8 µV);
there were no significant effects in the analysis of the
prefrontal electrodes.
Table 1: Effect Sizes (violation minus neutral, in µV) for
frontal, central, and posterior electrodes on every level of
Laterality in the first time-window (180-320 mSec postonset)

Frontal
Central
Posterior

Far Left
-0.8
0.0
0.9

Left
-0.7
0.4
1.1

Middle
-0.9
0.5
1.2

Right
-0.5
0.2
0.6

Far Right
-0.4
0.2
0.1

Positivity (350-550 mSec post-onset: N400 Time-Window)
For the main set of electrodes we found a significant effect
of Violation (F(1,15) = 5.95; p < .05), with a larger
positivity for the violation condition as compared to the
neutral condition (a difference of 1.3 µV). There was no
interaction with topographical factors Anteriority and
Laterality (all F-values < 1). In the analysis on the prefrontal
electrodes there was also only a main effect of Violation (a
difference of 1.8 µV; F(1,15) = 7.61; p < .05). There were
no significant effects in the analysis of the occipital
electrodes (all p-values > .19).
Late Positivity (550-750 mSec post-onset: P600 TimeWindow)

The analysis on the main set of electrodes produced a
significant main effect of Violation (F(1,15) = 7.99; p <
.05), with a larger positivity for the violation condition
versus the neutral condition (a difference of 1.9 µV). There
was no interaction with Anteriority (F < 1); the interaction
with Laterality was marginally significant ((F(4,60) = 2.22;
p = .10).
These effects were qualified by a significant three-way
interaction of Violation x Anteriority x Laterality (F(8,120)
= 7.61; p < .05). This interaction ensued from the effect of
Violation (violation more positive than neutral) being quite
pronounced on the left side of the scalp, and significantly
less strong on the right (and even absent on far right
electrodes). See Table 2 for the effect sizes on all electrodes
contained in the main set. Analysis of the prefrontal
electrodes showed a main effect of Violation where the
violation condition was much more positive than the neutral
(a difference of 2.8 µV; F(1,15) = 11.65; p < .005). At the
occipital electrodes, the violation condition gave rise to a
positivity on the left (O1: 0.5 µV), but to a slight negativity
on the right (O2: -0.2 µV); this interaction was marginally
significant (F(1,15) = 3.64; p = .08).
Table 2: Effect Sizes (violation minus neutral, in µV) for
frontal, central, and posterior electrodes on every level of
Laterality in the P600 time-window (550-750 mSec postonset)

Frontal
Central
Posterior

Far Left
2.1
2.3
2.3

Left
3.2
2.1
2.7

Middle
2.6
1.2
1.9

Right
2.3
1.4
1.3

Far Right
1.1
1.3
0.5

Discussion
Violating the Maxim of Quantity in these mini-dialogues had a
very clear effect on ERPs, in three different time-windows.
The early frontal negativity seems to be related to the Early
Left Anterior Negativity (ELAN) that has been found in
response to word category violations (Friederici, 1995). The
strong topic-structure expectation created by the question
presumably translates into a strong syntactic expectation for an
inflected verb to occur after the name of the second protagonist.
If participants read an adverb instead of a verb, this may be
detected very quickly. The positivity accompanying the anterior
negativity may reflect the detection of the additional pragmatic
violation.
After this early effect we found a broadly distributed
positivity in the interval between 350 and 550 mSec after
presentation of the critical word. This effect is highly
reminiscent of a positivity reported by Bornkessel,
Schlesewsky, and Friederici (2002). According to Bornkessel et
al., this positivity reflected a form of thematic reanalysis that
occurs when the thematic role that is initially assigned to a
discourse entity turns out to be wrong. In the present
experiment the ambiguous NP (e.g., ‘the alderman’) is expected
to be an AGENT (the entity that performs an action) on the
basis of the question, but turns out to be a PATIENT (the entity
that undergoes an action), requiring thematic reanalysis.

1328

Finally, there was a large positive effect for the Violation
condition in the P600 time-window. A P600 is generally found
as a response to syntactic violations (Hagoort, Brown, &
Groothusen, 1993), syntactic dependencies (Kaan et al., 2000),
but also to some kinds of semantic violations (e.g., Hoeks,
Stowe, & Doedens, 2004). It is generally thought to reflect the
effortful processing involved in syntactic integration, or
syntactic reanalysis following an error somewhere in the
utterance. This effortful processing is most likely motivated by
the wish to create a coherent representation of the language
input. The scalp distribution of the late positivity in the present
experiment, however, is not centro-parietal, as in the typical
case, but is shifted to the left, and especially large at frontal
electrodes. Following Friederici et al. (2002) and Hagoort et al.
(1999) we might assume that the more anteriorly oriented P600
reflects the difficulty of the revision process, whereas a
posterior P600 effect might result from a general failure to
compute. On a more speculative note, the late positivity that we
find here may in part also reflect the computation of whether
the speaker wants to impart something by not giving an
adequate answer to a question. In Grice’s terms there is an
implicature: Answering a question about X and Y solely by
relating what person X did, without reference to person Y, may
be an indirect way of asserting for instance that what person Y
did was in fact very insignificant. Ongoing research in our lab
is in fact aimed at investigating under what circumstances
people will compute implicatures of this kind.

Conclusion
If Grice is right, then all language users work from the default
assumptions that their conversational partners are rational
beings, who produce utterances that are true, clear, and
relevant, and do not contain more, but certainly not less
information than is required in the specific conversational
setting in which they occur. And indeed, whenever a given
utterance for instance violates the Maxim of Quantity, this will
be detected within 200 mSec, leading to thematic and syntactic
reanalysis - and possibly also the computation of an implicature
- all of which are motivated by the desire to create a coherent
representation of what the other person is saying.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Charlotte Wunderink and Ingeborg
Prinsen for their help in running the experiment.

References
Bornkessel, I., Schlesewsky, M., & Friederici, A.D. (2002).
Beyond syntax: language-related positivities reflect the revision
of hierarchies. NeuroReport, 13(3), 361-364.
Engelhardt, P.E., Bailey, K.G.D, & Ferreira, F. (2006). Do
speakers and listeners observe the maxim of quantity? Journal of
Memory and Language, 54, 554–573.
Frazier, L. (1987). Syntactic processing: evidence from Dutch.
Natural Language and Linguistic Theory, 5, 519-559.
Frazier, L., & Clifton, C.(1997). Construal: Overview, motivation,
and some new evidence. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research,
26, 277-295.
Friederici, A.D. (1995). The time course of syntactic activation
during language processing: A model based on neuro-

psychological and neurophysiological data. Brain and
Language, 50, 259–281.
Friederici, A.D., 2002. Towards a neural basis of auditory sentence
processing. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 6, 78–84.
Grice, H.P. (1975). Logic and Conversation. In P. Cole & J.L.
Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and Semantics, Volume 3: Speech Acts
(pp. 41–58). New York: Academic Press.
Hagoort, P., Brown, C.M., & Groothusen, J. (1993). The syntactic
positive shift as an ERP measure of syntactic processing.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 8, 439-484.
Hagoort, P., Brown, C.M., Osterhout, L. (1999). The neural
architecture of syntactic processing. In: Brown, C.M., Hagoort,
P. (Eds.), The neurocognition of language. Oxford University
Press, Oxford.
Hoeks, J.C.J. (1999). The processing of coordination: semantic
and pragmatic constraints on ambiguity resolution. Doctoral
Dissertation,
University
of
Nijmegen.
Available:
http://www.let.rug.nl/~hoeks/Hoeks1999_dis.pdf
Hoeks, J.C.J., Hendriks, P., Vonk, W., Brown, C.M., & Hagoort, P.
(2006). Processing the NP- versus S-coordination ambiguity:
thematic information does not completely eliminate processing
difficulty. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
59(9), 1581-1599.
Hoeks, J.C.J., Stowe, L.A., & Doedens, L.G. (2004). Seeing words
in context: the interaction of lexical and sentence level
information during reading. Cognitive Brain Research, 19, 5973.
Hoeks, J.C.J., Vonk, W., & Schriefers, H. (2002). Processing
coordinated structures in context: the effect of topic-structure on
ambiguity resolution. Journal of Memory and Language, 46, 99119.
Horn, L.R. (2004). Implicature. In: L.R. Horn & G. Ward (Eds.),
The handbook of pragmatics (pp. 3-28). Malden, MA:
Blackwell.
Kaan, E., Harris, A., Gibson, E., & Holcomb, P.(2000). The P600
as an index of syntactic integration difficulty. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 15, 159-201.
Kutas, M., & Hillyard, S. A. (1980). Reading senseless sentences:
brain potentials reflect semantic incongruity. Science, 207, 203205.
Kutas, M., Van Petten, C., & Kluender, R. (2007).
Psycholinguistics electrified II (1994-2005). In: M. A.
Gernsbacher & M. Traxler (Eds.), Handbook of
psycholinguistics (2nd Edition). New York, NY: Elsevier.
Lambrecht, K. (1994). Information structure and sentence form:
Topic, focus, and the mental representation of discourse
referents. Cambridge, MA: University Press.
Mueller, J.L., (2009). The influence of lexical familiarity on ERP
responses during sentence comprehension in language learners.
Second Language Research, 25, 43-76.
Phillips, C., Kazanina, N., & Abada, S.H. (2005). ERP effects of
the processing of syntactic long-distance dependencies.
Cognitive Brain Research, 22, 407– 428.

1329

