UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Hot Cognitions in Coherence-Based Reasoning and Decision-Making

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3tv1z1fr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Read, Stephen
Simon, Dan
Stenstrom, Douglas

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Hot Cognitions in Coherence-Based Reasoning and Decision-Making
Stephen J. Read (read@usc.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089

Dan Simon (dsimon@law.usc.edu)
Gould School of Law, University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089

Douglas Stenstrom (dstenstrom@email.com)
Department of Psychology, California State University, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90032

Abstract
The studies examine the role of hot cognitions alongside cold
cognitive appraisal within the framework of coherence-based
reasoning. In two simulated legal cases we find that emotions
towards the suspect and motivation with respect to the
outcome of the case are strongly correlated with the cognitive
appraisal of the facts of the case, the judged credibility of the
witnesses, and the overall judgment of the suspect’s blame.
Moreover, emotion and motivation partially mediate the
effect of experimental manipulations on decisions.
Keywords:
Decision-making;
constraint
satisfaction
processes; coherence based reasoning; legal decision-making.

Introduction
Decision making in real-world situations characterized by
complex patterns of facts often involves coherence-based
reasoning; as decision makers consider a pattern of
evidence and come to a conclusion, judgments about the
facts of the case and the conclusion shift to become more
coherent with each other (Holyoak & Simon, 1999; Simon,
2004; Simon et al., 2004a; Simon et al., 2004b). We sought
to extend this research by investigating the role of hot
cognitions in the cold cognitive appraisals involved in such
judgments. We were particularly interested in whether and
how emotions and motivation are implicated in conclusions
about a suspect’s guilt. Considerable research has recently
examined the role of emotions in decision-making (Rick &
Loewenstein, 2008). Particular attention has been directed
at anger, which leads to systematic distortions in a variety of
judgments. These distortions are especially problematic
when the anger is aroused by a source that is unrelated to
the person being judged. Observers aroused by such
incidental anger are more likely to attribute blame to the
person being judged, to perceive her conduct as intentional,
to lower the required threshold of evidence, to neglect
alternative explanations and mitigating circumstances
(Lerner, Goldberg, & Tetlock, 1998; Goldberg, Lerner, &
Tetlock, 1999; Quigley & Tedeschi, 1996), and to increase
the desire for retaliation (Ferguson & Rule, 1983)
Social judgment has also been shown to be affected by
motivation. As noted by Kunda (1990), reasoning processes

under directional goals often lead to results that comport
with those goals, whereas accuracy goals tend to lead to
more objective conclusions (Balcetis & Dunning, 2006;
Ditto & Lopez, 1992; Piercey, 2009).
In the current studies we sought to study the impact of
directional goals by giving some subjects a specific role as
either prosecutor (or investigator) and other subjects the role
of defender. Taking on such adversarial roles may lead to
biased information search and hypothesis testing. We also
hypothesized that such adversarial roles may lead to
negative emotions, such as anger.
Unfortunately the research demonstrating the effect of
emotion and motivation on reasoning offers little insight
into how these effects occur. How do emotion and
motivation interact with the variables on which the
judgments are supposed to be based: facts, preferences,
values, etc.? One possibility is that emotion and motivation
override these underlying variables. Another possibility is
that emotion and motivation influence the underlying
variables in the corresponding direction, which makes the
corresponding judgments feel natural and obvious. The
latter explanation is consistent with the Gestaltian notions
that underlie coherence-based reasoning: the mental model
of the task settles at a state of equilibrium at which all
relevant elements—the underlying variables, conclusion,
motivation, and emotion—all cohere with one another.
Thus, we hypothesized that the constraint satisfaction
processing that underlies coherence-based reasoning would
engulf both the cold cognitions (as observed previously) and
the hot cognitions. This prediction dates back to Heider’s
Balance Theory, in which liking for a person or an object
was theorized to affect the overall balance of the structure
(Heider, 1958). More recently, researchers have modeled
hot and cold cognitions within the framework of constraint
satisfaction processing (Nerb, 2007; Thagard, 2006).

Overview of Studies
In both studies, participants judged a quasi-criminal case
concerning an allegation of academic misconduct by a
university student. Participants were asked to imagine that
they worked at a state university in the Office of Student

1465

Disciplinary Affairs, which deals with allegations of
academic misconduct.
The Office investigates and
adjudicates the allegations and, where appropriate,
recommends disciplinary actions. The procedure consisted
of an investigation followed by an adversarial-like
disciplinary hearing, in which a University Representative
prosecutes the case, and the student is defended by a Student
Representative. The cases are ultimately decided by the
university’s Chief Judicial Officer.
The case involved an allegation that a student, Debbie
Miller, cheated on a closed-book exam by copying from her
notes. Participants received the case information, and were
asked to make a variety of judgments about the incident.
All participants received the same case information and
instructions, except for assignment instructions, as described
below. None of the manipulations provided any information
pertaining to whether she cheated or not. In all conditions,
participants were instructed to be “fair and objective.”
The first study examines whether the objectivity of
investigation is affected by directional motivations and
emotions that are elicited by the adversarial nature of the
process. Participants were asked to play the role of the
investigator, and assigned to investigate the case for one of
the two parties (the two adversarial assignments) or for both
(the non-adversarial assignment).
The second study examines the effects of the intensity of
adversarialism. Participants were asked to role-play a
prosecutor-like role in a case of alleged academic
misconduct. Half of the participants were given background
information intended to induce low intensity (non-partisan)
(e.g., you feel that most of the time, the disciplinary process
reaches correct decisions), while the other half were given
information intended to induce high intensity (partisan)
(e.g., you believe that many of the students who were
cleared by the disciplinary process did in fact cheat).

Study 1: Adversarial and Inquisitorial
Investigations
This study tested whether and how investigations conducted
in an adversarial framework might lead to different
outcomes than investigations conducted in a non-adversarial
mode. Participants were assigned to investigate the case for
either one of the parties (two adversarial conditions) or for
both parties (the non-adversarial condition). We predicted
that relative to the non-adversarial assignment, the
adversarial assignments would result in views of the case
that would be tilted towards the respective assignments and
that these views would be mediated by motives and
emotions elicited by the role assignment.

Method
Participants.
Participants were 296 individuals who
completed the study via the Internet. The sample was 62%
female, with an average age of 43.
Procedure. Participants went through a series of web pages
containing the instructions, the case information, and the
measures. They were informed that the assigned role of

investigator entailed preparing the evidence to be submitted
to the disciplinary hearing. All participants received the
same case information and instructions, except for
assignment instructions, as described below.
Assignment. Participants were randomly assigned to one of
three conditions. The “university-assignment” condition was
designed to simulate a police investigation. Instructions
emphasized that the individual was performing the
investigation on behalf of the University and their reports
were central to the case. They were also told that someone
would be fulfilling a similar function for the other side.
The “Debbie-assignment” condition was designed to
simulate a private investigation for the defense. The
instructions for this assignment were identical to the
university assignment, but the sides were reversed.
The “Sole Investigator” condition was designed to mimic
a non-adversarial investigation; participants were told that
they were the sole investigator in the case. The instructions
emphasized that they were the only investigator working on
the case and that both sides would rely on their report.
All participants were exposed to the same case and
instructed to be fair and objective. Participants performed
the study alone, and there was no other investigator.
Case. The case was intricate and ambiguous. From the
university files, participants learned that Debbie, a junior,
was an “A” student, and was considered hardworking and
ambitious. At high school, she was charged with cheating
on an exam, but the file did not indicate whether she was
disciplined or not. An interview with the examination room
proctor revealed that Debbie sat against a wall, close to the
back corner of the room. The proctor noticed that Debbie
sat crouched over her papers, as if she was hiding
something. At the end of the exam, she noticed also that
Debbie stuck something into the pocket of her sweater,
which later turned out to be a note with a summary of the
course. Brad Loomis, a fellow student who sat behind
Debbie, claimed to have seen her pull out the note from her
sweater pocket and copy from it throughout the exam. The
professor reported that Debbie was anxious about the exam,
but did not believe that she cheated. He did mention that
she was the only student to respond correctly to one of the
questions. Debbie denied the allegations adamantly. She
stated that as an A student, she had only to lose by cheating.
She explained that she crouches when sitting for long
periods of time because of a back injury she sustained while
playing on the college volleyball team.
Dependent Variables. 1. Overall Judgments. Participants
estimated the likelihood that Debbie cheated on the exam
(0-100%), how they would decide the case, how they
expected the Chief Judicial Officer to decide the case, and
which side their view supported.
2. Case facts and related beliefs. Participants evaluated 13
factual issues involved in the case, and 9 belief questions
that corresponded to 9 of the factual questions (1 - 11 scale).
3. Judgments of Liking, Emotions, and Motivation.
Participants indicated how much they liked Debbie (0-100).
Next, they reported how much they felt three positive

1466

emotions (sympathy, compassion, and sorrow) and three
negative emotions (anger, scorn, disgust) towards Debbie.
Another question gauged participants’ motivation towards
the outcome of the case by asking participants which side
they wanted to see win the case. (all on a 1-11 scale)
4. Objectivity and Distrust. The questions measured
participants’ assessments of the objectivity of their own
view of the case; the objectivity of the other investigator;
how their own objectivity would be judged by the other
investigator; and how the Chief Judicial Officer would
assess their own objectivity and the other investigator’s. (all
on 1-11 scale).

Results
The prediction was that role assignment would influence
participants’ judgments of all aspects of the case.
1. Overall Judgments. The assignment had the predicted
effects on overall judgments of the case. The estimates of
the probability that Debbie cheated were 33%, 43%, and
53% for the Debbie-Assignment, Sole Investigator, and
University-assignment conditions, respectively, F (2, 292) =
12.75, p < .001. A similar pattern was found in participants’
judgments as to which side of the case was supported by
their view: 3.5, 5.0, and 5.8, with higher numbers meaning
more University support, (F (2, 292) = 15.17, p < .001. A
chi-square analysis, Chi-square (2) = 6.99, p < .05, revealed
that the assignment also influenced how participants would
decide the case themselves (23%, 37%, and 40% would
decide that Debbie cheated, respectively).
2. Case facts and related beliefs. First, consistent with
prior research on coherence-based reasoning (Holyoak &
Simon, 1999; Simon et al., 2001; Simon et al., 2004b),
views of these items clustered around a coherent mental
model of the case. The 13 fact items formed a reliable
composite (alpha = .88). Participants developed globally
coherent structures that tended to view the factual pattern as
indicative either that Debbie cheated or that she did not. We
found a similar clustering of the 9 beliefs that were related
to the facts of the case (alpha = .60). This weaker alpha is
understandable given that background knowledge is more
stable than ad hoc judgments of specific events.
Second, the assignment influenced the facts and related
beliefs as predicted, Facts F (2, 292) = 15.87, p < .001;
Beliefs F (2, 292) = 14.11, p < .001. Those assigned to the
university-condition were more prone to interpret the facts
as incriminating Debbie (Fact M = 5.7, Belief M = 5.4),
whereas those assigned to the Debbie condition interpreted
them as least incriminating (Fact M = 4.4, Belief M = 4.5).
The judgments in the Sole Investigator condition were in
between (Fact M =5.2, Belief M = 5.0),
3. Judgments of Liking, Emotions, and Motivation. The
assignment also influenced liking and emotional reactions to
Debbie, as well as motivation with respect to the outcome.
Participants in the university-condition were consistently the
most negative toward Debbie, whereas those in the Debbie
assignment condition were consistently most positive, with
Sole Investigator in between: (Liking: 56 vs. 60 vs. 65;

Negative emotions: 4.0 vs. 3.5 vs. 3.1; Positive emotions:
5.4 vs 6.0 vs. 6.8; Motivation to see University win: 5.7 vs.
4.6 vs. 3.7), all ps < .05.
4. Coherence: Correlations and Mediation
All the primary variables, whether cold (facts, likelihood,
decision) or hot (liking, emotions, motivation), were
strongly inter-correlated, rs = .57 -.76, p< .01, two tailed.
These widespread correlations capture the essential core of
the network that underlies constraint satisfaction processing.
Mediational analyses of the potential causal paths among
the variables provided additional evidence to support the
coherence-based mechanism. They were conducted with an
SPSS macro by Preacher and Hayes (2004).
The first set of mediational analysis analyzed the
relationship between the three primary variables—role
assignment (“condition”), judgments of the case facts
(“facts”), and the “likelihood” item (“likelihood that Debbie
Miller did cheat on the exam”). Case facts were shown to be
a significant mediator between assignment and likelihood,
(p < .001). The assignment manipulation influenced the
participant’s perceptions of the case facts, which, in turn,
influenced perceptions of guilt. A significant mediational
effect was also observed in the reverse direction, with
judgments of likelihood mediating the effect of assignment
on the evaluations of the facts (p < .001). This is consistent
with the bi-directional nature of coherence-based reasoning,
in which all the elements in the network should mutually
influence one other.
Another set of analyses examined whether participants’
emotions and motivations mediated their “likelihood”
judgments. Four Sobel tests were conducted, one for each
mediator: facts, liking for Debbie, motivation (which side
participant wanted to see win), and emotion. The effect of
the assignment on the likelihood judgments was mediated
significantly by each variable, all in the predicted directions.
Similar meditation was observed when the “facts” were
treated as the dependant variable.
To explore the relative strength of each mediator we
conducted multiple mediational analysis. We included the
four significant mediators (facts, liking, motivation, and
emotion) simultaneously in the same analysis. The analysis
revealed that two of the four remained significant, with the
case “facts” being the strongest mediator (z = 4.59, p <
.001), then “motivation” (z = 4.00, p < .001), while the
emotion composite was marginal (z = 1.79, p = .07).
5. Perceived Objectivity – The Adversarial Mindset. The
findings provide insight into the participants’ metacognitive
judgments. First, participants felt that their views of the
case were equally objective in the adversarial conditions
(7.9 and 8.0, on a 1 to 11 scale) as in the non-adversarial
condition (7.9). They were unaware that the adversarial
manipulation biased their judgments. Second, participants’
in the two adversarial conditions had different views of their
own and their adversary’s objectivity. Participants deemed
their adversary to be less objective, M=6.45, than they
deemed themselves, M = 8.0, t = 6.80, p < .001. They also
deemed him or her to be less trustful of themselves, M =

1467

6.2, than they believed themselves to be, M = 8.0, t = 8.46, p
< .001.
Participants also believed that the other
investigator’s distrust was unwarranted, in that it was less
credulous, M = 6.2, than the Chief Judicial Officer’s
evaluation of themselves, M = 7.2, t = 5.06, p < .001.

Discussion
The adversarial role strongly influenced people’s perception
of an ambiguous case. Relative to the non-adversarial
assignment, adversarial role assignments skewed
participants’ views of the case in a self-serving manner.
Participants in the condition that simulated police
investigators were more likely to conclude that Debbie was
culpable, whereas those simulating investigators for the
defense were more prone to infer that she did nothing
wrong. Most likely both conditions had a biasing influence
on participants’ judgments. Indeed, participants in the Sole
Investigator condition viewed the case to be very close to
the middle between the two adversarial conditions. The
biasing impact of the adversarial assignment was manifested
also by the arousal of mistrust towards their adversary.
Finally, the study provides the first experimental evidence
of the interrelationship between hot and cold cognitions in
coherence-based reasoning. More evidence for this
relationship will be presented in Study 2.

Study 2: Partisanship and Coherence
Study 2 tested the effects of strength of partisanship on
people’s perceptions of a case and the role of motivation
and emotion. We compared participants primed with a nonpartisan manipulation with participants primed with a
partisan one. We also examined whether the assignment
would influence assessments of the trustworthiness of the
witnesses. Coherence-based reasoning would lead to the
prediction that judgments of the evidence would be
positively related to judgments of the source’s credibility.
We also sought to test coherence shift of beliefs. Study 2
introduced a pre-test instrument that tested participants’
responses to the “belief” items, which were later included in
the body of the study. This repeated-measures design
enabled us to test within-subject shifts in the participants’
responses to the belief items.

Method
Participants. The study used the same procedure as in
Study 1. 163 individuals participated via the Internet. The
sample was 48% female, with an average age of 46.
Procedure. We used the same case of Debbie Miller (with
minor changes). The instructions described the adversarial
hearing and the role of the University Representative
(“University Rep”), which was substantively very similar to
the role of a prosecutor, and role of the Student Advocate.
All participants were assigned to the role of University
Representative. After receiving the case, participants made
a variety of judgments about it. All participants received the
same case and instructions, except for information that was
designed to manipulate the degree of partisanship.

Dependent Variables. Most of the variables were
identical to those in Study 1. In addition, we measured
participants’ responses to the belief items on the pre-test and
the judgments of the trustworthiness of the witnesses. To
obtain a baseline measure for testing coherence shifts,
participants received a pre-test questionnaire prior to the
presentation of the case, containing questions probing their
beliefs on a number of seemingly unrelated social issues.
These questions were identical to the “belief” questions
administered later on. Each of the belief items probed for a
background belief that pertained to an ambiguous fact of the
case (e.g., “In general, people who have lower back pain
tend to crouch when they sit for extended periods of time”).
We predicted that responses to the belief items would shift
from pre-test to post-test, ultimately cohering more strongly
with the view of the case (see Simon, Snow, & Read, 2004).
Treatment. Participants were assigned to one of two
conditions differing in their partisanship. Participants in the
non-partisanship condition were told that for the most part
they felt the process was fair. They were also provided with
positive information about the Student Advocate assigned to
represent Debbie Miller, Jim Cooper. He was said to be fair
and professional and interested in the truth.
Participants in the partisanship condition were told that
they had become frustrated by the number of students who
had been cleared, despite being almost certainly guilty.
They were upset about the impact of this on the University’s
reputation and the harm inflicted on students who did not
cheat. Participants in this condition also received negative
information about their adversary, Jim Cooper, being told
that he was overzealous, strongly biased toward students,
and responsible for many of the recent cases in which
cheaters were cleared.

Results
The prediction was that participants in the partisan
condition would be more inclined to believe that Debbie did
cheat than participants in the non-partisan condition and
that this would influence a range of different judgments.
1. Overall Judgments. The estimates of the likelihood
that Debbie cheated were 40% in the non-partisan condition
and 53% in the partisan condition, F (1, 161) = 6.93, p <
.01. The assignment also influenced how participants would
decide the case themselves, non-partisan: 33% Guilty vs.
partisan : 49%, Chi-square (1) = 4.23, p = .04.
2. Case facts and related beliefs. Those in the partisan
treatment perceived the case to be more consistent with the
conclusion that Debbie cheated (Facts M = 5.6; Beliefs M =
5.4) than did participants in the non-partisan condition
(Facts M = 4.8; Beliefs = 5.0), where higher numbers are
more consistent with Debbie cheating, F (1, 160) = 9.65, p =
.002 and F (1, 160) = 6.14, p = .014, respectively. The 13
“fact” items cohered to make a reliable composite (alpha =
.86), as did the related “beliefs” (alpha = .61). Also
partisanship affected the perceived trustworthiness of the
witnesses. Both witnesses who testified that Debbie cheated
were deemed more trustworthy by partisan participants

1468

(Proctor: 6.8 v. 6.0; Brad Loomis: 6.0 v. 4.9), F (1, 160) =
4.96, p = .027 and F (1, 160) = 10.0, p = .001, respectively.
3. Judgments of Liking, Emotions, and Motivation. The
partisanship manipulation also influenced participants’
emotions and motivations. Compared with non-partisan
participants, partisan participants liked Debbie less (M = 53
vs. 59), had stronger negative feelings (M = 2.7 vs. 2.1) and
weaker positive feelings towards her (M = 3.3 vs. 4.0), and
were more motivated to see the university prevail (M = 5.8
vs. 4.3), all differences p < .05.
4. Coherence Shifts of the Belief Items. Despite the initial
ambiguity (as denoted by the non-significant differences at
pre-test), by the time of the decision, the beliefs shifted to
cohere with the decision and with one another, creating a
strongly interconnected mental model (Holyoak & Simon,
1999; Simon et al, 2004a, Simon et al, 2004b). Figure 1
shows the coherence shifts in the belief items, plotting the
data separately based on participants’ response to the
question: “if you were the Chief Judicial Officer, how
would you decide the case”? (regardless of partisanship). A
test of the interaction confirmed that these shifts were highly
significant, F (2, 158) = 91.5, p = .000.

reasoning; a central feature of the mutual influence in
constraint satisfaction processes.

Figure 2: SEM models of hot and cold cognitions
Our primary question was whether hot cognitions are
involved in the constraint satisfaction processes that drive
the representation towards coherence. We first tested
mediational relationships between the three hot cognitions
(anger towards Debbie, motivation, and liking) and a central
cold cognition: decision, (See Figure 3). A simultaneous
mediational analysis between the condition and the decision
revealed effects for “anger” and “motivation”, but not for
“liking”. Mediation by hot and cold cognitions was also
observed using SEM (see bottom of Figure 2), which found
good fitting models for both “motivation” and “anger” as
joint mediators, with “facts,” of “likelihood”, and decision.

Figure 1. Coherence shifts in belief measures
5. Mediations and Structural Equation Modeling. We
used SEM to perform simultaneous testing of the
interrelationships among the study variables to identify
which of the competing models best accounts for the
relationships. The first analyses contained the four primary
cold cognitions: partisanship assignment (“condition”),
judgment of the case facts (“facts”), “likelihood” that
Debbie Miller cheated on the exam, and the “decision”
(“how would you decide the case?”).
Two models (see Figure 2) show that partisanship predicts
the primary variables. Model 1 shows that partisanship
affected the judgment of the facts, which affected
likelihood, which affected the decision. This is compatible
with rational models of inference. Model 2 suggested that
the inference chain may also run in reverse. These opposing
models capture the bi-directionality of coherence-based

Figure 3: Multiple mediation model

Discussion
Judgments were influenced considerably by the intensity of
partisanship. As in Study 1, the treatment assignment
resulted in coherent mental models of the case, in which the
wide range of variables involved in the judgment all cohered
with the manipulated conclusion. Participants’ assessments
of the trustworthiness of the witnesses were also influenced
by the assignment. Partisan participants were more likely to
trust the witnesses who claimed to have seen Debbie cheat.
Most important, we observed that hot cognitions mediated
the effect of the assignment on the cold cognitions.

1469

General Discussion
The studies show that the perception of a factually
ambiguous case depends on the conditions under which the
judgments are made. Study 1 simulated a police
investigation and found that the perception of the case was
strongly influenced by the participants’ role assignment.
Relative to the non-adversarial assignment, adversarial role
assignments skewed participants’ hot and cold cognitions in
a manner that supported their assigned side. The nonadversarial assignment led to judgments close to the
midpoint between the two adversarial conditions. The
symmetry of the polarization supports the conclusion that
adversarialism results in a distorted perception of the case.
Participants in all conditions deemed their perception of the
case to be equally objective, suggesting that the participants
in the adversarial conditions were unaware of the influence
of the assignment on their judgments. Study 2 simulated a
prosecutorial view of the same case and found that both hot
and cold cognitive judgments are influenced considerably
by the intensity of the partisanship.
These studies provide further corroboration for the
coherence based reasoning framework (Holyoak & Simon,
1999; Simon, 2004; Simon et al., 2004a; Simon et al.,
2004b). We found again that participants’ views of a
complex task tend to cluster into large and coherent mental
representations that encompass the overall judgments of the
case as well as of the entire set of facts and related beliefs.
However, the most important contribution is the novel
finding of the interrelationship between the hot and cold
cognitive aspects of the task. While a great deal of research
has observed the effect of emotion and motivation on
cognitive processing (e.g., Kunda 1990; Slovic, Finucane,
Peters, & Macgregor, 2002; Zajonc, 1980), that research has
not provided much insight into the mechanisms by which
these effects occur. Mediational analyses and SEM revealed
that emotion, motivation and to some degree also liking,
mediated the effect of the assignment on the various cold
cognitive judgments of the case, while similar mediations
were observed in the reverse direction. While one ought to
be cautious drawing causal conclusions from these data,
these observations are strongly consistent with the
Gestaltian features of high interconnectivity and bidirectional influence that characterize constraint satisfaction
processing and coherence-based reasoning.

References
Balcetis, E., & Dunning, D. (2006). See what you want to
see: Motivational influences on visual perception. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 91, 612-625.
Ditto, P. H., & Lopez, D. F. (1992). Motivated skepticism:
Use of differential decision criteria for preferred and
nonpreferred conclusions. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 63, 568-584.
Ferguson, T. J., & Rule, B. G. (1983). An attributional
perspective on anger and aggression. In R. G. Geen & E.
I. Donnerstein (Eds.), Aggression: Theoretical and
empirical reviews, Vol. 1. New York: Academic Press.

Goldberg, J. H., Lerner, J. S., & Tetlock, P. E. (1999). Rage
and reason: The psychology of the intuitive prosecutor.
European Journal of Social Psychology, 29, 781-795.
Heider, F. (1958). The psychology of interpersonal
relations. New York: Wiley.
Holyoak, K. J., & Simon, D. (1999). Bidirectional reasoning
in decision making by constraint satisfaction. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 128, 3-31.
Kunda, Z. (1990). The case for motivated reasoning.
Psychological Bulletin, 108, 480-498.
Lerner, J. S., Goldberg, J. H., & Tetlock, P. E. (1998). Sober
second thought: The effects of accountability, anger, and
authoritarianism on attributions of responsibility.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 24, 563-574.
Nerb, J. (2007). Exploring the dynamics of the appraisalemotion relationship: A constraint satisfaction model of
the appraisal process. Cognition & Emotion, 21, 13821413.
Piercey, M. D. (2009). Motivated reasoning and verbal vs.
numerical probability assessment: Evidence from an
accounting context. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 108, 330-341.
Preacher, K. J. & Hayes, A. F. (2004). SPSS and SAS
procedures for estimating indirect effects in simple
mediation models. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, & Computers, 36, 717-731.
Quigley, B. M., & Tedeschi, J. T. (1996). Mediating effects
of blame attributions on feelings of anger. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 22, 1280-1288.
Rick, S., & Loewenstein, G. (2008). The role of emotion in
economic behavior. In Lewis, M. (Ed); Haviland-Jones,
Jeannette M. (Ed); Barrett, Lisa Feldman (Ed), Handbook
of emotions (3rd ed.). New York, NY, US: Guilford Press.
Simon, D. (2004). A third view of the black box: Cognitive
coherence in legal decision making. University of
Chicago Law Review, 71, 511-586.
Simon, D., Krawczyk, D. C., & Holyoak, K. J. (2004a).
Construction of preferences by constraint satisfaction.
Psychological Science, 15, 331-336.
Simon, D., Snow, C., J., & Read, S. J. (2004b). The redux of
cognitive consistency theories: Evidence judgments by
constraint satisfaction. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 86, 814-837
Slovic, P., Finucane, M., Peters, E., & MacGregor, D. G.
(2002). The affect heuristic. In Gilovich, Thomas (Ed);
Griffin, Dale (Ed); Kahneman, Daniel (Ed), Heuristics
and biases: The psychology of intuitive judgment. New
York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Thagard, P. (2006). Hot thought: Mechanisms and
applications of emotional cognition. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Zajonc, R. B. (1980). Feeling and thinking: Preferences
need no inferences. American Psychologist, 35, 151-175.

1470

