UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How much for a transitive? Subtle linguistic cues influence blame and punishment

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1582p8r0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Fausey, Caitlin
Boroditsky, Lera

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How much for a transitive?
Subtle linguistic cues influence blame and punishment
Caitlin M. Fausey (cmfausey@stanford.edu)
Lera Boroditsky (lera@stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology, 450 Serra Mall, Building 420, Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305 USA
Abstract
When bad things happen, how do we decide who is to blame and
how much they should be punished? In this paper we examined
whether subtly different linguistic descriptions of accidents
influence how much people blame and punish those involved. In
three studies, participants judged how much people involved in
particular accidents should be blamed and how much they should
have to pay for resulting damage. The language used to describe
the accidents differed subtly between conditions: either agentive
(transitive) or non-agentive (intransitive) verb forms were used.
Agentive descriptions led participants to attribute more blame and
request higher financial penalties than non-agentive descriptions.
Further, linguistic framing influenced judgments even when
participants reasoned about a well-known event like the ‘wardrobe
malfunction’ of Super Bowl 2004. Importantly, this effect of
language held even when people were able to see the event for
themselves on video. These results demonstrate that even when
people have rich established knowledge and visual information
about events, linguistic framing can shape event construal, with
important real-world consequences. Subtle differences in linguistic
descriptions can change the way people construe what happened
and how they attribute blame and dole out punishment.

Introduction
When bad things happen, how do we decide who is to
blame and how much they should be punished? Linguistic
and contextual framing has been shown to affect people’s
reasoning in a variety of domains (e.g., Lee, Frederick, &
Ariely, 2006; Levin, 1987; Levin & Gaeth, 1988; Loftus,
Miller, & Burns, 1978; Loftus & Palmer, 1974; Shiv,
Carmon, & Ariely 2005; Tversky & Kahneman, 1973;
Tversky & Kahneman, 1981), including causal attribution
(see Pickering & Majid, 2007, for a recent review). In this
paper we build on this work by exploring the effects of
linguistic framing in a domain of paramount real-world
importance: blame and punishment.
Linguistic descriptions are of course ubiquitous in legal
disputes. People linguistically frame incidents right from the
very moment they occur and later in police reports, legal
statements, court testimony and public discourse. Could the
linguistic descriptions of an event influence how much we
blame the people involved? Could language also influence
how financially liable we think a person is for any resulting
damage? Could linguistic framing shape construal even for
well-known events (ones for which we already have rich
knowledge and established mental representations) and even
when we can witness the event with our own eyes?
The particular linguistic contrast of interest in this paper
is between transitive agentive descriptions and intransitive
non-agentive descriptions. A canonical agentive description

(e.g., Timberlake ripped the costume) includes a person as
the subject in a transitive expression describing a change of
state (in this case, ripping). A canonical non-agentive
description (e.g., The costume ripped) is intransitive and
does not place the person as the subject for the change of
state event. 1 Previous work has shown that people are
sensitive to this distinction between agentive and nonagentive frames. For example, people are more likely to
remember the agent of an event when primed with agentive
language than with non-agentive language (e.g., Fausey &
Boroditsky, 2010). The attributional consequences of these
linguistic frames, however, are not well understood.
The linguistic contrast between agentive and nonagentive frames has the potential to have serious real-world
consequences, especially in legal contexts. For example, in
the 197,745 trials held between 1674 and 1913 at London's
central criminal court (Old Bailey Proceedings Online,
2009), cases with the agentive phrase “broke it” in the court
records resulted in a guilty verdict more often than cases
with the non-agentive phrase “it broke” (76% and 70%
guilty, respectively), with similar patterns for other
consequential actions such as “burned it” versus “it burned”
(77% and 57% guilty, respectively), χ2(1, N = 2748) =
11.04, p < .05. In the most serious of cases (when the charge
was “killing”), the transitive/intransitive contrast as marked
by different verbs also predicted verdicts. Saying “killed”
resulted in more guilty verdicts than saying “died” (65% and
56% guilty, respectively), χ2(1, N = 3814) = 21.34, p < .05.
These examples suggest that agentivity may be part of a
suite of linguistic cues that are influential in legal reasoning.
In a correlational analysis like this, however, it is
impossible to determine whether different linguistic forms
actually caused a difference in verdicts. It could be that
agentive descriptions indeed led the court more often to
guilty verdicts. But it is also possible that people were
simply more likely to use agentive language in cases where
the defendant was actually more guilty. While the
attributional consequences of transitivity have not been
directly explored in the empirical literature, the question has
been debated (and adjudicated!) in court. For example, in a
case petitioning to change the title of a ballot measure
(California’s high-profile Proposition 8 in the 2008 election
1

The distinction we draw here is different from active versus passive voice
(e.g., Garvey, Caramazza, & Yates, 1976; Kassin & Lowe, 1979; White,
2003). Here we focus on transitivity and investigate not just the
attributional consequences of transitivity (blame) but also the concrete realworld outcomes of these attributions (punishment).

1336

titled “Eliminates right of same-sex couples to marry”), the
judge rejected the petitioners’ claim, ruling that “There is
nothing inherently argumentative or prejudicial about
transitive verbs” (Jansson v. Bowen, 2008). Few other
questions in psycholinguistics have risen to a sufficient level
of civic importance to be ruled on in high court.
With the high stakes of guilt, innocence and the legality
of constitutional amendments on the line, it is important to
empirically establish whether agentive and non-agentive
frames indeed have any attributional consequences. In this
paper we examine the effects of agentive and non-agentive
linguistic frames on important real-world decisions about
blame and punishment.

Study 1
In this study, participants read about an accidental restaurant
fire that resulted in property damage. They then made
judgments about the person involved in the accident. The
survey was one of many unrelated surveys in a packet
presented to participants.

Method
Participants. 236 students at Stanford University (96
male; mean age = 19.22 years) completed one survey in
partial fulfillment of a course requirement. 116 read the
agentive version of the story and 120 read the non-agentive
version of the story.
Materials. Participants read either the agentive or the
non-agentive account about an individual – Mrs. Smith –
involved in a restaurant fire, and then answered two
questions (Table 1). The two accounts contain all of the
same content words (all of the same nouns, verbs and
adjectives are used), involve the same individual and
describe the same outcomes. The accounts differ only in the
frames used to describe the accidental events (underlined in
Table 1): transitive frames are used in the agentive account
and intransitive frames in the non-agentive account.

Results and Discussion
Linguistic framing influenced both people’s judgments
of blame and financial liability. Participants who read the
agentive account (M = 4.83, SE = .14) blamed Mrs. Smith
more than did participants who read the non-agentive
account (M = 4.01, SE = .15), t(234) = 4.04, p < .001, d =
.53. Impressively, a subtle difference in language caused a
big difference in dollars: people who got the agentive report
ruled that Mrs. Smith should pay $247, or 36%, more in
fines (M = $935.17, SE = $43.48 ) than participants who got
the non-agentive report (M = $688.75, SE = $43.64), t(234)
= 3.99, p < .001, d = .52.
In Study 1, linguistic framing influenced people’s
judgments of financial liability. One explanation for this
result could be that Mrs. Smith was punished more harshly
because she was also blamed more harshly. That is, the
effect of language on financial liability might be indirect,
such that language influences blame, which then determines
punishment. Could language directly impact judgments of
financial liability? This question is important because of the

somewhat flexible sentencing process that occurs after guilt
judgments in legal decision-making. A direct impact of
language on sentencing would be an important applied
result. Study 2 was designed to address this question.

Study 2
In Study 2, participants got an agentive or non-agentive
accident description and also learned of a blame attribution
generated by an independent review panel. This panel
attributed either low, middle, or high blame to the person
involved in the accident. After learning how blameworthy
other people judged the person to be, participants
determined the person’s financial liability for the property
damage. This paradigm allows us to target the independent
role of language on financial liability sentences. People’s
decisions about financial liability may be guided by
blameworthiness, language, or both.
Table 1: Studies 1 and 2 Reports and Questions
Agentive Report
Mrs. Smith and her friends were finishing a lovely dinner at their
favorite restaurant. After they settled the bill, they decided to
head to a nearby café for coffee and dessert. Mrs. Smith followed
her friends and as she stood up, she flopped her napkin on the
centerpiece candle. She had ignited the napkin! As Mrs. Smith
reached to grab the napkin, she toppled the candle and ignited the
whole tablecloth too! As she jumped back, she overturned the
table and ignited the carpet, as well. Hearing her desperate cries,
the restaurant staff hurried over and heroically managed to put
the fire out before anyone got hurt.
Non-agentive Report
Mrs. Smith and her friends were finishing a lovely dinner at their
favorite restaurant. After they settled the bill, they decided to
head to a nearby café for coffee and dessert. Mrs. Smith followed
her friends and as she stood up, her napkin flopped on the
centerpiece candle. The napkin had ignited! As Mrs. Smith
reached to grab the napkin, the candle toppled and the whole
tablecloth ignited too! As she jumped back, the table overturned
and the carpet ignited, as well. Hearing her desperate cries, the
restaurant staff hurried over and heroically managed to put the
fire out before anyone got hurt.
Questions for Study 1
Blame
Mrs. Smith is discussing the damage with the restaurant. How
much should she be blamed for the fire? (Likert scale from 1 to 7,
anchored by “Not at all to blame” and “Completely to blame”.)
Financial Liability
The restaurant’s insurance policy does not cover minor fires. The
restaurant has sought legal action to require Mrs. Smith to pay for
the damage. Total costs to the restaurant were $1500. How
much should Mrs. Smith be required to pay?
Question for Study 2
Financial Liability
The restaurant’s insurance policy does not cover minor fires and
so the restaurant has sought legal action to require Mrs. Smith to
pay for the damage. An independent review panel used their
standard blame assessment scale in reviewing this case. On this
scale, 0 means “not at all to blame” and 8 means “completely to
blame”. The panel gave Mrs. Smith a {1,4,7}. The total costs to
the restaurant were $1500. How much should Mrs. Smith be
required to pay?

1337

Method
Participants. 179 students at Stanford University (59
male; mean age = 19.01 years) completed one survey in
partial fulfillment of a course requirement. 91 read the
agentive account of the restaurant fire accident (33 lowblame, 30 mid-blame, 28 high-blame) and 88 read the nonagentive account (33 low-blame, 28 mid-blame, 27 highblame).
Materials. As in Study 1, participants read either the
agentive or the non-agentive narrative and then answered
the financial liability question shown in Table 1. Thus,
participants in this study answered only the financial
liability question, after learning that an independent panel
judged the person to be either a “one” (low), a “four” (mid)
or a “seven” (high) in terms of blame.

Results and Discussion
The level of blame assigned by the independent panel
influenced participants’ judgments of financial liability
(Figure 1). Overall, people judged that Mrs. Smith should
pay more in damages when the independent panel ruled her
to be highly to blame (M = $974.19, SE = $61.97) than
when the panel assigned her a middle level of blame (M =
$615.00, SE = $56.27) than when she was ruled to be of low
blame (M = $425.63, SE = $50.89).
Interestingly, language also influenced financial liability
judgments. As in Study 1, a subtle change in language led to
a substantial change in financial liability: Mrs. Smith was
held responsible for $153, or 26%, more in damages by
people who got the agentive report (M = $730.75, SE =
$49.57) than by those who got the non-agentive report (M =
$577.77, SE = $52.35).
A 3 (Blame: Low, Mid, High) by 2 (Language: Agentive,
Non-agentive) factorial ANOVA revealed reliable main
effects of assigned blame level (F (2, 173) = 25.23, p <
.001) and of language (F(1, 173) = 5.53, p = .02). Assigned
blame level and language did not interact, F (2, 173) = 1.40,
n.s.
Guilt and linguistic framing independently influenced
how much someone was required to pay for accidental
property damage. Increasing assigned blame led to greater
financial liability and agentive framing led to greater
financial liability than non-agentive framing. This finding
replicates the result from Study 1. Further, sentencing itself
appears to be susceptible to linguistic framing effects.
Results from the first two studies suggest that agentive
and non-agentive language can shape how people attribute
blame and financial liability to individuals involved in
accidents. Of course, in these two studies the only
information that reasoners had about the accident was
linguistic. Were people inevitably swayed by language
because it was the only thing that guided what they
imagined about the event? Perhaps people who received
differently phrased reports imagined substantially different
scenarios of what happened? In many real-life situations, the
information we have about an event is purely linguistic – in
court arguments, insurance claims, news accounts. But in
other situations we may also have visual evidence, either as

eye-witnesses or on videotape. Would linguistic framing
still have an effect even if people were able to see the event
with their own eyes? Further, the restaurant fire described in
Studies 1 and 2 was a novel event, one for which
participants had no other previous information. Would
people be so easily influenced by linguistic framing if they
were reasoning about an event that they already knew
something about, for which they already had a rich set of
mental representations?
To address these questions, we capitalized on a widely
known, much discussed, well-publicized and video-recorded
event: the “wardrobe malfunction” of Super Bowl 2004
when a performance by Justin Timberlake and Janet Jackson
ended with Janet Jackson’s breast being exposed on national
television. Post-experiment questioning confirmed that this
is indeed a well-known event; nearly all of our participants
(96.9%) had heard about it and many had also seen the
video (67.9%) before the experiment. With prior
knowledge, and current visual evidence, could linguistic
framing still influence blame and punishment?

Figure 1: Independent contributions of guilt and linguistic
framing to financial liability sentences (Study 2). Mean
values are plotted on the y-axis, with whiskers representing
+/- 1 SEM.

Study 3
In Study 3, participants reasoned about the wardrobe
malfunction incident under one of three conditions: (a) they
read about the incident, (b) they first read about the incident
and then watched the video, or (c) they first watched the
video and then read about it. In each condition, people read
either an agentive or non-agentive account of the incident.

Method
Participants. 589 participants (188 male; mean age =
31.17 years) were paid for completing one survey online.
Participants were recruited from the pool of English
speakers who use Amazon’s Mechanical Turk
(https://www.mturk.com/mturk/welcome). 306 read the
agentive account of the event (116 read-only; 88 read-thenwatch; 102 watch-then-read) and 283 read the non-agentive
account of the event (93 read-only; 106 read-then-watch; 84
watch-then-read).

1338

Materials and Design. Participants read either the
agentive or non-agentive account of the “wardrobe
malfunction” incident (Table 2). In two conditions
participants viewed a video of the final six seconds of the
performance, which included the infamous malfunction.
After reading about the incident (and in two of the
conditions also watching it on video), participants answered
the questions shown in Table 2. The order of the three
response options was randomized and the particular order
presented to each participant was the same for the blame
and financial liability judgments. Because Timberlake
initiated movement right before the “wardrobe malfunction”
and also because of his prominent apology to Super Bowl
viewers (in which he coined the very phrase “wardrobe
malfunction”, Timberlake, 2004), our narratives focused on
the actions of Timberlake. As a result, we expected that any
effects of linguistic framing should be strongest for judging
the guilt and financial liability of Timberlake. Also, because
the FCC tried to fine CBS for broadcasting the incident,
CBS was included among the possible targets for financial
liability.

Results and Discussion
In brief, linguistic framing affected people’s judgments
of blame and financial liability in all conditions: language
mattered whether it was presented before, after, or without
video evidence. The main results of interest are shown in
Figure 2.
Conclusions from these data are the same whether all
three framing contexts are considered (as reported below) or
whether only the two multimodal contexts are considered.
Conclusions are also supported by nonparametric analyses.
Blame and financial liability attributions were analyzed
using a 2 (Language: Agentive, Non-agentive) by 3 (Task
context: Read-only, Read-then-watch, Watch-then-read)
factorial ANOVA for each dependent measure. For clarity
of presentation, we focus on effects of language here.
Language and task context never interacted.
Blame. Linguistic framing influenced people’s blame
attributions (Figure 2a). Overall, people blamed Timberlake
more after reading agentive language (M = 38.76%, SE =
1.59%) than after reading non-agentive language (M =
30.49%, SE = 1.43%), F(1, 583) = 17.94, p < .001. The
effect of language was seen across the three conditions, with
no interaction of the effect of language by condition, F(2,
583) = .15, n.s.
Language also affected attributions to chance. Overall,
people attributed the outcome to chance more after reading
non-agentive language (M = 42.87%, SE = 2.40%) than after
reading agentive language (M = 33.92%, SE = 2.26%), F(1,
583) = 8.99, p = .003. Again this effect of language was
seen across the three conditions, with no interaction of the
effect of language by condition, F(2, 583) = .20, n.s.
Financial liability. The modal response for financial
liability was $0 (57.2% of all data). This is likely because
the sentence “Eventually the fine was dismissed in court”
appeared in the liability question. Nevertheless, the
linguistic framing of the event influenced people’s
judgments about financial liability. Overall, the proportion

of people who gave any non-zero amount of financial
liability to Timberlake depended on linguistic framing.
46.7% assigned a non-zero fine after reading agentive
language, while only 38.5% did so after reading nonagentive language, χ2(1, N = 589) = 4.05, p = .044.
The amount of money for which Timberlake was held
liable likewise depended on linguistic framing (Figure 2b).
Participants who got the agentive report asked that
Timberlake pay an extra $30,828.69, or 53%, more in fines
than those who got the non-agentive report (Agentive M =
$88,818.12, SE = $8,115.75; Non-agentive M = $57, 989.43,
SE = $6,465.34), F(1, 575) = 10.31, p = .001.2,3,4 Again
there was no interaction of the effect of language by
condition, F (2, 575) = 1.22, n.s.
Agentive and non-agentive linguistic framing did not
affect people’s attributions of blame or financial liability to
Janet Jackson or CBS.
Table 2: Study 3 Reports and Questions
Agentive Report
Justin Timberlake and Janet Jackson performed during the 2004
Superbowl Half-time Show. Toward the end of the song,
Timberlake followed Jackson across the stage and stood beside
her. As they sang the last line, Timberlake reached across the
front of Jackson’s body. In this final dance move, he unfastened a
snap and tore part of the bodice! He slid the cover right off
Jackson’s chest! This incident made for a lot of controversy.
Non-agentive Report
Justin Timberlake and Janet Jackson performed during the 2004
Superbowl Half-time Show. Toward the end of the song,
Timberlake followed Jackson across the stage and stood beside
her. As they sang the last line, Timberlake reached across the
front of Jackson’s body. In this final dance move, a snap
unfastened and part of the bodice tore! The cover slid right off
Jackson’s chest! This incident made for a lot of controversy.
Questions
Blame.
In your opinion, was someone to blame or was it just chance?
Please allocate the percentage of blame. Be sure your numbers
add up to 100%!
(Response options: Justin Timberlake, Janet Jackson, Chance)
Financial Liability.
The FCC (Federal Communications Commission) tried to fine
CBS $550,000 for this incident. Eventually the fine was
dismissed in court. How much do you think each of the parties
below should have been fined for this incident?
(Response options: Justin Timberlake, Janet Jackson, CBS)

2

Eight participants whose financial liability responses exceeded $550,000
were excluded from this analysis.
3
These conclusions are the same when analyses consider just those
participants who assigned Timberlake a non-zero fine (N = 244). Among
these participants, those who got the agentive report assigned more fines
(M = $193,726.47 , SE = $12,893.53) than those who got the non-agentive
report (M = $153,179.61, SE = $12,430.78 ), t(242) = 2.22 , p = .028.
4
These data show some heteroscedasticity, but our main conclusions
remain the same after appropriate corrections. A t-test which does not
assume equal variances confirms a reliable difference between the financial
liability assigned by participants who got agentive versus non-agentive
reports, t(559.36) = 2.97, p = .003.

1339

(a)

Agentive
Non-agentive

(b)

Figure 2: Language changes punishment of an observed
individual (Study 3). (a) Blame attribution to Timberlake,
(b) Financial liability to Timberlake. Mean values are
plotted on the y-axis, with whiskers representing +/- 1 SEM.
In an additional set of analyses, all of the reported
contrasts were conducted with an additional factor: whether
or not the participant reported having seen the video of this
incident prior to the experiment. This factor was not a
reliable main effect nor did it interact with effects of
linguistic framing in any of the analyses.
Linguistic framing influenced how much people
punished an individual involved in an event, even when they
witnessed the event with their own eyes, and even though
the event was one our participants already knew about.
Agentive language led to harsher punishment than nonagentive language. Replicating results from the first two
studies, linguistic framing not only influenced attributions
of blame but also financial liability. In the case of the
wardrobe malfunction incident, an agentive report led
people to think that Justin Timberlake owed more than
$30,000 more (an extra 53%) in fines compared to a nonagentive report. In real-world contexts, visual evidence of
accidents is rarely presented in the absence of linguistic
framing. These results suggest that the form of this framing
guides punishment.

General Discussion
In three studies, linguistic framing influenced
participants’ judgments about blame and punishment.
Financial liability judgments in particular were strongly
affected by linguistic framing: agentive descriptions led to
30-50% more in requested financial damages than nonagentive descriptions. Judgments of financial liability were
affected by linguistic frame even when blame was held
constant. This finding suggests that linguistic framing can
have an influence not only on verdicts of guilt and
innocence, but also on the sentencing process. Impressively,
linguistic framing influenced reasoning even about an event
that people knew a lot about, had seen before, and witnessed
(again) right before judging the individual involved.

Previous inquiries into effects of language on attribution
have examined the role of verbs, voice, and word order in
guiding how people determine the cause of an event (e.g.,
Brown & Fish, 1983; Garvey, Caramazza, & Yates, 1976;
Kasof & Lee, 1993; Kassin & Lowe, 1979; Pryor & Kriss,
1977; Schmid & Fiedler, 1988; Semin, Rubini, & Fiedler,
1995). Here, we provide the first report on the impact of
transitivity on both people’s attributions of blame and also
on the real-world outcomes of these attributions
(punishment). These studies extend previous research in
several important ways. First, we probed people’s decisions
about a concrete form of punishment – financial liability,
freely estimated in dollars – in addition to more abstract
ratings of blame. Second, we examined effects of linguistic
framing in the presence of previous knowledge as well as
with current visual evidence – a condition that is absent
from many previous attribution framing studies but present
in many real-world reasoning contexts. Finally, we
considered the transitive/intransitive alternation, a property
of event description that both has important real-world
consequences and differs interestingly across languages.
Previous work has shown that languages differ from one
another in their preference for agentive versus non-agentive
frames (e.g., Fausey & Boroditsky, 2010; Fausey, Long, &
Boroditsky, 2009). The present findings raise the possibility
that speakers of different languages may prescribe more or
less severe punishment as a function of the frequency of
particular grammatical frames in their language. While there
have been many demonstrations showing the power of
linguistic frames in shaping people’s decisions, there has
not been much contact between such findings and the
literature investigating cross-linguistic differences in
cognition. Establishing that linguistic framing has
psychological consequences in a domain where languages
naturally differ from one another opens the possibility for
connecting these two rich bodies of knowledge.
In particular, as Sher and McKenzie (2006) have pointed
out, the linguistic frames typically provided in framing
studies often are not informationally equivalent. Each
linguistic description is situated in a set of pragmatic norms
within a language, and participants may be responding to
the pragmatic cues implied by the choice of frame. The
possibility of cross-linguistic comparisons offers an exciting
extension to the framing literature: rather than having
frames provided by an experimenter, in the cross-linguistic
case, speakers of different languages may self-generate
different frames for the same events because of the
prevalent patterns in their respective languages (e.g., Maass,
Karasawa, Politi, & Suga, 2006). In this way, crosslinguistic comparisons may allow us to investigate
conceptual framing not just as a phenomenon in the
communicative context (where participants may use
pragmatic information to infer what the experimenter must
mean by their choice of frame), but also in contexts where
the participant naturally frames the event for themselves.
The linguistic (and cross-linguistic) framing of agentivity
is of particular importance in court proceedings. Filipovic
(2007) highlights a case from Northern California, in which
a Spanish-speaking defendant’s non-agentive (and

1340

appropriate in Spanish) description of events (“se me cayó”,
roughly “to me it happened that she fell”) was translated
into English for the broader court into the agentive (and
appropriate in English) “I dropped her.” Do these two
descriptions mean the same thing? Or does this change in
framing have serious attributional consequences? Our
results raise the possibility that speakers of different
languages may arrive at rather different conclusions
regarding blame and punishment for the same events.
In three studies we find that agentive descriptions of
events invite more blame and more severe punishment than
do non-agentive descriptions. These results demonstrate that
even when people have knowledge and visual information
about events, linguistic framing can significantly shape how
they construe and reason about what happened. In the case
of agentive and non-agentive language, subtle differences in
linguistic framing can have important real-world
consequences. Deciding how much to blame an individual,
and how much to hold them financially liable, appears to be
broadly susceptible to linguistic framing.

Acknowledgments
We thank V. Vanchinathan and N. Heitz for help with data
collection and entry. This research was supported by an
NSF Graduate Research Fellowship to CMF and an NSF
Career Award to LB.

References
Brown, R., & Fish, D. (1983). The psychological causality
implicit in language. Cognition, 14, 237-273.
Fausey, C.M., & Boroditsky, L. (2010). Whodunnit? Crosslinguistic differences in eyewitness memory. Manuscript
submitted for publication.
Fausey, C.M., Long, B.L., & Boroditsky, L. (2009). The role of
language in eye-witness memory: Remembering who did it in
English and Japanese. In N.A. Taatgen & H. van Rijn (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society, Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Filipovic, L. (2007). Language as a witness: Insights from
cognitive linguistics. The International Journal of Speech,
Language and the Law, 14(2), 245-267.
Garvey, C., Caramazza, A., & Yates, J. (1976). Factors influencing
assignments of pronouns and antecedents. Cognition, 3, 227243.
Jansson v. Bowen, No. 34-2008-00017351 (Sacramento Superior
Court August 7, 2008).
Kasof, L., & Lee, J.Y. (1993). Implicit causality as implicit
salience. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65,
877-891.
Kassin, S.M., & Lowe, C.A. (1979). On the use of single sentence
descriptions of behavior in attribution research. Social Behavior
and Personality, 7(1), 1-8.
Lee, L., Frederick, S., & Ariely, D. (2006). Try it, you’ll like it:
The influence of expectation, consumption, and revelation on
preferences for beer. Psychological Science, 17(12), 1054-1058.
Levin, I.P. (1987). Associative effects of information framing.
Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 25, 85-86.
Levin, I.P., & Gaeth, G.J. (1988). How consumers are affected by
the framing of attribute information before and after consuming
the product. Journal of Consumer Research, 15, 374-378.
Loftus, E.F., Miller, D.G., & Burns, H.J. (1978). Semantic
integration of verbal information into a visual memory. Journal

of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 4,
19-31.
Loftus, E. F., & Palmer, J.C. (1974). Reconstruction of automobile
destruction: An example of the interaction between language
and memory. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior,
13, 585-589.
Maass, A., Karasawa, M., Politi, F., & Suga, S. (2006). Do verbs
and adjectives play different roles in different cultures? A crosslinguistic analysis of person representation. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 90, 734-750.
Old Bailey Proceedings Online (2009). Retrieved November 3,
2009, from www.oldbaileyonline.org.
Pickering, M. J., & Majid, A. (2007). What are implicit causality
and consequentiality? Language and Cognitive Processes,
22(5), 780-788.
Pryor, J.B., & Kriss, M. (1977). The cognitive dynamics of
salience in the attribution process. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 35(1), 49-55.
Schmid, J., & Fiedler, K. (1998). The backbone of closing
speeches: The impact of prosecution versus defense language
on judicial attributions. Journal of Applied Social Psychology,
28(13), 1140-1172.
Semin, G.R., Rubini, M., & Fiedler, K. (1995). The answer is in
the question: The effect of verb causality upon locus of
explanation. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 21,
834-842.
Sher, S., & McKenzie, C.R.M. (2006). Information leakage from
logically equivalent frames. Cognition, 101, 467-494.
Shiv, B., Carmon, Z., & Ariely, D. (2005). Placebo Effects of
Marketing Actions: Consumers May Get What They Pay For.
Journal of Marketing Research, 42(4), 383-393.
Timberlake, J. (February 1 2004). "Statement From Justin
Timberlake," PR Newswire.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1973). Availability: A heuristic for
judging frequency and probability. Cognitive Psychology, 5,
207-232.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1981). The framing of decisions
and the psychology of choice. Science, 211, 453-458.
White, P.A. (2003). Effects of wording and stimulus format on the
use of contingency information in causal judgment. Memory &
Cognition, 31(2), 231-242.

1341

