UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Human foraging behavior: A virtual reality investigation on area restricted search in
humans

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/74m6d4qr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Kalff, Christopher
Hills, Thomas
Wiener, Jana Malte

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Human foraging behavior: A virtual reality investigation on area restricted search
in humans
Christopher Kalff (kalff@cognition.uni-freiburg.de)*
Center for Cognitive Science, University of Freiburg, Friedrichstr. 50,
79098 Freiburg, Germany.

Thomas Hills (thomhills@gmail.com)*
Department of Psychology, University of Basel, Missionsstr. 60/62,
4055 Basel, Switzerland.

Jan M. Wiener (jwiener@bournemouth.ac.uk)*
Department of Psychology, Bournemouth University,
Talbot Campus, Poole, Dorset, BH12 5BB, United Kingdom.
* The authors contributed equally to this work
Abstract
The control of attention and the control of movement in space
share a similar optimal control structure—mediating the tradeoff between exploiting one locale and exploring others. A
common spatial foraging strategy observed in many species is
area-restricted search, in which animals respond to resources
or their absence by moving between local and global search
strategies, respectively. When resources are clustered, arearestricted search can represent an optimal foraging strategy.
Surprisingly few studies have investigated whether humans
display such behavior in the context of spatial navigation.
Here we present two experiments in which human participants
search for resources distributed over a large virtual
environment. By systematically manipulating the specific
distribution of the resources the first experiment investigates
human’s ability to perform area-restricted search. The second
experiment probes for the patch-leaving rules humans apply
when facing resources distributed in patches that differ in
quality. Our results indicate that humans forage in space using
an area-restricted search, but do so in a non-optimal way—
consistent with other studies showing non-optimal search
strategies in memory.
Keywords: Foraging; area-restricted search; navigation.

Introduction
Picking bananas from banana trees, searching for nebulas in
the night sky, and hunting for schools of tuna in the open
ocean all involve the ability to detect and respond to spatial
resource distributions. Since the foundations of animal
foraging behavior were laid by MacArthur and Pianka
(1966) and Emlen (1966) decades of research have shown
that non-human animals respond adaptively to these spatial
resource distributions; moreover, their responses are often
optimal with respect to long-term rate maximizing models
(reviewed in Stephens & Krebs, 1987). For humans, these
models have been shown to predict patterns of search in
information foraging on the internet (Pirolli & Card, 1999),
the foraging strategies of hunter-gatherer societies (e.g.,
Hawkes, Hill, & O’Connell, 1982), and the search patterns
of humans in their own memory (Hills, Todd, & Jones,

2009; Hills, Todd, & Goldstone, 2008). However,
surprisingly, almost nothing is known about how humans
search in 3-dimensional environments like those described
for the bananas, nebulas, and tuna (but cf. Smith, 1983, for
an overview of anthropological research).
How do humans forage in space? Are they capable of
detecting and localizing resources in space, with or without
the help of visual cues? Moreover, are their foraging
strategies adaptive, or near optimal in terms of rate
maximization? In this article, we use 3-dimensional virtual
representations of fields and orchards to investigate how
people forage in open environments, and in particular,
whether or not they show patterns consistent with arearestricted search.
Area-restricted search (ARS) is one of the most wellstudied behavioral patterns in animal foraging, and has been
observed in a wide variety of animals (e.g., Hills, Brockie,
& Maricq, 2004; Krebs, 1973; Smith, 1974). It can also
produce patterns of movement that look like Levy walks—
another commonly observed foraging pattern (Benhamou,
2007). ARS involves high turning angles following resource
encounters but lower turning angles elsewhere. It indicates
an adaptive response to spatial distributions in clustered (or
patched) environments because in clustered environments when prior knowledge about resource locations is limited to
the time since they were last encountered - ARS is optimal
(Walsh, 1996; Grunbaum, 1999). ARS, like an annealing
strategy, localizes animals where resources are most dense
(Karieva & Odell, 1987). The success of this strategy and its
minimal information requirement are consistent with the
evidence that ARS had an early evolutionary origin amongst
mobile animals. Moreover, the evolution of this strategy
may have provided the biological building blocks for the
subsequent evolution of human attention (proposed in Hills,
2006).
If humans respond to clustered resources with increased
turning, but don’t do so when resources are uniformly or
dispersedly distributed, they are showing foraging patterns
consistent with ARS. However, evidence for ARS in human

168

spatial foraging requires more than simply noting that
humans respond to clustered resources with more turning. A
number of potentially viable foraging heuristics are
consistent with ARS at a gross level, but fail to meet its
more strict definition of turning mediated by decaying
memories of resources. These alternate hypotheses include
the fixed-number rule and the fixed-time rule (see Stephens
& Krebs, 1987).
For the fixed-number rule, the forager collects roughly the
same amount of items in every patch regardless of the time
to achieve this goal: n1 ≈ n2 ≈ ni. If participants used a fixednumber-rule, they would yield insignificant differences in
gathered items across patches. Additionally, re-visited (and
therefore emptier) patches should receive significantly more
time than during first encounter.
The fixed-time rule states that a foraging organism will
devote roughly the same time to all patches it visits: t1 ≈ t2 ≈
ti. If humans used a fixed-time-rule, there should be no
significant differences in patch visit times, regardless of
patch quality. Additionally, re-visited (and therefore
emptier) patches should receive the same attention than
during first encounter
Like the fixed-time rule, ARS uses temporal cues to
determine patch departures. However, ARS adds time to the
total patch residence time by incrementing the time in the
patch (by turning) following each resource encounter. If a
certain temporal threshold without resources is exceeded,
the patch is abandoned. As Iwasa, Higashi and Yamamura
(1981) mention, this heuristic—sometimes called the
incremental rule or Green’s assessment rule (Green, 1984)
— is highly appropriate among variable patch sizes. Several
studies have indicated that humans use this kind of
incremental strategy when foraging in a lexical problem
space (Payne, Duggan & Neth, 2007; Wilke, Todd, &
Hutchinson, 2009).
In the present study we investigate human spatial foraging
in a 3-dimensional environment by first asking if
participants show behavior consistent with area-restricted
search in clustered resource distributions (versus uniform
distributions). Second, we ask if humans can detect the
difference between high and low quality patches, and if so,
do they respond using one of the foraging heuristics
described above. That is, are their foraging patterns most
consistent with an incremental rule, or are they more likely
to be fixed-time or fixed-number rules?

navigate through the environment, searching for resource
items.

Method
Environments A circular virtual environment with a radius
of 110m was constructed. The environment consisted of a
textured ground plane resembling a large meadow and was
surrounded by a fence. Three large landmarks (mountain,
city skyline, and skyscraper) surrounded the environment
providing global direction cues (see Figure 1).

Fig. 1: Participants’ perspective during the
task. One of the global landmarks (mountain)
is visible in the distance.
1440 individual resource items (mushrooms, modeled as
3d objects) were then either evenly distributed about the
environment (dispersed condition) or they were arranged in
24 patches that were randomly scattered about the
environment (patched condition; see Figure 2). Each patch
had a radius of 8.65 m and contained 60 resource items. The
minimal distance between any two resource items in the
patched environments was 1.53m, in the distributed world it
was 2.35m. For each type of resource distribution (dispersed
or patched) five different environments that differed in the
specific arrangement of the resource items were created.
The resource items in both conditions were visible only
from close proximity – i.e. from a distance smaller than
1.25m – similar to real mushrooms in long grass.

Experiment I
Experiment 1 investigated whether human foragers are
sensitive to the distribution of resources in the environment
displaying a foraging pattern consistent with area-restricted
search (ARS). In the experiment, participants were placed in
large virtual environments that contained resource items.
These were either uniformly distributed about the entire
space or organized in patches. Participants could not see the
items prior to encountering them; there were no visual cues
to help them harvest resources. Participants had to actively

Fig. 2: The two types of resource
distributions: left: one of five ‘dispersed’
environments; right: one out of five ‘patched’
environments.
Participants navigated through the environments in the
first person perspective using the arrow keys of the

169

keyboard. Translation speed was set to 4m/s and turning
velocity was set to 75°/s. The motion model allowed for
either forward translations or rotations but did not allow
combining translations and rotations. Thus, the resulting
trajectories resembled segmented paths (see Figure 4).
Participants collected resource items simply by moving
closer than .75m to an item. This pick-up distance was just
below half of the minimal distance between any two
resource items and therefore assured that participants
gathered only one item at any time. The collection of a
resource item was signaled by an auditory cue. Once an item
had been collected it was removed from the environment.
Fig. 3: Mean search time for each trial in the
two conditions. Error bars depict one SE.

Participants Thirty-two participants (17 women) aged 19 to
28 (M = 22.28, SD = 2.41) took part in the experiment.
They were mainly students from Freiburg University and
received course credits or monetary compensation for their
participation.
Procedure Participants were randomly assigned to either
the dispersed or the patched condition (counterbalanced for
gender) and were then briefed about the experiment: Their
task was to navigate through the environment and to collect
resource items. Each participant was given 5 trials. Each
trial was carried out in a different environment with the
same type of resource distribution (dispersed or patched). At
the beginning of each trial, participants were placed in the
center of the environment. A single trial was terminated
either after 600 seconds or when participants collected 90
resource items. The experiment ended after participants
completed all 5 trials. Participants were offered a fixed
compensation, independent of the time required to do the
experiment. Thus, they were motivated to finish as quickly
as possible and the usual (biological) energy cost variable
was transformed into a temporal equivalent.

Fig. 4: Example trajectories in the dispersed
(left) and the patched condition (right).
Turning rate As argued above, an increase in overall
turning rate in environments with clustered resources as
compared to environments with evenly distributed resources
indicates an adaptive response to spatial distributions. This
would be perfectly consistent with area-restricted search.
Figure 5 shows the average total turning angles per second.

Results
Search time A two-way mixed ANOVA (factors: trial,
condition; sphericity assumed: χ2(9) = 14.015, p = .122)
reveals a main effect for trials: F(4, 120) = 4.703, p < .01,
partial-η2 = .136 which is due to significant differences
between trials one and three, and one and five (both Sidakcorrected p’s < .05). Even though completion time was
higher for the patched versions (M = 442.63, SE = 12.94 vs.
dispersed: M = 422.95, SE = 12.94) there is no main effect
of condition (F(1, 30) = 1.158, p = .291, partial- η2 = .037),
as well as no significant interaction between trials and
condition: F(4, 120) < 1 (see Figure 3).
Search time results did not demonstrate a significant
difference between experimental conditions (patched vs.
dispersed condition). The reduction in search time over
trials, however, indicates an adaptation of search strategy
(see Figure 4) leading to a higher rate of item encounter.
An alternative explanation is that participants learned to
control their movements more effectively as the experiment
progressed.

Fig. 5: Average turning angle per second for
the two conditions. Error bars depict one SE.
A two-way mixed ANOVA (factors: trial, condition; due
to violation of sphericity [χ2(9) = 52.293, p < .001, ɛ = .589]
the Huynh-Feldt correction for degrees of freedom was
used) demonstrates both, a main effect of trials (F(2.356,
70.675) = 6.353, p < .01, partial- η2 = .175) as well as a
main effect of condition (F(1, 30) = 5.143, p < .05, partialη2 = .146). Specifically, total turning angle per second in the

170

patched condition was higher than in the dispersed condition
(patched: M = 8.59°, SE = .91; dispersed: M = 5.67°, SE =
.91), demonstrating an adaptive response to the specific
distribution of resources. The interaction of trial and
condition did not yield a significant effect: F(4, 120) < 1.
Trajectories and turn rate after item encounter Visual
inspection of the trajectories corroborates the latter analysis
that demonstrates that participants search behavior differed
in the patched and the dispersed condition (cf. Figure 4).
These findings, however, do not necessarily demonstrate
area restricted search, which specifically involves an
increase in turning angle after resource encounter.

spatial distributions of resources; moreover, they show more
evidence of area-restricted search in environments where
such a search strategy is optimal.

Experiment II
Results from Experiment 1 suggest that human foragers,
when searching for resources in a spatial context, are
sensitive to the distribution of the resources. However, in
Experiment 1 all resource patches featured the same amount
of items, i.e. the quality of all patches was identical.
Experiment 2 was designed to investigate how human
foragers interact with resource patches that differ in quality,
but that are visually identified by the presence of a tree. Can
they tell a good from a bad patch? And, given that foragers
have a priori knowledge about the distance to the next patch
(by the distribution of trees), how do they determine when
to leave a patch in order to harvest at another patch? Also,
this experiment allowed to more directly test for arearestricted search in comparison with the other patch leaving
rules outlined in the introduction.

Method

Fig. 6: Turning angle as a function of time after
item encounter. Error bars represent one SE.
Figure 6 shows the effect on turning immediately after
encountering a resource item. Note that in order to capture
items, participants must be moving forward in a straight
line. Therefore, turning angle at time of capture will always
be zero. Participants in the patched condition are clearly
turning more sharply following a resource encounter, as
demonstrated by a mixed-model ANOVA (withinparticipant factor: time after item encounter; betweenparticipant factor: condition). Due to violation of the
sphericity assumption (χ 2(44) = 270.664, p < .001, ɛ = .327)
the Huynh-Feldt correction for degrees of freedom was
used. The interaction of time and condition is significant
(F(2.943, 88.283) = 3.616, p < .05, partial-η2 = .108),
because turning angles at time bins ‘3’, ‘4’, and ‘5’ differed
significantly (all Sidak-corrected p’s < .05). This also
resulted in a main effect of condition: F(1, 30) = 4.403, p <
.05, partial-η2 = .128.

Discussion
How do humans forage in space? Do they detect resources
in the environment and adapt their search behavior when
facing different distributions of resources? Experiment 1
demonstrated that participants increased their turning rate
and turned more sharply after resource encounters in
environments in which resources were patched. These
results are consistent with area-restricted search and suggest
that human foragers adapted their search strategy according
to the specific distribution of resources in the environment.
People do search differently when faced with different

Environment The same circular virtual environment as in
Experiment 1 was used. In addition, 19 trees, arranged on a
hexagonal grid (see Figure 7), were planted in the virtual
environment. Resource items were distributed under the
trees in patches with a radius of 8 meters. The hexagonal
arrangement of the trees (patches) ensured that for each
patch the distances to all neighboring patches were identical.
Each patch featured either 15 (poor patches) or 30 (rich
patches) resource items.

Fig. 7: Left: overview of the environment and
the 19 patches (9 poor and 10 rich); right:
participants’ view while navigating.
As in Experiment 1, participants navigated through the
environment (see Figure 7) using the arrow keys of the
keyboard. They could not see resource items from the
distance, but only in close proximity (viewing distance:
1m). In order to increase the costs associated with moving
from one patch to another, translation speed was reduced to
2m/s. Thus, moving from one tree to a neighboring tree took
25 seconds.
Participants Thirty-two participants (16 women) aged 14 to
30 (M = 23.06, SD = 3.37) took part in the experiment.
They were mainly students from Freiburg University and
received course credits or monetary compensation for their

171

participation. None of the participants took part in
Experiment 1.
Procedure Participants were first briefed about the
experiment: Their task was to navigate through the
environment and to collect a total of 125 resource items.
Participants were also told that resource items were to be
found in the vicinity of the trees: The instruction mentioned
a certain type of mushroom that only grows under and in the
close vicinity of trees, but never further away. Participants
were unaware that the patch quality differed between
patches. At the beginning of the experiment, participants
were placed in the center of the environment. The
experiment was terminated after participants collected the
last of the 125 resource items required. As in Experiment 1,
participants were motivated by being assured that they
would receive a fixed compensation for their participation,
independent of the time required to solve the task. For the
purposes of patch leaving rule analyses, the first and the last
patch participants visited were discarded from the analyses.

Results

ANOVA: F(1, 34.319) = 63.663, p < .001, partial- η2 = .65).
This indicates that participants were not using a fixed-time
rule when foraging in this environment.
Amount of collected items The fixed-number rule predicts
that foragers collect an equal amount of items in every
patch, regardless of the time it would take to succeed.
Again, in order to control for the patch quality at the time of
encounter, only the first visit of each patch entered this
analysis; revisits were discarded. Participants collected more
than twice as many items in rich patches (M = 13.71, SE =
.27) as compared to poorer patches (M = 6.06, SE = .27):
random-factor ANOVA: F(1, 32.405) = 95.685, p < .001,
partial-η2 = .747. This poses strong evidence that
participants were not using a fixed-number rule.
Giving-up-densities Giving up density was lower for rich
patches (M = 54.3%, SE = .012) than for poor patches (M =
59.6%, SE = .012; F(1, 34.552) = 5.99, p < .05, partial-η2 =
.148). This may indicate that participants are leaving the
different patches at different inter-item retrieval times, i.e.
they are more patient in rich than in poor patches.

Patches visited On average, participants visited 18.84 (SD
= 10.02) patches (including re-visits). The minimum
number of patches visited was seven the maximum 45 visits
(see Figure 8).

Fig. 8: Trajectories in the actual environment
for the minimum (left) and maximum (right)
amount of visited patches.
Time On average, participants needed 1804.87 (SD =
347.81) seconds to complete the experiment. Participants
considerably differed with respect to the time needed to
complete the experiment (range = 1161). Given the time
required to move between patches (25 seconds), time to
complete the experiment strongly correlated with the
number of patches visited (r(32) = .55, p < .001).
Time spent in patches As stated above, the fixed-time rule
would result in foragers devoting the same amount of time
to every patch regardless of its quality. Time in patch is
calculated as the time difference between the first and the
last item encounter within each patch. In order to control for
quality of the patch at time of encounter, only the first visit
of each patch entered this analysis; revisits were discarded.
Participants spent significantly more time – roughly twice as
much – in richer patches (M = 112.25 sec, SE = 3.15) than
in smaller patches (M = 64.57 sec, SE = 3.16; random-factor

Fig. 9: Mean inter-item retrieval times for the
last four item encounters over patch quality.
Error bars represent one SE.
To test this, we subjected the time between encounters
for the last three items within a patch to a random-factor
ANOVA. Results (see Figure 9) show a significant
difference between the two patch qualities1: F(1, 34.28) =
6.631, p < .05, partial- η2 = .162. This is due to the last three
inter-item retrieval times being higher in the poorer (M =
12.94 sec, SE = .45) than in the richer patches (M = 11.09
sec., SE = .39).

Discussion
In summary, Experiment 2 demonstrates that participants
were not using fixed-time or fixed number rules, but were
1
There is also a main effect for the development of the last three
inter-item-retrieval times (F(2, 71.085) = 3.277, p < .05, partial- η2
= .144) which is due to an increase in time towards the last time
difference. There is no interaction of the two measures (F < 1).

172

instead using a strategy similar to area-restricted search (i.e.,
an incremental rule) - staying longer in richer patches and
shorter in poorer ones. Given the nature of the patch types
(one rich and one poor), this strategy is optimal. However,
unlike the optimal foraging strategy predicted by the
marginal value theorem (Charnov, 1976), participants do not
appear to be leaving patches at equal rates of resource
capture.

General Discussion
Our results provide evidence that people are using an
evolutionarily old foraging strategy—area-restricted
search—when foraging in patchily distributed spatial
environments. The same strategy has been observed in a
variety of ‘internal’ foraging tasks (e.g., Payne et al., 2007;
Hutchinson et al., 2008). Moreover, the same
neuromolecular processes facilitate area-restricted search
across species as facilitate the control of human attention,
suggesting a possible evolutionary origin for human
attention (reviewed in Hills, 2006). This is a fascinating
possibility because fluid intelligence, working memory,
executive control processes, and spatial foraging may all be
largely about appropriately mediating a similar kind of
trade-off between exploitation and exploration of goal
structures and associative relations (e.g., Kane & Engle,
2002). Optimal control of focus is a problem common to
many tasks, both internal and external.
Interestingly, while our participants show evidence of
utilizing ARS, they do so non-optimally—using different
departure rules for different quality patches. This too has
been observed in memory search (Young, 2004), and
suggests that foraging tasks may provide an important
paradigm for understanding the control of attention and the
influence of environmental structure on that control.
Acknowledgments
We thank Gavan Wilhite and Inka Hähnlein for their help
building the virtual environment, recruiting participants and
collecting the data. This work was partially funded by the
Volkswagen-Stiftung, and the SFB/TR8 of the German
Research Foundation (DFG).

References
Benhamou, S. (2007). How many animals really do the
Levy walk? Ecology, 88, 1962-1969.
Charnov, E. L. (1976). Optimal foraging, the marginal value
theorem. Theoretical Population Biology, 9, 129-136.
Emlen, J. M. (1966). The role of time and energy in food
preference. American Naturalist, 100, 611-617.
Goldstone, R. L., & Ashpole, B. C. (2004). Human foraging
behavior in a virtual environment. Psychonomic Bulletin
& Review, 11(3), 508-514.
Green, R. F. (1984). Stopping rules for optimal foragers.
American Naturalist, 123, 30-43.
Grunbaum, D. (1999). Advection-diffusion equations for
generalized tactic searching behaviors. Journal of
Mathematical Biology, 38, 164-194.

Hawkes, K., Hill, K., & O’Connell, J. (1982). Why hunters
gather: optimal foraging and the Ache of eastern
Paraguay. American Ethnologist, 9, 379-398.
Hills, T. (2006). Animal foraging and the evolution of goaldirected cognition. Cognition, 30, 3-41.
Hills, T., Brockie, P., & Maricq, A.V. (2004). Dopamine
and glutamate control area-restricted search behavior in
Caenorhabditis elegans. Journal of Neuroscience, 24,
1217-1225.
Hills, T., Todd, P. M., & Jones, M. (2009). Optimal
foraging in semantic memory. Proceedings of the 31st
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Hills, T., Todd, P. M., & Goldstone, R. L. (2008). Search in
external and internal spaces. Evidence for generalized
cognitive search processes. Psychological Science, 19(8),
676-683.
Hutchinson, J. M. C., Wilke, A., & Todd, P. M. (2008).
Patch leaving in humans: can a generalist adapt its rules to
dispersal of items across patches. Animal Behaviour,
75(4), 1331-1349.
Iwasa, Y., Higashi, M., & Yamamura, N. (1981). Prey
distribution as a factor determining the choice of optimal
foraging strategy. American Naturalist, 117, 710-723.
Kane, M. J., & Engle, R. W. (2002). The role of the
prefrontal cortes in working-memory capacity, executive
attention, and general fluid intelligence: An individualdifferences perspective. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review,
9, 637-671.
Karieva, P., & Odell, G. (1987). Swarms of predators
exhibit ‘prey taxis’ if individuals use area-restricted
search. American Naturalist, 130, 233-270.
Krebs, J. R. (1973). Behavioral aspects of predation. In:
Bateson, P. P. G., & Klopfer, P. H. (eds.), Perspectives in
ethology, vol. 1, New York: Plenum Press, 73-111.
MacArthur, R. H., & Pianka, E. (1966). On optimal use of a
patchy environment. American Naturalist, 100, 603-609.
Payne, S. J, Duggan, G. B., & Neth, H. (2007).
Discretionary task interleaving: heuristics for time
allocation in cognitive foraging. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 136(3), 370-388.
Pirolli, P., & Card, S. (1999). Information foraging.
Psychological Review, 106, 643-675.
Smith, J. N. M. (1974). The food searching behaviour of
two European thrushes. II. The adaptiveness of the search
patterns. Behaviour, 49, 1–61.
Smith, E. A. (1983). Anthropological applications of
optimal foraging theory: A critical review. Current
Anthropology, 24(5), 625-651.
Stephens, D. W., & Krebs, J. R. (1986). Foraging theory.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Walsh, P. D. (1996). Area-restricted search and the scale
dependence of patch quality discrimination. Journal of
Theoretical Biology, 183, 351-361.
Young, C. J. (2004). Contributions of metaknowledge to
retrieval of natural categories in semantic memory.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 30, 909-916.

173

