UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Impatience as Intertemporal Egoism

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/77f7m0wg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Bartels, Daniel
Urminsky, Oleg

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Impatience as Intertemporal Egoism
Daniel M. Bartels (bartels@uchicago.edu)
Center for Decision Research, University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Ave., Chicago, IL 60637 USA

Oleg Urminsky (ourminsk@chicagobooth.edu)
University of Chicago Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Ave., Chicago, IL 60637 USA
a measure of impatience (Ainslie 1975). Thus, we can restate
the general question of (im)patience in intertemporal choices
as asking why people exhibit such high discount rates
(compared to market interest rates or some other norm) in their
behavior and to provide a partial account for why people
exhibit such different discount rates from each other.
We will argue that our understanding of what constitutes a
reasonable discount rate (or, more generally, prudent vs.
impatient choices) has been limited by the implicit assumption
that people should maximize the utility of a constant self over
one’s lifetime. The philosopher Derek Parfit (1984) proposed
an alternative view: that a decision about consuming now or
later should depend not only on the temporal distance between
events, but also on the perceived continuity between one’s
present and future selves. In this view, the degree of concern
one has for one’s future self should be scaled by the degree of
“psychological connectedness”—overlap in properties such as
beliefs, values, and ideals—held between one’s current and
future self. These properties have been proposed to define the
mental ties between selves that comprise identity over time
(Lewis, 1983; Perry, 1972).
We employ the notion of psychological connectedness—
drawn from a literature in which there is an ongoing debate
over its specifically normative implications (Parfit, 1984; see
Dancy 1997 for dissenting views)—to test a descriptive
account of people’s intertemporal choices. In our view, the
greater the perceived connectedness to the future self, the
greater people’s willingness to defer benefits to the future self,
all else equal. Conversely, feeling disconnected from the
future self will undercut the general motivation to preserve
resources for the future self, causing a reduction in patience
that is distinct from other factors that affect valuations of
present and future outcomes.

Abstract
We build on a philosophical account of personal identity (Parfit,
1984) which argues that the degree of concern one has for one’s
future self may be scaled by the degree of “psychological
connectedness”—overlap in properties such as beliefs, values,
and ideals—held between one’s current and future self. We pose
participants with tradeoffs between consuming a benefit in the
near future versus consuming more of that benefit in the distant
future. When people’s sense of connectedness with their future
self is reduced, they make impatient choices.

Introduction
Many of the most important and difficult decisions we face
in life hinge on the same underlying dilemma: how to choose
when trading off consumption or happiness in the immediate
future with (more) consumption or happiness delayed to the
more distant future. Research on such dilemmas has been
broadly defined as concerning choices between one option
with higher immediate benefits but lower (or negative) longterm utility and another with lower immediate benefits but
higher long-term utility. People’s widely documented
tendency to prefer smaller rewards sooner over larger rewards
later has been characterized as revealing short-sightedness or
impatience (Elster, 1979).
In this paper, we focus on a fundamental question raised by
the literature on intertemporal choice: why do people’s choices
often seem so short-sighted or impatient, and why do people
differ in their degree of impatience, as inferred from the
choices they make? In particular, we will focus on a subset of
such dilemmas—intertemporal choices in which the tradeoffs
between short and long-term benefits are made explicit—as an
ideal setting in which to investigate the decision processes
leading to impatience in decision making across a wide range
of future-directed thought and behavior. Economists and
psychologists have extensively studied how people make these
kinds of intertemporal choices, and have offered metrics for
judging the degree to which behavior conforms to or diverges
from normative and descriptive models.
Much of the work on intertemporal choice has centered on
the specific issue of temporal discounting: how people choose
between smaller amounts of money or other goods in the
immediate future and larger amounts of money or goods to be
received at a later date (see Frederick, Loewenstein, and
O’Donoghue, 2002 for a detailed review). In this context, the
discount rate, the degree to which an outcome loses value by
being delayed for a given period of time, can be interpreted as

Evidence for high discount rates
In the context of intertemporal choice, impatience (or shortsightedness) is exhibited by consistently choosing soonersmaller options even when the latter option is more than large
enough to compensate for the delay (per some normative
standard). Normative models (Koopmans, 1960) indicate that
the premium needed in order to forego receiving money
sooner rather than later (i.e. the discount rate) should depend
primarily on how much interest could be earned on the money
in the intervening time, taking into account liquidity
constraints and economic factors such as inflation. In contrast,

483

the current self, to varying degrees. The future instantiations of
the self may be seen as nearly identical to the current self, or
they may be substantially different, and we will argue that this
perceived degree of continuity leads to differences in patience.
In extending the notion of connectedness to a descriptive
account of impatience, we define connectedness between the
current self at time t0 and a future self at time t1 as the
proportion of the defining psychological features of the current
self believed to persist in the self that will exist at time t1.
Consistent with the recent empirical literature on how people
judge the continuity of identity over time (Nichols & Bruno, in
press; Rips, Blok, & Newman, 2006), connectedness between
current and future selves hinges specifically on the stability of
one’s defining psychological properties over the time interval.
In our view, a person values future outcomes in proportion
to how much she believes that the current self’s important
psychological characteristics will persist in the future self.
When people feel highly connected to the future self, benefits
received by the future self are valued much as if they were
received by the present self. However, when a discontinuity in
identity is perceived, deferred benefits accrue to a
disconnected future self (i.e., a somewhat different person),
and this outcome is valued less than having those benefits
consumed by the present self. Thus, when people are faced
with explicit intertemporal tradeoffs, their allocations of
benefits to the future selves are driven, in part, by how
psychologically connected they feel to those future selves. As
a result, decisions that might appear short-sighted (i.e.
characterized by placing a low weight on future consequences
or having an inflated discount rate) may instead merely reflect
an unwillingness to share resources with a future self who is
evaluated to be substantially different from the current self.
A few studies have examined correlations between people’s
perception of the continuity of their identity over time and the
choices they make. Ersner-Hershfield and colleagues have
shown that people who perceive less continuity with the future
self show greater devaluation of money (Ersner-Hershfield,
Wimmer, & Knutson, 2009; cf. Frederick 2002) and tend to
have accrued fewer material assets in their lives (ErsnerHershfield et al., 2009). Bartels and Rips (2010) investigated
the role of connectedness in non-constant discount rates over
time and found that declines in a given persons’ discount rates
over time—a pattern often referred to as “hyperbolic
discounting” (Ainslie, 1975)—correlated with perceived
reduction in their own connectedness over time.
In this paper, we provide the first direct, experimental
evidence that changes in connectedness to the future self
across individuals causes differences in patience for real
choices and that the influence of connectedness on patience is
distinct from other factors already identified in the literature as
impacting people’s relative timing preferences.

empirical research has found that actual behavior is generally
more impatient than what would be predicted by these views.
Numerous studies have attempted to estimate discount rates,
using field and experimental studies, real and hypothetical
outcomes, and a range of elicitation methods. Frederick et al.
(2002) summarize the literature as characterized by a
“predominance of high discount rates—discount rates well
above market interest rates.” In addition to experimental studies
with hypothetical choices, they review field study evidence for
high discount rates (i.e. impatience) in everyday decisions, such
as people’s preferences for lower priced appliances with
substantially higher long-term usage costs and military
employees’ preferences for a large lump-sum payment over an
annuity representing a higher than market interest rate.

Heterogeneity in discount rates
Of the research that has shed light on high discount rates,
the primary focus has been on moderators of discount rates,
both across people and across decision contexts. While
generally high, discount rates have been shown to be sensitive
to the specific experimental elicitation methods used (e.g.
choice, willingness-to-pay, matching, titration of indifference
points). Discount rates have been found to exhibit reasonably
high test-retest reliability as individual traits (Simpson &
Vuchinich, 2000), but vary systematically by demographics
(Green et al., 1994) as well as by individual differences in how
people think about the long-term implications of their choices
(Strathman et al., 1994).
This large literature on interpersonal differences in
discounting provides correlational evidence that people often
have fundamentally differing discount rates, often in ways that
map onto more generalized short-sightedness. However, the
behavioral correlates of discounting (e.g. higher discounting
among alcohol or drug abusers), in particular, raise questions
as to potential confounds and the order of causality.

Connectedness to the future self and discounting
In this paper, we propose that the notion of connectedness to
the future self is fundamental for understanding impatience,
shedding light on why discount rates are generally high, why
some people are more impatient than others, and what kinds of
interventions may lead to higher or lower discount rates. In
doing so, we draw on the views of philosopher Derek Parfit,
who has theorized that changes over time in the psychological
properties that comprise one’s identity should warrant a
reduction in concern for a later self:
“We care less about our further future… because we know
that less of what we are now—less, say, of our present hopes
or plans, loves or ideals—will survive into the further
future… We may, because of this, act knowingly against our
own long-term self-interest… [If] what matters holds to a
lesser degree, it cannot be irrational to care less.”
(Derek Parfit 1976, p. 99)

Study 1

In this view, the future self, given an extremely large
reduction in connectedness, may be reasoned about almost as
a distinct individual. We do not mean to overstate the analogy
of regarding the future self as you would regard another—in
our account, rather, the future self is seen as a continuation of

In Study 1, we investigate the effect of manipulating
connectedness on subsequent hypothetical choices between
either the immediate receipt of a gift card or a gift card
bundled with an additional payment to delay receipt. After

484

reading either that identity changes radically in early
adulthood (especially during the college years) or that the core
features of one’s identity are fixed in early childhood (and
stable during college), participants made a set of hypothetical
choices between receiving a gift certificate later in the day, or
receiving it in a year along with an additional payment to
compensate for the delay. If disconnectedness from the future
self is a driver of discounting, then anticipating changes in the
properties that comprise one’s identity will make people more
impatient, and participants exposed to the instability message
should require a larger delay premium than participants
exposed to the stability message.

Manipulation checks. Participants who read about stability
rated themselves as more connected (M = 4.43, SD = 0.73)
than did participants who read about instability (M = 4.00, SD
= 1.07; t(1,102) = 2.39, p < .05), suggesting that our
manipulation was effective in promoting perceptions of one’s
own identity as more (or less) stable over time and therefore
more (or less) connected to one’s future self. Believability of
the stability and instability passages did not differ (t < 1).
Relating perceived (in)stability to discounting. Our measure
of patience was the number of deferred options (waiting one
year for the gift certificate) chosen out of the eight given, such
that larger values indicated greater patience. Participants in the
high-connectedness conditions were more patient, requiring a
smaller delay premium, on average ($49, inferred from M =
5.14), than did participants in the low-connectedness conditions
($68, inferred from M = 4.04). A 2 (Condition: High/Low
Connectedness) x 2 (Good Type: Target/Expedia) ANOVA,
finds the expected main effect of Connectedness (F(1,100) =
9.21, p < .01); neither the effect of good type nor the interaction
term reached significance (Fs < 1). These results demonstrate
both that perceived connectedness to one’s future self can be
directly manipulated, and, more importantly, that increasing
perceived connectedness to the future self increases patience.

Method
One hundred seven undergraduates were approached in a
dining hall on campus and agreed to fill out a short survey for
a chocolate square. We manipulated connectedness (high vs.
low, between subjects) by inducing the belief that the identity
of the future self will either change or not change from one’s
current identity. Specifically, in the high-connectedness
condition, participants began by reading a short description of
“recent research” suggesting that young adulthood is
characterized by stability in identity (e.g., “the important
characteristics that make you the person you are right now...
are established early in life and fixed by the end of
adolescence”). In the low-connectedness condition,
participants read about instability (e.g., “the important
characteristics that make you the person you are right now...
are likely to change radically in young adulthood.”). Then,
participants wrote a short summary of the passage they read.
Data from four participants were dropped from further
analysis because they left this response blank or because their
paraphrasing indicated misunderstanding or noncompliance.
Next, participants in both conditions were asked to imagine
being given a $120 gift certificate. We used two different
retailers, Target and Expedia, to ensure the generalizabilty of
results. They were then asked to make a series of choices
between receiving the gift certificate later that day vs.
receiving the gift certificate one year later and being paid an
extra amount for the delay, using eight dollar values (0, 17, 34,
51, 69, 86, 103, and 120). Participants then answered two
kinds of manipulation checks: an assessment of connectedness
and a rating of the believability of the passage they had read.
To assess connectedness, we asked participants to “think about
the important characteristics that make you the person you are
now—your personality, temperament, major likes and dislikes,
beliefs, values, ambitions, life goals, and ideals and circle the
one diagram out of the six below that best reflects your
opinion about the degree of connectedness between the person
you are now and the person you will be in a year, where no
overlap means ‘completely different’ and complete overlap
means ‘exactly the same.’” Participants circled one of the six
sets of Euler circles representing connectedness, which were
coded as numeric scores.

Study 2
Study 1 shows that disconnectedness causes impatience, as
revealed by the premium people demand to delay receiving an
award. Implicit in these choices is that people are depriving
their future selves of potential resources, in order to consume
sooner. However, it is not necessarily the case that people
think of such tradeoffs in terms of allocating resources, and
they may instead think in terms of fair rates of return for delay
or other factors. In fact, the literature has shown that framing
matters in such choices: while people are generally willing to
accept compensation to wait to consume, they are much less
willing to actually pay to speed up an outcome, due to the pain
of paying and other factors (Loewenstein, 1988). We have
argued that reduced connectedness impacts preferences due to
a reduced willingness to share resources with a future self who
is evaluated to be substantially different from the current self.
In our view, the effects of connectedness should persist even
when it is made explicit to participants that they have to, in
effect, deprive their future self of resources in order to
consume now, thereby highlighting the future consequences of
impatience. In this study, we test whether disconnectedness
causes impatience so pronounced that people actually are
willing to spend their own money in order to consumer sooner.
The results of Study 1 show that over periods of time where
one might reasonably expect meaningful change in the
properties that comprise one’s identity, providing information
that highlights the likelihood of decreased connectedness leads
to more impatience. Note, however, that the way in which
people’s perceived connectedness was manipulated relied on
participants in different groups being presented with different
information. A potential concern, then, is that participants’
choices may have reflected a lay theory about what the
appropriate effect of changes in identity on patience should be,

Results and Discussion

485

other words, participants made to feel disconnected from the
future self were significantly more impatient—as in the
previous study, they strongly preferred to allocate benefits to
their sooner, more connected self over their later, less
connected self. Unlike the previous study, making impatient
choices did not merely imply being less generous to the future
self, but rather required the participants to, in effect, deprive
their future self of resources in order to consume sooner, thus
highlighting the long term consequences of impatient choices.

rather than reflecting their true preferences. Study 2 addresses
this concern in two ways: (i) we pose participants with a
decision involving real economic outcomes, and (ii) we
manipulate connectedness while keeping the information
content the same across the two conditions.
In this study, we used the inferences that participants
reached from a metacognitive cue to manipulate their sense of
connectedness to the future self. Specifically, we drew from
the work on “accessibility experiences” (Schwarz, 2004) to
indirectly manipulate people’s perceptions of the stability of
their identity, by asking them to judge how difficult it would
be to generate either 2 or 10 reasons why their identity will
remain very stable over the next 12 months. Participants asked
to imagine how difficult it would be to generate two reasons
should find the task easy, and therefore have no reason to
doubt the stability of their identity. Conversely, participants in
the 10 reasons condition should anticipate that the task would
be more difficult, and are likely to use this anticipated
difficulty as a cue to question the stability of their identity,
yielding a feeling of low connectedness.

Study 3
The studies above provide the first evidence that directly
manipulating connectedness systematically affects people’s
patience for the outcomes they will receive. Next, we test
whether naturally-occurring individual differences in
perceived connectedness to the future self relate to individual
differences in patience. One goal was to rule out the possibility
that the observed effects on impatience could be attributed to
highlighting the notion of connectedness for our participants
prior to their choices, by extending the findings to more
natural contexts in which people might or might not
spontaneously reflect on connectedness when making choices.
Recall that in the prior studies, we manipulated perceived
connectedness and then asked for people’s preferences. In this
study, we instead employed a re-contact methodology. In the
first stage, we measured connectedness (without manipulating
it). Three weeks later, in a separate study, we re-contacted
participants and collected preference data followed by
measures of other psychological constructs known to affect
intertemporal choice.
The second goal of this study was to assess the impact of
several other variables that could contribute to possible
alternative explanations for our findings. In particular, we
assess whether intertemporal preference is affected by
connectedness, even when we control for natural variation in
several psychological factors, distinct from connectedness,
that have been linked to patience in the literature. Furthermore,
by simultaneously assessing the relationship of individual
differences in connectedness and these alternative
psychological factors with patience, we can gauge how large
an impact connectedness has on patience relative to the impact
of other important psychological factors..
In order to test whether rated connectedness has a unique
influence on patience when controlling for other potentially
explanatory variables, we included measures of (i) degree of
“projection bias”, (ii) future anhedonia, (iii) time perception,
(iv) reward responsiveness, and (v) non-planning
impulsiveness at the end of the second survey.
Projection bias is a measure that captures whether people
believe that specifically their tastes and preferences will be
different in the future (Loewenstein et al. 2003), which might
lead people to consume sooner, rather than later, if they think
delayed benefits might not fit the future self’s tastes. “Future
anhedonia” refers to an affective forecasting phenomenon
where people view both positive and negative outcomes as
less extreme the farther into the future these outcomes occur.
Viewing both positive outcomes as less extreme when delayed

Method
As part of a larger study, one hundred five graduating
seniors filled out an online survey 1-2 weeks before their
graduation in return for $4 and entry into a lottery for which
they could receive a real gift certificate.
All participants were presented with a passage that
described the effect of college graduation on the stability of
one’s identity as mixed. Participants in the high-connectedness
condition were then asked to judge (on a 7-point scale) how
easily they could generate 2 reasons why their own identity
would remain very stable over the next 12 months (i.e., before
and after graduation), after reading that most participants were
able to generate 2 reasons in a previous study. In the lowconnectedness condition, participants judged how easily they
could generate 10 such reasons, after reading that most
participants previously had been able to generate 10 reasons.
Lastly, they read that they had been entered into a lottery for
a gift card. They read:
“The drawing will occur in two weeks, and if your survey is
chosen, you will receive a $95 Amazon.com gift card either in one
year, or you can pay to receive it immediately after the drawing is
held in two weeks.
What is the maximum amount that you would be willing to pay
now to be able to use the $95 gift card immediately?”

Results and Discussion
Manipulation checks. Participants in the 2 reasons (highconnectedness) condition rated the reason-generation task as
relatively easy (M = 5.28, SD = 1.51) compared to the ratings
of the participants in the 10 reasons (low-connectedness)
condition (M = 4.58, SD = 1.81; t(103) = 2.15, p < .05).
Relating perceived (in)stability to willingness to pay to
expedite gift certificate. Participants in the 10 reasons (lowconnectedness) condition were willing to pay more to speed
up receipt of the gift certificate (M = $14.83, SD = 15.96) than
were participants in the 2 reasons (high-connectedness)
condition (M = $9.49, SD = 8.99; t(103) = 2.16, p < .05). In

486

Our measure of patience is simply the number of deferred,
larger rewards chosen. We first correlated patience to each
predictor variables individually; then conducted a multiple
regression, including all predictor variables simultaneously.
Our index of psychological connectedness in the first survey
was significantly correlated with patience for receiving a gift
card, as measured three weeks later (r=.29, p<.05). In addition,
projection had a marginally significant effect (r=-.24, p<.10),
such that those who anticipated that their tastes would change
exhibited less patience. None of the other measures had a
significant correlation with patience in the gift card task.
More importantly, connectedness predicts patience in a
multiple regression (β =.78, p <.05) controlling for the other
factors which have been shown, in other circumstances, to
exert their own influences on patience (but which were not
significant in this regression). This finding is particularly
striking, given that we measured each construct (connectedness
and patience) uncontaminated by the other construct, due to the
three week delay between the two measures. Thus, the fact that
psychological connectedness remains a significant predictor of
patience, even when all of the factors are entered in the
regression simultaneously (model R2 = .20), provides strong
evidence for both the distinctiveness and pervasiveness of
psychological connectedness as an explanation for discounting.

to the farther future may cause people to consume benefits
sooner, when their positive qualities are more intense (Kassam
et al., 2008). Time perception has been implicated by
Zauberman et al. (2009) as a partial explanation for hyperbolic
discounting and for high discount rates in the near future. In
this view, the proportion of value retained over a given delay
is linearly-related to the perceived duration of the delay, rather
than the actual duration.
Lastly, people who score high in reward responsiveness
(degree of desire induced by a reward; Carver & White, 1994)
may be more susceptible to factors that induce impulsivity in
discounting tasks, and non-planning impulsiveness (inability
to resist temptation; Patton, Stanford, & Barratt, 1995) has
been linked to higher discount rates (Hinson, Jameson, and
Whitney 2003).
We argue that psychological connectedness predicts
intertemporal choice over and above these other contending
variables, and it does so even in a context in which the idea of
connectedness to the future self is not brought to mind by the
study’s procedure. So, this study assesses the contribution of
connectedness to patience, relative to the influence of several
other relevant psychological factors.

Method
Ninety four undergraduates participated in the first round of
data collection, 57 of whom agreed to participate in the second
round of data collection when re-contacted. Participants in the
first survey were paid $1 for their time, and those who agreed
to participate in the second survey participated in exchange for
entry into a lottery for a $50 gift certificate.
First survey. Participants gave three sets of connectedness
ratings. First, as in Study 1, they circled the pair of Euler
circles that best represented their perceived degree of
connectedness. Next, participants were asked to think again
about these identity-comprising properties and to rate
connectedness on a 0 to 100 scale. Finally, participants were
asked to draw a mark on a line to rate their connectedness. The
multiple measurement procedures enabled us to limit the
impact of elicitation method-specific biases.
Second survey. Approximately three weeks later, we recontacted our participants, offering them an opportunity to
participate in a second round of data collection. They were
first presented with a titration task, in which they made real
choices between receiving a $50 gift card for Amazon.com (if
their survey was chosen) in a week, when the drawing would
be held, or receiving a larger-valued gift card in a year ($50,
58, 66, 74, 82, 90, 98 or 106). Next, they responded to items
which measured (i) projection bias, (ii) future anhedonia, (iii)
time perception, (iv) reward responsiveness, and (v) nonplanning impulsiveness.

Summary and Conclusions
The three studies described here show that people’s beliefs
about the stability of the important characteristics that
determine their identity over an interval of time also determine
the patience they exhibit over that interval. People who
perceive relatively less connectedness to their future selves
require a larger delay premium to wait for a gift card, pay
more to expedite receipt of a gift card, and are more likely to
favor smaller-valued gift cards over larger-valued, delayed gift
cards than people who feel highly connected to their later
selves. Perceived connectedness, in turn, can be influenced by
exposure to information regarding the variability of identitycomprising characteristics over time and by the ease with
which reasons for expecting stability over time can be
generated. We found that both manipulated and measured
perceptions of connectedness influence intertemporal choice,
even when connectedness is not brought to mind in the testing
session. Moreover, in the last study, connectedness was shown
to be a unique, and in our data, the strongest predictor of
discounting compared to other psychological factors.
Taken together, these results shed light on a heretofore
under-represented explanation of discounting, and one that is
quite well-grounded theoretically (Parfit, 1984): A powerful
determinant of people’s future-oriented preferences, plans, and
behavior is the person they expect to be when outcomes are
realized. When this later person is more closely connected to
the current self in terms of sharing important psychological
properties, the decision maker is more motivated (consciously
or not) to act patiently—that is, in a manner that reflects
greater consideration of the later self’s welfare.
To our knowledge, the current studies are the first to
manipulate perceived connectedness to a later self and the first

Results and Discussion
We combined the three connectedness ratings (Euler circles,
similarity rating, and line scale) into an index of connectedness
which yielded high internal reliability (α = .91). We used this
index, along with the alternative variables, to predict people’s
discounting, as expressed in their choices of gift certificates.

487

continuity predict temporal discounting. Social Cognitive
and Affective Neuroscience, 4, 85-92.
Frederick, S. (2002). Time preference and personal identity. In
Time and decision: Economic and psychological
perspectives on intertemporal choice, G. Loewenstein, D.
Read, & R. Baumeister, Eds. NY: Russell Sage.
Frederick, S., Loewenstein, G., & O'Donoghue, T. (2002).
Time discounting and time preference: A critical review.
Journal of Economic Literature, 40, 351-401.
Green, L., Fry, A., & Myerson, J. (1994). Discounting of
delayed rewards: A life-span comparison," Psychological
Science, 5, 33-36.
Hinson, J., Jameson, T., & Whitney, P. (2003). Impulsive
decision making and working memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 29, 298-306.
Kassam, K., Gilbert, D., Boston, A., & Wilson, T. (2008).
Future anhedonia and time discounting. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 44, 1533-1537.
Killeen, P.R. (2009). An additive-utility model of delay
discounting. Psychological Review, 116, 602-619.
Koopmans, T. (1960). Stationary ordinal utility and impatience.
Econometrica, 28, 87-309.
Laibson, D. (1997). Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 443-477.
Lewis, D. (1983). Survival and identity. In Philosophical
Papers, Vol. 1, Oxford: Oxford U. Press, 55-77.
Loewenstein, G. (1988). Frames of mind in intertemporal
choice. Management Science, 34, 200-214.
Loewenstein, G., O’Donoghue, T., & Rabin, M. (2003).
Projection bias in predicting future utility. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 118, 1209-1248.
Nichols, S. & Bruno, M. (in press). Intuitions about personal
identity: An empirical study. Philosophical Psychology.
Parfit, D. (1976). Lewis, Perry and what matters. In The
Identities of persons, A.O. Rorty, Ed. Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press, 91-108.
Parfit, D. (1984). Reasons and Persons, Oxford: Oxford U.
Press.
Perry, J. (1972). Can the Self Divide? Journal of Philosophy,
69, 463-488.
Rips, L.J., Blok, S., & Newman, G. (2006). Tracing the identity
of objects. Psychological Review, 113, 1-30.
Schwarz, N. (2004). Meta-cognitive experiences in consumer
judgment and decision making. Journal of Consumer
Psychology, 14, 332–348.
Simpson, C. & Vuchinich, R. (2000). Reliability of a measure
of temporal discounting. Psychological Record, 50, 3-16.
Strathman, A., Gleicher, F., Boninger, D., & Edwards, C. S.
(1994). Consideration of future consequences: Weighing
immediate and distant outcomes of behavior. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 66, 742-752.
Zauberman, G., Kim, B.K., Malkoc, S., & Bettman, J. (2009).
Discounting time and time discounting: Subjective time
perception and intertemporal preferences. Journal of
Marketing Research, 46, 543-556.

to assess the descriptive adequacy of this determinant of
discounting against the adequacy of other determinants. It is
important to note, however, that temporal discounting is likely
to be multiply-determined. There have been several attempts to
integrate these multiple determinants in models of discounting
(e.g., Killeen, 2009), but because none of the existing models
accommodate how inferences about continuity of self over time
affect preference, none explicitly account for the effects we
have demonstrated. A model designed to capture our effects
would need to incorporate a parameter which represents the
degree of connectedness, such as the proportion of the defining
characteristics of the current self’s psychological make-up
believed to persist in the future self at future points in time.
Discounted utility would then be scaled by this parameter,
representing the partiality towards more connected selves
which we hypothesize and provide evidence for.
The key intuition of our framework that is absent from other
accounts of discounting is that “impatience” can be the result
of simply allocating less to a future self that is seen, to varying
degrees, as a continuation of the current self. And notably, by
our account, allocating less utility to a less connected later self
is thus not necessarily a mistake. However, in those contexts
where it is a mistake—for example, where people consistently
fail to maintain their plans in advance of temptation (e.g.,
under-saving relative to budgetary allowances)—fostering the
sense that what matters most in defining us persists over time
may help us persist in achieving important goals, including
those that most help us maintain what defines us.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Gretchen Chapman, Kristin Diehl, Hal ErsnerHershfield, Shane Frederick, Ryan Hamilton, Reid Hastie,
Craig Joseph, Aparna Labroo, Sean Nichols, Pete McGraw,
Doug Medin, Greg Murphy, Chris Olivola, Howard Rachlin,
Ed Smith, Stephen Spiller, George Wu, and special thanks to
Lance Rips for feedback, suggestions, and encouragement
regarding this project.

References
Ainslie, G. (1975). Specious reward: A behavioral theory of
impulsiveness and impulse control. Psychological Bulletin,
82, 463-496.
Bartels, D. M. & Rips, L. J. (2010). Psychological
connectedness and intertemporal choice. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 139, 49-69.
Carver, C. & White, T. (1994). Behavioral inhibition,
behavioral activation, and affective responses to impending
reward and punishment. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 67, 319–333.
Dancy, J. (1997). Reading Parfit. Oxford: Blackwell
Elster, J. (1979). Ulysses and the Sirens. NY: Cambridge U.
Ersner-Hershfield, H., Garton, M.T., Ballard, K., SamanezLarkin, G.R., & Knutson, B. (2009). Don’t stop thinking
about tomorrow: Individual differences in future selfcontinuity account for saving. Judgment and Decision
Making, 4, 280-286.
Ersner-Hershfield, H., Wimmer, G.E., & Knutson, B. (2009).
Saving for the future self: neural measures of future self-

488

