UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Implicit spatial length modulates time estimates, but not vice versa.

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5wk560z0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Bottini, Roberto
Casasanto, Daniel

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Implicit spatial length modulates time estimates, but not vice versa.

1

Roberto Bottini1,2

Daniel Casasanto2,3

(roberto.bottini@unibg.it)

(daniel.casasanto@mpi.nl)

University of Bergamo, Department of Human Sciences, Bergamo, IT
2
Donders Center for Brain, Cognition, and Behavior, Radboud University, Nijmegen, NL
3
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Neurobiology of Language Group, Nijmegen, NL
Abstract
How are space and time represented in the human mind? Here
we evaluate two theoretical proposals, one suggesting a
symmetric relationship between space and time (ATOM
theory) and the other an asymmetric relationship (metaphor
theory). In Experiment 1, Dutch-speaking participants saw 7letter nouns that named concrete objects of various spatial
lengths (tr. pencil, bench, footpath) and estimated how much
time they remained on the screen. In Experiment 2,
participants saw nouns naming temporal events of various
durations (tr. blink, party, season) and estimated the words’
spatial length. The implicit length encoded in object nouns
modulated time estimates, but the implicit duration encoded
in event nouns did not affect estimates of spatial length.
Nouns that named short objects were judged to remain on the
screen for a shorter time, and nouns that named longer objects
to remain for a longer time. By contrast, variations in the
duration of the event nouns’ referents had no effect on
judgments of the words’ spatial length on the screen. This
asymmetric pattern of cross-dimensional interference cannot
be attributed to differences in the discriminability or
perceptual salience of space and time in the stimuli. Results
support metaphor theory and challenge ATOM.
Keywords: ATOM, Metaphor, Psychophysics, Space, Time

Introduction
Space and time are intimately related in the human mind, as
they are in the physical world. But exactly how are these
dimensions related? Here we evaluate two theoretical
proposals, one suggesting a symmetric and the other an
asymmetric relationship between space and time.
According to the first proposal, space and time are
represented in the brain and mind by a common analog
magnitude system, which also generates representations of
number and quantity. This view, summarized in Walsh’s
ATOM (A Theory of Magnitude; 2003), is consistent with
neurological data showing shared brain areas for processing
space, time, and quantity (e.g., Basso, et al., 1996), and with
many behavioral studies in animals and humans (e.g.,
Church & Meck, 1984; Fischer, 2003; Gallistel & Gellman,
2000; Cappelletti, et, al, 2009).
Implicit in ATOM is an assumption that these ‘ATOMic’
dimensions
are
symmetrically
interrelated:
not
hierarchically related in the brain/mind. Accordingly, Walsh
(2003) frames predictions in symmetrical terms, positing
“overlapping brain regions” and “cross-domain, withinmagnitude priming” between dimensions, without
specifying any directionality to the priming (or interference)
effects. Indeed, if space and time are both manifestations of

the same general-purpose analog magnitude system, there
may be no a priori reason to posit that one dimension
should depend asymmetrically on another.
On an alternative proposal, space, time, and quantity are
importantly related, but in a different way. According to
theories of metaphorical mental representation (e.g., Lakoff
& Johnson, 1999), representations of time, number, and
quantity depend asymmetrically on representations of space.
The claim that some domains are asymmetrically dependent
on others, which is at the core of metaphor theory, was
originally supported by patterns in metaphorical language.
In English, it is nearly impossible to talk about domains like
time without using words whose primary meaning is spatial
(denotatively, developmentally, or historically (Clark,
1973)). Vacations can be long or short, meetings can be
moved forward or pushed back, deadlines can loom ahead
or lie behind us. Yet, it is far less common to use temporal
words to talk about space (Lakoff & Johnson, 1999). This
asymmetry in language has been echoed by behavioral
findings in psycholinguistics (Boroditsky, 2000), cognitive
development, (Casasanto, Fotakopoulou, & Boroditsky, in
press), and psychophysics (Casasanto & Boroditsky, 2008).
In one set of studies, participants viewed lines of various
spatial lengths that appeared on a screen for varying
durations (Casasanto & Boroditsky, 2008). They were asked
to estimate either the duration or the spatial length of each
line, using mouse clicks. Participants were unable to ignore
irrelevant spatial information when making judgments about
duration, but not the converse. For stimuli of the same
average duration, lines that extended shorter in space were
judged to take a shorter time, and lines that extended longer
in space were judged to take a longer time. By contrast, for
stimuli of the same average spatial length, spatial estimation
was not affected by the line’s duration. This crossdimensional asymmetry, predicted based on patterns in
language, was shown here in non-linguistic psychophysical
judgments. Five follow-up experiments varied the
attentional, mnemonic, and perceptual demands of the
stimuli, and all six experiments supported the same
conclusion: mental representations of time depend on
representations of space, more than vice versa.
This robust space-time asymmetry supports metaphor
theory, but presents a challenge to ATOM. If space and time
are both derived from (or are both manifestations of) a
general-purpose magnitude metric, then why should
representations of time depend on representations of space
more than the other way around -- in adults and children,
and in language and thought?

1348

It might be possible to reconcile these results with ATOM
by positing that in previous studies, space influenced time
asymmetrically because space was either (a) the more
discriminable dimension, or (b) the more perceptually
salient dimension in the stimulus. Discriminability, in this
context, refers to the resolution at which a dimension is
sampled. Salience means the extent to which one dimension
attracts attention relative to the other. Differences in
discriminability and perceptual salience have been shown to
modulate the strength or direction of cross-dimensional
interference and priming effects across numerous studies
(see Santiago, Román, & Ouellet, submitted, for review). In
general, the dimension that is more discriminable or salient
interferes with the dimension that is less discriminable or
less salient. Can task-related differences in the relative
discriminability or salience of stimulus dimensions account
for the space-time asymmetries observed previously?
One set of studies reviewed above addressed these
questions. Tests of cross-dimensional relationships often
manipulate more levels of one dimension than of the other,
creating an imbalance in discriminability (see Pansky &
Algom, 1999). In the space-time experiments by Casasanto
& Boroditsky (2008), however, there were 9 levels of each
dimension fully crossed, to equate discriminability.
Differences in discriminability may correspond to
differences in the accuracy, precision, or variability of
judgments across domains. This complicates the
interpretation of cross-dimensional interference effects. In
the limit, if performance in one domain is perfect, there is
no opportunity for variation in the other domain to influence
it: the ‘clean’ domain can influence performance the
‘messy’ domain, but not vice versa. In Casasanto &
Boroditsky’s studies, however, within-domain performance
was equivalent across space and time (see also Casasanto,
Fotakopoulou, & Boroditsky, in press).
But is it possible that space was more salient than time in
these studies? Following Garner (1976), Casasanto &
Boroditsky (2008) asked participants to judge different
dimensions of the same stimuli (e.g., the spatial or temporal
extent of a line). Thus, people had the exact same perceptual
input during space and time judgments. But this does not
guarantee that the dimensions were equally perceptually
salient: it is possible to see the spatial extent of a line, but
not its duration. To address the concern that space may have
been more salient than time, in one experiment each line
was accompanied by a tone, which sounded for the duration
that the line remained on the screen. Tones have temporal
extent but no spatial extent. Thus, temporal information was
available to the participant through two sensory channels,
but spatial information through only one. Yet, increasing the
salience of temporal information did not diminish the spacetime asymmetry.
Still, on a skeptical interpretation, these previous studies
did not definitively rule out cross-dimensional differences in
perceptual salience. It is possible that space will always be
more perceptually salient than time whenever perceptible
spatial stimuli are used, since it is possible to perceive

space, but arguably it is not possible to perceive time
directly through the senses (Ornstein, 1969). The question
remains, then, whether the space-time asymmetry would
persist in psychophysical judgments if differences in the
perceptual salience of space and time in the stimulus were
eliminated.
In the present study, we eliminated differences in
perceptual salience by eliminating perceptible variation in
the critical dimension (space or time), altogether. We tested
whether the implicit spatial information encoded in object
nouns can influence estimates of time (in Experiment 1),
and whether the temporal information encoded in event
nouns can influence estimates of spatial length (in
Experiment 2). Participants saw words presented one at a
time and reproduced either the duration for which they
remained on the screen or their spatial length, using mouse
clicks as in Casasanto & Boroditsky (2008). In the duration
estimation task (Experiment 1), the target words named
objects of various spatial lengths (e.g., pencil, clothesline,
footpath). All target words had the same number of letters in
Dutch, and therefore the same physical length on the screen.
In the spatial length estimation task (Experiment 2) the
target words named events of various durations (e.g., blink,
party, season). Again, all target words had the same number
of letters, but they were presented with a varying number of
spaces between letters (1-9 spaces), stretching them out to
different spatial lengths on the screen.
Word meanings were irrelevant to the length and duration
estimations. We expected, however, that participants would
read the words while viewing them, and activate their
meanings (voluntarily or involuntarily). Presumably, the
meaning of an object noun typically includes a
representation of the object’s spatial form, and the meaning
of an event noun a representation of the event’s duration. If
internally generated spatial and temporal representations
cued by words are sufficient to modulate estimates of
experienced duration and spatial length, then we should
observe cross-dimensional interference. Following metaphor
theory, we predicted that the cross-dimensional interference
should be asymmetric, even in the absence of crossdimensional differences in perceptual salience: spatial
representations cued by object nouns should modulate
estimates of their duration more than temporal
representations cued by event nouns modulate estimates of
their spatial extent on the screen.

Experiment 1: Does implicit spatial length
modulate time estimates?
Experiment 1 tested whether the spatial length of a word’s
referent can modulate estimates of how much time the word
remained on the screen.

Methods
Participants Native Dutch speakers (N=39) performed
Experiment 1 in exchange for payment.

1349

Materials Dutch nouns naming 9 concrete objects (Targets)
and 9 abstract entities (Fillers) were presented on a
computer monitor (resolution = 1024 x 768 pixels) for
varying durations. The concrete nouns referred to objects
whose characteristic spatial lengths ranged from short
(normally measured in centimetres) to long (normally
measured in kilometres). English equivalents of these nouns
are listed here in order of increasing length: cigarette,
pencil, ruler, meter stick, bench, clothesline, footpath, lane,
highway. In Dutch, all 9 target nouns had 7 letters, and were
presented on the screen in a fixed-width font (62-point
Courier New). Therefore, the targets did not differ in their
physical spatial lengths on the screen; rather, they differed
in their implicit lengths (i.e., the typical spatial lengths of
their referents).
The filler nouns referred to abstract entities that have no
physical spatial length: guess, idea, pride, opinion, envy,
thought, philosophy, suspicion, dignity. However, they
varied in their number of letters in Dutch (from 3-11 letters)
and therefore in their physical length on the screen (nine
different lengths, varying from 50-450 pixels as measured
from the left edge of the first letter to the right edge of the
last letter). By contrast with the targets, the fillers did not
differ in the implicit lengths of their referents; rather, they
differed in their physical lengths on the screen.
Each target and filler word was presented 9 times
throughout the experiment, for 9 different durations.
Durations ranged from 1000 to 5000 ms in 500 ms
increments. Fully crossing these 9 durations with the target
words (which had 9 different implicit spatial lengths)
produced 81 target trials. Likewise, fully crossing the 9
durations with the filler words (which had 9 different
physical lengths on the screen) produced 81 filler trials. The
162 different trials were presented in random order, with
fillers and targets intermixed. Words were presented in
white letters on a black background in the center of the
screen. Participants were tested individually and testing
lasted about 30 minutes.
Procedure Participants viewed the 162 words, one word at
a time, from a viewing distance of approximately 50 cm.
Immediately after each word disappeared an “hourglass”
icon appeared in the upper left corner of the monitor
indicating that the subject should reproduce the amount of
time the word remained on the screen. To estimate duration,
subjects clicked the mouse once on the center of the
hourglass, waited the appropriate amount of time, and
clicked again in the same spot, thus indicating the beginning
and end of the temporal interval. All responses were selfpaced.
After the experiment there was a two-part debriefing. In
the first part, the experimenter asked the participant “What
do you think this experiment is about?” and “What do you
think we were looking for?” to determine whether the
participant was aware of any relationship between the
implicit lengths of the target words and their durations. In
the second part, participants saw each target word again, in
random order, and verbally estimated the typical spatial

length of the target words’ referents (using an appropriate
unit of measurement). These subjective length estimates
were used in later analyses as predictors of subjective
duration.

Results and Discussion
Four participants were removed from the analyses below:
one for giving nonsensical answers in the debriefing, one for
excessively poor time estimation performance according to
the criterion used by Casasanto & Boroditsky (2008)1, and
two for guessing the that there was a connection between
the meanings of the target words and time estimation.
For the remaining 35 participants, we first analyzed
participants’ duration estimates as a function of the actual
duration of the stimuli. Overall, duration estimates for target
words were highly accurate (mean effect of actual duration
on estimated duration: y=0.83x + 154.11, r2=.99, df=7,
p<.001; fig 1a).
We then tested for effects of implicit length on duration
estimation. Target words were rank-ordered according to the
typical lengths of their referents (this a priori ranking was
confirmed by participants’ post-test length estimates). Nonparametric correlation showed that implicit spatial length
affected estimates of duration (y=3.77x + 2605.70,
rs(Spearman’s rho)=0.75, df=7, p<.001; fig.1b).
Finally, we conducted a parametric analysis of the effect
of implicit length on duration estimation. Participants’ posttest ratings of the typical spatial length of each target word’s
referent were used as a predictor of their duration estimates.
Ratings for each target item were averaged, and the average
length estimates in meters were transformed by a base 10
logarithm. This analysis corroborated the non-parametric
analysis, showing a highly significant effect of implicit
spatial length on duration estimation (y=5.60x + 2619.20,
r²=.57, df = 7, p< .001).
Participants incorporated irrelevant spatial information
into their temporal estimates. For stimuli of the same
average duration, words with (spatially) shorter referents
were judged to remain on the screen for a shorter time, and
words with longer referents for a longer time. This was true
even though the task did not require participants to process
the words’ meanings.
This result shows that perceptible spatial input is not
necessary to modulate time estimates; rather, internallygenerated spatial representations cued by words are
sufficient. This outcome, per se, is equally consistent with
metaphor theory and with ATOM. To distinguish between
the theories, it is necessary to conduct a complementary
experiment to determine whether implicit duration can
affect estimates of spatial length, and whether cross1

Participants were excluded if the slope of their within-domain
duration or length estimates was less than 0.5 (see Casasanto &
Boroditsky, 2008). This criterion, which resulted in the exclusion
of only one participant overall, is unbiased with respect to the
predicted cross-dimensional interference because length and
duration are orthogonal in the designs of both experiments.

1350

dimensional interference effects are as symmetric, as
expected on ATOM (Effect of Space on Time ≈ Effect of
Time on Space) or asymmetric, as predicted by metaphor
theory (Effect of Space on Time > Effect of Time on
Space).

Therefore, the targets did not differ in the physical durations
for which they remained on the screen; rather, they differed
in their implicit durations (i.e., the typical durations of their
referents).
The filler nouns referred to concrete objects that have no
inherent duration: doormat, ballast, portrait, detritus,
crystal, device, case, sawdust, handle. Each filler noun
appeared for 9 different durations from 1000-5000ms,
increasing in 500ms increments. By contrast with the
targets, the fillers did not differ in the implicit durations of
their referents; rather, they differed in the physical durations
for which they remained on the screen.
In Dutch, all target and filler nouns had seven letters,
and were presented on the screen in a fixed-width font (62point Courier New). Each word was presented 9 times
throughout the experiment, with a varying number of spaces
in between the letters (1-9), to stretch the words out to 9
different spatial lengths on the screen. Due to the font
selected, word lengths ranged from 397 to 773 pixels, in 47
pixels increments. Presenting each word at each of these 9
spatial lengths produced 81 filler trials and 81 target trials.
For the fillers, spatial length was fully crossed with the
physical duration for which they were presented. For the
targets, spatial length was fully crossed with the implicit
duration of their referents. The 162 different trials were
presented in random order, with fillers and targets
intermixed. Words were presented in white letters on a
black background in the center of the screen. Participants
were tested individually and testing lasted about 30 minutes.

Figure 1. Results of Experiment 1 (top) and Experiment 2
(bottom). 1a. Within-domain effect of actual word duration on
estimated duration. 1b. Cross-domain effect of words’ implicit
spatial length on estimated duration. 1c. Within-domain effect of
actual word length on estimated spatial length. 1d. Cross-domain
effect of words’ implicit duration on estimated spatial length. The
axes of the top and bottom plots (a-c, b-d) are proportional with
respect to the total range of target values. Error bars show s.e.m.

Procedure Participants viewed the 162 words, one word at
a time, from a viewing distance of approximately 50 cm.
Immediately after each word disappeared an “X” appeared
in the upper left corner of the monitor indicating that the
subject should reproduce the spatial length that the word had
occupied on the screen. To estimate length, subjects clicked
the mouse once on the center of the X, moved the mouse to
the right the appropriate distance, and clicked again, thus
indicating the beginning and end of a spatial interval. All
responses were self-paced.
After the experiment there was a two-part debriefing, as
in Experiment 1. The first part was to determine whether the
participant was aware of any relationship between the
implicit durations of the target words and their spatial
lengths. In the second part, participants saw each target
word again, in random order, and verbally estimated the
typical duration of the target words’ referents (using an
appropriate unit of measurement). These subjective duration
estimates were used in later analyses as predictors of
subjective spatial length.

Experiment 2: Does implicit duration modulate
estimates of spatial length?
Experiment 2 tested whether the duration of a word’s
referent can modulate estimates of the word’s spatial length
as presented on the screen.

Methods
Participants Native Dutch speakers (N=35) performed
Experiment 2 in exchange for payment.
Materials Dutch nouns naming 9 events (Targets) and nine
concrete objects (Fillers) were presented on a computer
monitor (resolution = 1024 x 768 pixels). The target nouns
referred to events whose characteristic durations ranged
from short (normally measured in seconds) to long
(normally measured in years). English equivalents of these
nouns are listed here in order of increasing duration: blink,
injection, melody, breakfast, party, Monday, January,
Season, Antiquity. All targets were presented for 3000ms.

Results and Discussion
One participant was removed from the analyses below for
guessing that there was a connection between the meanings
of the target words and spatial length estimation.
For the remaining 34 participants, we first analyzed
participants’ spatial length estimates as a function of the
actual spatial length of the stimuli. Overall, length estimates

1351

for target words were highly accurate (mean effect of actual
length on estimated length: y=0.71x + 132.44, r²=.99, df=7,
p=.001; fig 1c).
We then tested for effects of implicit duration on spatial
length estimation. Target words were rank-ordered
according to the typical durations of their referents (this a
priori ranking was confirmed by participants’ post-test
duration estimates). Non-parametric correlation showed that
implicit duration did not affect estimates of spatial length
(y=0.10x + 553.00, rs(Spearman’s rho)=0.06, df = 7, ns; fig.1d).
Next, we conducted a parametric analysis using
participants’ post-test ratings of the typical duration of each
target word’s referent were used as a predictor of their
length estimates. Ratings for each target item were
averaged, and the average duration estimates in minutes
were transformed by a base 10 logarithm. Again, there was
no effect of implicit duration on spatial length estimation
(y= 0.04x + 553.39, r²=.0003, df=7, ns).
Finally, we compared the strength of the crossdimensional interference effects across Experiments 1 and
2. The difference of correlations showed the predicted crossdimensional asymmetry (reffect of spatial length on duration-reffect of
duration on spatial length=0.74, z=1.66, p=0.05, one-tailed; see fig.
1b, 1d). This difference cannot be attributed to differences
in within-domain performance (reffect of actual duration on estimated
duration-reffect of actual spatial length on estimated spatial length=0.00, z=0.00,
ns; see fig. 1a, 1c).

General Discussion
This study tested whether implicit spatial information
encoded in concrete object nouns can influence estimates of
time (in Experiment 1), and whether implicit temporal
information encoded in event nouns can influence estimates
of spatial length (in Experiment 2). When participants
reproduced the duration for which an object noun remained
on the screen, their estimates were influenced by the
implicit length of the word’s referent. Words that named
shorter objects (e.g., cigarette, pencil) were judged to last a
shorter time, and words that named longer objects (e.g.,
bench, highway) to last a longer time. By contrast, when
participants reproduced the spatial length of an event noun,
the duration of the word’s referent did not influence
judgments of spatial length.
This asymmetric pattern of cross-dimensional
interference was predicted based on patterns in language:
people talk about time in terms of space more than they talk
about space in terms of time (Lakoff & Johnson, 1999).
These data show that people incorporate spatial information
into their temporal judgments even when they’re not using
any metaphorical language, and support the hypothesis that
mental representations of time are asymmetrically
dependent on representations of space: people use spatial
length to think about duration, more than vice versa.
This space-time asymmetry cannot be attributed to
differences in how well participants reproduced the actual
durations and lengths of the stimuli, per se, since there was
no significant difference between the effect of actual

duration on estimated duration (fig. 1a) and the effect of
actual length on estimated length (fig. 1c). Thus, differences
in cross-dimensional interference were not due to
differences in within-domain performance.
Furthermore, the space-time asymmetry cannot be
attributed to differences in the perceptual salience of the
interfering dimensions (i.e., space in Expt. 1, time in Expt.
2). In previous experiments, space could have influenced
time asymmetrically because space is inherently more
perceptually salient than time (which some scholars have
argued can never be perceived directly (Ornstein, 1969)).
But here there was no perceptible variation in the spatial
component of duration-reproduction stimuli, and no
perceptible variation in the temporal component of lengthreproduction stimuli. Internally generated representations of
spatial length, cued by words, were sufficient to modulate
estimates of the words’ physical duration. This was true
even though the words’ meanings were task-irrelevant.
Before discussing theoretical implications of these data
further, it is important to consider whether the observed
pattern could be due to unintended features of the stimulus
words. For example, is it possible that duration estimates in
Experiment 1 were influenced by implicit speed encoded in
the concrete nouns, rather than implicit length? The three
longest objects (footpath, lane, and highway) are all spatial
paths. The speed of motion associated with these paths
increases with their lengths (i.e., footpath-walking, laneslow driving, highway-fast driving). The conflation of
length and speed in these items was a consequence of
restrictions on the stimuli: items had to increase in ordinal
length unambiguously, and had to have 7 letters in Dutch.
If the effect of object length on duration estimates had
been driven by these three items, this would be problematic.
However, even a causal inspection of fig. 1b shows this was
not the case. For the majority of the items there were no
clear speed associations, and yet the effect of implicit length
was found. For the first 5 items (cigarette, pencil, ruler,
meter stick, bench), ordinal increases in implicit length
corresponded to a monotonic increase in estimated duration.
The predicted effect of length on duration was significant in
these 5 items, alone (y=6.84x + 2600, rs(Spearman’s rho)=1.00,
p=.001). Thus, implicit speed was not responsible for the
effect of implicit spatial length we report here (see
Casasanto & Boroditsky, 2008, Expt. 6 for further evidence
that spatial length affects duration estimates independent of
speed).
On another skeptical possibility, could implicit duration
encoded in object nouns have produced the observed effect
on duration estimation? Looking at the longest and shortest
items alone, this seems plausible. Cigarette could be
associated with the time it takes to smoke a cigarette (a short
time), and highway with the amount of time one typically
drives on a highway (a longer time). Yet, looking at the full
range of stimuli, this alternative explanation seems
implausible. What durations are prepotently associated with
clothesline, pencil, ruler, bench, or meter stick? Ordinal
increases in spatial length predicted ordinal increases in

1352

duration estimates for 7 out of the 8 ordinal pairs of stimuli
(i.e., cigarette < pencil; pencil < ruler; ruler < meter stick;
etc.) Pairwise differences in the typical spatial lengths of the
words’ referents are self-evident (and were confirmed by
participants’ post-test ratings), but for most of these word
pairs, it seems unlikely that there are corresponding pairwise
differences in durations associated with the words’
referents.
Finally, although the space-time asymmetry cannot be
due to differences in the perceptual salience of the
interfering dimensions, could they be due to differences in
conceptual salience? Could the spatial component of the
object words’ meanings be more salient than the temporal
component of the event words’ meanings? We cannot rule
out this possibility definitively, but this seems unlikely to be
the case. It is difficult to evaluate how salient spatial length
is in the meaning of bench or cigarette, and to compare this
with the salience of temporal duration in the meaning of
melody or party. But a few of the stimuli are very strongly
associated with a unit of space (ruler, meter stick) or a
period of time (Monday, January, season, Antiquity). For
these items, it is reasonable to assume that a spatial or
temporal representation is the most salient aspect of the
word’s meaning. This was the case for only two of the
object words (22% of targets) but for four of the event
words (44% of targets). Therefore, overall, it seems likely
that any asymmetry in conceptual salience favored the
temporal meanings of the event words, thus working against
the hypothesized space-time asymmetry.
These results suggest that the asymmetric dependence of
time on space in psychophysical judgments is not an artifact
of perceptual or conceptual asymmetries built into the
stimuli. Rather, this performance asymmetry reflects a
fundamental difference in the way people mentally represent
space and time. Yet, this asymmetric relationship between
space and time in the mind may, indeed, result from an
asymmetry in how perceptible space and time are more
broadly -- not in any particular experimental stimuli, but
rather in the observable world, in general. Space and time
are correlated in our everyday experiences (e.g., as objects
travel farther more time passes), and tracking these
correlations may be useful for anticipating changes in the
physical environment. Correlation is a symmetrical
relationship, but people may rely more heavily on the more
perceptually available dimension (space), using it
heuristically as an index of changes in the less perceptible
dimension (time).
It appears that time and space are, in Garner’s (1976)
terminology, asymmetrically separable dimensions: it is
possible to ignore irrelevant variation in time while judging
space but not possible (or more difficult) to ignore irrelevant
variation in space when judging time. At present, there is
nothing in Walsh’s (2003) ATOM proposal that can predict
or explain the asymmetric separability of space and time.
Yet, this cross-dimensional relationship is readily predicted
by metaphor theory.

Importantly, space and time are predicted to be related
asymmetrically but not unidirectionally. There is evidence
that time can influence space in some paradigms (e.g.,
Miles, Nind, & Macrae, 2010), just as people can sometimes
use temporal words to talk about space (e.g., “I live two
minutes from the station” is a temporal metaphor for spatial
distance). Simply showing that time can influence spatial
judgments in some cases does not challenge the asymmetry
we report here: to address the question of asymmetry, the
cross-dimensional influences of time and space must be
appropriately compared, controlling for salience and
discriminability across dimensions, and for withindimension performance.
We propose that Garner-like tests of dimensional
separability will be critical for either modifying ATOM or
deciding to abandon it in favor of a metaphorical theory of
spatial, temporal, and numerical magnitude representation.
In order to understand how space, time, and other prothetic
dimensions are represented in the brain and mind, it is
necessary to go beyond investigating whether these
dimensions interact and determine how they interact.

References
Basso, G. et al. (1996). Time perception in a neglected space.
Neuroreport 7, 2111 – 2114.
Boroditsky, L. (2000). Metaphoric structuring: understanding time
through spatial metaphors. Cognition, 75(1), 1-28.
Cappelletti, M., Freeman, E.D. and Cipolotti, L. (2009).
Dissociations and interactions between time, numerosity and
space processing. Neuropsychologia, 47(13), 2732 – 2748.
Casasanto, D. & Boroditsky, L. (2008). Time in the Mind: Using
space to think about time. Cognition, 106, 579-593.
Casasanto, D., Fotakopoulou, O, & Boroditsky, L. (2010). Space
and Time in the Child's Mind: Evidence for a CrossDimensional Asymmetry. Cognitive Science, 34, 387-405.
Church, R.M. and Meck, W.H. (1984). The numerical attribute of
stimuli. In Animal Cognition (Roitblat, H.L., Beaver, T.G. and
Terrace, H.S., eds), pp. 445 – 464, Erlbaum.
Clark, H. H. (1973). Space, time, semantics and the child. In
Cognitive Development and the Acquisition of Language, T. E.
Moore (ed.), 27–63. New York: Academic Press.
Fischer, M. (2003). Cognitive representation of negative numbers.
Psych. Sci., 14(3), 278-282.
Gallistell, R.C. and Gellman, R. (2000). Non-verbal numerical
cognition: from reals to integers. Trends in Cog. Sci. 4, 59 – 65.
Garner, W.R. (1976). Interaction of Stimulus Dimensions in
Concept and Choice Processes. Cog. Psych., 8, 98-123.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the flesh: The
embodied mind and its challenge to Western thought. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Miles, L. K., Nind, L. K. and Macrae, C. N. (2010). Moving
Through Time. Psych. Sci., DOI: 10.1177/0956797609359333
Ornstein, R. (1969). On the experience of time. Hammondsworth:
Penguin.
Pansky, A. & Algom, D. (1999). Stroop and Garner effects in
comparative judgement of numerals: The role of attention.
JEP:HPP, 25, 39-58.
Santiago, J., Román, A. and Ouellet, M. (submitted). Flexible
foundations of abstract thought: A review and a theory.
Walsh, (2003). A theory of magnitude: common cortical metrics of
time, space and quantity. Trends in Cog. Sci., 7 (11), 483-488.

1353

