UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Information Relevance in Pseudodiagnostic Reasoning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/34d5k52d

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Vallee-Tourangeau, Frederic
Villejoubert, Gaelle

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Information Relevance in Pseudodiagnostic Reasoning
Frédéric Vallée-Tourangeau and Gaëlle Villejoubert
Psychology Research Unit, Kingston University
Kingston-upon-Thames UNITED KINGDOM KT1 2EE
f.vallee-tourangeau/g.villejoubert@kingston.ac.uk

Abstract
When faced with two competing hypotheses, people
sometime prefer to look at multiple sources of
information in support of one hypothesis rather than to
establish the diagnostic value of a single piece of
information for the two hypotheses. This is termed
pseudodiagnostic reasoning, and is understood to reflect
a pervasive confirmation bias. Past research suggests
that diagnostic reasoning may be more easily fostered
when participants seek data to help in the selection of
one of two competing courses of action as opposed to
situations where they seek data to help inferring which
of two competing hypotheses is true. In the experiment
reported here, we provide the first empirical evidence
demonstrating that the facilitating effect observed in
action problems is driven by considerations of
information relevance, reasoners’ motivations and the
numerical value of the first piece of information
presented. The discussion of these findings focuses on
implications for the ability to engage in diagnostic
hypothesis-testing.

decision-making process.
More generally, the diagnosticity of a datum D for a
given hypothesis X (HX) is defined in terms of the ratio of
the probability that D is observed given that HX is true,
P(D|HX), and the probability that D is observed given that
an alternative hypothesis Y is true, P(D|HY). Hence,
diagnosticity can only be assessed from the perspective of
multiple hypotheses. The likelihood ratio in Bayes’s
Theorem is the normative metric of the diagnosticity of
information (Doherty, Mynatt, Tweney, & Schiavo,
1979).

People’s Search for Information Is Not (Always)
Driven by Considerations of Diagnosticity

Keywords: decision making; utilities; pseudodiagnostic
reasoning

Introduction
A sales manager advertised a new position for a sales
assistant. After reviewing the curriculum vitae of the
candidates, she selects two promising applicants, Ms. A.
and Ms. B. The manager initially leans towards the first
candidate, Ms. A., and discovers that she successfully
completed 70% of her sales transactions in the last month
in her previous position. The manager must now engage
in inductive reasoning: She needs to collect more
information in order to decide whether Ms. A or Ms. B. is
the best candidate for the job. A long tradition of
psychological research suggests that her search for
information will be driven by a need for evidence
confirming the hypothesis she is entertaining. Thus, if, at
this point, the manager believes Ms. A. is the best
candidate, she would naturally seek more information
about Ms. A rather than checking Ms. B.’s sale
performance. Yet, this strategy is potentially shortsighted:
Ms. B. could well have outperformed Ms. A. on the sales
front in her previous job, in which case, seeking more
information about Ms. A. could be misguided and lead to
the employment of a candidate with less potential.
Without establishing the sales performance of Ms. B, the
diagnostic value of Ms. A’s sales performance is
undetermined, and hence cannot judiciously inform the

1172

Early research examining how people gather information
in order to make inferences suggested they did not fully
appreciate that diagnosticity is defined in terms relative to
at least two hypotheses, not just one (Beyth-Marom &
Fischhoff, 1983; Doherty et al. 1979; Kern & Doherty,
1981; cf. Trope & Bassok, 1982, 1983). For example,
Beyth-Marom and Fischhoff (1983, Experiment 1) told
participants that an individual possessed a distinguishing
feature and asked them what information they deemed
relevant to determine whether that individual was a
member of Group A. Nearly 90% of their participants
indicated that it was relevant to know P(D|group A), but of
those ‘only’ 50% deemed important to know the
probability that this information would also be observed
given membership in a different group, or P(D|group B).
Yet both probabilities must be examined in order to gauge
the diagnosticity of the distinguishing feature.
Mynatt, Doherty and Dragan (1993) argued that people’s
hypothesis testing process is predominantly concerned
with gathering evidence in favour of one hypothesis, rather
than determining the diagnosticity of any given piece of
information for multiple hypotheses. In one of their
reasoning scenarios, participants were asked to determine
which of two cars, X or Y, their “sister” purchased. They
were told about two features characterising this car, its
petrol consumption (D1: “25 miles per gallon” –mpg) and
its mechanical reliability (D2:“no major mechanical
problems in the first two years of ownership”). In addition,
participants were given an anchoring piece of information:
“65% of car Xs do over 25 mpg”, or P(D1|HX) = .65.
Participants were then asked to choose which of the
following three pieces of information would help them

decide which type of car was owned by their sister (the
participants did not see the information presented here in
brackets).
1. The percentage of car Ys that do over 25 mpg.
[Diagnostic, P(D1|HY)].
2. The percentage of car Xs that have had no major
mechanical problems for the first two years of
ownership. [Pseudodiagnostic, P(D2|HX)].
3. The percentage of car Ys that have had no major
mechanical problems for the first two years of
ownership. [Switching, P(D2|HY)].
The first choice would establish the diagnosticity of the
petrol consumption data. If more than 65% of car Ys do
over 25 mpg, then the sister’s car is more likely to be a Y
car. Otherwise, it is more likely to be an X car. The second
choice would determine the mechanical reliability of car
Xs. This choice leaves the reasoner with two pieces of
information, and the diagnosticity of neither can be
established. Learning that a high percentage of car Xs also
featured good mechanical reliability could make one
confident that the sister owned a car X, but this feeling of
confidence would only be illusory: here again, car Xs
could well be outperformed by car Ys. Hence, choosing to
learn about P(D2|HX) is considered a pseudodiagnostic
choice. We term the third choice switching because the
focus switches from the initial information (D1) to the
second piece of information (D2) and from the initial
hypothesis (HX) to the alternative one (Hy).
In Experiment 1 of Mynatt et al. (1993), 60% of the
participants chose to learn about the percentage of car Xs
with good mechanical reliability in order to determine the
identity of the car, while only 26% chose to know the
percentage of car Ys that do 25 mpg. The majority of
participants thus made what is considered a
pseudodiagnostic choice, since opting to look at the
mechanical reliability of car Xs cannot determine the
diagnosticity of being informed that 65% of car Xs do over
25 mpg.
In contrast, there is evidence demonstrating that people
will, under various circumstances, seek to know
information that would establish the diagnosticity of the
anchoring information. For example, if the anchoring
information defines a relatively rare feature, for example
65% of cars of make X have a top speed of 165 miles per
hour, participants are more likely to want to know the
proportion of the alternative make of cars that reach that
top speed (Feeney, Evans, & Venn, 2008, Experiment 1).
The rare, and arguably more interesting feature (it’s
plausibly more interesting to be told about a top speed of
165 mph than that the car has an ashtray), thus invite
participants to gauge its frequency given the alternative
category, thereby encouraging diagnostic data selection. In
addition, if the dimensions that define the target object
(e.g., ‘your sister’s car’) are couched in terms of an actor’s
motivation (e.g., you sister wanted a car with good petrol
consumption) then anchoring information that appears to

1173

run counter to this motivation (e.g., car X does 20 miles
per gallon) elicits less pseudodiagnostic reasoning.
Likewise, a low value for the initial anchoring information
(e.g., 35% of car Xs do over 25 mpg) encourages more
diagnostic choices (Mynatt et al., 1993, Experiment 2).
Thus, upon learning that P(D1|HX) is relatively low, more
participants are interested in P(D1|HY). Conversely, if the
anchoring information given plausibly endorses the focal
hypothesis, that is when P(D1|HX) is high, participants
appear less motivated to determine the diagnosticity of that
information.

Information Relevance and Initial Values in
Action Problems
Another important characteristic that seems to determine
whether people will make diagnostic search choices is the
goal of the task. Mynatt et al. (1993) distinguished
between inference and action problems. The car example
discussed above, they argued, represents an inference
problem. The car has already been purchased and is owned
by someone, the goal is to determine whether it is a car X
or a car Y. In effect the problem is a categorization
inference, and in principle the categorization can be true or
false. In contrast, an action problem is one where
hypotheses represent two courses of action. One might be
better than the other, but the decision cannot in principle
be evaluated in terms of whether one action is true and the
other false. In a separate experimental condition, Mynatt et
al. instructed participants to imagine buying a car,
considering car X or car Y and told them they were
“concerned about (…) petrol consumption and mechanical
reliability” (p. 768). Participants were then given the same
anchoring piece of information (“65% of car Xs do over 25
mpg”) and were asked to choose one among the same three
pieces of information in order to help them decide which
car to buy (see options 1. through 3. above).
In that action problem, 52% chose the piece of
information that could determine the petrol consumption of
car Ys (the diagnostic choice) and 41% chose the piece of
information that could determine the mechanical reliability
of car Xs (a pseudodiagnostic choice). To explain the high
proportion of diagnostic choices in action problems,
Mynatt et al. propose that the choice among the three
alternatives is determined by the datum which bears more
utility for each individual participant: “Precisely how
many subjects will select (the diagnostic choice) will
depend on the content of a given problem and subjects’
idiosyncratic utility function and decision strategies”
(pp.765-766, emphasis added). On this account, those who
consider petrol consumption to be more important than
mechanical reliability would be motivated to establish the
petrol consumption of car Ys and hence chose the
diagnostic option. In contrast, those who are more
concerned about mechanical reliability should seek
information about car Xs’ mechanical reliability, a
pseudodiagnostic choice.

The authors, however, did not manipulate explicitly the
perceived relevance of the two dimensions characterising
each alternative (e.g., petrol consumption and mechanical
reliability in the car scenario) nor did they seek to assess
how relevant their participants believed these dimensions
to be. Moreover, there is conflicting evidence showing that
action problems may not necessarily promote
diagnosticity. Maggi, Butera, Legrenzi and Mugny (1998,
Experiment 1) asked participants to imagine having to
choose between two cars or two political candidates. These
authors found over 60% choices to be pseudodiagnostic.
There was, however, an important methodological
difference between their task and that of Mynatt et al.
(1992): Maggi et al. (1998) presented participants with
four possible pieces of information to choose from for each
alternative (e.g., the car price, reliability, fuel consumption
and performance). In addition, the authors found that
people tended to be more diagnostic in their choices when
the anchoring information concerned a characteristic they
believe to be important (e.g., the price of a car or the
competence of a political candidate). In light of these
incongruous findings, one important issue to resolve would
thus be to determine whether those who made a diagnostic
choice by choosing to look up P(D1|HY) did so because
they were more interested in D1 than in any other piece of
information D.
Another important difference between inference and
action problems outlined by Mynatt et al. (1993) is the role
of the initial P(D1|HX) value of the anchoring information.
According to the authors, in inference problems this initial
value could be a cue to the truth value of HX and, as such,
dictate participants’ information search. By contrast, the
authors predicted and found that this initial value would
not affect choices in action problems since, in those
situations, information search would solely be determined
by the perceived relevance of the anchoring information
D1. The authors, however, tested this prediction by
comparing relatively narrow values, hovering modestly
below and above the 50% mark (viz. 35% vs. 65%). It is
therefore reasonable to assume that participants who
believed, for example, petrol consumption was the most
important attribute for a new car would always wonder if
car Ys outperformed car Xs, even upon learning that 65%
car Xs did over 25 mpg. However, this does not
necessarily imply that participants’ information search
strategy will never be affected by the P(D1|HX) value in
action problems. It is not implausible to expect, for
example, that participants may no longer search to
establish a diagnosticity ratio when told that 95% of car Xs
do over 25 mpg. In this case, the P(D1|HX) value could be a
cue to the superiority of HX. Consequently, under such
circumstances, participants might then be more interested
in learning more about car Xs than in finding out whether
car Ys outperform car Xs. Hence, when the P(D1|HX) value
is deemed satisfactory in action problems, we should
expect more pseudodiagnostic choices.

1174

The Present Study
In the experiment reported here, we examined the role of
information relevance and initial values in determining
diagnostic and pseudodiagnostic choices in problems
structurally isomorphic to the one developed by Mynatt et
al. (1993). The first aim of this experiment was to test the
hypothesis that diagnostic choices in action problems
occur because people believe D1 is more relevant than D2
in deciding whether to take action X or action Y. We
manipulated the relative importance of D1 and D2 in two
scenarios so that participants would care more about D1
than D2. We anticipated the higher perceived relevance of
D1 would lead to a higher proportion of diagnostic choices,
since participants would seek to determine the probability
of D1 given the alternative course of action. Second, this
experiment aimed to assess the degree to which people
may revert to a pseudodiagnostic search for information
when the initial value of the anchoring information
P(D1|HX) is deemed satisfactory. To do so, we manipulated
the motivation underpinning participants’ action. One
scenario was designed to motivate people to find the
highest value of P(D1|H). In this case, we anticipated that
participants would never be satisfied by the initial value of
P(D1|HX) and hence we predicted that their search for
information would not be affected by this initial value. The
alternative scenario was designed to motivate people to
find a satisfactory value of P(D1|H). In such a situation, we
predicted that when the initial P(D1|HX) presented could be
deemed satisfactory, the rate of pseudodiagnostic choices
would be greater.

Method
Participants
Participants were recruited by third-year psychology
students at the University of Toulouse, France, as a course
requirement. Each student made a list of several men and
women who were older than 18 and not studying
psychology, randomly drew one man and one woman from
his or her list, and asked them to take part in a general
survey which included the present study. Of the 1040
participants in the final sample (520 men, 520 women;
mean age = 31.37, SD = 13.24), 11% had completed
graduate school, 53% had an undergraduate education,
20% had graduated from high school only, and the
remaining 16% had not graduated from high school. The
sample included a large proportion of students (40%), but
also working professionals (51%) and retired or
unemployed individuals (8%). The survey was conducted
in French.

Design and Procedure
The current experimental manipulation was embedded in a
longer questionnaire. The experiment used a 2 × 2

between-subjects design. The independent variables were
the implicit motivation of the decision-maker (maximizing
vs. satisficing – Simon, 1955) and the numerical value of
the anchoring piece of information (high or low).
Participants were randomly allocated to one of the
resulting four conditions. Their task was presented as
follows: they were asked to imagine they were the director
of a large zoo and that they had set up a programme aiming
to promote reproduction in captivity of African elephants,
a species at risk of extinction. Their calves, however, were
facing a severe health issue. They were informed of the
presence of a parasite whose eggs could lodge in the
calves’ aortic artery, causing strokes and killing the calves
if left untreated, threatening the success of the
reproduction programme. The experimental manipulation
concerned the animals needed to be treated in order to rid
the zoo of parasites. Half the participants were told the
deadly parasites were infecting the calves directly and
treatment was, therefore, to be administered to calves
(satisficing scenario). The remaining half was told the
deadly parasites were carried by roaming rats which were
to be treated directly (maximizing scenario). In all cases,
the zoo’s chief veterinary suggested using one of two
treatments to save the calves: treatment A or treatment B.
Participants were then told about the mortality rate of
calves (rats) treated with treatment A and that both
treatments could also potentially cause infertility in calves
(rats). The initial value of the anchoring piece of
information was either high or low. Thus, half were told
treatment A could cause the death of 80% calves (rats)
whereas the remaining half were told it could cause the
death of 20% calves (rats). Before making their choice,
however, they were allowed to consult one additional piece
of information among three alternatives: they could choose
to consult the mortality rate of calves (rats) treated with
treatment B (a diagnostic choice). They could also choose
to learn more about treatment A and ask to consult the
percentage of infertile calves (rats) among those treated
with treatment A (a pseudodiagnostic choice). Finally, they
could choose to learn about the rate of infertility observed
in calves (rats) treated with treatment B (a switching
choice). The order of the choices remained constant in all
experimental conditions.
In both scenarios, we anticipated that people would be
more concerned about mortality rates (D1) than about
infertility rates (D2). Specifically, we anticipated people to
place more value on the mortality rate of rats than on their
infertility since rats made infertile would not eliminate
their status as a contamination vector. Likewise, we
anticipated people would be more concerned about
avoiding the death of the endangered calves than about
their potential infertility. A few pages later in the survey,
all participants were asked to consider the calves (rats) task
again and to rate the importance of avoiding killing the
calves (rats) as well as the importance of avoiding making
the calves (rats) sterile. Both ratings were recorded on an

1175

8-point scale ranging from 1 (Absolutely not important) to
8 (Extremely important).
We expected that the greater relevance of the anchoring
dimension (the mortality rate) induced by the scenarios
would result in a large proportion of diagnostic choices. In
the maximizing scenario, we predicted that participants
would be motivated to find the best treatment to kill all the
rats, and that consequently, short of a 100% mortality rate,
they would be more interested in determining the mortality
rate of the alternative treatment regardless of the mortality
rate for treatment A. As a result, we expected high
proportions of diagnostic choices in these scenarios when
the mortality rate for treatment A was set at either .20 or
.80. In the satisficing scenario, we anticipated that
mortality would bear unacceptable consequences to a
degree that varied with the rate associated with treatment
A. We predicted that participants would deem it important
to save as many calves as possible and that, consequently,
the 80% chance of killing the host organism associated
with treatment A would be deemed unacceptably high. In
this situation, we predicted a strong preference for
enquiring about the mortality rate associated with
treatment B, the diagnostic option. With a lower mortality
rate of .20, however, we predicted that some participants
might deem it satisficingly low and hence be tempted to
enquire about the infertility rate associated with treatment
A, resulting in higher proportion of pseudodiagnostic
choices in this condition.
Table 1: Mean and standard deviation of the importance ratings
of preventing killing or preventing infertility in the host
organism (rats or calves) in the conditions where the rats and
elephant calves are treated as a function of the mortality rate for
treatment A, .2 and .8.
Motivation
Maximizing (rats)

Satisficing (calves)

Mortality Rate of Treatment A

Mortality Rate of Treatment A

.2
Prevent Killing
Prevent Infertility

.8

.2

.8

M

3.37

3.59

7.19

7.18

SD

2.30

2.48

1.17

1.32

M

3.09

3.30

6.93

6.87

SD

2.32

2.57

1.36

1.64

Results
Importance Ratings
Participants were asked to rate the importance of not
killing the host animals or not making them infertile. These
mean importance ratings are reported in Table 1. The
importance of saving the calves was consistently rated
higher than that of saving the rats. The same was true for
the infertility ratings: Participants judged it more important
to prevent infertility in the calves than in the rats. Most
notably, as we had anticipated, participants deemed it more
important to prevent mortality than infertility.

A 2 (goals: maximizing, satisficing) × 2 (mortality rate
of treatment A: .2, .8) × 2 (rating type: killing, infertility)
mixed analysis of variance (ANOVA) confirmed these
observations. The main effect of goal was significant, F(1,
1036) = 1255, p < .001, MSE = 5.69, η2 = .55, the main
effect of the mortality rate was not significant, F < 1, and
the main effect of rating type was significant, F(1, 1036) =
20.1, p < .001, MSE = 2.11, η2 = .02. None of the
interactions were significant, largest non reliable F(1,
1036) = 1.46.

Choice Preferences
Two participants did not make a choice and were discarded
from subsequent analyses. Consistent with our predictions,
the diagnostic option was by far the most frequently
chosen in all experimental conditions with over 70% of
participants opting for this type of information (see Fig. 1).
In the maximizing scenarios (treating the rats), nearly 80%
of the participants elected to examine the mortality rate
associated with treatment B, and the remaining 20% of the
participants were evenly split between the other two
options (the infertility rate for treatment A or B).
Moreover, this pattern of choice was identical whether the
value of the mortality rate of treatment A was said to be
20% or 80%. In contrast, in the satisficing scenarios
(treating the calves), while most participants still elected
primarily to determine the mortality rate of treatment B
(the diagnostic choice), the frequency of pseudodiagnostic
choices was nearly twice as large when treatment A had a
relatively low mortality rate (20%) compared to when it
had a high mortality rate (80%). Approximately one fifth
of the participants chose the irrelevant option, the
infertility rate of treatment B in both versions of the
satisficing scenario.

A number of χ2 tests were conducted. The first
determined that the choice frequencies in all four
experimental conditions differed significantly, χ2 (df = 6,
N = 1038) = 35.2, p < .001. The proportion of diagnostic
choices was significantly higher when the implicit goal
was to maximize the number of rats killed, χ2 (df = 1, N =
869) = 5.46, p < .02. Separate tests were then conducted
within the maximizing (rats) and the satisficing (calves)
scenarios, excluding the switching choice frequencies.
Within the maximizing scenarios, the frequencies of
diagnostic and pseudodiagnostic choices did not differ as a
function of the mortality rate of treatment A, χ2 (df = 1, N
= 463) = .11, p > .05. In contrast, within the satisficing
scenarios, the frequencies differed significantly as a
function of the mortality rate of treatment A, χ2 (df = 1, N
= 406) = 9.22, p < .005.

Discussion
This experiment successfully manipulated the relative
importance of the information dimensions available in a
two-alternative action problem where participants were
asked to choose which treatment they should use to save
endangered calves whose life was threatened by a deadly
parasite. Specifically, ratings of the importance of not
killing the animals and not making them infertile
confirmed that the mortality dimension was judged more
important than the infertility dimension whether the
animals were the calves themselves or rats hosting the
parasite.
The examination of information search patterns in turn
confirmed that when the anchoring dimension was
perceived as being the most relevant, participants were
strongly drawn to check the diagnostic option: nearly 71%
of the 1038 responses collected were diagnostic. This high
Satisficing (calves)

Maximizing (rats)

Percentage of Participants

100%

P(death|A) = .2
P(death|A) = .8

78% 77%

70%

75%
58%

50%

25%

23%

19%
11% 12%

11% 11%

Pseudodiag

Switching

20%

10%

0%
Diagnostic

Choice

Diagnostic

Pseudodiag

Switching

Choice

Figure 1: Percentage of participants making a diagnostic, pseudodiagnostic, or switching choice for
the maximizing scenarios (involving the rats) and the satisficing scenarios (involveing the calves) for
both values of P(death|treatment A).

1176

degree of consensus is all the more impressive given the
size and the variety of the sample from which it originated.
This result supports Mynatt et al.’s (1993) initial, albeit
untested, assumption that individuals’ search for
information is driven by considerations of utility in action
problems.
We note the large inconsistency between the rate of
diagnostic choice observed in our action problems (on
average, more than 70% of our participants chose the
diagnostic option) compared to those observed by Maggi et
al. (1998) with a similar task (on average, less than 40% of
their participants did so). These authors, however, had also
found that people were more diagnostic when the
anchoring dimension was one they judge to be important.
Recall that an important methodological difference
between their task and the original action problems used by
Mynatt et al. (1993), as well as that used in the present
study, was the number of dimensions participants could
choose from. Whereas our participants and Mynatt et al.’s
(1993) could only choose to look up the probability
associated with two dimensions (D1 and D2) for each of
two alternatives, Maggi et al.’s participants were presented
with four such dimensions (D1, D2, D3, and D4). Moreover,
the authors rotated the dimension defined as the anchoring
dimension so that some participants would be first given
information about D1, others about D2 and so on. Suppose
that participants’ search strategy is primarily driven by the
importance of the dimension and suppose D1 was the
dimension they deemed most important. This means that
whenever the anchoring dimension was not the most
important dimension (3 times out of 4), participants would
seek to learn more about D1 for the current alternative and
hence make a pseudodiagnostic choice. In other words,
perhaps the reason why so many people made
pseudodiagnostic choices in Maggi et al.’s (1998) task was
because most of the time the anchoring dimension was not
the dimension bearing the highest utility.
Finally, in line with our initial predictions, but contrary
to Mynatt et al.’s (1993) conclusions, we were able to
demonstrate that the numerical value of the anchoring
dimension could affect people’s search strategies when
their motivation was to find a satisficing alternative. In
such circumstances, a more satisficing value (viz., a
relatively low mortality rate of endangered calves) resulted
in almost twice as many pseudodiagnostic choices than a
plainly unsatisfactory value (viz., a high mortality rate).
This suggests that people will also engage in confirmatory
search for information when they aim to choose between

1177

two courses of actions (and not only when they seek to
make an inference, as the authors had previously
concluded). These data therefore offer strong support for
the hypothesis that the perceived relevance of the
dimensions that define two courses of action governs the
information search strategies adopted by reasoners. In
addition, they establish that such strategies can also be
modified depending on what the decision-maker is
motivated to achieve, namely either identify a satisficing
alternative or identify a utility maximizing alternative.

References
Beyth-Marom, R., & Fischhoff, B. (1983). Diagnosticity
and pseudo-diagnosticity. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 45, 1185-1195.
Doherty, M. E., Chadwick, R., Garavan, H., Barr, D., &
Mynatt, C. R. (1996). On people’s understanding of the
diagnostic implications of probabilistic data. Memory
and Cognition, 24, 644-654.
Doherty, M. E., Mynatt, C. R., Tweney, R. D., & Schiavo,
M. D. (1979). Pseudodiagnosticity. Acta Psychologica,
43, 111-121.
Feeney, A., Evans, J., Venn, S. (2008). Rarity,
pseudodiagnosticity and Bayesian reasoning. Thinking
& Reasoning, 14, 209-230.
Kern, L., & Doherty, M. E. (1982). “Pseudodiagnosticity”
in an idealized medical problem-solving environment.
Journal of Medical Education, 57, 100-104.
Maggi, J., Butera, F., Legrenzi, P., & Mugny, G. (1998).
Relevance of information and social influence in the
pseudodiagnosticity bias. Swiss Journal of Psychology,
57, 188-199.
Mynatt, C. R., Doherty, M. E., & Dragan, W. (1993).
Information relevance, working memory, and the
consideration of alternatives. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 46A, 759-778.
Simon, H. A. (1955). A behavioral model of rational
choice. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 69, 99-118.
Trope, Y., Bassok, M. (1982). Confirmatory and
diagnosing strategies in social information gathering.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 43, 2234.
Trope, Y., Bassok, M. (1983). Information-gathering
strategies
in
hypothesis-testing.
Journal
of
Experimental Social Psychology, 19, 560-576.

