UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Investigating phonotactics using xenolinguistics: A novel word-picture matching paradigm

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8bx6s7vp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Kapatsinski, Vsvolod
Johnston, Lamia

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Investigating phonotactics, lexical analogy, and sound symbolism using
xenolinguistics: A novel word-picture matching paradigm
Vsevolod Kapatsinski (vkapatsi@uoregon.edu)
Department of Linguistics, 1290 University of Oregon,
Eugene, OR 97401 USA

Lamia H. Johnston (lhj@uoregon.edu)
Department of Linguistics, 1290 University of Oregon,
Eugene, OR 97401 USA

Abstract
All human languages have restrictions on sound sequences,
called phonotactic constraints. Knowledge of phonotactic
constraints is typically tested using pseudoword rating tasks,
e.g., an English speaker might be asked to rate acceptability
or wordlikeness of the phonotactically illegal /bnɪk/ and the
phonotactically legal /blɪk/. We introduce a new method of
testing knowledge of phonotactic constraints. Instead of
asking subjects to rate pseudowords, we ask them to assign
pseudowords to pictures of novel objects. The set of available
pseudowords is larger than the set of pictures and includes
both legal and illegal pseudowords. We find legal
pseudowords to be less likely to be left unassigned to pictures
than illegal pseudowords. Thus, the listeners show knowledge
of the phonotactics of English. We suggest that the present
method has important advantages over rating tasks: it is a
more direct measurement of the influence of phonotactics on
the lexicon, and it allows the experimenter to detect
influences of sound symbolism and lexical analogy and
separate them from the influence of phonotactics.
Keywords: phonology; phonotactics; sound symbolism;
analogy; acceptability

Introduction
The grammars of all languages contain restrictions on
possible sound sequences, called phonotactic constraints.
For instance, despite /bnɪk/ and /blɪk/ not being actual
English words, /blɪk/ obeys the phonotactic constraints of
English but /bnɪk/ does not because there are no word-initial
stop+nasal sequences in English. Native English speakers
would also rate /bnɪk/ as being less acceptable than /blɪk/,
showing that they have knowledge of the phonotactic
constraints of their language (Chomsky & Halle 1965).
The phonotactic constraints are thought to place
restrictions on the way the lexicon of the language can
develop in the future, such that newly coined or adopted
words are likely to also obey the phonotactics of the
language. If a word does not obey the phonotactics of a
language into which it is borrowed, it often changes to fit
the phonotactics. One way this change can happen is
through misperception (Ohala 1981). Berent et al. (2007),
Dupoux et al. (1999), and Pitt (1998) have documented that
phonotactically illegal sequences are often perceived as
similar legal sequences, e.g., English listeners often perceive

natural productions of /bnɪk/ by speakers of Russian, for
whom the /bn/ cluster is phonotactically legal, as having a
vowel between /b/ and /n/. Thus a word like /bnɪk/ is likely
to be misperceived by English speakers as /bənɪk/ and
borrowed into English as /bənɪk/.
An additional, and much more controversial, way in
which phonotactic constraints can influence the
development of a language is by militating against the
adoption or retention of phonotactically illegal words. Thus,
phonotactically illegal words may be less likely to be
borrowed and retained in the language than phonotactically
legal words. An intriguing piece of evidence for this
influence of phonotactics is provided by Berg (1998:230233) who examines the probability of Old English words
surviving into Modern English depending on the
phonotactics of the initial cluster in Modern English. He
finds that 803/968 (83%) words containing a
phonotactically legal cluster (/kr/, or /sn/) have survived,
compared to 555/774 (72%) for words containing now
illegal clusters (/kn/, /gn/, and /wr/, χ2(1)=31.1, p<.001). He
argues that “a word may pass out of the system because of
phonological problems” (Berg 1998:231), suggesting that
phonotactic constraints may not only force illegal words to
change but also force illegal words out. A plausible
mechanism for this effect is suggested by Martin (2007),
who provides simulation data from neural networks
showing that, as long as sublexical-to-lexical feedback is
assumed, words that are phonotactically suboptimal are less
likely to be selected for production than more well-formed
competitors.
Knowledge of phonotactics is typically tested using rating
tasks (for recent representative examples, see Bailey &
Hahn 2001, Coleman & Pierrehumbert 1997, Frisch et al.
2000, in press, Shademan 2005, Treiman et al. 2000).
involving a metalinguistic judgment of ‘acceptability’,
‘grammaticality’, ‘goodness’, ‘wordlikeness’ etc. However,
judgment tasks offer at best an indirect way to gauge the
hypothesized effect of phonotactics on lexical selection.
One goal of the present paper is to develop a more direct
method for examining the potential influence of knowledge

2010

of phonotactics on lexical choice experimentally (Berg
1998, Martin 2007).
Phonotactic constraints are not the only influence on
lexical selection. Two other potential factors are sound
symbolism (e.g., Sapir 1929, Ultan 1978 vs. Diffloth 1994)
and lexical analogy (e.g., Bailey & Hahn 2001, Shademan
2005). A word containing a consonant cluster that is never
observed in English may nonetheless be selected (and
receive high ratings in a judgment task) if it is sufficiently
phonologically similar to an existing English word. In
addition, words that contain sounds that iconically represent
some aspects of their referents may be especially likely to
enter the lexicon. In the present study,we focus on size
symbolism, where high vowels like [i] symbolize small
creatures while low vowels like [a] symbolize large ones
(Sapir 1929, Ultan 1978).

Methods
40 native English speakers were recruited from the
Psychology/Linguistics human subjects pool and
participated for course credit. All reported being native
English speakers. Each subject was presented with a
Microsoft Powerpoint file containing instruction slides
followed by experimental slides.
The instructions asked the subject to imagine oneself in
the distant future, arriving on an unknown planet (called
Terra Enigmatica) and discovering the remains of an Earth
colony that was established by speakers of both English and
Wilkipaengo (the language name was invented, so as to
avoid the influence of knowledge regarding non-English
phonotactics). The rest of the story, shown in (3), explained
the importance of matching names to creatures and stressed
that the lists ‘inadvertently’ included non-English names
that should not be assigned to creatures.

since languages often have more tolerance of phonotactic
violations in borrowings than in the native vocabulary (e.g.,
McCauley 1968, Pierrehumbert 2006, Schutze 2005). We
also wanted to avoid asking speakers to ‘name’ the creatures
believing that such an instruction would unleash the
subjects’ creativity and perhaps lead them to choose the
strangest-sounding words to match the strangeness of the
novel creatures (although see Martin 2007 for corpus data
showing that even names of characters of role-playing
games produced (largely) by English speakers tend to obey
the phonotactics of English). Thus, the backstory is
designed to suggest to the speakers that the words to be
assigned to creatures should be ordinary English words that
speakers of English would be using in speech. In Schutze’s
(2005) terms, we are after the “dictionary scenario” where
the word is assumed to be unknown to the subject but to be
a regular English word that could be found in a big enough
dictionary of the right variety of the language. An important
goal for future work is to determine the extent to which
subjects’ behavior in the task is influenced by instructions.
The experimental slides, which followed the instruction
slides, are exemplified by Figure 1.

Figure 1: An experimental slide containing draggable and
playable sound files and creature animations.

(3) It appears that the colony was established by
speakers of both English and Wilkipaengo. Before
disappearing, the colonists recorded an archive of
messages.
Listening to the English, you notice some
unfamiliar words. The words appear to be names
for creatures common to Terra Enigmatica.
According to the recordings, some creatures are
benign while others are extremely dangerous and
may be responsible for wiping out the entire
colony!
Now you need to match the creatures you’ve
encountered to the names given to them by the
English-speaking colonists.
You are not interested in the Wilkipaengo
names that seem to have somehow crept into your
lists.
The backstory was designed to avoid the speakers treating
the nonsense words as loanwords from another language,

When a subject came to an experimental slide, s/he clicked
on ‘Play animations’, which played all creature animations
simultaneously. The animations were made using Electronic
Arts’ SporeTM and featured movement and animal sounds.
After playing the animations, the subject would double click
on the sound files of pseudowords on the left and drag the
desired sound files onto the creatures they name using the
computer mouse. This procedure avoids presenting subjects
with orthography (see Clopper & Pisoni 2007 for a related
free classification paradigm for acoustic stimuli). The
subjects could listen to the sound files as much as they
wanted to and could also replay creature animations if
desired. They were instructed to make sure that they listened
to all the words on a slide before proceeding to the next one.
There were six experimental slides, each containing six
animated creatures and twelve sound files of pseudowords.
Six of the pseudowords on each slide began with a
consonant cluster that is phonotactically illegal in English

2011

while six began with either a single consonant or a legal
consonant cluster. Consonant cluster legality was fully
crossed with vowel identity such that half of the words with
legal clusters contained one vowel, and half another vowel.
The vowels contained in words differed across slides, with
two slides featuring [i] and [a], two featuring [u] and [æ],
and two featuring [oʊ] and [eɪ]. The order in which vowel
pairs were presented was counterbalanced: half the subjects
were exposed to each of the slide sequences in (4).
(4) i/a  u/æ  eɪ/oʊ  u/æ  i/a  eɪ/oʊ
eɪ/oʊ  u/æ  i/a  eɪ/oʊ  u/æ  i/a
There were two matched sets of pseudowords such that
for each phonotactically illegal pseudoword there was a
legal pseudoword that differed from the illegal counterpart
only in the onset. All pseudowords had a (C)CVC structure.
The legal and illegal counterparts were never presented to
the same subject. Rather, they appeared in the same
positions on the same slides but for different subjects. This
was done to avoid presenting minimal pairs differing only in
the (legality of) the onset and thus perhaps drawing
abnormal degree of attention to phonotactics. Half of the
subjects assigned to each vowel sequence order received
each pseudoword set. The mappings between legal and
illegal clusters are shown in (5) with numbers of word pairs
exemplifying a mapping in parentheses.

Figure 2: The effect of phonotactic legality on a word’s
frequency of being assigned to any creature (maximum
possible difference = 20; pairs with no difference in
popularity between legal and illegal words (n=4) not
shown).
It is important to distinguish between underuse of legal
clusters, which could then be argued to have been perceived
as illegal by the subjects, and overuse of illegal clusters.
Figures 3 and 4 show that in the present case we are dealing
primarily with underuse of the legal clusters [dr] and [Cw]
(all words beginning with these clusters are shown as
darkened blocks in Figure 3) rather than overuse of the
corresponding illegal words.

(5) bd/bl (9), bn/bl (3), bn/br (1), bw/kw (1), bz/sp (3), bz/sk
(1), bz/bl (1), dg/dw (3), dg/dr (5), fn/fl (3), fn/fr (1),
gd/gl (3), gd/gr (3), kp/kw (6), ks/sk (3), lb/bl (4), lb/w
(3), sr/fl (1), nd/dr (1), nd/pl (1), pn/pl (2), pt/pr (2),
pw/pl (2), sr/sw (3), sr/tr (3), tk/tw (2), tn/tw (2)

Results and Discussion
The effect of phonotactic legality is shown in Figure 2.
Phonotactically legal words were significantly more likely
to be assigned to creatures than the corresponding
phonotactically illegal words (by items, t(71)=8.05,
p<1/1011; by subjects, t(39) = 5.57, p<1/105).
The legal/illegal pairs in which the illegal pseudoword
was (unexpecdtedly) used less often than the legal one are
drVC/dgVC (n=4), dwæʃ/dgæʃ, fneɪk/freɪk, kwum/kpum,
and twis/tnis.
Figure 3: The distribution of popularities of legal words
with the legal words beginning with /dr/ or /Cw/ shown
darkened

2012

pairings are shown in Figure 5. The likely explanation for
these preferred assignments is lexical analogy to the words
‘snake’ [sneɪk], ‘bloom’ [blum], and ‘blue’ [blu]
respectively: the creatures in question are the only snakelike, bloom-like, and blue creatures on their slides.

/fneɪk/
Figure 4: The distribution of popularities of illegal words.
Darkened blocks represent illegal words that are minimal
pairs for the legal words in Figure 3 (differing in onset
cluster)
/blun/
The underuse of /dr/ onsets may be due to the speaker’s
strong affrication of /d/ in these clusters, possibly resulting
in the cluster being perceived as the phonotactically illegal
cluster /dʒr/ by listeners who produce less affrication of /d/
in /dr/ (cf. Ohala 1981). The lack of preference for Cw over
illegal clusters may be due to the legal clusters having a
very low type frequency in English, which makes these
clusters, though legal, marginal (for effects of type
frequency on acceptability ratings, see Bailey & Hahn 2001,
Coleman & Pierrehumbert 1997, Frisch et al. 2000, in press,
Treiman et al. 2000).
Finally, the strong preference for /fneɪk/ over /freɪk/ (the
former is used by 8 more subjects than the latter and is the
most popular illegal word in the present study: the clear
outlier in Figure 4) is likely to be an effect of lexical
analogy to the word ‘snake’. To assess possible effects of
lexical analogy and sound symbolism, we tested whether
some words might be preferentially paired with certain
creatures by cross-tabulating sound files and the creatures
they are paired with and looking for cells with values that
are significantly higher than expected under the null
hypothesis. We tested three different null hypotheses: 1)
subjects are randomly pairing words with creatures within a
slide (which produces a 1/12 change of assigning a word to
a creature), 2) subjects randomly pair phonotactically legal
words with creatures within a slide, and 3) for each slide,
subjects choose a set of words to assign to creatures, and
then randomly match the words within the set with creatures
on the slide. With any of the three null hypotheses, there
were three words that were paired with particular pictures
more often than would be expected if the null hypothesis
were true. The words were /fneɪk/, /blun/, and /blut/
(assigned to their preferred creatures 43%, 42%, and 37% of
the time they were assigned to any creatures; p=.0005,
p=.0003, p=.0006 respectively according to the binomial
test with null hypothesis 3; the Bonferroni-adjusted critical
p value is .05/72=.0007). The preferred creature-word

/blut/
Figure 5: Non-random word-creature pairings.
Schutze (2005) objects that the “dictionary scenario”
(exemplified by our backstory) is inappropriate for use in
nonce probe tests of grammatical knowledge because of
being particularly subject to effects of lexical analogy. The
present findings confirm the presence of lexical analogy
effects in the scenario. However, we do not believe this
invalidates the use of the “dictionary scenario” in the
present paradigm even if one believes in grammar as a
cognitive module that is separate from the lexicon (Schutze
2005). Unlike in rating tasks, lexical analogy effects can be
detected (and factored out) in the present task by searching
for non-random picture-word co-occurrences. In order to
examine possible differences between rating tasks and
word-picture matching, we have conducted a wordlikeness
rating task where “1” meant “not at all like English words”
and “5” meant “very much like typical English words”. The
same pseudowords were used but no pictures were
presented. We observed that [fneɪk] received the highest
ratings out of all phonotactically illegal pseudowords. Given
the results of the picture-matching task, we would argue that
this result is due to lexical analogy to the word /sneɪk/. We
would not have been able to infer this based on the rating
data alone, leaving the effect unexplained.
The use of pictures in the present experiment may
discourage the use of phonological analogy to existing
words that are phonologically similar to the experimental
pseudowords but not semantically similar to any of the
pictures of the slide, e.g., the pseudoword /glog/ could be

2013

rated highly wordlike on analogy with /grog/ or /log/ but the
existence of /grog/ and /log/ might not lead the subjects to
assign /glog/ to a creature because /grog/ and /log/ are not
names for animals (or features of animals). This hypothesis
remains to be tested.
Both rating tasks and the present paradigm are limited by
the fact that phonotactically illegal sound sequences are
often misperceived as phonetically similar legal sequences
(Berent et al. 2007, Dupoux et al. 1999, Pitt 1998).
Furthermore, as Berent et al. (2007) show, phonotactically
illegal sequences are not equal in how likely they are to be
misperceived. In particular, typologically marked onsets
with falling sonority like /lg/ are more likely to be
misperceived by English speakers than onsets with flat
sonority like /bd/, which are less likely to be misperceived
than clusters with rising sonority like [bn] or [pw]. While
we might have expected that English listeners would judge
words beginning with /lg/ to be particularly unnatural and
would be unlikely to assign them to objects, the finding that
such clusters are most likely to be misperceived as legal
sound sequences (e.g., /ləg/) throws a wrench into this
expectation. Thus, it is a priori unclear whether illegal
clusters strongly violating sonority sequencing should be
assigned to creatures more often or less often than illegal
clusters that do not violate sonority sequencing (as much).
The breakdown of onsets by sonority is shown in Figure
6. Assuming that [s] is extrasyllabic, the optimality of the
sonority sequence in the onset rises from left to right.

sequencing. The effect of sonority on acceptability of illegal
clusters is thus ambiguous and requires perception data for
interpretation.
In future work, it appears important to supplement data
from picture-word matching with data on how the stimuli
are perceived by the same subjects. We expect that subjects
who often misperceive an illegal cluster as a related legal
sequence should be more likely to assign words containing
the cluster to pictures of novel objects. Nonetheless, the
presence of the effect of phonotactic legality in the present
data as well as in rating studies of phonotactics (Bailey &
Hahn 2001, Coleman & Pierrehumbert 1997, Frisch et al.
2000, in press, Treiman et al. 2000) shows that the
perceptual mechanism of repairing phonotactically illegal
sequences does not succeed in repairing the sequence 100%
of the time, leaving room for speakers to choose between
borrowing or retaining phonotactically legal and illegal
pseudowords, thus repairing phonotactic violations on the
lexical level (Berg 1998). The imperfection of perceptual
repair is what allows rating studies as well as the present
method to assess knowledge of phonotactics.
Following the completion of all experimental slides, we
asked subjects to review all creature animations and rate the
creatures’ size and cuteness. Subjective and objective
(height, width, area, thickness) measures of the size of a
creature, the height of F0 in the creatures’ vocalizations, and
ratings of creature cuteness did not correlate with the
presence or absence of any segments or segment features in
the words subjects assigned to the creature (all p>.1). Thus,
size sound symbolism did not seem to play an important
role in this experiment. We hypothesized that this may be
due to the presence of many dimensions other than size in
the visual stimuli. Figure 7 presents the results of an
ongoing follow-up study. Thus far 7 subjects have been
asked to name ten (5 big, 5 small) monochromatic 2dimensional creature pictures using 20 words (half
phonotactically illegal, half containing [i] or [u], half
containing [a] or [au]). As Figure 7 shows, words with high
vowels tended to be assigned to small creatures while words
with low vowels tended to be assigned to large creatures
(χ²(1)=8.21, p=.004). Thus, size sound symbolism effects
may be observed in the present task when size is a salient
dimension of variation for the presented objects.

Figure 6: Frequency of being assigned to any creature as a
function of sonority (C=”obstruent”). This figure does not
include /dr/ clusters.
There is a statistically significant difference between
C{z;s;n} and C{l;r} (W=349, p=.00001). However, there is
only a trend for {n;C}C clusters to be used less than
C{z;s;n} clusters (W=137, p=.034, which would not reach
pcritical with the Bonferroni correction), and /lb/ clusters are
assigned to creatures numerically more often than clusters
that should be more acceptable according to sonority

2014

Figure 7: An effect of size sound symbolism with
simpler creatures.

Conclusion
Asking subjects to match a set of pseudowords with a
smaller set of novel objects provides a new way to assess
the subjects’ knowledge of phonotactics. This method
provides important advantages over the traditional method
of assessing knowledge of phonotactics (acceptability or
wordlikeness ratings). First, the proposed method is a much
more direct way of assessing the influence of phonotactics
on lexical selection (found to operate in historical data by
Berg 1998 and Martin 2007). Second, the method facilitates
separating out and investigating the effects of lexical
analogy and may restrict the occurrence of lexical analogy
to words that are semantically related to the pictures,
although analogies based on such words may be more likely
in the present task than in rating. The method may also be
profitably used to examine the effect of sound symbolism
and how it competes with phonotactics.
This task does share some shortcomings with rating tasks.
First, it requires somewhat accurate perception of illegal
clusters. Given the evidence that phonotactically illegal
sequences are often misperceived as similar legal sequences
(e.g., Berent et al. 2007, Dupoux et al. 1999, Pitt 1998), the
present task should ideally be followed by an assessment of
the same subjects’ perception of the stimuli. This might be
accomplished using discrimination, transcription or
identification tasks, or testing for the presence/absence of
identity priming between the similar-sounding legal and
illegal sound sequences (Berent et al. 2007, Dupoux et al.
1999, Pitt 1998). Second, the present instructions still
require subjects to explicitly judge whether or not the
presented words could be words of English. Future work
should investigate the importance of this instruction.
Finally, the principal disadvantage of the present task
compared to rating is that subjects perform the task much
more slowly than a comparable rating task (the subjects in
the word-picture matching version of the present task took
on average 15 minutes to go through the 72 words, while a
rating task using the same words took only 3 minutes). A
possible way to reduce the time demands is to present fewer
words and pictures per slide, thus simplifying the decision.
The principal potential disadvantage of such a move is a
reduction in the possibilities for detecting effects of lexical
analogy due to an even more restricted set of referents to be
assigned to the words.

References
Bailey, T., & Hahn, U. (2001). Determinants of
wordlikeness: Phonotactics or lexical neighborhoods?
Journal of Memory & Language, 44, 568–91.
Berent, I., Steriade, D., Lennertz, T., & Vaknin V. (2007).
What we know about what we have never heard:
Evidence from perceptual illusions. Cognition, 104, 591–
630.
Berg, T. (1998). Linguistic structure and change: An
explanation from language processing. Oxford: Oxford

University Press.
Chomsky, N.., & Halle, M. (1965). Some controversial
questions in phonological theory. Journal of Linguistics,
1, 97–138.
Clopper, C., & Pisoni, D. B. (2007). Free classification of
regional dialects of American English. Journal of
Phonetics, 35, 421-38.
Coleman, J. S., & Pierrehumbert, J. (1997). Stochastic
phonological grammars and acceptability. In Third
Meeting of the ACL Special Interest Group in
Computational Phonology (pp. 49–56). Somerset, NJ:
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Diffloth, G. (1994). i: big, a: small. In L. Hinton, J. Nichols,
& J. J. Ohala, eds. Sound symbolism. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Dupoux, E., Kakehi, K., Hirose, Y., Pallier, C., & Mehler, J.
(1999). Epenthetic vowels in Japanese: A perceptual
illusion? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception & Performance, 25, 1568-78.
Frisch, S. A., Brea-Spahn, M. R., & Orellana, C. I. (In
press). Metalinguistic judgments of phonotactics by
bilinguals. Laboratory Phonology, 11.
Frisch, S. A., Large, N. R., & Pisoni, D. B. (2000).
Perception of wordlikeness: Effects of segment
probability and length on the processing of nonwords.
Journal of Memory & Language, 42, 481-96.
Martin, A. (2007). The evolving lexicon. PhD Dissertation,
UCLA.
McCauley, J. (1968). The Phonological Component of a
Grammar of Japanese. The Hague: Mouton.
Ohala, J. J. (1981). The listener as a source of sound change.
Chicago Linguistic Society, 17-2, 178-203.
Pierrehumbert, J. (2006). The statistical basis of an
unnatural alternation. Laboratory Phonology, 8, 81-107.
Pitt, M. A. (1998). Phonological processes and the
perception of phonotactically illegal consonant clusters.
Perception & Psychophysics, 60, 941–51.
Sapir, E. (1929). A study in experimental symbolism.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 12, 225-39.
Schutze, C. T. (2005). Thinking about what we are asking
speakers to do. In S. Kepser & M. Reis, eds. Linguistic
evidence: Empirical, theoretical, and computational
perspectives. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Shademan, S. (2005). Is phonotactic knowledge
grammatical knowledge? Proceedings of the West Coast
Conference on Formal Linguistics, 25, 371-9.
Treiman, R., Kessler, B., Knewasser, S., Tincoff, R. &
Bowman, M. (2000). English speakers’ sensitivity to
phonotactic patterns. Laboratory Phonology, 5, 269-82.
Ultan, R. (1978). Size sound symbolism. In J. H. Greenberg,
C. R. Ferguson, & E. A. Moravcsik, eds. Universals of
human language, vol. 2. Stanford: Stanford University
Press.

2015

