UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Is it me or the world? 16-month-olds distinguish competing hypotheses about the cause of
failed interventions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8qd1z4h0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Gweon, Hyowon
Schulz, Laura

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Is it me or the world? 16-month-olds distinguish competing hypotheses about the
cause of failed interventions
Hyowon Gweon (hyora@mit.edu) and Laura E. Schulz (lschulz@mit.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 021 USA
Abstract
When an agent fails to make an object function properly,
there are two possibilities: the agent did something wrong or
something is wrong with the object. As in all problems of
confounding, these hypotheses can be disambiguated by
varying one factor and holding the other constant: in this case,
either by holding the object constant and varying the agent
(e.g., by asking for help from others) or by holding the agent
constant and varying the object (e.g., by trying another
object). Here we show that 16-month-old infants engage in
distinct patterns of behavior depending on the relative
probability of the competing hypotheses: they ask for help
more often when they (rather than the object) are the probable
cause of failure; they reach for a new object more often when
the object (rather than themselves) is the probable cause of
failure.
Keywords: infants, confounding, exploratory behavior,
ambiguous evidence, asking for help.

Imagine that you are trying to get into a new office but the
key doesn’t work. You jiggle it for a minute and then assess
your options. What you choose to do next depends on what
hypothesis you think is most probable: if you think you are
having trouble positioning the key, you might ask a friend
for help; if you think you picked up the wrong key, you will
probably try a different one.
As intentional agents, we frequently plan and carry out
goal-directed actions. Most of the time, these actions are
successful. However, when we experience failure, we can
experience not only the frustration of our intentions but also
a problem of confounded evidence. Did we do something
wrong or was something wrong in the world?
This problem of “me or the world” is perhaps the most
common example of confounded causal variables that we
encounter in everyday life. Of course, the variables “me”
and “the world” can sometimes be more precisely defined.
In the key example for instance, if you are the problem, you
might have put the key in upside down, turned it in the
wrong direction, or lack fine motor coordination.
Alternatively, if you believe the problem lies in the world,
the door might be jammed, or the lock might have been
changed. However, these distinctions are subordinate to the
primary problem of discovering whether you or the world is
the culprit. When things go wrong, how do we identify the
locus of failure?
As in any causally confounded situation, changing one
variable at a time can disambiguate the evidence. Assuming
that changing either variable is possible and equally costly,

a rational agent who wants to generate the effect should
change the variable that seems most likely to be the source
of the failure. If I think I’m the problem, I should hold the
object constant and vary the agent (e.g., ask my friend to
help); if I think the object poses the problem, I should hold
myself constant and vary the object (e.g., try a new key).
There are many reasons to believe that recognizing, let
alone solving, problems of confounding between the self
and the world might require substantial expertise. Indeed,
previous research suggests that both children and adults
have difficulty recognizing when information is ambiguous
(Penner & Klahr, 1996) and designing experiments that
could generate informative evidence (Chen & Klahr, 1999;
Koslowski, 1996; Kuhn, 1989). Such studies of formal
scientific reasoning however, typically involve many
hypotheses, including those that conflict with the learners’
prior beliefs. In contexts where there are only two
competing hypotheses and both are familiar and plausible,
children seem to be sensitive to confounding at a much
younger age (Gweon & Schulz, 2008; Kushnir & Gopnik,
2005; Schulz & Bonawitz, 2007; Sodian, Zaitchik, & Carey,
1991). Thus in simple cases, even very young children
might be sensitive to competing hypotheses.
While a sensitivity to confounded variables might enable
young children to recognize the “me vs. the world” problem,
deconfounding the self and the world requires children to
understand how to intervene on each variable. For example,
imagine a simple confounded situation where a child tries a
novel toy and fails to make it work; the child needs to
understand that other people (‘the agent’ variable), and other
toys of the same kind (‘the world’ variable), can both serve
as useful sources of information. Here we briefly review
some previous studies that suggest that even very young
children might be capable of such an understanding.
A large body of literature on social referencing in infancy
suggests that infants readily treat their caregivers as sources
of information about the emotional valence of events (Sorce,
Emde, Campos, & Klinnert, 1985; Walden & Ogan, 1988)
and the referent of adults’ attention (Baldwin, 1993;
Carpenter, Nagell, Tomasello, Butterworth, & Moore, 1998).
Moreover, infants use the information to regulate their own
behavior. In particular, O’Neill (1996) showed that twoyear-olds will request help from a knowledgeable (but not
ignorant) parent in retrieving a hidden object, suggesting
that toddlers not only look to parents for the information
they might provide but also actively solicit such information.

2846

Children’s imitation of object-directed actions is also
often interpreted as an indication that children perceive
others as agents like themselves (the ‘like me’ hypothesis;
Meltzoff & Brooks, 2001) and use adult actions for
information about how to interact with an object (Gergely,
Bekkering, & Kiraly, 2002; Gopnik & Meltzoff, 1994).
Notably, children are more likely to imitate an adult’s goaldirected action if they themselves have previously failed to
generate a target outcome than if they have succeeded
(Williamson, Meltzoff, & Markman, 2008) which suggests
that young children can use adult actions as evidence about
the cause of their own failures, and modify their own actions
accordingly.
Such studies speak to children’s understanding of other
agents as potential sources of information about objects in
the world. What about children’s understanding that one
object can be informative about other members of the object
kind? Previous research has shown that preschoolers
generalize non-obvious properties (like squeaking or
magnetism) from one member of a kind to others (Gopnik &
Sobel, 2000; Nazzi & Gopnik, 2000). Moreover, children
maintain this expectation even when one exemplar fails to
function as expected (Schulz, Standing, & Bonawitz, 2008).
Indeed, 9-month-old infants can generalize a property of an
object to other identical-looking object after a single
exposure (Baldwin, Markman, & Melartin, 1993), and by 15
months infants can even integrate information about how
the exemplars are sampled in their inferences about object
properties (Gweon, Tenenbaum, & Schulz, 2010). These
studies establish that children expect object properties to
generalize across similar-looking objects, maintain that
expectation even when they themselves fail to elicit the
expected property, and, having experienced failure, can both
solicit help from caregivers and act on other similar objects.
This study however, is the first to investigate the possibility
that infants might be sensitive to competing hypotheses for
why their actions fail, and might rationally trade-off actions
directed towards agents and actions directed towards objects.
Here we ask whether 16-month-old infants implicitly
recognize the ambiguity in a failed attempt to activate a toy.
We predict that children should be more likely to ask for
help when they themselves are the probable source of failure
and more likely to test another toy when the probable cause
of failure lies in the toy itself.

Experiment
In the current study, we introduce infants to three identicallooking toys, differing only in color (Green, Yellow, and
Red). The experimenter shows the child that she can push a
button on the Green toy and the toy will make music. In the
Agent condition, the experimenter then hands the child the
Green toy; in the Object condition, the experimenter hands
the child the Yellow toy. All the children are allowed to try
to activate their toy. However, because the Green toy is
actually activated by a hidden switch and the Yellow toy is
inert, the toys never activate for the infants.

The condition manipulation is designed to affect the
relative probability of the two hypotheses for why the toy
fails to activate. In the Agent condition, the hypothesis that
the toy is broken is relatively improbable given that the toy
had just worked moments before; the hypothesis that the
child herself is doing something wrong should seem more
probable. By contrast, in the Object condition, where the
child’s toy has never activated, the hypothesis that the toy
doesn’t work should seem more probable than the
hypothesis that the child herself is doing something wrong
(given that the button is conspicuous and easy to press).
Thus, we created a situation in which infants might
differentially weigh the two hypotheses about the cause of
the failure. In both cases however, infants had identical
sources of information that they could use to resolve the
ambiguity. All children were seated next to their parents.
By turning and asking their parent for help with the toy they
had, they could test the ‘agent’ variable. All children could
also reach for the Red toy, which sat on the end of a piece of
felt cloth. By pointing to the Red toy or pulling the piece of
felt cloth they could try to retrieve a toy of the same kind
and test ‘the object’ variable. (We placed the Red toy at a
distance to ensure that all infants would initially attend to
the toy they were given.) Because previous research
indicates that infants reliably understand the intentional
structure of action in a cloth-pulling sequence by the age of
12 months (e.g., Sommerville & Woodward, 2005), we
recruited infants slightly older than this age and verified in a
warm-up period that they can pull the cloth to retrieve a toy.
We hypothesized that the infants’ behavior would be
sensitive to the relative probability of the competing
hypotheses. Therefore, we predicted that infants in the
Agent condition should be more likely to appeal to their
parents; infants in the Object condition should be more
likely to reach for the other toy.

Methods
Participants
Thirty infants (mean: 16 months, 10 days;
range: 14 – 20 months; 47% girls) were recruited from a
local children’s museum; infants were randomly assigned to
an Agent condition or an Object condition (n =
15/condition). Six infants were replaced due to parental
interference or experimental error. Two additional infants
were replaced because they did not pull the cloth to retrieve
a toy during the warm-up procedure. (See Procedure.)
Finally, two infants (one in each condition) were excluded
from analyses because they never showed any of the target
behaviors. (See Results.)
Materials One commercially available toy (a plastic fish)
was used during the warm-up period. Three similar-looking
novel toys were built by attaching a wooden stick (10 cm in
length) to a round plastic container (4 inches in diameter).
The toys resembled small hand drums with handles. A
square-shaped button (2 x 2 x 1 cm) was attached to the top
of the container. This button was inert. Each object was
covered with green, red, or yellow electrical tape and felt

2847

child and was not within direct reach of the child’s hands.
She placed the other end of the felt cloth on the child’s tray
within easy reach of the child. Then, the experimenter
handed the child either the Green toy (Agent condition) or
the Yellow toy (Object condition) and said, “Here you go,
you can go ahead and play!” She took the basket with the
remaining toy (the Yellow toy in the Agent condition: the
Green toy in the Object condition) out of the child’s line of
sight. The child’s behavior was videotaped for 90 seconds
(24 children) or until the child fussed-out (6 children); all
but one of the infants who stopped playing before 90
seconds played for at least 60 seconds. The remaining infant
was in the Object condition and played for 35 seconds.
There was no difference between conditions in children’s
mean length of free play (Agent Condition: mean 89
seconds; Object Condition: mean 84 seconds, p = ns).
Figure 1: Schematic drawing of the experimental
setup and procedure. R (Red), G(Green), Y (Yellow)
refer to the color of the toys.

Results

cloth. The Green toy had a small battery-powered circuit
that was operated by a hidden switch at the bottom of the
container: when the toy was laid flat on a hard surface and
the fake button was pressed down, the real switch depressed
and the toy played a musical tune (creating the appearance
that pushing the fake button activated the toy). Children sat
in a highchair. The tray on the high chair was covered with
white felt, creating a surface that was too soft to activate the
real switch at the bottom of the Green toy. The Green toy
never worked on this tray when the fake button was pressed.
The Red and Yellow toys did not have a musical mechanism
inside, but contained play-dough so that all three toys were
matched in approximate weight.
Procedure All children were tested individually in a quiet
room inside the museum. The children sat in the highchair
and the parents sat next to them on a chair. (See Figure 1 for
experimental setup and stimuli.) Parents were instructed not
to interact with the toys and only to smile and nod if the
child addressed them. They were given a brochure about the
study and asked to read it during the experimental procedure.
Once the child was positioned in the highchair, the
experimenter put a piece of orange felt cloth (approx. 20 x
75 cm) on the table and placed the warm-up toy on one end
of the cloth. She pulled the cloth towards herself and
retrieved the toy. Then she encouraged the infant to pull the
cloth. Infants who did not pull the cloth and retrieve the toy
after two demonstrations were excluded from analysis and
replaced.
The experimenter removed the warm-up toy and
introduced the child to a basket containing the Green, Red,
and Yellow toys. She took the Green toy out, put it on the
table, and pressed the button on top of the toy to play the
music. She demonstrated this three times. Then she showed
the child the basket containing the other two toys. She took
out the Red toy and placed it on one end of the felt cloth.
The toy was approximately 70 centimeters away from the

For our preliminary analyses, we looked at whether all the
children imitated the experimenter’s action on the toy and
whether they were equally persistent in the Agent condition
(where they were given the same toy on which the action
had been modeled) and the Object condition (where they
had to make an inductive generalization from the Green toy
to the Yellow toy). Given previous research suggesting that
even 9-month-olds readily make such generalizations
(Baldwin et al., 1993), we did not expect any difference in
their button-pushing behavior. Indeed, all but one infant
immediately (within two seconds) pressed the inert button
on the toy in front of them. There was no difference in the
frequency of children’s button-pushing attempts in the two
conditions (Agent Condition: mean 3.0 times; Object
Condition: mean 3.2 times, p = ns).
We also used two different measures to look at whether
parents differentially cued the infants to ask for help in the
two conditions. Two coders, blind to hypotheses and
conditions, coded from videotape; the monitor was partially
covered with a cardboard occluder so that only the parent
was visible. One coder was asked to make Yes/No
judgments about whether the parent ever encouraged the
child to ask for help. A second coder rated parents’ attempts
to initiate communication on a scale from 1 (no attempts to
communicate) to 7 (repeated attempts to communicate).
There was no difference between conditions on either
measure (% of Yes judgments = 7% in both conditions;
mean rating: 1.71 (Agent) vs. 1.79 (Object), p = ns).
The primary measure of interest was whether children’s first
response to failure was directed towards their parents or to
the other toy. To determine this, we coded three target
behaviors: Ask, Point, and Pull. The criteria for coding a
behavior as Ask was that the child turned to the parent1 and
1
The infants could also have asked the experimenter for help.
However, the experimenter stood behind the high chair during the
free play period and acted busy (i.e., by writing something on a
clipboard). Therefore, although there were a few cases where the
infants looked as if they wanted the experimenter’s attention, we
did not include these attempts as one of our target behaviors.

2848

Figure 3: Data excluding Point behavior. 3a. %
infants who Asked or Pulled first in each
condition. 3b: % infants who ever Asked or Pulled
during free play in each condition.

Figure 2: Experimental results. 2a. % infants
Asking first or Pointing/Pulling first in each
condition. 2b. % infants ever Asking or
Pointing/Pulling in each condition (infants can
perform more than one behavior, so the combined
percentage within a condition can exceed 100).
2c and 2d. Same as 2a and 2b, respectively, but
showing Point and Pull separately.
tried to give her the inoperative toy or grabbed the parent’s
hand and tried to bring it towards the inoperative toy (the
Green toy in the Agent condition; the Yellow toy in the
Object condition). We coded Point as a finger point to the
Red toy or a direct reach for the Red toy. We coded Pull as
pulling on the cloth and successfully retrieving the Red Toy.
We predicted that children’s first response to failure would
be to Ask for help in the Agent condition but to Point or
Pull in the Object condition. Additionally we coded whether
infants ever showed the three target behaviors during free
play, the latency to their first target behavior, and what they
did with the Red toy if they retrieved it. The data for three
target actions were originally coded by the experimenter,
but also coded by an observer blind to hypotheses and
conditions. The inter-coder reliability was high (Cohen’s
kappa = 92.6); using the data from the blind-coder did not
change the results. All but two infants (one in each
condition) performed at least one of the three target
behaviors during the course of their free play; these two
children were eliminated from subsequent analyses.
As predicted, children were significantly more likely to
Ask First than Point or Pull first in the Agent condition than
the Object condition (!2 (1, N = 28) = 7.04, p < 0.01). In the
Agent condition, 10 infants (71%) Asked first and 4 infants
(29%) Pointed or Pulled first; in the Object condition, 3
infants Asked first (21%); 11 infants (79%) Pointed or
Pulled first. Within conditions, children were marginally
more likely to Ask first than Point/Pull in the Agent
condition (p < 0.10 by binomial test) and more likely to
Point/Pull first than Ask in the Object condition (p < 0.05 by
binomial test). See Figure 2a.
We also looked at how many infants in each condition
exhibited each of the target behaviors at least once during

the course of their free play. Children were more likely to
Ask for help over the course of their free play in the Agent
condition than the Object condition (!2 (1, N = 28) = 5.6, p
< 0.05, see Figure 2b.). Twelve infants (86%) in the Object
condition Asked at some point; only 6 infants (43%) did so
in the Object condition. Similarly, there was a trend for
children to be more likely to Point to or Pull the red object
in the Object condition than the Agent condition: 11 infants
(79%) Pointed/Pulled at some point in the Agent condition
whereas all 14 infants (100%) did so in the Object condition
(!2 (1, N = 28) = 3.36, p = .07). See Figures 2c and 2d for
the first target action and any instance of the target actions
broken down by each of the three target behaviors.
There was no difference between conditions in the mean
latency to the first target action (Agent condition, mean:
19.3 s; Object condition, mean: 25.4 s, p = ns). This
suggests that the children in the two conditions were
approximately matched in their motivation to act. There was
also no difference in latency between the agent-directed and
object-directed actions (Ask: 20.5 s; Point/Pull: 26.6 s, p =
ns). This suggests that the agent-directed and object-directed
actions were equivalently easy for the children to perform.
Although there was no overall latency difference, the
Pulling action occurred (non-significantly) later than the
Ask or Point actions (because most children in both
conditions pointed before they pulled). Prima facie, Point is
a less complex action than either Ask or Pull. Point required
only a finger movement whereas Ask required the child to
try to hand the object to the parent or to try to place the
parent’s hand on the object and Pull required a means/end
sequence. We believe the collapsed Point/Pull measure is
the correct measure of children’s interest in the distal object
as there is little doubt from the videotapes that infants coded
as Pointing were unambiguously asking for the Red toy.
However, to match for the overall complexity of the action
sequence, we looked at whether infants were more likely to
Ask or Pull first if the Point measure is excluded. Under this
analysis, and excluding infants whose only target behavior
was pointing (one child in the Agent condition; three
children in the Object condition) infants were more likely to
Ask than Pull in the Agent condition compared to the Object
condition (!2 (1, N = 24) = 11.7, p < 0.001; see Figure 3a).
Within conditions, infants in the Agent condition were more
likely to Ask than Pull (12 Ask first, 1 Pull first; p < 0.01 by
binomial test); infants in the Object condition were equally

2849

likely to Ask and Pull (4 Ask first, 7 Pull first p = ns, by
binomial test).
Looking at any instance of Asking or
Pulling over the course of free play, infants in the two
conditions again tended to show different patterns of
behavior (!2 (1, N = 24) = 3.03, p = .08; Agent condition: 12
Ask overall, 5 Pull overall; Object condition: 6 Ask overall,
9 Pull overall; See Figure 3b).
Finally, of those infants who pulled the cloth and
successfully retrieved the Red toy (5 infants in the Agent
condition; 9 agents in the Object condition), all but one
immediately (within 2 seconds) pressed the button on the
Red toy, suggesting that infants did indeed retrieve the toy
in order to see whether they could make the toy go.

Discussion
These results suggest that when an object fails to function as
expected, 16-month-old infants entertain competing
hypotheses about the cause of the failure and act on the most
probable hypothesis. Not only did almost every child (28
out of 30) actively try to elicit information from the
available sources (another agent or another object), they
selectively accessed different sources of information given
different evidence about the likely cause for the failure.
When the hypothesis that the agent caused the failure was
more probable than the hypothesis that the toy was broken
(because infants were given a toy that worked for the
experimenter), the majority of infants asked their parents for
help. In this condition, varying the ‘agent’ variable is the
most effective strategy: if you’re doing something wrong,
doing the same thing with a different object will not solve
the problem. By contrast, when the hypothesis that their toy
was broken was more probable than the hypothesis that they
were doing something wrong (because infants were given a
similar but non-identical toy), the majority of infants
reached for a new object. In this condition, trying another
exemplar is the most effective strategy: if a toy is broken,
asking someone else to act on the broken toy will not solve
the problem. These results suggest that infants rationally
trade-off help-seeking and object-exploration behaviors
depending on the relative probability of the two hypotheses.
Are there alternative ways of accounting for the results?
One possibility is that infants’ differential behavior across
conditions might reflect different affective responses to
differentially frustrating situations rather than active
requests for information. The manipulation was set up so
that infants in the Agent condition would have a stronger
expectation that their toy should work than infants in the
Object condition. Arguably, infants in the Agent condition
might have been more frustrated by their failure, and more
likely to turn to their parents than infants in the Object
condition. Conversely, infants in the Object condition
arguably had a more “boring” toy than infants in the Agent
condition (because they had never seen their toy activated).
They thus may have been more motivated to discard it and
reach for a new toy than infants in the Agent condition.
Further research is needed to definitively rule out these
accounts but we believe that the current data renders both

explanations unlikely. First, differential frustration or
boredom might be indicated by a difference in children’s
overall playtime between conditions but children played just
as long in the Agent condition as the Object condition.
Second, infants in the Agent condition who asked their
parents for help did not show any signs of upset and did not
look for comfort. They handed their parents the toy or tried
to place their parents’ hands on the toy but they did not
cling to their parents or fuss out. Similarly, there was no
indication that infants in the Object condition were more
bored by the toy than infants in the Agent condition. Infants
in the Object condition were just as likely to push the button
on the toy as infants in the Agent condition, and they pushed
the button just as persistently. Moreover, infants in the
Object condition who retrieved the red toy immediately
tried the button on the red toy. These behaviors suggest that
infants in the Object condition expected that the toys would
work and were strongly motivated to try to activate them.
Thus the alternative accounts are inconsistent with how
infants used the two different means: rather than reflecting
frustration or boredom, infants’ behavior is consistent with
an attempt to generate an effective intervention. As noted
however, conclusively distinguishing these possibilities
requires further research. If for instance, an irrelevant
distracter toy (rather than the Red toy) is placed at the end
of the cloth, there should be no differences between the two
conditions. We are currently running this control.
We note that the current study falls short of looking at
whether children learn from the source of information they
choose. That is, we cannot distinguish between the
possibility that infants are taking the most rational steps to
try to generate an outcome and the possibility that infants
are (additionally) using the disambiguating evidence to
determine the cause of the initial failure. In the current study,
we deliberately asked the parents not to touch the toy, and
the Red toy on the cloth was always inert. In future studies,
we aim to look at whether learning occurs by studying
infants’ responses to different information that other people
or other toys might provide. Imagine for instance, that if
children retrieve the Red toy, it works for half the children
and is inert for the other half. This evidence should give the
children different information about the Yellow toy: if the
Red toy works, the yellow toy is probably broken; if the Red
toy does not work, it is now more probable that the child
herself is the source of the failure. Thus if the Red toy is
removed and the Yellow toy is returned to the children, they
should be more likely to discard it if the Red toy worked,
and more likely to ask for help if the Red toy failed. This
would suggest that the infants’ interventions not only serve
the purpose of helping them make things happen but also
help children disambiguate evidence to support causal
learning. This research is also currently underway.
The study proposed above might also help clarify whether
infants actually entertain the two competing hypotheses
simultaneously, or whether only one of the two is
considered in a given context. In the current study, some
children who pulled the cloth and confirmed that the Red

2850

toy did not work subsequently turned to their caregivers and
asked for help. This suggests the possibility that children
might indeed consider both hypotheses and act on the one
favored by the evidence. Whether infants’ choices of actions
change dynamically given evidence that favors different
hypotheses is an exciting topic for future research.
The current results however, already reveal impressive
abilities in 16-month-old infants. There is abundant
evidence that young children both ask adults for help
(Dunham, Dunham, & O'Keefe, 2000; O'Neill, 1996) and
explore objects in the world (Bonawitz, Shafto, Gweon,
Spelke, & Schulz, submitted; Gweon & Schulz, 2008;
Piaget, 1930; Gweon, Tenenbaum, & Schulz, 2010). This
study goes beyond previous work in suggesting that infants’
actively trade-off these two alternatives. Infants not only
consider competing hypotheses about the failure of goaldirected actions, but also choose different means to resolve
the ambiguity depending on which hypothesis is more
probable. In the face of failure to achieve a goal, 16-monthold infants do not simply look to their parents nor do they
simply move on to a new toy. Instead, they are able to infer
the likely cause for their failure, and flexibly and rationally
adjust their behavior. In solving the problem of assigning
causal responsibility to themselves or the world, infants
might lay the earliest foundations for scientific inquiry.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Stephanie Tong for help with data collection.
This research was supported by an NSF Faculty Early
Career Development Award, a John Templeton Foundation
Award, and James S. McDonnell Foundation Collaborative
Interdisciplinary Grant on Causal Reasoning to L.S.

References
Baldwin, D. A. (1993). Infants' ability to consult the speaker
for clues to word reference. Journal of Child Language,
20(2), 395-418.
Baldwin, D. A., Markman, E. M., & Melartin, R. L. (1993).
Infants' ability to draw inferences about nonobvious
object properties: evidence from exploratory play. Child
Development, 64(3), 711-728.
Bonawitz, E. B., Shafto, P., Gweon, H., Spelke, E. S., &
Schulz, L. E. (submitted). The double-edged sword of
pedagogy: Teaching limits children’s spontaneous
exploration and discovery.
Carpenter, M., Nagell, K., Tomasello, M., Butterworth, G.,
& Moore, C. (1998). Social cognition, joint attention, and
communicative competence from 9 to 15 months of age.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development, 63(4).
Chen, Z., & Klahr, D. (1999). All other things being equal:
Acquisition and transfer of the control of variables
strategy. Child Development, 70(5), 1098-1120.
Dunham, P., Dunham, F., & O'Keefe, C. (2000). Two-yearolds' sensitivity to a parent's knowledge state: Mind
reading or contextual cues? British Journal of
Developmental Psychology, 18(4), 519-532.

Gergely, G., Bekkering, H., & Kiraly, I. (2002). Rational
imitation in preverbal infants. Nature, 415(6873), 755.
Gopnik, A., & Meltzoff, A. N. (Eds.). (1994). Minds,
bodies, and persons: Young children's understanding of
the self and others as reflected in imitation and "theory of
mind" research. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Gweon, H., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Schulz, L. E. (in press).
Infants consider both the sample and the sampling process
in inductive generalization. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences.
Gweon, H., & Schulz, L. E. (2008). Stretching to learn:
Ambiguous evidence and variability in preschoolers'
exploratory play. Proceedings of the 30th annual meeting
of the Cognitive Science Society, 570-574.
Koslowski, B. (1996). Theory and evidence: The
development of scientific reasoning. Cambridge, MA: The
MIT Press.
Kuhn, D. (1989). Children and adults as intuitive scientists.
Psychological Review, 96(4), 674-689.
Kushnir, T., & Gopnik, A. (2005). Young children infer
causal strength from probabilities and interventions.
Psychological Science, 16(9), 678-683.
Meltzoff, A., & Brooks, R. (2001). "Like me" as a building
block for understanding other minds: bodily acts,
attention, and intention. In B. F. Malle, L. J. Moses & D.
A. Baldwin (Eds.), Intentions and intentionality:
Foundations of social cognition. Cambridge MA: The
MIT Press.
O'Neill, D. (1996). Two-year-old children's sensitivity to a
parent's knowledge state when making requests. Child
Development, 67(2), 659-677.
Penner, D., & Klahr, D. (1996). The interaction of domainspecific knowledge and domain-general discovery
strategies: A study with sinking objects. Child
Development, 67(6), 2709-2727.
Piaget, J. (1930). The child's conception of physical
causality: New York: Harcourt, Brace.
Schulz, L. E., & Bonawitz, E. B. (2007). Serious fun:
preschoolers engage in more exploratory play when
evidence is confounded. Developmental Psychology,
43(4), 1045-1050.
Sodian, B., Zaitchik, D., & Carey, S. (1991). Young
children's differentiation of hypothetical beliefs from
evidence. Child Development, 62(4), 753-766.
Sommerville, J., & Woodward, A. (2005). Pulling out the
intentional structure of action: the relation between action
processing and action production in infancy. Cognition,
95(1), 1-30.
Sorce, J., Emde, R., Campos, J., & Klinnert, M. (1985).
Maternal emotional signaling: Its effect on the visual cliff
behavior of 1-year-olds. Developmental Psychology,
21(1), 195-200.
Walden, T., & Ogan, T. (1988). The development of social
referencing. Child Development, 1230-1240.
Williamson, R., Meltzoff, A., & Markman, E. (2008). Prior
experiences and perceived efficacy influence 3-year-olds'
imitation. Developmental Psychology, 44(1), 275-285.

2851

