UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Language specific preferences in anaphor resolution: Exposure or Gricean maxims?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8kq1b40b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Hemforth, Barbara
Konieczny, Lars
Scheepers, Christoph
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Language specific preferences in anaphor resolution: Exposure or Gricean maxims?
Barbara Hemforth (barbara.hemforth@parisdescartes.fr)
Laboratoire de Psychologie et de Neuropsychologie Cognitives, CNRS, Université Paris Descartes,
71 ave Edouard Vaillant, 92100 Boulogne-Billancourt, France

Lars Konieczny (lars@cognition.uni-freiburg.de)
Center for Cognitive Science, University of Freiburg, Friedrichstr. 50, 79098 Freiburg, Germany

Christoph Scheepers (c.scheepers@psy.gla.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Glasgow, 58 Hillhead Street, Glasgow, Scotland

Savéria Colonna (Saveria.Colonna@univ-paris8.fr)
Laboratoire Structure Formelles du Langage, CNRS, Université Paris 8, 59-61 rue Pouchet, 75849 Paris Cedex 17

Sarah Schimke (sarah.schimke@sfl.cnrs.fr)
Laboratoire Structure Formelles du Langage, CNRS, Université Paris 8, 59-61 rue Pouchet, 75849 Paris Cedex 17

Peter Baumann (p.bau@web.de)
Center for Cognitive Science, University of Freiburg, Friedrichstr. 50, 79098 Freiburg, Germany

Joël Pynte (joël.pynte@parisdescartes.fr)
Laboratoire de Psychologie et de Neuropsychologie Cognitives, CNRS, Université Paris Descartes,
71 ave Edouard Vaillant, 92100 Boulogne-Billancourt, France
Abstract

(1)

In this paper we will present evidence for language specific
preferences in anaphor resolution from two series of
experiments in English, German, and French. For within
sentence anaphor resolution with “before” subclauses, we will
show that English and German follow the generally assumed
preference for the first mentioned NP or subject of the
sentence, whereas French shows a clear preference for the
object of the matrix clause. We will argue that our data can
most easily be explained by a usage-based account, linking
comprehension preferences to production preferences.
Keywords: Sentence processing; anaphor resolution;
crosslinguistic differences; usage-based preferences

Introduction
It has been shown for many languages that the resolution of
non-reflexive pronouns is strongly influenced by pragmatic
factors such as topicality (in the sentence or in the
discourse; Givon, 1983), the chain of causality, and other
kinds of discourse relations (e.g. Kehler, 2002; Sanders &
Noordman, 2000). On the sentence level, two of the factors
that seem to play a role are a preference for the first
mentioned antecedent (Gernsbacher, 1990), and a preference
for the subject (Jaervikivi, van Gompel, Hyöna, & Bertram,
2005). These preferences are assumed to be valid across
languages so that for subject-verb-object sentences like (1) a
preference for the first noun phrase would generally be
predicted, given that it is mentioned first and the subject at
the same time.

English: The postman met the streetsweeper
before he went home.
French: Le facteur a rencontré le balayeur avant
qu'il rentre à la maison.
German: Der Briefträger hat den Strassenfeger
getroffen bevor er nach Hause ging.

More language specific predictions can be derived from
accounts based on the availability of alternative
constructions in the grammar of a particular language.
According to the Gricean Maxim of Manner (Clarity),
speakers should avoid ambiguous constructions in choosing
unambiguous alternatives if they exist. If for an ambiguous
construction an unambigous alternative exists for one of the
readings, listeners may thus assume that the speaker would
have chosen this alternative for the respective reading. From
this reasoning, a preference for the reading without an
unambiguous alternative will result for the ambiguous
construction.
In this paper, we will compare closely matched
constructions in English, French, and German (see examples
2-5) to investigate cross-linguistic differences in pronoun
resolution. What makes the comparison of these languages
particularly interesting, is the distribution of alternative
constructions for the different interpretations of an
ambiguous sentence like (1): In French, a highly frequent
construction exists for binding an anaphoric pronoun to the
subject of the matrix clause (2) which does not exist for
German.

2218

(2)

English: The street-sweeper met the postman before
going home.
French: Le balayeur a rencontré le facteur avant de
rentrer à la maison.

Following the Gricean Maxim of Manner, the existence of
this alternative predicts a preference for an object
antecedent in sentences with full pronouns for French in
contrast to the presumably saliency based preference for the
subject for German. Listeners hearing a French sentence
with “avant que” followed by a full pronoun will assume
that the speaker would have used the unambiguous
infinitival form in (2) had she intended the temporal clause
to relate to the subject of the matrix clause. The pronoun is
thus preferentially interpreted as relating to the object of the
matrix clause for which no such alternative exists.1
English is an interesting case for comparison, given that
an alternative construction with a zero anaphor exists for
subject antecedents (2). This construction is, however, used
less frequently than the infinitival construction in French.
Gricean accounts would thus predict that English patterns
with French with respect to pronoun resolution.
An unambiguous alternative for one of the readings may
also influence frequencies of usage. In a small scale corpus
analyses (100 sentences per language) we established the
following distribution: 77% subject antecedents for German
(Frankfurter Rundschau), 64 % subject antecedents for
English (Wall Street Journal) and 100 % (Le Monde) or
85% (Google News groups) object antecedents for French.
Frequency based accounts would thus position English
between German and French.

Experiments
Series 1: Visual World Experiments
In our first series of experiments, participants (32 native
French speakers, 32 native English speakers, and 24 native
German speakers) were presented with pictures such as in
Figure 1 showing two characters while they listened to
sentences such as (3-6). Their task was to judge whether a
sentence presented aurally matched the picture or not. All 16
experimental trials were “match” cases. Half of the 4
practice items as well as of the 24 filler items were
“mismatch” cases. Mismatches were realized by including
characters in the sentence that were not in the picture (such
as: “The florist prepared a bouquet for the street-sweeper”).
Mismatches were realized at different positions during the
sentence.

Materials: In our experimental materials, the subclause
introduced by before, avant que, or bevor, was semantically
biased for the High Antecendent (HA, the subject of the
sentence which is situated higher in the phrase structural
representation of the sentence, 3,5), or the Low Antecedent
(LA) the object (4,6) of the main clause as antecedent of the
pronoun. To control for visual scanning preferences, the first
mentioned character was either on the left (3,4) or on the
right (5,6) side of the screen. As a between participants
factor, we also switched the position of the characters for
half of the participants, so that, for example, the postman
was on the right of the screen and the street sweeper on the
left.
(3)
French: Le facteur a rencontré le balayeur avant
qu’il ramasse les lettres.
English:The postman met the street-sweeper before
he picked up the letters.
German: Der Briefträger traf den Straßenfeger,
bevor er die Briefe einsammelte.
(4)
French: Le facteur a rencontré le balayeur avant
qu’il ramasse la poubelle.
English:The postman met the street-sweeper before
he picked up the trash.
German: Der Briefträger traf den Straßenfeger,
bevor er den Abfall einsammelte.
(5)
French: Le balayeur a rencontré le facteur avant
qu’il ramasse les lettres.
English: The street-sweeper met the postman before
he picked up the letters.
German: Der Straßenfeger traf den Briefträger,
bevor er die Briefe einsammelte.
(6)
French: Le balayeur a rencontré le facteur avant
qu’il ramasse la poubelle.
English: The street-sweeper met the postman before
he picked up the trash.
German: Der Straßenfeger traf den Briefträger
bevor er den Abfall einsammelte.
Eight lists were created such that each item appeared in a
different condition across lists, but only once in each list.
Participants were first presented with four practice items
followed by one of the eight lists of experimental items
mixed with 24 filler items. The lists were randomized
individually. Participants received course credits for their
participations. Each experiment lasted less than 30 minutes
including calibration. Eye movements were recorded using
the Eyelink II© system by SR research.

1
The same pattern would be predicted by Ariel’s (1990)
accessibility hierarchy: less informative anaphora are predicted to
prefer more salient antecedents. The zero anaphor in the infinitival
construction in French, prefers the subject as the most salient
antecedent. Using a full pronoun can thus be interpreted as a cue to
search for a less salient antecedent which would be the object in
sentences such as (1).

2219

Figure 1: Example of the visual stimulus material

Results: We calculated the likelihood of a gaze on either of
the two critical picture elements by time steps of 20 ms
starting from 500 ms before the onset of the pronoun
(he/she) and ending at 2000 ms after the onset of the
pronoun. From these data, we calculated the logodds for a
gaze on the first-mentioned referent at each time step.
Values below zero represent more fixations on the object,
values above zero more fixations on the subject. Figure 2
shows the results for English, Figure 3 for German, and
Figure 4 for French. HA means High Antecedent and
corresponds to the subject, LA means Low Antecedent and
corresponds to the object. “Left” and “right” correspond to
the position of the subject on the picture.

Figure 2: Time course analysis for English;
log2(p(sub/p(obj)), HA=High Antecedent, subject; LA=
Low Antecedent, object

Before the onset of the pronoun, marked by the first vertical
line in Figures 2 to 4, participants had a tendency to fixate
the object more often than the subject (for German speakers,
this tendency is somewhat modulated by the position of the
object). This is not surprising, given that the object was the
last mentioned entity in the matrix clause. After the onset of
the pronoun, participants did not show any preference for a
short period of time. This probably reflects the time needed
to process the pronoun plus the time for planning a saccade
(at least 230ms + 250 ms = 480 ms). After this period,
German and English speakers fixated the subject more often
than the object, whereas French speakers fixated the object
more often. Disambiguation can only start playing a role
after the onset of the disambiguating word plus at least 480
ms (given the time needed for processing and saccade
planning). The dotted vertical line reflects the mean onset of
the disambiguation, the third vertical line shows the earliest
point possible for disambiguation to kick in. Participants
start fixating the corresponding character more often after
this point. Note that the onset of disambiguating is earlier in
German due to German word order.
We defined three critical time periods for each individual
trial: the 500 ms period before the onset of the pronoun
(R1), the time period from the onset of the pronoun until
480 ms after the onset of the disambiguating region (R2),
and the remaining time steps until 2000 ms (R3). For each
participant and condition, respectively item and condition,
we calculated a single logodds value per time period. The
summarized data across conditions for English, German,
and French are shown in Table 1.
Table 1: Average log odds for gazes on the firstmentioned referent, broken down by region. Ninety-five
percent confidence limits are listed in parentheses (by
subjects / by items).
Language

Figure 3: Time course analysis for German;
log2(p(sub/p(obj)), HA=High Antecedent, subject; LA=
Low Antecedent, object

Figure 4: Time course analysis for French;
log2(p(sub/p(obj)), HA=High Antecedent, subject; LA=
Low Antecedent, object

R1

R2
+0.34
(±0.28/±0.19)

R3

English

-0.50
(±0.52/±0.43)

+0.40
(±0.45 / ±0.32)

German

-0.09
+0.35
+1.14
(±0.51 / ±0.32) (±0.33 / ±0.34) (±0.22 / ±0.32)

French

-0.90
-0.38
-0.50
(±0.36 / ±0.28) (±0.30 / ±0.22) (±0.29 / ±0.29)

The eye movements show clear differences between the
languages investigated. In the ambiguous region R2, we find
a reliable preference to look at the subject of the matrix
clause for English and German. In German, this extends
even to the disambiguating region R3. In French, however,
participants preferentially fixated the character
corresponding to the object of the matrix clause.
One question remains to be answered at this point: Do the
French fixation preferences reflect interpretational

2220

preferences or possibly just differences in visual scanning
patterns? Since the object of the matrix clause is at the same
time the last entity mentioned before hearing the ambiguous
pronoun, our French participants may have preferred to
continue fixating the entity they just heard of until
disambiguating information would be made available by the
linguistic input. French participants did actually look at the
character representing the object of the matrix clause more
often than German and English participants even in Region
1. In order to test this possibility, we ran a further eyetracking experiment with 32 native French speakers, using
constructions with no structural alternative for either of the
possible interpretations (7a-d). A subject preference would
be predicted for these cases.
a . Le facteur a rencontré le balayeur. Puis il a
ramassé les lettres.
The postman met the street-sweeper. Then he picked
up the letters.
b . Le facteur a rencontré le balayeur. Puis il a
ramassé la poubelle.
The postman met the street-sweeper. Then he picked
up the trash.
c . Le balayeur a rencontré le facteur. Puis il a
ramassé les lettres.
The street-sweeper met the postman. Then he picked
up the letters.
d . Le balayeur a rencontré le facteur. Puis il a
ramassé la poubelle.
The street-sweeper met the postman. Then he picked
up the trash.

1,5

logodds log2(p(sub)/p(obj))

(7)

reliably more often at the character representing the subject
of the matrix clause. Note, that the pictures we used in this
experiment were identical to the ones used before. Clearly,
French speakers do not have different visual scanning
patterns. In cases where a subject preference is predicted,
they clearly look at the character representing the subject
more often, although the subject is the less local entity.
Figure 6 summarizes the results of all four experiments:
Remember that values above zero reflect more looks to the
subject, whereas values below zero reflect more looks to the
object of the matrix/first clause. The most striking
differences can be found in Regions 2 and 3: For within
sentence pronoun resolution the subject is preferred as the
antecedent for German and English, and likewise for
between sentence anaphor resolution in French. The only
deviating cases are French within sentence anaphors,
showing a preference for the object.

0,5
0
-0,5
-1
-1,5

The set up of the experiment was identical to the earlier
experiments. Since the preference for the more local referent
could only be established for French, we will only present
the French data here (see Figure 5).

R1

R2

English
French « avant
que »

German
French « puis »

R3

Figure 6: Average log odds for gazes on the first-mentioned
referent, broken down by region.
The fixation patterns are thus far compatible with the corpus
frequencies mentioned above. We can, however, not be fully
sure that they really reflect interpretational preferences and
not just fixation preferences. We therefore ran a series of
questionnaire studies in all three languages to clarify this
issue.

1

0,8

0,6

0,4
HA, left
LA, left
HA, right
LA, right

0,2

1

0

Series 2: Questionnaires

-0,2

-0,4

-0,6

R1

R2

R3

Figure 5: Time course analysis for French between-sentence
anaphor resolution; log2(p(sub/p(obj)), HA=High
Antecedent, subject; LA= Low Antecedent, object
As in the earlier experiments, the French participants started
with an increased number of fixations to the object of the
first sentence. However, after a short period without any
preferences right after the onset of the pronoun, they look

Materials and procedure. In this series of experiments, we
presented participants with ambiguous sentences derived
from the materials used in the eye tracking experiments and
asked them to fill a gap in a paraphrase following each
sentence to indicate their interpretation of the pronoun.
(7)
French: Le facteur a rencontré le balayeur
avant qu’il rentre chez lui.
Le ____________ rentre chez lui.
English: The postman met the streetsweeper before he went home.
The ____________ went home.

2221

German: Der Briefträger hat den Straßenfeger getroffen, bevor er nach Hause ging.
Der _____________ ging nach Hause.
We also included a cross-sentence condition (8), where the
second sentence always started with “puis”, “then”, or
“dann”.
(8)
French: Le facteur a rencontré le balayeur.
Puis il est rentré chez lui.
German: Der Briefträger hat den Straßenfeger getroffen. Dann ist er nach Hause
gegangen.
English: The postman has met the streetsweeper. Then he went home.
To control for semantic/pragmatic biases, we switched the
grammatical role of the characters as a between participants
factor, so that, for example, the postman became the object
of the matrix clause and the street sweeper became its
subject. We created eight lists so that each item appeared in
a different condition but only once in each list. The 16
experimental items where interspersed with 64 filler items
mostly from unrelated experiments. Each list was
randomized once. 32 native speakers of each language
participated in the experiment.
Results. Figure 7 shows the results of the questionnaire
experiments. All three languages showed a clear preference
for the subject for between sentence pronoun resolution for
sentences with “puis”, “then”, and “dann” (all ps < .01).
However, whereas English and German participants chose
the subject of the matrix clause more often as the antecedent
of the pronoun for within sentence pronoun resolution as
well, French participants chose reliably more often the
object of the matrix clause.

•

German and English, both show a subject
preference for within sentence pronoun resolution
(3-6, 7).
• French shows are clear object preference for within
sentence pronoun resolution (3-6, 7).
An explanation of the differences between German and
French before-sentences could be based on the Gricean
Principle of Manner (avoid ambiguity). In French, the
temporal clause can be unambiguously related to the subject
of the matrix clause using an infinitival construction such as
(2). In German, no such alternative construction exists.
French listeners or readers might thus apply a Gricean logic
taking the object of the matrix clause as the antecedent of
the the full pronoun in (1).
A Gricean account is, however, hard to reconcile with the
English data: For English, an alternative construction
relating the temporal clause to the subject is available as
well (2). Still, the full pronoun in (1) consistently shows a
clear preference for the subject across experiments. An
experience-based account would be fully compatible with
the results of the sentences with « before » as can be seen in
the small scale corpus study mentioned above (see Figure 8
for a direct comparison of off-line decisions and corpus
data).
The Gricean Principle of Manner neither predicts production
preferences nor comprehension preferences in English. This
finding is very much in line with earlier evidence showing
that speakers do not follow the Principle of Quantity (they
very often produce more information then necessary in
referring expressions, e.g., Pechmann, 1989), neither are
they generally cooperative in using unambiguous
alternatives for one of the possible interpretations of an
unambiguous construction (Ferreira & Dell, 2000). Arnold,
Wasow, T., Asudeh, and Alrenga (2004) likewise argue
against sentence production as designed to be easily
comprehensible for the audience, based on a consistent lack
of ambiguity avoidance. The choice of linguistic
expressions seems to be more affected by cognitive pressure
than by cooperativeness (Wardlow & Ferreira, in press).

Figure 7: Decisions in % for the subject or the object of the
main/first clause as the antecedent of the pronoun.

Discussion
In our experiments, we established the following pattern:
•

All three languages show a clear subject preference
for between sentence pronoun resolution in
sentences like (7) and (9).

Figure 8: Decisions in % for the subject or the object of the
main clause as the antecedent of the pronoun compared to
corpus counts
However, we still have to explain why French and
English should be different with respect to production

2222

preferences: A reason why French speakers prefer producing
an infinitival construction for subject antecedents may be
the increased complexity of temporal clauses with « avant
que »: The French conjunction “avant que” demands the
subjunctive form as do many other conjunctions such as
“puisque”, “pour que”, “bien que”, whereas others demand
the indicative form, such as “après que”, “lorsque”, “parce
que” and many others. The correct marking of the verb will
thus have to be adapted to the respective conjunctions.
Using the infinitival form avoids the necessity of checking
which verb form to use in the actual utterance.2 No such
checking would be needed for English conjunction-pluspronoun sentences which consistently demand the indicative
form.
The results so far would thus be fully compatible with an
approach linking comprehension preferences to production
preferences (Cuetos & Mitchell, 1988; Gennari &
MacDonalds, 2009, Konieczny, 2000). French speakers
prefer using the infinitival form whenever possible, which is
the case when the infinitival clause is related to the subject
of the matrix sentence. “Avant que” plus pronoun will thus
mostly be used in cases where the pronoun is related to a
non-subject antecedent. These production preferences will
result in the distributions observed in the corpora. Exposure
to these distributions will consequently shape preferences in
comprehension.
We do, of course, by no means imply that pronoun
resolution preferences are based on exposure exclusively.
Factors such as information structure, coherence relations
and others are most certainly playing a role as well. An
interesting question for further research will be, in how far
the crosslinguistic differences established in our
experiments extend to other conjunctions, and in how far
they interact with factors influencing the prominence of
antecedents such as first mention, topicality, prominence,
and many more (Colonna, Schimke, & Hemforth, 2009;
Schimke, Colonna, & Hemforth, 2009). We will also have to
extend our research to other languages. Interestingly,
European Portuguese provides a combination of alternatives
highly comparable to what can be found in French. Recent
self-paced reading experiments and questionnaire studies
(Baumann, Konieczny, & Hemforth, 2010) show a clear
object preference for pronouns in Portuguese constructions
parallel to those under investigation in this paper.

References
Ariel, M. (1990) Accessing Noun-Phrase Antecedents.
Routledge, London.
2
French native speakers are actually not allways fully sure of
which form to use. A short questionnaire sent by mail to 20
doctoral students (mostly from the linguistics department) asking
for the correct verb to use in sentences like “Le balayeur a appelé
le facteur après qu'il ______ rentré à la maison.” (The street
sweeper called the postman after he ______ gone home. ), resulted
in 56 % responses using he subjunctive and 44 % using the
indicative. Following normative grammar, “après que” does not
demand the subjunctive.

Arnold, J. E., Wasow, T., Asudeh, A, and Alrenga, P. (2004).
Avoiding Attachment Ambiguities: The Role of
Constituent ordering. Journal of Memory and Language.
Baumann, P., Konieczny, L., & Hemforth, B. (2010).
Expecting coreference: the role of alternative
constructions. In Proceedings of the 23d Annual Meeting
of the CUNY Conference on Human Sentence Processing.
New York, March 2010.
Colonna, S., Schimke, S., & Hemforth, B. (2009). The role
of information structure in pronoun resolution. Talk at the
c o n f e r e n c e o n Linguistic and Psycholinguistic
approaches to Text Structuring, Paris, September 21-23.
Cuetos, F., & D. Mitchell. 1988. Cross-linguistic differences
in parsing: Restrictions on the use of the late closure
strategy in Spanish. Cognition, 3: 73-105.
Ferreira, V. S., & Dell, G. S. (2000). The effect of ambiguity
and lexical availability on syntactic and lexical
production. Cognitive Psychology, 40, 296-340.
Gennari, S. P., and MacDonald, M. C. (2009) Linking
production and comprehension processes: The case of
relative clauses, Cognition, 111, 1-23.
Gernsbacher, M.A. (1990). Language Comprehension as
Structure Building. Hillsdale NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Givon, T. (1983). Topic continuity in discourse: A
quantitative cross-language study. Amsterdam:
Benjamins.
Järvikivi, J., van Gompel, R., Hyöna, J., & Bertram, R.
(2005). Ambiguous pronoun resolution: Contrasting the
first-mention and subject preference accounts.
Psychological Science, 16, 260-264.
Kehler. A. (2002). , Coherence, Reference, and the Theory
of Grammar, Stanford: CSLI Publications.
Konieczny, L. (2000). Locality and parsing complexity.
Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 29-6. 627-645
Pechmann, T (1989). Incremental speech production and
referential overspecification. Linguistics,27: 89–110.
Sanders, T. & Noordman, L. (2000). The role of coherence
relations and their linguistic markers in text processing.
Discourse Processes, 29: 37-60.
Schimke, S., Colonna, S., & Hemforth, B. (2009). Discourse
prominence and pronoun resolution : Evidence from
French. Talk at the conference on Text and Discourse,
Rotterdam, July 26-28.
Wardlow Lane, L. & Ferreira, V. S. (in press). Speakerexternal versus speaker-internal forces on utterance form:
Do cognitive demands override threats to referential
success? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, & Cognition.
Acknowledgements
This work was partially funded by the bilateral research
grants “Alliance” and “Procope” attributed to the first three
authors. We would like to thank the “Linglunch”
participants at Paris Diderot as well as our colleagues from
the FRIAS in Freiburg for many helpful discussions.

2223

