UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Language-Driven Motor Simulation is Sensitive to Social Context

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9rq4w5jb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Dennison, Heeyon Y.
Bergen, Benjamin K.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Language-Driven Motor Simulation is Sensitive to Social Context
Heeyeon Y. Dennison (yoon@hawaii.edu)
Department of Linguistics, 569 Moore Hall, 1890 East West Road,
Honolulu, HI 96822 USA

Benjamin K. Bergen (bkbergen@ucsd.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science, University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Dr., La Jolla, CA 92093-0515
responses away from the body, while Katie handed the
puppy to you speeds movements toward to the body.
Research in this area has shown that implied features of a
described scene – even when only implicit – show up in the
comprehender’s mental simulation. For example, people
simulate handshapes specifically afforded by the objects
mentioned. For instance, Mary caught the marble primes a
grasping handshape, while Mary caught the watermelon
primes an open palm handshape (Bergen & Wheeler, 2005).
However, it is unknown at present whether language-driven
motor simulation is sensitive to not only physical but also
social constraints on action.
Part of acculturation is for people to learn culture-specific
prescriptions for motor action (Mauss, 1934). For instance,
in Korean culture, people learn to use both hands when
giving an object to someone of higher social status, but only
one hand with peers or social inferiors. This is obviously a
learned behavior – many other cultures around the world do
not share this particular convention. What’s more, it’s a
cultural action convention that’s specific to social context.
In order to transfer an object appropriately to someone, you
have to determine what your relative social status is, so as to
engage an action using the right number of hands.
In the study described below, we ask whether sociallycontingent prescriptions for motor action reach into other
aspects of cognition as well, in particular, language
comprehension. Does hearing about an action performed in
a particular social situation elicit simulation of the
prescribed physical behavior that conforms to the cultural
constraint? More specifically, do Koreans who hear
sentences about object transfer simulate using one hand or
two hands, depending on the relative social status of the
mentioned recipient? If they do, this would suggest that the
motor simulations are flexibly tailored to the social
situations comprehenders would encounter in the described
situations. In addition, it would suggest that motor
simulations have features specific to culture-specific
constraints on action.

Abstract
People use their bodies differently in different social
situations. In Korea, Japan, and Thailand, for example, there
are culture-specific conventions for how to transfer small
objects. People use one hand to transfer objects to people of
equal or lower social status, but two hands with people of
higher status. But does individual knowledge of these
conventions for how to use one’s body extend to other aspects
of cognition? For instance, it is known that understanding
action language involves internally simulating what it would
be like to perform described actions. Do people mentally
simulate actions appropriate to the social context described in
a sentence? We report on a behavioral experiment, conducted
with people born and raised in Korea, that investigated
whether cultural practices affect the actions that people
represent during language comprehension. We report
evidence that motor simulations do indeed reflect social
constraints on action.
Keywords: sentence processing; mental simulation; motor
simulation; embodiment; social cognition; culture.

Introduction
What are the cognitive processes involved in understanding
the meaning of a sentence that you hear or read? Behavioral
and brain imaging evidence over the past several decades
has revealed that – among other mechanisms – one process
that is engaged routinely and mostly unconsciously is
mental simulation (Barsalou, 1999). When you hear or read
a sentence about an event, you use your visual system to
simulate what the mentioned entities would look like: how
they would move (Kaschak et al, 2005), what color
(Connell, 2007), orientation (Stanfield & Zwaan, 2001,
Zwaan et al., 2004) and shape (Zwaan et al., 2002) they
would have, and so on. Similarly, when a sentence describes
actions, you engage mental simulations of the described
actions (Glenberg & Kaschak, 2002; Tettamanti et al., 2005;
Buccino et al., 2005; Kaschak & Borreggine, 2008; Bub et
al., 2008; Bergen & Wheeler, In press, Bergen et al., In
press).
Key evidence that understanding motor language engages
motor routines comes from the so-called “Action-sentence
Compatibility Effect” (Glenberg & Kaschak, 2002): manual
responses to make sentence sensibility judgments are
facilitated when the motion of the physical response is
compatible with the sentence’s implied direction. For
instance, You handed the puppy to Katie speeds manual

Method
The logic of the experiment was relatively simple.
Participants listened to sentences in Korean about
transferring small objects to recipients who were of either
high status or low status. After the end of each sentence,
they made a meaningfulness judgment about the sentence,
which required them to press buttons either with two hands

901

not about transfer of a small object. Because participants
were performing a forced choice task, we needed forty nonsensible fillers to balance the twenty critical and twenty
meaningful filler sentences. By including these, we ensured
that each participant was expected to respond “Yes” half of
the time overall. So that participants could not learn to use
syntactic properties of the sentences to make judgments,
half of the non-meaningful sentences were dative sentences,
while the other half included sentences varying in structure
and length – just like the meaningful sentences. Also,
orthogonally, approximately half of all items mentioned
high-status people in somewhere in the sentences, whereas
the other half mentioned equal- or lower-status people.

or just with their right hand. We predicted that if the
participants
were
automatically
engaging
motor
representations of actions that used either one hand or two
hands (appropriate to the social status of the mentioned
recipient) then the status of the recipient and the number of
hands they had to use to respond should show an interaction
in their effect on measured response times.

Participants
Thirty-two native Korean speakers at the University of
Hawai‘i participated in this experiment and received $5 in
compensation. They all had been born and raised in Korea
but moved to the U.S. for their higher education. All but 2
people had lived in Korea for at least 20 years. Their mean
length of residency in Korea was 24 years (range: 13.5–35,
std: 4.6), while the mean of their age was 27.8 (range: 20–
45, std: 6.38). All had normal or corrected-to normal vision
and hearing. All but one were right-handed.

Design, Procedure, and Predictions
Participants performed a sentence meaningfulness judgment
task. They were seated in front of a computer with two
keyboards aligned side-by-side in front of them (as in Figure
1 below). They keyboards were oriented such that the long
axis of the keyboards projected out directly in front of the
participant, at their midline. Participants first pressed the
yellow keys with their two thumbs to begin auditory
presentation of a sentence – these are at the bottom of the
image in Figure 1, and were on the edge of the keyboard
closest to the participant. Once they decided whether the
sentence made sense or not, they released the yellow buttons
to press either the “Yes” or “No” buttons on the keyboard to
indicate their decision. The response buttons were
positioned to require the participant to use either both hands
(the green buttons) or only their right hand (the pink
buttons) to press the buttons. Participants were instructed to
press the pink buttons with two fingers of their right hand
and the green buttons with the index fingers of their two
hands. We measured the Reaching Time – the time from the
yellow-button release until the “Yes” or “No” button press,
because we were interested in seeing if simulation of the
socially expected action would influence subsequent motion
execution.

Materials
We constructed twenty pairs of critical sentences in Korean,
all of which are meaningful and describe transfer of a small
object. The object in all these sentences is conventionally
transferred to people of higher status using two hands and to
people of equal or lower status using one hand. Examples of
high status and low status sentences are in (1) and (2),
below.
(1) [High Status]
Ne-nun cikum kyoswu-nim-kkey phyenci-lul tuli-koisse.
‘You are now (humbly) giving a letter to (your) professor.’
(2) [Low Status]
Ne-nun cikum tongsayng-hanthey phyenci-lul cwu-koisse.
‘You are now giving a letter to (your) younger sibling.’
The sentences in each pair (like (1) and (2)) differed in two
ways. First, while High-status sentences mentioned people
of conventionally high status as recipients (such as
professors, doctors, lawyers, etc.), low status sentences had
recipients who were of lower status or close peers, (like
younger siblings, nieces, friends, etc.). Second, the
sentences about transfer to people of high status were
accompanied by grammatical/lexical markers called
honorifics, which indicated that the status of the recipient is
higher than the status of the subject (you). These markers
are present on the recipient noun, the dative case marker,
and the verb, and as confirmed in a norming study, this is
the most natural and proper way to describe an object
transfer to a social superior in Korean. (We’ll discuss these
honorific markers and their implications in more detail in
the Discussion section below.) All critical sentences had you
as the subject, were in the present tense, and used active
dative sentence structure.
Beyond the critical stimuli, we created some additional
materials. In order to disguise the intent of the experiment,
we prepared twenty meaningful filler sentences that were

Figure 1. Configuration of keyboards to collect bimanual
(green buttons) and unimanual (pink buttons) responses.

902

Korean, however, the verb occurs at the end of the sentence
(as exemplified in (3) below). As a result, when a
participant is asked to perform an action immediately after
the end of a Korean sentence, it falls within the 500ms
window in which we observe mismatch-advantages for
similar but non-identical actions. In this experiment, the
described actions are indeed different in certain ways from
the action of pressing keyboard buttons. Handing someone a
business card or a letter, for instance, is different from
pressing keyboard buttons in terms of its force, acceleration,
palm orientation, handshape, and other motor details.
Because participants are asked to process language about an
action and then perform a similar but subtly different action
very soon thereafter, we expect that Korean sentences
should produce a mismatch advantage. This is unlike
canonical English sentences, which, due to their verb
occurring earlier in the sentence, would be expected to
produce match advantages, as has been found in other
studies investigating language-action interaction effects
(e.g., Glenberg & Kaschak, 2002).

Participants pressed down the yellow buttons with the
thumbs of their two hands to initiate presentation of a
sentence, then pressed either the pink or green buttons to
indicate their meaningfulness judgment.
We assigned participants to one of two starting conditions
– they began with two-handed responses (the green buttons)
meaning either “Meaningful” or “Non-meaningful” (and the
pink buttons assigned complementarily). We switched the
key assignments for each participant halfway through the
experiment. Ten training trials preceded each half. Each
participants heard the high-status recipient version of a
randomly selected half of the critical sentences (e.g., (1))
and the low-status version of the other half (e.g., (2)). Each
session lasted less than 20 minutes.
If native Korean speakers engage motor representations of
two-handed actions when processing sentences about object
transfer to people of high social status, and one-handed
actions when processing sentences about transfer to people
of equal or low status, then we should observe an interaction
of Hand-Number by Sentence-Type.
But the direction of this interaction effect between
language and action is a more difficult matter. Both match
advantages (i.e., faster responses in the matching
conditions) and mismatch advantages (i.e., slower responses
in the matching conditions) have been reported in the
literature. A close reading, however, leads us to expect a
mismatch advantage; that is, two-handed responses will be
faster when participants have just heard a sentence about
transferring an object to someone of lower status, and
conversely, one-hand responses should be faster when the
preceding sentence describes transfer of an object to
someone of higher status.
We are led to predict this mismatch advantage, rather than
a perhaps more intuitive match advantage, for the following
reason. Priming effects of action language on motor control
are quite sensitive to timing. When there is a delay (more
than 500 milliseconds) between the word that denotes the
action and the action itself, language about actions
facilitates motor actions that have broadly similar
characteristics, such as the direction of motion (Glenberg &
Kaschak, 2002; Kaschak & Borreggine, 2008; Bergen &
Wheeler, In press) or handshape (Bergen & Wheeler, 2005;
Bub et al., 2008). However, when the critical action word
and the motor action are temporally aligned (within 500
ms), actions that are similar but not exactly the same will in
fact be inhibited (Bergen, 2007; Bergen et al., In press, see
also the review in Kaschak et al., 2005). That is, there is a
mismatch advantage when an action verb (e.g., throw)
immediately precedes activation of a motor routine for a
similar but subtly different action (e.g., push), as compared
with a less similar action (e.g., kick) (Bergen et al., In press).
Critically, Korean differs from English in terms of where
in the sentence the main verb is placed. In English, the verb
in canonically ordered sentences occurs after the subject and
before the object. This means that in a sentence about
someone acting on something (like You handed Andy the
pizza), the verb appears relatively early in the sentence. In

(3) Ne-nun Andy-hanthey ku pizza-lul kenneyesse.
You-TOP Andy-DAT
the pizza-ACC handed.
‘You handed Andy the pizza.’ (English translation)

Results
Among data from 32 participants and 20 critical items,
results from two participants and one item were excluded
due to low mean accuracy (more than 3 standard deviations
below the participants’ and items’ overall means of 97% and
96%, respectively). The means for accurate responses from
each of 30 participants and 19 items all fell within 3
standard deviations from the overall means for participants
and items, respectively, and none were therefore eliminated
as outliers.
The dependent measure was Reaching Time, the time it
took participants from release of the yellow buttons until
press of the pink or green buttons, indicating that the
sentence was meaningful. We first eliminated all incorrect
responses. Correct responses to critical items were then
winsorized using 3 standard deviations from each
participant’s mean as a cut-off and submitted to the
subsequent inferential statistical tests. Mean reaction times
in each condition are shown in Figure 2.
We performed two two-way repeated measures ANOVAs
(one by participants and one by items) to look at effects of
the two independent variables – Sentence-Type with HandNumber. We found one significant main effect, that was
unrelated to our hypothesis; bimanual responses were on
average slower than unimanual responses, regardless of the
Sentence-Type manipulation: F1(1,29)=20.21, p<.001;
F2(1,18)=27.18, p<.001. More importantly, however, we
also observed an interaction between Hand-Number and
Sentence-Type that was significant both by participants
F1(1,29)=7.60, p=0.01, and by items, F2(1,18)=6.60, p=0.02.
This effect, as seen in Figure 2, seems to have been driven
by slower two-handed responses in reaction to sentences

903

about object transfer to high status recipients than low status
recipients, and one-handed responses that were slightly
slower after sentences about transferring objects to low
status recipients than high status recipients.

more than merely create a subjective experience akin to
what the comprehender would experience when confronted
with the described scene; it might also facilitate inference or
be used to generate predictions or interpolate implied but
implicit elements of the scene.
However, the findings we’ve reported here is different
from previous work. The current study’s findings suggest
that the motor activation comprehenders engage during
language processing is tailored not only to the objects
described but also to the culturally appropriate motor
actions that one would perform in the described social
context. This suggests that motor simulation isn’t merely
activated by specific words. Instead, it reflects a
computation of socially appropriate action, which must take
into account not merely low-level physical properties of a
mentioned object, but social variables like age and position.
On some accounts, people perform mental simulation to
create representations of what it would be like if they were
immersed in the described experience (Zwaan, 2004). The
finding that people take social variables into account when
constructing motor simulations is coherent with this
account.
While the finding reported above highlights the
importance
of
social
knowledge
in
language
comprehension, the difference we observed between the
high and low status sentences could be due to either or both
of two differences between them. As we discussed above,
the sentences differed both in terms of the social character
of mentioned recipients, as well as in the presence or
absence of honorific markers. Honorifics—also known as
indexical politeness forms—are grammatical and lexical
markers in the Korean language that systematically encode
the speaker’s socio-culturally appropriate regard towards the
addressee and/or the referent (Sohn, 1999). In our stimuli,
the High Status sentences, as exemplified in the example
(1), indicated that the status of the recipient was higher than
that of the subject (you) by employing honorific markers in
three places within the sentence, since that is how native
Korean speakers would most naturally express this. The
marker -nim ‘sir/madam’ on the recipient noun indicates
deference to the high status referent. The marker -kkey
‘(honorable) to’ is a case marker used for a high status
recipient. The verb root tuli-, which is the humble form of
the plain verb cwu- ‘give’, is used to indicate deference to
the high status recipient. To any native Korean speaker, the
presence of these honorific markers clearly indicates that the
subject of the sentence (you) has a lower status than the
mentioned recipient. When these honorifics are dropped,
Korean speakers naturally understand that the status of the
sentential subject is at least equal or even higher to the
mentioned recipient. For instance, dropping honorifics is a
common way for Korean students to make fun of their
teachers behind their back.
Due to these two kinds of differences, when we compare
effects of these two sentence types (1) and (2), we cannot
tell if the status of the recipients or the presence/absence of
honorifics is responsible for the differences in hand

Figure 2: Response times as a product of high status and
low status sentences, when manual responses were made
with one hand or two hands, show a significant interaction
between Hand-Number and Sentence-Type
Subsequent pairwise comparisons indicated that this
interaction effect was driven mainly by the differences in
bimanual responses. That is, the mean reaction time to
respond with two hands was significantly slower when the
manual action was preceded by high status sentences than
low status sentences (t1(29)=2.05, p=.02; t2(18)=2.11,
p=.027). However, looking at the one-handed responses
revealed no significant effect of Sentence-Type on Reaching
time.

Discussion
The results reported above indicate that Korean speakers’
manual responses to indicate sentence meaningfulness were
significantly influenced by the social context mentioned in
the sentences they were processing. People were
significantly slowed down in making bimanual actions after
they heard sentences describing object transfer to someone
of higher social status, as compared with sentences about
people of equal or lower status. In contrast, unimanual
responses were slower with the low status sentences than
the high status sentences, although this numerical difference
did not approach statistical significance.
This result is yet another piece of evidence in line with
previous findings, showing that people engage their motor
systems while processing language about interacting with
objects and moving their bodies more generally. The study
of how exactly we extract meaning from utterances is still in
its infancy. And yet, the discovery that modality-specific
systems are automatically engaged during the process
suggests one part of the puzzle – it could be that motor (and
perceptual) simulation plays a functional role in language
understanding by allowing the comprehender to construct an
experience that is in some ways like what it would be to
experience a distal described scene. This simulation may do

904

In contrast, using both hands is a more difficult task,
particularly when participants are trying to maximize both
speed and accuracy. It could be that greater difficulty in
bimanual action provided room for the critical SentenceType factor to more differentially influence reaction times.
Indeed, the significantly faster responses in the one-hand
condition, as compared with the two-hand condition, are
compatible with this floor account. We expect our follow-up
studies will further illuminate the extent to which the ACE
paradigm can tease apart the action execution resulting from
a mental computation of the socially appropriate action,
versus an action execution based on a routinized motor
command.

responses. We believe it is critical to determine whether the
social status of the recipients by itself produces the
interaction effect, or whether the presence of honorifics is
important as well.
To investigate this question, we are currently collecting
data for a follow-up study. In that study, we closely matched
the current experiment’s design and materials, but included
a third Sentence-Type condition, one with sentences using
high status recipients but no honorific markers. If these
sentences behave like the high status sentences in this first
experiment, that will suggest that it is the status of the
recipient, and not the presence of honorifics, that produces
the effect we’ve observed. But if we find that these new
sentences behave like low-status sentences, then this will
lead us to conclude that honorifics present in a sentence are
a critical factor affecting the motor routines people simulate.
This in turn will tell us a little bit about how world
knowledge and linguistic cues affect the motor simulations
comprehenders construct.
In the Method section, we presented the reasoning why
we expected a mismatch-advantage rather than a matchadvantage. We found such an effect, and the next step is for
us to investigate whether the proposed explanation is
correct. We intend to do this through another study,
currently under design, in which we change the structure of
the critical Korean sentences, so that several words appear
at the end of the sentence, after the transfer-action verb.
When we thereby increase the interval between the action
verb and the subsequent motor response, our explanation
would predict that we should find a reversal in the direction
of the effect: from a mismatch- to a match-advantage.
The final aspect of the findings reported here that may be
of interest is the result of the follow-up pairwise t-tests
reported in the Results section. The significant mismatch
advantage we observed appears to have been driven more by
the bimanual responses than the unimanual responses. We’d
like to offer two possible explanations for this fact.
First, in situations of actual transfer, people use the right
hand regardless of the status of the recipient; two-handed
actions use both hands by definition, and one-handed
actions conventionally use the right hand, as left hand
transfer is regarded as disrespectful in Korean culture. As a
result, both the high-status and low-status sentences should
engage motor circuitry involved in the use of the right hand.
And the two sentence types might thus interfere to the same
extent with subsequent one-hand actions. By contrast, twohanded transfer actions are more similar to – and thus are
more interfered with following – sentences about highstatus actions, which also use two hands.
A second possible explanation for the larger effect in twohanded responses than one-handed responses is that it could
result from differences in the degree to which the two
actions are routinized. Perhaps reaching actions to press
buttons with one hand are so common as to be routinized to
the point where people perform them at floor (i.e., shortest
possible reaction times). This would leave little room for
effects of previously heard sentences on reaching behavior.

Conclusion
Is language-driven motor simulation sensitive to not only
physical but also social constraints on action? The current
study suggests that it is. We’ve presented three new
findings. First, the motor simulation that people engage
during language comprehension includes the number of
hands one would use to perform a described action. Second,
cultural-specific rules for motor control enter into these
mental simulations. For Korean people, it is customary to
tailor the number of hands one uses to transfer objects to the
relative social status of the self and the object recipient. This
social knowledge about proper actions is engaged in the
form of active motor representations of the number of hands
appropriate in each social context, even when people merely
hear language describing those events. Finally, the direction
of action-sentence interactions is different in Korean and
English – arguably due to differences in word order. These
findings clearly indicate that language understanding is a
constructive process that broadly engages heterogeneous
cognitive systems – it uses our understanding of physical
actions, and even the social conventions surrounding those
actions.
These results raise a host of potentially productive followup questions. Do people engage socially constrained motor
knowledge during other non-motor tasks, such as object
perception or recall? Do people raised biculturally, such that
they have two distinct systems of motor conventions,
simulate different actions depending on the cultural context
or the language of an utterance? And is a social constraint
on action the type of thing that can be learned late in life –
do people introduced to a culture and language as adults
also simulate socially appropriate actions? Clearly, there is
much more to know about how social constraints on action
are learned and what other aspects of cognition they affect.

Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful to Chae Eun Kim for assisting the
stimuli recording, Bodo Winter for helpful suggestions on
this work, and to Korean students at the University of
Hawai‘i who participated in the experiment.

905

Zwaan, R.A., Madden, C.J., Yaxley, R.H., & Aveyard, M.E.
(2004). Moving words: Dynamic mental representations
in language comprehension. Cognitive Science, 28, 611–
619.

References
Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 577-609.
Bergen, B., & Wheeler, K. (2005). Sentence Understanding
Engages Motor Processes. In Proceedings of the TwentySeventh Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society.
Bergen, B. (2007). Experimental methods for simulation
semantics. In M. Gonzalez-Marquez, I. Mittelberg, S.
Coulson, and M. J. Spivey (eds.) Methods in Cognitive
Linguistics: Ithaca. John Benjamins.
Bergen, B., Lau, A., Narayan, S., Stojanovic, D., &
Wheeler, K. (In press). Body part representations in
verbal semantics. Memory and Cognition.
Bergen, B., & Wheeler, K. (In press). Grammatical aspect
and mental simulation. Brain and Language.
Bub, D. N., Masson, M. E. J., & Cree, G. S. (2008).
Evocation of functional and volumetric gestural
knowledge by objects and words. Cognition, 106, 27-58
Buccino, G., Riggio, L., Melli, G., Binkofski, F., Gallese,
V., Rizzolatti, G. (2005). Listening to action-related
sentences modulates the activity of the motor system: A
combined TMS and behavioral study. Cognitive Brain
Research, 24, 355–363.
Connell, L. (2007). Representing object color in language
comprehension. Cognition, 102, 476–485.
Glenberg, A. M., & Kaschak, M. P. (2002). Grounding
action in language. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9(3),
558–565.
Kaschak, M. P., Madden, C. J., Therriault, D. J., Yaxley, R.
H., Aveyard, M. E., Blanchard, A. A., & Zwaan, R. A.
(2005). Perception of motion affects language processing.
Cognition, 94, B79–B89.
Kaschak, M. P., & Borreggine, K. L. (2008). Temporal
dynamics of the action-sentence compatibility effect.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 61, 883895.
Mauss, M. (1934). Les Techniques du corps, Journal de
Psychologie 32, 3–4. Reprinted in Mauss, Sociologie et
anthropologie, 1936, Paris: PUF.
Sohn, H.- M. (1999). The Korean Language. New York:
NY. Cambridge University Press.
Stanfield, R. A., & Zwaan, R. A. (2001). The effect of
implied orientation derived from verbal context on picture
recognition. Psychological Science, 12, 153–156.
Tettamanti, M., Buccino, G., Saccuman, M., Gallese, V.,
Danna, M., Scifo, P., Fazio, F. (2005). Listening to
action-related sentences activates fronto-parietal motor
circuits. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 17, 273–281.
Zwaan, R.A., Stanfield, R., & Yaxley, R. (2002). Language
comprehenders mentally represent the shapes of objects.
Psychological science, 13(2), 168–171.
Zwaan, R. A. (2004). The immersed experiencer: toward an
embodied theory of language comprehension. In B. H.
Ross (Ed.), The Psychology of Learning and Motivation.
New York: Academic Press.

906

