UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Learning verb alternations in a usage-based Bayesian model

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/186313ch

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Parisien, Christopher
Stevenson, Suzanne

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Learning verb alternations in a usage-based Bayesian model
Christopher Parisien and Suzanne Stevenson
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto
Toronto, ON, Canada
{chris, suzanne}@cs.toronto.edu
Abstract
One of the key debates in language acquisition involves the
degree to which children’s early linguistic knowledge employs
abstract representations. While usage-based accounts that focus on input-driven learning have gained prominence, it remains an open question how such an approach can explain the
evidence for children’s apparent use of abstract syntactic generalizations. We develop a novel hierarchical Bayesian model
that demonstrates how abstract knowledge can be generalized
from usage-based input. We demonstrate the model on the
learning of verb alternations, showing that such a usage-based
model must allow for the inference of verb class structure, not
simply the inference of individual constructions, in order to
account for the acquisition of alternations.
Keywords: Verb learning; language acquisition; Bayesian
modelling; computational modelling.

Introduction
An important debate in language acquisition concerns the nature of children’s early syntax. On one side of the debate lies
a claim that children develop their syntactic knowledge in an
item-based manner. This claim of usage-based learning argues that very young children associate verb argument structure with specific lexical items, only gradually abstracting
syntactic knowledge after four years of age (e.g., Tomasello,
2003). An alternative claim suggests that young children do
indeed possess abstract syntactic representations—i.e., generalizations about the structure of their language that are not
necessarily tied to lexical items (e.g., Fisher, 2002).
Syntactic alternation structure is often considered to be a
central phenomenon in this debate. Consider the following
example of the English dative alternation:
(1) I gave a toy to my dog.
(2) I gave my dog a toy.
These sentences mean roughly the same thing, but are expressed in different ways. The first, a prepositional dative,
expresses the theme (a toy) as an object and the recipient (my
dog) in a prepositional phrase. The second, a double-object
dative, expresses both the theme and recipient as objects and
reverses their order.
Verbs that allow similar alternations often have similar semantics (Levin, 1993), which suggests that alternations reflect much of our cognitive representations of verbs. Furthermore, these regularities appear to influence our language
use. In word learning experiments, children as young as three
years of age appear to use abstract representations of the dative alternation (Conwell & Demuth, 2007). While this is evidence of abstract syntax at a very young age, it does not necessarily invalidate the usage-based hypothesis, since the abstractions may originate from item-specific representations.

One way to bring these opposing positions together is to
demonstrate, using naturalistic data, how to connect a usagebased representation of language with abstract syntactic generalizations. We argue that alternation structure can be acquired and generalized from usage patterns in the input, without a priori expectations of which alternations may or may
not be acceptable in the language. We support this claim using a hierarchical Bayesian model (HBM) which is capable of
making inferences about verb argument structure at multiple
levels of abstraction simultaneously. We show that the information relevant to verb alternations can be acquired from
observations of how verbs occur with individual arguments
in the input. In this sense, we present a competency model
showing what can be acquired, but we do not make claims
regarding the specific processing mechanisms involved.
From a corpus of child-directed speech, our model acquires
a wide variety of argument structure constructions over hundreds of verbs. Moreover, by forming classes of verbs with
similar usage patterns, the model can generalize knowledge
of alternation patterns to novel verbs. This stands in contrast
to earlier models which have focused on either the acquisition
of the constructions themselves, or the formation of classes
over given constructions. The integration in our model of
these two important aspects of verb learning has implications
for current theories of language acquisition, by showing how
abstract syntactic knowledge can be acquired and generalized
from usage-level input.

Related work
Previous computational approaches to language acquisition
have used HBMs to represent the abstract structure of verb
use. Alishahi and Stevenson (2008) used an incremental
Bayesian model to cluster individual verb usages (or tokens),
simulating the acquisition of verb argument structure constructions. Using naturalistic input, the authors showed how a
probabilistic representation of constructions can explain children’s recovery from overgeneralization errors. In another
Bayesian model of verb learning, Perfors et al. (2010) cluster verb types by comparing the variability of constructions
for each of the verbs. The model can distinguish alternating
from non-alternating dative verbs and can make appropriate
generalizations when learning novel verbs.
Both of the above models show realistic patterns of generalization, but they operate at complementary levels of abstraction. The model of Alishahi and Stevenson does not capture the alternation patterns of verbs, while Perfors et al. assume that the individual constructions participating in the alternation have already been learned. Furthermore, Perfors et

2674

Features
OBJ, OBJ2
COMP, XCOMP
PRED, CPRED, XPRED
LOC
JCT, CJCT, XJCT
PP
PREP
NSLOTS

al. limit their model to only consider two possible constructions (the prepositional and double-object dative), and only
the verbs that participate in those constructions.
In this work, we address both levels of abstraction of the
above models. We cluster individual verb usages to learn argument structure constuctions and their patterns of use across
many verbs, and we also cluster verb types to learn alternation
behaviour, generalizing that behaviour to novel verbs. Moreover, we use representative corpora of child-directed speech
to model the acquisition of verb alternation behaviour in the
context of many constructions, verbs, and alternations.
Vlachos et al. (2009) used a Dirichlet Process mixture
model to cluster verb types by their subcategorization preferences, but did not address learning the argument structures
themselves. Other work has modelled different aspects of the
dative alternation, such as how discourse features affect the
expression of dative constructions (de Marneffe et al., submitted), yet did not consider how these preferences are learned.

Table 1: Slot features.

Model 1: Argument structure constructions

Model description
We discuss the feature representation of a verb usage and develop two contrasting models to show how alternation classes
contribute to generalization in verb learning. Model 1 is
an adaptation of an existing probabilistic topic model, the
Hierarchical Dirichlet Process (HDP; Teh et al., 2006), to
the problem of learning verb argument structure. Model 2,
a novel extension to the HDP, addresses the limitations of
Model 1 by learning verb alternation classes, allowing regularities in construction use to be transferred to novel verbs.

Verb features
Following from existing approaches (as in Joanis, Stevenson,
and James (2008)), we use syntactic “slot” features to encode basic argument information about a verb usage. Table
1 presents the 14 features used in our representation. The
first 12 (up through “PP”) are binary features denoting the
presence or absence of the stated syntactic slot, such as an
object (OBJ) or a prepositional phrase (PP); the slots are indicated by labels used by the CHILDES dependency parser
(Sagae et al., 2007).1 When a PP is present, the nominal
feature PREP denotes the preposition used. Such syntactic
slot features are easier to extract than full subcategorization
frames. We make the assumption that children at this developmental stage can distinguish various syntactic arguments in
the input, but may not yet recognize recurring patterns such
as transitive and double-object constructions. The following
examples show this representation used with a double-object
dative and a prepositional dative, respectively:
(3) I sent my mother a letter.
h OBJ, OBJ2, PREP = null, NSLOTS = 2 i
(4) I sent a letter to my mother.
h OBJ, PP, PREP = to, NSLOTS = 2 i
1 We consider only the slots internal to the verb phrase, for now
ignoring syntactic subjects. We also do not attempt to distinguish
true arguments from adjuncts, a very difficult distinction to make.

Description
Objects
Clausal complements
Predicate complements
Locatives
Adjuncts
Prepositional phrases
Preposition (nominal value)
Number of slots used

Like other topic models, the HDP (Teh et al., 2006) is essentially a model of category learning: the model clusters
similar items in the input to discover structure. Adopting a
usage-based approach to language (e.g., Goldberg, 2006), we
view the acquisition of verb argument structure as a categorylearning problem. In this view, structured verb knowledge
translates well to the hierarchical nature of the model.
Model 1 is a straightforward adaptation of the HDP to verb
argument structure, which we will use as a point of comparison for an extended model. Figure 1(a) provides an intuitive
description of the hierarchical levels of inference in Model 1.
At level 1, the lowest level of abstraction, individual verb usages yi are represented by sets of features as described above.
At level 2, the model clusters similar usages together to
form argument structure constructions, where a construction
is represented by a set of multinomial distributions, one for
each feature. Since the clustering mechanism is nonparametric, we need not specify the total number of constructions to
learn. Each of these constructions, denoted by its multinomial parameters θ, probabilistically represents a pattern such
as a simple transitive or a prepositional dative. While a construction here encodes only syntactic information, with no semantic elements, the model can be generalized to a combined
syntactic/semantic input representation.
At level 3, a multinomial distribution for each verb (π) represents the range of constructions that tend to occur with the
verb. For example, in Figure 1(a), give (π2 ) would have a high
probability for the double-object dative and prepositional dative constructions (θ2 and θ3 , respectively), but a low probability for the transitive construction, θ1 . Let yi j denote feature
j of usage i. Levels 1 through 3 are given by the following:
πv

∼

Dirichlet(α · β)

zi
θ jzi

∼
∼

Multinomial(πv )
Dirichlet(1)

yi j

∼

Multinomial(θ jzi )

The indicator variable zi selects a cluster (i.e., a construction,
one of the θ) for usage i. Given a verb v, this is drawn from
a multinomial distribution which includes a small probability
of creating a new construction.

2675

Figure 1: (a) Model 1, a Hierarchical Dirichlet Process applied to learning verb argument structure constructions. (b) Model 2,
an extension of Model 1 to learn verb alternation classes.
The verb-specific distributions πv depend on hyperparameters which encode expectations about constructions in general, across all verbs. They represent acquired knowledge
about the likely total number of constructions, which constructions are more likely to occur overall, and so on:
γ
α

∼
∼

Exponential(1)
Exponential(1)

β

∼

Stick(γ)

As with lower-level parameters, these are influenced by observed structure in the input. β, drawn from a stick-breaking
process (Stick), encodes how many constructions will be used
and which constructions are more likely overall. α affects
the variability of πv . Large values of α push πv closer to β,
the global distribution over constructions, while smaller values encourage more variation among verbs. γ affects the total number of constructions; small values of γ correspond to
fewer constructions. By drawing α and γ from an exponential distribution, we give a weak preference for verb-specific
behaviour and for solutions with fewer constructions. These
preferences are effectively designed into the model; they may
be informed by general human category-learning behaviour.
For further details of this model, see Teh et al. (2006).

are less likely to occur as simple transitives. By recognizing
the similarity of π2 and π3 , we can create a cluster containing give, show, and other similar verbs. Figure 1(b) presents
this intuition in Model 2. We extend Model 1 by introducing
a fourth level of abstraction, where we represent clusters of
similar verbs. For each verb cluster c, we use φc to represent
the range of constructions that tend to occur with any of the
verbs in that cluster. By serving as a prior on the verb-level
parameters πv , φc directly influences each verb in the cluster.
The lower levels of this model are the same as in Model
1. In addition, the verb representations, πv , depend on the
alternation classes in level 4:
∼

Dirichlet(α0 · β0 )

πv
zi
θ jzi

∼
∼
∼

Dirichlet(α1 · φcv )
Multinomial(πv )
Dirichlet(1)

yi j

∼

Multinomial(θ jzi )

Each verb v belongs to a cluster of verbs, denoted cv . Now, πv
depends on φcv , which gives a distribution over constructions
for all the verbs in the same cluster.
As before, these parameters themselves depend on toplevel hyperparameters:

Model 2: Alternation classes
Model 1 acquires argument structure constructions from individual verb usages, and learns how those constructions are
used by individual verbs, but it is unable to recognize that
certain kinds of verbs behave differently than others. Competent language speakers regularly use this kind of information.
For example, if a verb occurs in a double-object dative construction, then we should infer that it is also likely to occur in
a prepositional dative. We develop a novel extension of the
above model to capture this phenomenon by learning clusters
of similar verbs.
Recall that we represent a verb by a probability distribution over the constructions in which it may occur. In the example shown in Figure 1(a), give and show both tend to occur with a double-object dative and a prepositional dative, but

φcv

γ0

∼

Exponential(1)

α0,1
β0

∼
∼

Exponential(1)
Stick(γ0 )

These hyperparameters serve similar roles to those in Model
1. β0 gives a global distribution over all the constructions in
use. γ0 affects the total number of constructions overall. α1
affects the variability of a verb compared with its class, and
α0 affects the variability of verb classes.
To group verbs into alternation classes, we use a mechanism similar to the way we group individual verb usages into
constructions. Recall that cv acts as an indicator variable, selecting a class for verb v from the available classes in level
4. This is drawn from a multinomial distribution σ which
includes a small probability of creating a new verb class:

2676

γ1
σ

∼
∼

Exponential(1)
Stick(γ1 )

cv

∼

Multinomial(σ)

As with earlier uses of the stick-breaking construction, γ1 affects the expected total number of verb classes. This method
of clustering verb types is similar to Wallach (2008).

Parameter estimation
Models 1 and 2, as written, each specify a prior distribution
over the complete set of possible parameters to the models
(i.e., all possible values for θ, z, φ, and so on). We update
these distributions using the observed verb usage data, thus
obtaining posterior distributions over parameters.
We estimate the posterior distributions using Gibbs sampling, a Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method (Teh
et al., 2006). Model parameters are initially set randomly,
then iteratively adjusted according to the observed data. We
randomly set each zi to one of 10 initial constructions, and
each cv to one of 10 verb classes (if applicable). We set the
remaining parameters to random values drawn from the distributions specified in the model descriptions. We then iteratively update each model parameter individually by drawing
it from a posterior distribution conditioned on the data and
all the other parameters in the model. As we iterate through
the parameters many times, we collect samples of their values. Over time, this set of samples converges on the posterior
distribution—i.e., the model parameters given the observed
data. In the experiments, we average over this set of samples
to estimate what each model has learned about the input.

Experimental set-up
We use child-directed speech from the Manchester corpus
(Theakston et al., 2001), part of the CHILDES database
(MacWhinney, 2000). The corpus covers 12 British Englishspeaking children between the ages of approximately 2 and 3
years. Using CLAN, we extract all child-directed utterances
containing at least one verb. We parse the utterances with the
MEGRASP dependency parser (Sagae et al., 2007), then reserve every second usage for an evaluation dataset, using the
remainder for development. As described above, we extract
14 slot features for each verb usage. The datasets corresponding to each child contain between 4,400 and 10,700 usages
and between 239 and 479 verb types. All reported results are
obtained using the evaluation data.
Due to flaws in the automatic part-of-speech tagging and
parsing, the data contains many errors, particularly in ditransitive constructions. We manually correct the portion of the
input related to the dative alternation. For each verb in the
development set that occurs with at least one prepositional or
double-object dative (as given by the automatic parsing), we
draw a sample of up to 50 usages. We repair any cases of incorrectly parsed dative constructions, then duplicate the corrected samples as necessary. Since manual annotation is so
labour-intensive, we use this same sample to correct the data
for corresponding verbs in the evaluation set. We assume that

the proportions of various usages are identical for these verbs
across the development and evaluation sets.
We implement both learning models using an adaptation of
the NPBayes package (Release 1).2 For each of the 12 children in the input, we run 10 randomly initialized simulations.
The parameters appear to converge within 3,000 iterations,
so we run each simulation for 5,800 iterations, discarding the
first 3,300 as burn-in. We record a sample of the model parameters on every 25th iteration after the burn-in, giving 100
samples per simulation, 1,000 per child. By averaging over
these samples, we can examine the models’ behaviour.

Experiments
We compare the ability of our two models to acquire knowledge about the usage patterns of verbs in the input and generalize that knowledge to new verbs. Firstly, we examine construction preferences in two related classes of verbs. Secondly, we test whether the models use an abstract representation of the dative alternation to help learn new verbs.

Verb argument preferences
We examine how our models acquire the usage patterns of
verbs in the input by looking at verbs that participate in two
different alternation patterns. Earlier, we demonstrated the
dative alternation in examples (3) and (4). The benefactive
alternation is a related pattern, in which verbs alternate between a double-object form and a prepositional benefactive
form, as in the following examples:
(5) John made his friend a sandwich.
h OBJ, OBJ2, PREP = null, NSLOTS = 2 i
(6) John made a sandwich for his friend.
h OBJ, PP, PREP = for, NSLOTS = 2 i
We consider all verbs involved in the dative and benefactive
alternations, as listed by Levin (1993, Sections 2.1 and 2.2).
We test three constructions: the prepositional dative (PD); the
double-object construction (DO), whether dative or benefactive; and the prepositional benefactive (PB). Using the samples of the model parameters, we estimate the posterior predictive likelihood of each of these frames for each of the verbs
in the given classes. For a given test frame y0 , using verb v,
and the observed data Y,
P(y0 |Y) = ∑ P(yo |k, Y)P(k|v, Y)
k

= ∑ ∏ P(y0 j |θ jk )P(k|πv )
k

(1)

j

This likelihood is averaged over all 1,000 samples per child.
Figure 2 shows the behaviour of both models. We average
the likelihoods over all 12 children, and over all verbs in the
following cases: (a) verbs listed as dative but not benefactive,
(b) verbs listed as benefactive but not dative, and (c) verbs
in both classes. In both models, both dative and benefactive
verbs show a high likelihood for the DO frame, and a somewhat higher likelihood for the appropriate prepositional frame

2677

2 http://www.gatsby.ucl.ac.uk/˜ywteh/research/software.html

Figure 2: Argument preferences for known dative and benefactive verbs in Models 1 and 2. Shorter bars indicate higher
likelihood. The two models show similar behaviour.

Figure 3: Generalization of novel dative verbs in Models 1
and 2, under various training conditions. Shorter bars indicate
higher likelihood.

(PD and PB, respectively) than for the inappropriate one (PB
and PD, respectively). Verbs that occur in both classes show
closer likelihoods for all three frames.
These results suggest that both models can acquire the argument structure preferences of verbs in the input. In this
case, the ability of Model 2 to acquire verb alternation classes
is not necessary. Both models are able to cluster verb usages
into a range of constructions and acquire appropriate usage
patterns over a range of verbs. Both models acquire approximately 20 different constructions. Model 2 acquires 35-40
verb classes, depending on the child.

the appropriate samples of the verb-level distribution πv . For
each of the 1,000 parameter samples per child we obtained
from the original simulations, we re-initialize the model with
the parameters from the sample, add in the novel data for case
(a), (b), or (c), then do a further 350 iterations, recording 10
new samples of the model parameters. This gives 10,000 new
samples per test case, per child. Using equation (1) and the
new samples, we estimate the posterior predictive likelihood
of each of the three constructions. This gives an estimate
of the relative preferences for a verb’s usage and is a direct
measure of the acquired lexicon. Translating this estimate to
production, as seen by Conwell and Demuth (2007), would
require a model of how discourse and other factors influence
dative production (e.g., de Marneffe et al., submitted). This is
beyond the scope of this paper.
Figure 3 shows how the ability to acquire verb classes aids
generalization. In Model 1, without verb classes, only the
frames already seen with the novel verb are highly likely.
This means that Model 1 is unable to generalize beyond observed data. In contrast, Model 2 shows appropriate generalization for the dative alternation. When the novel verb is
trained with the prepositional dative, the double-object dative
shows a much higher likelihood than the unrelated SC frame.
A similar effect occurs with DO-only training: the PD frame
is now more likely than the SC frame, although only slightly.
Compared with Model 1, both dative frames obtain a higher
likelihood across all three training cases, while the SC likelihood remains low. The ability to acquire alternation classes
improves the ability to learn both alternating constructions.
One aspect of our results differs from the behaviour observed in children. Our verb-clustering model is more likely
to generalize to the double-object form when trained only on
a prepositional form, than the other way around (i.e., generalizing from a DO to a PD). However, three-year-old children seem to be biased to the prepositional form, the opposite
effect (Conwell & Demuth, 2007). We suggest that this is
a result of our small corpora. High-frequency dative verbs

Novel verb generalization
Children as young as three years of age have been shown to
use abstract representations of the dative alternation (Conwell
& Demuth, 2007). When young children hear a sentence like
I gorped Charlie the duck, they appear to know that the same
meaning can be expressed by saying I gorped the duck to
Charlie. We test this generalization in our models by presenting a novel verb in one form of the dative and measuring
the likelihood of the alternating form.
We test each model by independently presenting it with
a novel verb in three different situations: (a) two instances
of the prepositional dative, (b) two instances of the doubleobject dative, or (c) one instance of each. Only in case (c) is
the verb explicitly seen to be alternating. We test the ability to
generalize alternation behaviour by comparing the likelihood
of the unseen alternating form with an unseen form unrelated
to the alternation. The non-alternating frame is the sentential
complement (SC) frame, which occurs in 1-1.5% of the input,
approximately the same overall frequency as either of the two
dative frames. For example, if we train the novel verb using
only the PD, yet the DO frame shows a higher likelihood than
the unrelated SC frame, then we can say that the model has
generalized the dative alternation.
Since the novel verbs are not in the observed data, we must
further iterate the Gibbs sampler, using the new data, to obtain

2678

tend to be biased toward the double-object form (Campbell &
Tomasello, 2001). However, Gries and Stefanowitsch (2004)
show that out of 40 alternating verbs in the larger ICE-GB
corpus, 19 are prepositional-biased. This strongly suggests
that more low-frequency verbs are prepositional-biased than
otherwise. A small corpus will likely over-represent a doubleobject bias because of undersampling of low-frequency verbs.
By applying Model 2 to larger corpora of child-directed
speech in future work, we hope to correct this issue.

Conclusions
In this paper, we show how verb alternation classes contribute
to generalization in verb learning. We develop a hierarchical
Bayesian model, Model 2, that is capable of acquiring knowledge of verb argument structure at multiple levels of inference
simultaneously. We demonstrate this using the wide range of
verbs and constructions contained in a corpus of naturalistic
child-directed speech.
By clustering individual verb usages, both of our models acquire a variety of argument structure constructions and
learn their patterns of use over hundreds of verbs. Furthermore, Model 2 learns groups of verbs that occur with similar
usage patterns. Using the dative alternation as a key example,
we demonstrate how this knowledge of alternation classes can
be generalized to novel verbs, as observed in the behaviour of
children and adults. This verb class model can acquire and
apply this knowledge without any prior expectation of which
constructions and alternations may or may not be relevant.
In contrast to previous analyses of the dative alternation
(Perfors et al., 2010; de Marneffe et al., submitted), we
demonstrate its acquisition in the context of many other constructions, verbs, and alternations. Despite the low frequency
of the participating constructions, our model successfully acquires the dative alternation. This is a strong endorsement of
hierarchical Bayesian models of language acquisition.
This approach offers a potential bridge between differing
theoretical positions in language acquisition. By simultaneously learning at multiple levels of abstraction, our model
connects a usage-based representation of language, as proposed by Tomasello (2003), with weak abstract representations similar to those championed by Fisher (2002). Other
usage-based Bayesian models, such as that of Alishahi and
Stevenson (2008), offer a similar opportunity, although our
model develops higher-level abstractions regarding the structured knowledge of verbs.
One of the key features of usage-based constructions is that
they couple form to meaning (Goldberg, 2006). Moreover,
Fisher argues that abstract syntactic representations influence
semantics in verb learning, and vice-versa. By augmenting
our model’s input with semantic properties, we will examine the interaction of syntax and semantics in verb alternations. We will investigate how an argument alternation may
convey semantic information, as in Scott & Fisher’s (2009)
demonstration of 28-month-old children inferring causation
in transitivity-alternating verbs.

Acknowledgments
We thank Yee Whye Teh for valuable discussions, and
NSERC and the University of Toronto for financial support.

References
Alishahi, A., & Stevenson, S. (2008). A probabilistic model
of early argument structure acquisition. Cognitive Science,
32(5), 789-834.
Campbell, A. L., & Tomasello, M. (2001). The acquisition
of English dative constructions. Applied Psycholinguistics,
22(02), 253–267.
Conwell, E., & Demuth, K. (2007). Early syntactic productivity: Evidence from dative shift. Cognition, 103(2),
163–179.
de Marneffe, M. C., Grimm, S., Arnon, I., Kirby, S., & Bresnan, J. (submitted). A statistical model of the grammatical
choices in child production of dative sentences.
Fisher, C. (2002). The role of abstract syntactic knowledge
in language acquisition: a reply to Tomasello (2000). Cognition, 82(3), 259-278.
Goldberg, A. E. (2006). Constructions at work: the nature of
generalization in language. Oxford University Press.
Gries, S. T., & Stefanowitsch, A. (2004). Extending collostructional analysis: A corpus-based perspective on alternations. Intl. J. Corpus Linguistics, 9, 97–129.
Joanis, E., Stevenson, S., & James, D. (2008). A general feature space for automatic verb classification. Natural Language Engineering, 14(3), 337-367.
Levin, B. (1993). English verb classes and alternations: A
preliminary investigation. University of Chicago Press.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES Project: Tools for
analyzing talk (3rd ed., Vol. 2: The Database). Erlbaum.
Perfors, A., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Wonnacott, E. (2010). Variability, negative evidence, and the acquisition of verb argument constructions. J. Child Language, 37(3), 607–642.
Sagae, K., Davis, E., Lavie, A., MacWhinney, B., & Wintner, S. (2007). High-accuracy annotation and parsing of
CHILDES transcripts. In Proc. ACL-2007 Wkshp on Cognitive Aspects of Computational Language Acquisition.
Scott, R., & Fisher, C. (2009). Two-year-olds use distributional cues to interpret transitivity-alternating verbs. Language and Cognitive Processes, 24, 777–803.
Teh, Y. W., Jordan, M. I., Beal, M. J., & Blei, D. M. (2006).
Hierarchical dirichlet processes. Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 101(476), 1566-1581.
Theakston, A. L., Lieven, E. V. M., Pine, J. M., & Rowland,
C. F. (2001). The role of performance limitations in the
acquisition of verb-argument structure: an alternative account. J. Child Language, 28, 127-152.
Tomasello, M. (2003). Constructing a language: A UsageBased theory of language acquisition. Harvard U. Press.
Vlachos, A., Korhonen, A., & Ghahramani, Z. (2009). Unsupervised and constrained Dirichlet process mixture models
for verb clustering. In Proceedings of the EACL Workshop
on Geometrical Models of Natural Language Semantics.
Wallach, H. M. (2008). Structured topic models for language.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Univ. of Cambridge.

2679

