UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Making Assessments While Taking Sequential Risks

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/92q7j22f

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Wershbale, Avishai
Pleskac, Timothy

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Making Assessments While Taking Sequential Risks
Avishai Wershbale (wershbal@msu.edu) & Timothy J. Pleskac (pleskact@msu.edu)
Department of Psychology,
Michigan State University,
East Lansing, MI 48824

postulated within the components of the model have
received less direct attention. In this study, we focus on the
BART and test some of the processing implications of its
respective cognitive model. In particular we use inter pump
times to better understand the response selection process
that decision makers use to take sequential risks during the
BART.

Abstract
This study utilized inter pump response times on a laboratory
gambling task, the BART, to examine cognitive aspects of
response selection during sequential risky decision making.
Findings suggest a response procedure that utilizes multiple
levels of processing. Amount of task exposure as well as the
distance to the goal both affect the rate at which assessments are
made, with task exposure decreasing assessment rate, while
target distance increases assessment rate. Several alternative
models are fit to the data, to determine if the behavioral results
can be informative of a model that more accurately reflects
differences in processing.

Balloon Analogue Risk Task (BART; Lejuez et al.,
2002)
During the BART participants are presented with a
computerized balloon, a pump button, and a stop button.
Pressing the pump button inflates the balloon, and also puts
money in a temporary bank. Balloons in the BART explode
after a randomly predetermined amount of pumps are made.
An explosion terminates the trial and all money in the
temporary bank is lost. Clicking the stop button, transfers
the temporary points into the permanent bank and also
terminates that trial. The participant’s goal in the BART is
to earn as much money as they can, but they need to take
into account the chance that the balloon could pop.
Participants typically complete 30 independent balloon
trials.
Participants are given no information about the design of
the task, other than the basic reward and punishment rules,
and the fact that the balloon will explode before it fills the
entire screen. It is up to the participant to determine the
amount of risk they are willing to incur for a given reward.
Though the BART may seem simple at first, there are many
processes that take place within the course of completing
the task. The processes have been formally defined in the
Bayesian Sequential Risk Taking model (BSR; Wallsten et
al., 2005).

Keywords: Psychology, Decision Making, Mathematical
Modeling, Cognitive Decision Theory

Introduction
People take sequential risks every day. Drivers repeatedly
choose to talk on the cell phone, or text while driving each
time they get in their car. People every day choose to eat at
their favorite fast food establishment. Smokers of all ages
repeatedly choose to smoke a cigarette. In all of these
situations, our choice is not a one-shot deal rather our
choices occur many times sequentially over the course of a
day, a week, a month, etc. Often we are even presented with
the same or similar choices on multiple occasions.
Sometimes these choices may even change as a function of
time or even as a function our previous choices (Busemeyer
& Pleskac, 2009).
Despite the many instances of sequential risks in the real
world, most of the laboratory analogs of risky decision
making only ask participants to make one single choice
(e.g., Hertwig, Barron, Weber, & Erev, 2004; Kahneman &
Tversky, 1979). However, a number of laboratory-based
gambling tasks have now been developed that require
people to take sequential risk, such as the Iowa Gambling
Task (Bechara, Damasio, & Anderson, 1994); the Balloon
Analogue Risk Task (BART; Lejuez et al., 2002); or the
Angling Risk Task (Pleskac, 2008). These tasks also appear
to have some construct validity with real world risk taking.
Risk taking in the BART, for example, correlates with
smoking and drug abuse, as well as safety issues including
seatbelt usage and safe sex (Lejuez et al., 2002; Lejuez,
Aklin, Zvolensky, & Pedulla, 2003; Pleskac, Wallsten,
Wang, & Lejuez, 2008).
The overall decision making processes for these
sequential risk taking tasks are also reasonably well
understood. In fact, the processes have been formalized in
terms of cognitive models (Busemeyer & Stout, 2002;
Wallsten, Pleskac, & Lejuez, 2005). However, the processes

Bayesian Sequential Risk Taking (BSR) Model
We briefly review the general processes of this 4 parameter
model (for a formal derivation see Pleskac, 2008; Wallsten
et al., 2005). The BSR model consists of three sub
processes. The first process is a reward evaluation process.
During this process, participants select a target pump
number to pump the balloon towards. The target selected is
a function of the participant’s subjective value of a reward
and their perceived chance that an explosion will occur for
any pump. Participants who value the reward more will
increase their target amount of pumps to be made, while an
increase in the perceived chance of an explosion occurring
decreases this pumping target.

326

The second process in the model is a response selection
process. This process describes how participants use their
target to determine whether to select a pump or a stop
response at each pumping opportunity. In particular, the
probability of pumping is assumed to be a function of the
participant’s current distance to the pumping target that they
derived in the reward evaluation component. According to
the model, the probability of pumping decreases as the
current number of pumps taken approaches and passes the
target number of pumps. Some participants are more
consistent in pumping to their targets. A topic of interest in
this paper is if in fact participants appear to be making a
distance calculation, as the model seems to assume, at every
pump opportunity.
The final process in the BSR model describes how
participants learn from their experience. This process
describes how participants arrive at their belief of the
probability that the balloon will explode (used in the reward
evaluation process described previously). The model
assumes participants use a Bayesian learning process to
integrate their prior beliefs with the observed data from each
balloon trial (# pumps and if it exploded or not). Their new
belief is used to evaluate rewards and select a target during
the next balloon trial.
The model has been formally specified and tested (see
Pleskac, 2008; Pleskac et al., 2009; Wallsten et al., 2005)
with previous studies being by and large centered on the
reward evaluation process and learning components of the
BART. Little focus, however, has been allocated to the
response selection component of the model. Recall the BSR
model implies that on every pump opportunity of every
balloon participants engage in some sort of distance-totarget calculation. If they are far from the target they are
almost certain to pump and as they approach the target they
become more and more likely to stop pumping. This raises
the question whether participants perform a distance
calculation at every pump opportunity? Our hypothesis is
that instead of performing this calculation on every pump
opportunity, there are instead two different types of
pumping behavior being utilized. One pump type is a
relatively automatic pump, while on other pump
opportunities, decision makers pause and take an assessment
of how far they have gone and how far they want to go. To
test this hypothesis we examined the inter-pump times (the
amount of time taken between responses).

some observable amount of processing time over and above
motor time.
However, we also know that these sequential risk taking
situations require choices on multiple trials. This high
exposure to the task and task structure may lead to a
routinization of the decision making process (Betsch,
Haberstroh, Glöckner, & Fiedler, 2001) and perhaps even
eventually approaching the automaticity properties of a
habit (Aarts, Verplanken, & van Knippenberg, 1998). This
routinization of decision making would imply less and less
demands on working memory and thus lead to fairly quick
inter-pump times.
Our hypothesis though is that there is some mix between
fairly routine almost automatic pumps and other pumps
where the decision maker pauses to take an assessment of
where they are in the balloon trial. Our hypothesis is very
much motivated by analogous findings from the animal
learning literature where rats make a series of sequential
decisions while traversing a maze. In particular, rats when
learning a maze will at some decision points pause and
appear to orient themselves toward potential options
(Tolman, 1938 & Tolman 1948). Then after orienting
themselves make a decision. This behavior has been termed
vicarious trial and error (VTE), and has several interesting
characteristics (Gallistel, Fairhurst, & Balsam, 2004). It was
found that these VTEs occur fairly frequently during the
early learning trials, and decreases with exposure to the task.
This decrease in VTE’s means that after enough exposure to
the task environment, rats upon reaching a decision point (a
fork where they have to go either right or left), eventually
stop orienting themselves towards both potential options
before making a decision, and instead simply immediately
take the correct turn. It was also shown that this decrease in
VTE’s takes a non-linear shape.
These results prompt the question whether our postulated
assessments follow the same pattern as VTEs. To test this
we examined inter-pump times. Our hypothesis was that the
inter-pump intervals in which a distance calculation was
performed should take longer than those intervals in which
no calculation was performed. And the inter-pump times for
non-calculation intervals should not differ from baseline
pumping speed.
To determine baseline inter-pump times, participants first
completed a task in which only one option is presented to
them: a pump option. Participants were instructed to pump
each balloon as quickly as possible until they exploded.
Participants neither received nor lost money for these trials.
The inter-pump times from this were averaged together to
estimate a baseline inter-pump time for each participant, as
well as the standard deviation of their baseline pumping
speed.
An assessment pump was operationalized as any pump for
which the respective inter-pump time was 3 standard
deviations or greater than the mean baseline time. Our
hypotheses are as follows.
Hypothesis 1: Assessments will only occur periodically
throughout a given balloon trial. The remaining trials will

Assessments
Cognitive psychologists have long known that due to
limitations in working memory capacity an increase in the
amount of information to process leads to an increase in the
time it takes to process that information (Atkinson,
Holmgren, & Juola, 1969; & Schneider & Schiffrin, 1977).
This means that an action that occurs following a complex
calculation should have a slower response time then if that
action were preceded by an easier calculation. This
cognitive principle implies the distance calculation the BSR
assumes to take place when selecting a response should take

327

reflect relatively routine almost automatic choices due to the
frequency of their occurrence.
Hypothesis 2: Another testable prediction comes out of
the hypothesis that the assessment points found in the
BART reflect the same type of learning as the VTE’s in
rodent maze learning. As in the VTE’s we expect that over
balloon trials assessments will decrease in a non-linear
fashion so that the observed assessment rate will decrease as
exposure to the BART increases.
Hypothesis 3: Within a balloon trial, as participants
approach their targeted stopping point their assessment rate
should increase. This hypothesis is derived from the
following reasoning. First, we assume that as participants
pump they form an association between pump opportunities
and the difficulty of making a choice (to pump or not). For
example, participants will tend to associate the 4th pump
trial with an easy decision (pump), but later pump
opportunities (e.g., 48th opportunity) will present the
participant with a more difficult choice. The prediction that
follows from this hypothesis is that participants should be
more likely to make an assessment on later pump
opportunities for a given balloon.
Finally, we were interested whether the actual magnitude
of the inter-pump times on routine pumps (non-assessed)
would change over the course of pumping any given
balloon. If we think of reaching the target pump as the main
goal and the assessment points as sub-goals in reaching the
target then we form a goal hierarchy. We know from goal
activation models (Altmann & Trafton, 2002) that
respondents often track their distance from previous sub
goals and this leads to a slowing in response times as they
progress. One might expect that participants are somehow
implicitly tracking their distance from the last assessment.
This would imply that inter-pump times of non-assessed
pumps should increase as the distance from the last
assessment increases. Next we test these predictions using
data from two studies. Then we propose modifications
based on these results to the BSR model.

response time BART were included in these studies as well
as a number of other executive function tasks, however we
will limit descriptions of the tasks to just those relevant to
this paper. Participants were college age undergraduates. A
total of 104 students participated in the 2008 study and 108
in the 2009 study. There were no substantial differences
between the two studies so we report their results together.

Baseline BART
The first task that every participant completed in both data
sets was a baseline BART. The baseline BART is a
simplified version of the BART that was created to measure
average response time for pumping behavior. This version
has only a pump button and participants are instructed to
pump each balloon until it explodes. The balloons in the
baseline BART were programmed to explode with the same
statistical distribution that the normal BART balloons
utilize. Participants completed ten trials of the baseline
BART in order to establish a baseline non-fatigued measure
of pumping motor time.

Manual BART
The regular BART task that we used is based on the task
used in previous studies (see Lejuez et al., 2002; Pleskac et
al., 2009). The task consists of a virtual balloon that is
inflated by pressing a button. Participants were awarded 10
points for each successful pump. The popping point for each
trial was randomly chosen out of 128, and pairings for each
random trial were included to assure the same optimal
distribution as in the original BART paper (Lejuez et al.,
2002). Each trial ends with either a popped balloon
(participants earn no points), or the participant clicking the
stop button in which case the participant keeps all of the
earned points for that balloon trial. Either way a fixation
cross then appears in the center of the screen to prepare the
participants for the onset of the following trial. To obtain
more accurate response time data, our version of the manual
BART was programmed in E-Prime 2.0. Furthermore,
participants entered their pump and stop choices with
separate keyboard buttons.

Methods
The data examined comes from two experiments conducted
in the Laboratory for Cognitive Decisions at Michigan State
University during spring of 2008 and spring of 2009. These
studies were designed to look at the effect of individual
differences in various executive functions on BART
performance. Both a standard version of the BART and a

Results
Behavioral
In both studies, participants’ risky behavior was consistent
with past studies. On non-exploding balloons, they pumped
an average of 39 (SD =16.03) and 34.3 (SD = 18.01) pumps

Figure 1: Inter Pump Time on a Single Trial for Participant 55 in study 2.

328

in studies 1 and 2, respectively. The average baseline interpump time in both studies was 181.38 ms (SD = 58.4) and
178.47 ms (SD = 54.22). The average within-subject
standard deviation of inter-pump times on the baseline task
was 53.91 ms (SD = 32.14) and 55.38 ms (SD = 40.66).
Recall we defined an assessment as any pump during the
BART for which its respective inter-pump time exceeded 3
standard deviations above the baseline inter-pump time.
With that definition, 11.1% of the pump opportunities from
study 1 and 16.35% from study 2 would be classified as
assessments. This yields an average assessment rate of 4.3
and 5.6 assessments per trial respectively. A plot of interpump times from a single subject and balloon trial is shown
in Figure 1.
In terms of Hypothesis 2, to test whether there was a
change in assessment behavior as participants become more
familiar with the task, we regressed assessment rate onto
trial number. Assessment rate was calculated by dividing
the number of assessments in a given trial by the length of
that particular trial. The results of this regression showed the
same pattern for both studies, which is a decrease in
assessment rate as trial number increases. Averaging across
participants, the data seemed to best fit a logarithmic
decreasing curve, with study 1 significant at R2 = .876 and p
< .001, and study 2 significant at R2 = .935 and p < .001
(Figure 2). Thus, assessment rate was high on the first few
trials (approximately a 40% assessment rate on average) and
then decreased at an increasing rate as participants
experienced more balloon trials.
Hypothesis 3 focused on whether the probability of an
assessment changes within a balloon trial. Pump number
itself cannot be used as the predictor for this regression, due
to the fact that the length of each trial is entirely dependent
on the participant’s own pumping behavior. Instead a count
of how many non-assessment pumps was taken between
each assessment point, and then that count was divided by
the length of that trial. This number is the proportion of
pumps within that trial that preceded each assessment point
(excluding the initial pump opportunity). Assessment points
that are immediately followed by another assessment point
were only counted as a single assessment. These proportions
were then averaged across trials and across participants to
give us a proportion score. A regression was run with
assessment point number as the predictor and the proportion
score as the dependant measure. Results of this regression
also had a logarithmic fit, with R2 = .652 and p < .001 for
study 1, and R2 = .675 and p < .001 for study 2. This is
similar to the shape as for trial number, but the
interpretation is that assessment rate increases as a factor
of pump number.
Along with determining the factors that influence the
probability of a distance to target assessment occurring, it
is also important to identify characteristics of the nonassessed pumps as they approach the next assessment
point. To characterize the changes in response times of the
non-assessed pumps, Goodman-Kruskal  rank order
correlations were ran to determine if there is generally an

Figure 2: Change in Assessment Rate by Trial Number
increase, decrease, or no change in the response times the
non-assessed pumps that were made between assessment
points (hypothesis 4). A  coefficient was calculated for
every string of non-assessed pumps that occurred. When the
gamma coefficients were averaged (2615 coefficients in
study 1 and 2887 coefficients from study 2), the results
indicate an increase in inter-pump times time for the nonassessed pumps as they approach the next assessment point,
with an average gamma coefficient of .108 for study 1 and
.135 for study 2. While small, this result indicates a small
but systematic increase in inter-pump times the further one
gets from an assessment.
These results suggest that choice behavior during the
BART is a bit more complex than that which is depicted in
the BSR model. In particular, we have shown that in two
studies on some trials participants pause and perhaps take an
assessment of their situation. On the other trials the interpump times are quick enough to suggest a routine or
perhaps even an almost automatic pumping behavior. Next
we examine how to best modify the BSR model to
incorporate these findings.

Proposed Changes to BSR Model
One possible way to account for these observed pauses in
the BSR model is to modify the response selection process.
Figure 3 illustrates this proposed change. The idea is that in
the original response selection process participants either
pumped or stopped and each response followed an
assessment. Instead we propose that not every pump
opportunity involves a distance to target assessment. That is
with some probability participants stop to make an

Figure 3: One possible modification to the BSR model.

329

assessment and only then do they choose between pumping
and stopping. On other trials they make what we call a nonassessed pump which has an inter-pump time that is close to
baseline. Several different functional forms of this
modification were examined to determine if the inclusion of
non-assessed behaviors improves the model fit.
The changes to the model are based off of the predictions
from the new hypotheses. We tested four modifications. The
first model assumed a static assessment rate, μ, which
estimates the probability of making an assessment before
the response is selected.
The second model assumed assessment changed as a
function of balloon trial (h),
.
(1)
1
P assess  
1  exp  h   
Where λ is a biasing factor that controls the starting point of
the assessment rate and μ now controls the rate of change in
the assessment rate.
The third model incorporates the idea that assessments
change as a function of pump opportunity i,
exp  i   
(2)
P assess  

The models were also compared against a statistical
baseline model. The baseline model simply uses the
observed proportion of assessed pumps, non-assessed
pumps, and stops over the thirty balloons and estimates the
likelihood of the data by utilizing those proportions.
The average BICs are shown in Table 1. They show that
the best fitting model is one in which assessment rate
changes as a function of balloon trial. It is of note that there
is some variability in this conclusion at the individual level.
In particular, while nearly all the participants exhibited
some form of assessment behavior, there was individual
variability in the relationship between assessment rate and
balloon trial. Some (~40%) showed a very weak relationship
between balloon trial and assessment rate. For these
individuals, the constant assessment model and the baseline
model provided better fits.

Discussion
This study aimed to better understand the response
selection process in sequential risk taking situations. Using
the BART as an analog to these situations, we found that
nearly all participants engaged in a behavior we call
assessment. That is, within a given sequence of risky
choices, generally decision makers would make very quick
choices, but periodically (about every 4 to 5 pumps) they
would take very long pauses. We interpret this behavior as a
time of assessment when the decision maker gauges how
many risks they have taken and how many more risks they
plan to take. We also found the following behavioral
properties of an assessment rate.
First, across balloon trials the assessment rate was on
average higher for early balloon trials and then diminished
at an increasing rate. This idea is consistent with previous
decision making literature with rodents, showing that as task
exposure increases, learning takes place, which leads to
automated decision evaluations (Tolman, 1938 & Tolman
1948). The second, property of assessment rate, was the
change within a single balloon trial, where assessment rate
increases towards the end of the trial. One possible
explanation is that the assessment rate increases relative to
the level of perceived risk. It would be interesting to see if
this is reflected in self reported risk taking measures. Lastly,
there was a small but significant increase in inter-pump
times between assessments. This suggests an increasing
taxing of cognitive resources, which may be due to a
buildup of interference, so that eventually the participants
need to reassess their location relative to their pump target
Assessments and the change in assessment rate over
balloon trials may be analogous to the distinction between
exploration and exploitation in sequential decision making
(Schumpter, 1934 & Holland, 1975). This idea of
exploration versus exploitation holds that in order to
maximize gains, one should initially explore the structure of
the environment to create a good approximation of the
distribution of rewards. Once a good approximation of the
environmental structure is obtained, then one should begin
exploiting it in a manner that maximizes their gains.

1  exp  i   

The parameters serve much the same role as in Equation 2,
but now assessment rate changes as a function of pump
opportunity and λ controls the starting assessment rate for
each balloon.
The fourth model incorporates both an assessment rate
that changes as a function of balloon trial h and pump
opportunity i,
exp   i h   
(3)
P assess  

1  exp   i h   

Preliminary Model Fitting & Comparisons
The modifications were incorporated into the BSR model.
Then each model was fit at the individual level with
maximum likelihood procedures using the Nelder-Meade
numerical optimization routine. Several different starting
points were used to try and guard against local maxima
issues. A Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) was
calculated for each model, and was used to determine the
best fitting model overall (where lower BIC means better
fit). The BIC is a goodness of fit measure which penalizes
models for the number of parameters they have.
Table 1: Average BIC scores for Alternative Models
Ave (Std) BIC

Ave (Std) BIC

Baseline

740.32 (358.85 )

758.86 ( 428.15)

Static Assessment Rate

733.06( 360.15)

746.54 (434.73 )

Assessment rate changes as a 718.74 (325.78 )
function of balloon trial
Assessment rate changes as a 728.57 ( 358.84)
function of pump opportunity
Assessment rate is a function of 741.62 (338.5 )
both trial and pump opportunity

734.20 ( 397.82)
747.88 ( 442.52)
733.60 (410.01 )

330

Assessments in sequential risk taking may afford the
decision maker with an opportunity to explore different risk
options and then exploit the options.

Pleskac, T. J. (2008). Decision making and learning while
taking sequential risks. Journal of Experimental
Psychology-Learning Memory and Cognition, 34(1), 167185.
Pleskac, T. J., Wallsten, T. S., Wang, P., & Lejuez, C. W.
(2008). Development of an Automatic Response Mode to
Improve the Clinical Utility of Sequential Risk-Taking
Tasks. Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology,
16(6), 555-564.
Schneider, W., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1977). Controlled and
automatic information processing: I. Detection, Search,
and attention. Psychological Review, 84(1), 1-66
Schumpter, J. A. (1934). The Theory of Economic
Development. Cambridge. MA: Harvard University
Press.
Tolman, E. C. (1938). The determiners of behavior at a
choice point. Psychological Review, 45, 1-41
Tolman, E. C. (1948). Cognitive maps in rats and men.
Psychological Review, 55, 189-208
Wallsten, T. S., Pleskac, T. J., & Lejuez, C. W. (2005).
Modeling behavior in a clinically diagnostic sequential
risk-taking task. Psychological Review, 112(4), 862-880.

Acknowledgments
We thank David McFarlane for his help in programming the
BART in E-Prime.

References

Aarts, H., Verplanken, B., & van Knippenberg, A. (1998).
Predicting behavior from actions in the past: Repeated
decision making or a matter of habit? Journal of Applied
Social Psychology, 28, 1355-1374.
Altmann, E. M. & Trafton, J. G. (2002). Memory for goals:
An activation-based model. Cognitive Science, 26, 39-83
Atkinson, R. C., Holmgren, J. E., & Juola, J. F. (1969)
Processing time as influenced by the number of elements
in a visual display. Perception & Psychophysics, 6, 321326
Bechara, A., Damasio, A. R., Damasio, H., & Anderson, S.
W. (1994). Insensitivity to future consequences following
damage to human prefrontal cortex. Cognition, 50(1-3), 715.
Betsch, T., Haberstroh, S., Glöckner, Haar, T., & Fiedler,
K., (2001). The effects of routine strength on
adaptation and information search in recurrent
decision making. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 84, 23-53.
Busemeyer, J. R., & Pleskac, T. J. (2009). Theoretical tools for
understanding and aiding dynamic decision making. Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, 53(3), 126-138.
Busemeyer, J. R., & Stout, J. C. (2002). A contribution of
cognitive decision models to clinical assessment:
Decomposing performance on the Bechara gambling task.
Psychological Assessment, 14(3), 253-262.
Gallistel, C. R., Fairhurst, S., & Balsam, P. (2004). The
learning curve: Implications of a quantitative analysis.
PNAS, 101, 13124-13131
Hertwig, R., Barron, G., Weber, E. U., & Erev, I. (2004).
Decisions from experience and the effect of rare events in
risky choice. Psychological Science, 15(8), 534-539.
Holland, J. H. (1975), Adaptation in Natural and Artificial
Systems. Ann Arbor, Ml: University of Michigan Press
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An
analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica, 47(2), 263291.
Lejuez, C. W., Read, J. P., Kahler, C. W., Richards, J. B.,
Ramsey, S. E., Stuart, G. L., et al. (2002). Evaluation of a
behavioral measure of risk taking: The Balloon Analogue
Risk Task (BART). Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Applied, 8(2), 75-84.
Lejuez, C. W., Aklin, W. M., Zvolensky, M. J., & Pedulla,
C. M. (2003). Evaluation of the Balloon Analogue Risk
Task (BART) as a predictor of adolescent real-world risktaking behaviours. Journal of Adolescence, 26(4), 475479.

331

