UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Modeling Cognitive-Affective Dynamics with Hidden Markov Models

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/06b952g5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
D'Mello, Sidney
Graesser, Art

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Modeling Cognitive-Affective Dynamics with Hidden Markov Models
Sidney K. D’Mello (sdmello@memphis.edu)
Institute for Intelligent Systems, University of Memphis,
Memphis, TN 39152 USA

Art Graesser (a-graesser@memphis.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Memphis
Madison, TN 38152 USA

Abstract
We present and test a theory of cognitive disequilibrium to
explain the dynamics of the cognitive-affective states that
emerge during deep learning activities. The theory postulates
an important role for cognitive disequilibrium, a state that
occurs when learners face obstacles to goals, contradictions,
incongruities, anomalies, uncertainty, and salient contrasts.
The major hypotheses of the theory were supported in two
studies in which participants completed a tutoring session
with a computer tutor after which they provide judgments on
their cognitive-affective states via a retrospective judgment
protocol. Hidden Markov Models constructed from time
series of learners’ cognitive-affective states confirmed the
major predictions as well as suggested refinements for the
theory of cognitive disequilibrium during deep learning.
Keywords: affect dynamics, hidden markov model, learning.

Introduction
Deep learning and problem solving are emotionally rich
experiences. Students experience boredom when the
material does not appeal to them, confusion when they have
difficulty comprehending the material and are unsure about
how to proceed, frustration when they make mistakes and
get stuck, and perhaps even despair and anxiety when their
efforts seem to be futile and the big exam is creeping around
the corner. This negative picture of the emotional
experiences that accompany learning has a complimentary
positive side. Students experience curiosity when they
encounter topics that interest them, eureka moments when
insights are unveiled and major discoveries made, delight
when challenges are conquered, and perhaps even flow-like
states (Csikszentmihalyi, 1990) when they are so engaged in
learning that time and fatigue disappear.
There have been several theories that link cognition and
affect very generally (Bower, 1981; Mandler, 1984; Ortony,
Clore, & Collins, 1988; Russell, 2003; Stein & Levine,
1991). While these theories convey general links between
cognition and emotions, they do not directly explain and
predict the sort of emotions that occur during complex
learning, such as attempts to master physics, biology, or
computer literacy. Researchers in many different fields are
familiar with Ekman’s work on the detection of emotions
from facial expressions (Ekman, 1984). However, the
emotions that Ekman intensely investigated (e.g., sadness,
happiness, anger, fear, disgust, surprise) have minimal
relevance to learning in typical academic settings (D'Mello,

Craig, Sullins, & Graesser, 2006; Kort, Reilly, & Picard,
2001; Lehman, D’Mello, & Person, 2008). Instead, the
pervasive cognitive-affective states during complex learning
include confusion, frustration, boredom, flow/engagement,
and sometimes delight, surprise, anxiety, and curiosity
(D'Mello et al., 2006; Lehman, Matthews, D'Mello, &
Person, 2008).
The identification of the cognitive-affective states that
occur during learning is critical, but it could be argued that
merely knowing what states occur has limited utility. What
is missing is a specification of how these states evolve,
morph, interact, and influence learning and engagement.
What is required is a fine-grained analysis of the rapid
dynamics of the cognitive-affective processes that naturally
occur during effortful learning activities.
Although affect dynamics has been generally ignored by
theories that link affect and cognition during learning, one
theory, called the cognitive disequilibrium theory, does
address transitions between states. The theory postulates an
important role for
cognitive disequilibrium
in
comprehension and learning processes, a notion that has a
long history in psychology (Berlyne, 1960; Festinger, 1957;
Piaget, 1952). Cognitive disequilibrium is a state that occurs
when learners face obstacles to goals, contradictions,
incongruities, anomalies, uncertainty, and salient contrasts
(Graesser, Lu, Olde, Cooper-Pye, & Whitten, 2005; Otero &
Graesser, 2001; Piaget, 1952).
The cognitive disequilibrium theory is depicted in Figure
1 as a state transition network. The nodes (circles) in the
figure represent the cognitive-affective states (in
parentheses) and their presumed causes (in bold). Links
represent situations that trigger transitions between the
different states.

2721

Figure 1. Cognitive Disequilibrium Theory

The theory assumes that learners are in a base state of
engagement (perhaps a degree of flow) until they are
confronted with a contradiction, anomaly, system
breakdown, or error, and when they are uncertain about
what to do next (Forbes-Riley & Litman, 2009; Graesser et
al., 2005; Siegler & Jenkins, 1989; VanLehn, Siler, Murray,
Yamauchi, & Baggett, 2003). Confusion is a key signature
of the cognitive disequilibrium that occurs when an impasse
is detected (Link 1). Learners must engage in effortful
problem solving activities in order to resolve the impasse
and restore equilibrium. Equilibrium is restored when the
source of the discrepant information is discovered and the
impasse is resolved, thereby causing learners to revert back
to the engaged state (Link 2).
However, this form of productive confusion associated
with impasse resolution can be contrasted with hopeless
confusion. This occurs when the impasse cannot be
resolved, the student gets stuck, and important goals are
blocked. The theory hypothesizes that learners will
experience frustration in these situations (Link 3).
Furthermore, persistent frustration may transition into
boredom, a crucial point at which the learner disengages from
the learning process (Link 4).
We have confirmed some of the predictions of the theory
in previous publications (D'Mello & Graesser, in review;
D'Mello, Taylor, & Graesser, 2007). In particular, we have
assessed the presence of oscillations between flow and
confusion as well as transitions from confusion to
frustration and frustration to boredom. However, verifying
the presence of these transitions represents only one
important component of the theory. The other crucial
component that has not been yet empirically supported
pertains to the internal causes that give rise to the observed
cognitive-affective patterns. These include an equilibrium
state that presumably activates the flow/engaged experience,
a disequilibrium state that causes confusion, a stuck state
that causes frustration, and a disengaged state that emits
boredom. Our previous analyses so far have exclusively
focused on transitions between the cognitive-affective states
but have not explicitly addressed their causes. It is
important, however, that both components of the theory be
verified before it can be accepted as a useful explanation of
the cognitive-affective phenomena that underlies deep
learning.
Unfortunately, it is difficult to model the causes that
underlie the cognitive-affective expressions. These states
can be observed via facial expressions, body movements,
and contextual cues, but the internal causes are hidden (i.e.
they cannot be directly observed). This limitation can be
alleviated via modeling techniques that permit the
simultaneous modeling of both hidden and observed
variables. In particular, the present paper describes a study
in which Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) were used to
model both the observed cognitive-affective states
(confusion, frustrations, etc) and their hidden causes
(equilibrium, stuck, etc), thereby testing the two
components of cognitive disequilibrium theory. The HMMs

were parameterized from learners’ self reports on their
cognitive-affective states via a retrospective judgment
protocol after a tutorial session with AutoTutor, an
Intelligent Tutoring System with conversational dialogues
(Graesser et al., 2004).

Brief Description of HMMs
Hidden Markov Models are valuable tools for modeling
system with sequential observable outcomes when the states
producing the outcomes cannot be directly observed (i.e.
they are hidden). They are widely used to model complex
phenomenon with applications in a variety of disparate
domains, such as automatic speech recognition, tutorial
discourse, computational biology, financial economics,
computer vision , and earthquake detection (Jurafsky &
Martin, 2008; Rabiner, 1989).
HMMs are characterized by a set of parameters that can
be estimated from available data. If there are
hidden
states (
) and
observable states
(
, then the parameters include a
emission probability matrix ( ) and a
transition
probability matrix ( . The emission probability matrix
specifies the conditional probability of emitting an observed
state at time given that the system is a hidden state at
the same time point [
]. On the other hand, the
transition probability matrix specifies the conditional
probability of transitioning from the current hidden state
to the next (or same) hidden state at the next time interval
[
].
As an example consider a simplified model of two hidden
states for equilibrium ( ) and disequilibrium ( ) and two
observed states for flow ( ) and confusion ( ). Here,
and both matrices are of size
. The
emission probability matrix would consist of the following
four conditional probabilities:
,
,
,
and
. Since it is assumed that a given hidden state
emits one of the observable states,
and
.
The transition probability matrix would also consist of
four probabilities:
,
,
, and
. Once again,
and
. Hence, given that a learner is in
one of the hidden states, we can probabilistically determine
which cognitive-affective state is most likely to be observed
as well as what the next hidden state is likely to be.

Methods
Study 1
Participants. 28 undergraduate students (5 male and 23
female) from a large mid-south university participated for
extra credit in their psychology courses.
Interaction with AutoTutor. Participants interacted with
AutoTutor for 32 minutes on one of three randomly
assigned topics in computer literacy: hardware, Internet, or

2722

operating systems. AutoTutor is a validated intelligent
tutoring system that helps learners construct explanations by
interacting with them in natural language with adaptive
dialogue moves similar to human tutors (Graesser et al.,
2004). AutoTutor’s dialogues are organized around difficult
questions, such as why, how, what-if, what if not, how is X
similar to Y, that require answers involving inferences,
explanations, and deep reasoning. Although each question
requires 3-7 sentence-like ideas in a correct answer, learners
rarely give the complete answer in a single conversational
turn. Therefore, the tutor scaffolds the construction of an
answer by an adaptive dialogue with pumps for information,
hints, prompts, assertions, summaries, and feedback.
AutoTutor delivers its dialogue moves via an animated
conversational agent that speaks the content of the tutor’s
turns.
A video of the participant’s face and computer screen was
recorded during the tutorial session (see Figure 2). Gross
body language was tracked using Tekscan’s Body Pressure
Measurement System (not described here).

Figure 2. Learner interacting with AutoTutor
Judging Cognitive-Affective States. Participants provided
self-judgments of their cognitive-affective states
immediately after the tutorial session; learning activities
during the session were not interrupted. Similar to a cuedrecall procedure (Rosenberg & Ekman, 1994), the
judgments for a learner’s tutoring session proceeded by
playing a video of the face along with the screen capture
video of interactions with AutoTutor on a dual-monitor
computer system (see center and right monitor in Figure 2).
The screen capture included the tutor’s synthesized speech,
printed text, students’ responses, dialogue history, and
images, thereby providing the context of the tutorial
interaction.
Participants were instructed to make judgments on what
affective states were present at any moment during the
tutoring session by manually pausing the videos (called
spontaneous judgments). They were also instructed to make
judgments at each 20-second interval; the video
automatically stopped every 20 seconds (called fixed
judgments). If the learner was experiencing more than one
affective state, the learner was instructed to mark each state

and indicate which was most pronounced. However, only
the first choice (more prominent) affective states were
included in the subsequent analyses.
Participants were provided with a checklist of seven states
(boredom, flow/engagement, confusion, frustration, delight,
surprise, and neutral) for them to mark along with
definitions of the states. Hence, judgments were made on
the basis of the participants’ facial expressions, contextual
cues via the screen capture, and the definitions of the
cognitive-affective states.

Study 2
The participants were 30 undergraduate students (13 male
and 17 female) from a mid-south university in the U.S. who
participated for extra course credit.
Study 2, was similar to Study 1, but with two important
differences. While participants in Study 1 interacted with
the traditional typed-input version of AutoTutor, Study 2
participants spoke their responses to a new spoken-input
AutoTutor. In addition to changing the input modality, there
were a number of technical improvements in the new
version of AutoTutor (version 3.1). These include
improvements in conversational smoothness via a
contextually-sensitive dialogue management module, stateof-the-art semantic and statistical natural language
understanding mechanisms (Jurafsky & Martin, 2008), and
an updated domain knowledge base for computer literacy.
The second difference between the two studies pertains to
the retrospective affect judgment protocol. While
participants in Study 1 provided affect judgments every 20
seconds and in-between each 20 second block, participants
in Study 2 provided judgments at three pre-selected points
plus some random points in the tutorial session. These
included: (1) a few seconds after AutoTutor completed a
dialogue move, (2) immediately before the learner started
expressing his or her spoken response to the tutor, and (3)
other randomly selected points in the dialogue. Participants
provided approximately 30-35 cognitive-affective ratings at
each of these three judgment points. These constituted the
fixed judgment points. Similar to Study 1, the participants
could stop the video at any time and make spontaneous
judgments.

Results and Discussion
The retrospective affect judgment procedure yielded 2967
and 3099 self reported cognitive-affect judgments for
Studies 1 and 2, respectively. A time series that preserved
the temporal ordering of the cognitive-affective states was
constructed for each participant. On average, there were 106
states (SD = 9) per time series for Study 1 and 103 states
(SD = 14) for Study 2.
Since the goal of this paper is to investigate transitions
between different states, and not persistence in the same
state, the data was recoded to eliminate repetitions between
states. For example, the sequence
was
converted to
. This process reduced the length of
the time series to a mean of 64 states for both studies (SD1 =

2723

19, SD2 = 15.24). On average, there was a state transition
every 32.38 and 32.77 seconds for Studies 1 and 2,
respectively (SD1 = 11.17, SD2 = 9.58). The recoding
process did not alter the distribution of the cognitiveaffective states.

Estimating Parameters of HMMs
The current analyses focused on discovering the parameters
of HMMs that best explain the relationship between
observable cognitive-affective states and the hidden
variables that presumably govern their behavior. In
particular, we estimated the parameters of an HMM with six
observable states and four hidden states. The hidden states
were equilibrium, disequilibrium, stuck, and disengaged,
whereas
the
observable
states
were
boredom,
flow/engagement, confusion, frustration, delight, and
surprise. Although the theory does not explicitly address the
presence of delight and surprise, the states were included in
the present analyses because they occasionally occur during
learning sessions with AutoTutor (Graesser et al., 2006).
The present analyses constructed separate HMMs for each
study from the time series of the cognitive-affective states.
Parameters of the two matrices of each HMM were
estimated with the Baum-Welch algorithm, which is the
standard procedure used to train HMMs (Jurafsky & Martin,
2008; Rabiner, 1989). The algorithm begins with a set of
initial parameters and then iteratively improves the
estimates of these parameters by comparing how well the
model constructed at each iteration fits the data. The
algorithm converges when the discrepancy between the
predictions made by the model and the training data
minimally vary (i.e. within a preset threshold).
The choice of initial parameters plays an important role in
the estimation process (Jurafsky & Martin, 2008). The
initial parameters can be randomly seeded if there is no
prior theory guiding their selection. In our case, the
cognitive disequilibrium theory provides some important
guidelines for initial parameter selection. For example, the
theory hypothesizes that flow/engagement is expected to
accompany the equilibrium state. Hence, the initial emission
matrix was seeded such that the Flow|Equilibrium
probability was slightly higher ( ) than the other
emissions stemming from the equilibrium state. In particular
emissions
for
Boredom|Equilibrium,
Confusion|
Equilibrium, etc, were set to .164 [
].
In this fashion, a small increase in emission probabilities
was provided to confusion in the disequilibrium state,
frustration in the stuck state, and boredom in the disengaged
state.
The initialization process for the transition probability
matrix was quite different. Here, transitions into the same
hidden states were set to zero (because we are interested in
modeling transitions to other states), while transitions to
other hidden states were set to .333. Hence, each hidden
state had an equal probability of transitioning to any other
hidden state. The HMMs were seeded in this fashion to test
whether hidden state transitions in the converged HMMs

aligned with predictions of the cognitive disequilibrium
theory. For example, equilibrium should transition into
disequilibrium more frequently then stuck and disengaged.
It should be noted that the initial distribution of hidden
states were also set to .25. The initial parameters of the
HMM’s are listed in Table 1 (see Init band). HMMs
initialized on the basis of these parameters converged in 30
and 29 iterations for Study 1 and Study 2, respectively.

Exploring the Structure of the Converged HMMs
Before delving into the structure of the HMMs, we first
evaluated how well the HMMs captured the dynamics of the
state transitions in the two sets of analyses. In the first
analysis, we compared each HMM to its random surrogate,
which was an HMM that was seeded with the same initial
parameters but was trained on randomly shuffled time
series. Random surrogate comparisons provide a convenient
face-validity test for time series analyses, because random
shuffling eliminates all temporal dependencies between
events while preserving the priori probabilities of individual
events. The results indicated that the log-likelihood (LL) for
HMM’s constructed on the basis of a randomly shuffled
time series was significantly (p < .05) lower than the LL for
HMMs constructed from the original time series (d = 1.36
and 1.33 for Study 1 and Study 2, respectively).
The second analysis focused on the generalizability of the
HMMs. Here we compared HMMs constructed and
validated on the entire training set to HMMs constructed on
partial data sets using a leave-one-out cross validation
procedure (LVOCV). LVOCV involves constructing
HMMs, where each HMM is trained on time series from
participants and tested on the time series of the
remaining one participant. Correlations between the LL of
LVOCV HMMs and HMMs trained on the entire data set
were almost perfect (r = .99 for both Studies).
Table 1 lists the parameters of the HMMs for Study 1 and
Study 2. As could be expected, the parameters of the
emission matrix indicate that the flow state is emitted during
equilibrium, confusion during disequilibrium, frustration
when stuck, and boredom when disengaged. Hence, the
converged emission matrix accurately models the
hypotheses of the cognitive disequilibrium theory.
Although the transition matrix was seeded such that
transitions between the hidden states were equivalent (.333),
a different distribution of transitions emerged after training.
In particular, consistent with the theory, the equilibrium
state is more likely to transition into disequilibrium than the
other states. As predicted, the disequilibrium state is more
likely to transition back into equilibrium and the stuck state
than the disengaged state.
The patterns were somewhat more murky for the stuck
state. Although we hypothesized that stuck should transition
into disengagement more frequently than equilibrium or
disequilibrium, this pattern was not observed in the HMM
for Study 1. The results were more in line with the theory
for the HMM for Study 2, where stuck was equally likely to
transition into disengagement and disequilibrium, but not

2724

equilibrium. Finally, the theory does not explicitly address
transitions from the disengaged state, and the HMMs did not
reveal any clear transition pattern for this state.
It is also important to indicate that we constructed two
additional HMMs for Studies 1 and 2. These HMMs were
identical to the HMMs listed in Table 1 but were seeded

with randomly initialized parameters instead of the
theoretically derived initial parameters. The structure of
these randomly-seeded HMMs were quite similar to the
HMMs listed in Table 1, indicating that our theoretically
derived initial parameters did not bias the models.

Table 1. Parameters of HMMs
00

000
Emission Matrix

Transition Matrix

Current Hidden
State

Current Observed State
Bor Con Del Flo

Fru

Sur

Next Hidden State
Eq. Dq. St. Dg.

Init

Equilibrium
Disequilibrium
Stuck
Disengaged

.16
.16
.16
.18

.16
.18
.16
.16

.16
.16
.16
.16

.18
.16
.16
.16

.16
.16
.18
.16

.16
.16
.16
.16

.00
.33
.33
.33

.33
.00
.33
.33

.33
.33
.00
.33

.33
.33
.33
.00

S1

Equilibrium
Disequilibrium
Stuck
Disengaged

.00
.00
.00
.80

.00
.94
.00
.00

.02
.02
.15
.06

.96
.00
.00
.00

.00
.00
.79
.00

.01
.04
.06
.15

.00
.43
.35
.38

.42
.00
.33
.31

.28
.33
.00
.31

.30
.24
.33
.00

.00
.37
.29
.32

.46
.00
.36
.33

.27
.35
.00
.35

.27
.27
.36
.00

HMM

S2

Equilibrium
.00 .00
.06 .89 .00 .05
Disequilibrium
.00 .90
.07 .00 .00 .03
Stuck
.00 .00
.13 .00 .83 .03
Disengaged
.04 .00 .00 .06
.90 .00
Notes. Eq. = equilibrium, Dq = disequilibrium, St = stuck, Dg. = disengagement

Discussion
The present paper used HMMs to test a theory of cognitive
disequilibrium that is applicable to the dynamics of
cognitive-affective states in deep learning environments.
The major predictions of the theory were verified via the
emission and transition matrices of the HMM which aligned
with different aspects of the theory. In particular, the results
supported
an
equilibrium
state
that
emitted
flow/engagement, a disequilibrium state that emitted
confusion, and transitions between the equilibrium and
disequilibrium states. These results support the assertion
that students in the state of engagement/flow are continuously
being challenged within their zones of optimal learning
(Brown, Ellery, & Campione, 1998; Vygotsky, 1978) and are
experiencing two-step episodes alternating between confusion
and insight.
The HMMs confirmed the presence of a transition from
disequilibrium to the stuck state that emitted frustration.
However, the prediction of a transition from the stuck state
to the disengaged state was only partially supported. The
converged HMMs suggest that in addition to the predicted
transition from the stuck to disengaged states, transitions
from stuck to the disequilibrium and even the equilibrium
states are permissible.

These transitions from frustration suggest that it is
important to differentiate between different exemplars of
frustration. Similar to the discrimination between productive
and hopeless episodes of confusion, there might also be
different manifestations of frustration. For example, being
stuck for a short period of time and then obtaining an insight
might trigger delight and cause a transition into the
equilibrium state. Some evidence for this assertion can be
obtained from the emission matrix which indicates that
delight is sometimes emitted from the stuck state.
Alternatively, the stuck state can transition into the
disequilibrium state when an additional impasse is detected.
The third manifestation of frustration is one that is predicted
by the theory. Here, persistent failure and hopelessness from
being stuck will eventually trigger disengagement, where
the learner detaches from the learning session.
In summary, there appear to be three alternatives for
transitions from frustration and the stuck state: (a)
frustration is alleviated when a resolution is reached, (b)
frustration oscillates with confusion when a stuck student
detects an additional impasse, and (c) frustration transitions
into boredom when a hopelessly stuck learner disengages
from the learning session. Testing the fidelity of these
transitions will require further empirical research.

2725

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the National Science
Foundation (REC 0106965, ITR 0325428, HCC 0834847).
Any
opinions,
findings
and
conclusions,
or
recommendations expressed in this paper are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of NSF.

References
Berlyne, D. (1960). Conflict, Arousal, and Curiosity. New
York: McGraw-Hill Inc.
Bower, G. (1981). Mood and memory. American
Psychologist, 36, 129-148.
Brown, A., Ellery, S., & Campione, J. (1998). Creating
Zones of Proximal Development Electronically in
Thinking Practices in Mathematics and Science
Learning. In J. Greeno & S. Goldman (Eds.), (pp. 341368). Mahawah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). Flow: The Psychology of
Optimal Experience. New York: Harper and Row.
D'Mello, S., Craig, S., Sullins, J., & Graesser, A. (2006).
Predicting affective states expressed through an emotealoud procedure from AutoTutor's mixed-initiative
dialogue. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence
in Education, 16(1), 3-28.
D'Mello, S., & Graesser, A. (in review). Dynamics of
Cognitive-Affective States during Deep Learning.
D'Mello, S., Taylor, R., & Graesser, A. (2007). Monitoring
affective trajectories during complex learning. In D.
McNamara & G. Trafton (Eds.), Proceedings of the
29th Annual Cognitive Science Society (pp. 203-208).
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Ekman, P. (1984). Expression and the nature of emotion. In
K. Scherer & P. Ekman (Eds.), Approaches to emotion
(pp. 319-344). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Festinger, L. (1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance.
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Forbes-Riley, K., & Litman, D. (2009). Adapting to student
uncertainty improves tutoring dialogues. In V.
Dimitrova, R. Mizoguchi & B. Du Boulay (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on
Artificial Intelligence in Education (pp. 33-40).
Amsterdam: IOS Press.
Graesser, A., Lu, S., Olde, B., Cooper-Pye, E., & Whitten,
S. (2005). Question asking and eye tracking during
cognitive disequilibrium: Comprehending illustrated
texts on devices when the devices break down. Memory
and Cognition, 33, 1235-1247.
Graesser, A., Lu, S. L., Jackson, G., Mitchell, H., Ventura,
M., Olney, A., et al. (2004). AutoTutor: A tutor with
dialogue in natural language. Behavioral Research
Methods, Instruments, and Computers, 36, 180-193.
Graesser, A., McDaniel, B., Chipman, P., Witherspoon, A.,
D'Mello, S., & Gholson, B. (2006). Detection of
emotions during learning with AutoTutor. Paper
presented at the 28th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, Vancouver, Canada.

Jurafsky, D., & Martin, J. (2008). Speech and language
processing: An introduction to natural language
processing, computational linguistics, and speech
recognition. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Kort, B., Reilly, R., & Picard, R. (2001). An affective model
of the interplay between emotions and learning. Paper
presented at the Proceedings of the International
Conference of Advanced Learning Technologies,
Madison, WI.
Lehman, B., D’Mello, S., & Person, N. (2008). All Alone
with your Emotions: An Analysis of Student Emotions
during Effortful Problem Solving Activities. Paper
presented at the Workshop on Emotional and Cognitive
issues in ITS at the Ninth International Conference on
Intelligent Tutoring Systems.
Lehman, B., Matthews, M., D'Mello, S., & Person, N.
(2008). What are you feeling? Investigating student
affective states during expert human tutoring sessions.
In B. Woolf, A. E., N. R. & L. S. (Eds.), Proceedings of
the 9th International Conference on Intelligent Tutoring
Systems (pp. 50-59).
Mandler, G. (1984). Mind and Body: Psychology of
Emotion and Stress. New York: W.W. Norton &
Company.
Ortony, A., Clore, G., & Collins, A. (1988). The cognitive
structure of emotions. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Otero, J., & Graesser, A. (2001). PREG: Elements of a
model of question asking. Cognition and Instruction,
19(2), 143-175.
Piaget, J. (1952). The origins of intelligence. New York:
International University Press.
Rabiner, L. (1989). A tutorial on hidden Markov models and
selected
applications
in
speech
recognition.
Proceedings of the IEEE, 77(2), 257-286.
Rosenberg, E., & Ekman, P. (1994). Coherence between
expressive and experiential systems in emotion.
Cognition & Emotion, 8(3), 201-229.
Russell, J. (2003). Core affect and the psychological
construction of emotion. Psychological Review, 110,
145-172.
Siegler, R., & Jenkins, E. (Eds.). (1989). Strategy Discovery
and Strategy Generalization. Hillsdale, NJ,: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Stein, N., & Levine, L. (1991). Making sense out of
emotion. In A. O. W. Kessen, & F, Kraik (Eds.) (Ed.),
Memories, thoughts, and emotions: Essays in honor of
George Mandler (pp. 295-322). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
VanLehn, K., Siler, S., Murray, C., Yamauchi, T., &
Baggett, W. (2003). Why do only some events cause
learning during human tutoring? Cognition and
Instruction, 21(3), 209-249.
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society: The development of
higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.

2726

