UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Motor Simulation in a Memory Task: Evidence from Rock Climbing

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6b6005sk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Pezzulo, Giovanni
Barca, Laura
Bocconi, Alessandro Lamberti
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Motor Simulation in a Memory Task: Evidence from Rock Climbing
Giovanni Pezzulo (giovanni.pezzulo@cnr.it)
Istituto di Linguistica Computazionale ‘Antonio Zampolli’, CNR - Pisa, Italy
Istituto di Scienze e Tecnologie della Cognizione, CNR – Roma, Italy

Laura Barca (laura.barca@istc.cnr.it)
Neuroscience and Neurorehabilitation Department, Children's Hospital Bambino Gesù - IRCCS
Santa Marinella (Rome), Italy

Alessandro Lamberti Bocconi
Facoltà di Scienze Motorie, Università degli Studi dell’Aquila
L’Aquila, Italy

Anna M. Borghi (anna.borghi@gmail.com)
University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy
Istituto di Scienze e Tecnologie della Cognizione, CNR – Roma, Italy
Abstract

perceiving affordances activates in observers specific motor
programs (Borghi, 2004; Borghi and Riggio, 2009; Martin,
2007). This phenomenon can be interpreted as activation of
a motor simulation, where ‘simulating’ means that the same
sensorimotor systems that are activated during interaction
with objects are activated during object perception (e.g.
when observing objects or when listening their characteristic
sound), but without the execution of overt movements
(Gallese, 2009; Jeannerod, 2006).
A computational framework proposed by Wolpert and
Kawato (1998) and elaborated in Frith et al. (2000);
Jeannerod (2006); Wolpert et al. (2003) explains motor
simulations as the re-enactment of internal models that
allow motor control. Internal models come in two varieties,
inverse and forward. During motor control, the former
compute the necessary motor commands to achieve a certain
goal given a starting position, and the latter predict the
sensory consequences of those motor commands. In
addition, it is possible to re-enact internal models to form a
simulation of possible actions by feeding the inverse model
with predicted sensory inputs rather than ‘true’ sensory
inputs, and successively feeding the new motor command to
the forward models, and so on. This process permits the
linking of multiple predictions in order to obtain simulations
of possible actions for an arbitrary long number of steps.
Note that for this process to work it is also necessary to
inhibit ‘true’ sensory inputs and motor outputs. Indeed,
simulating is not the same as performing an overt action, for
a variety of reasons: simulation implies a weaker activation
of the interested neural areas. In addition, during simulation
some kind of blocking mechanisms might intervene that
prevents the action to be executed overtly. Finally, during
overt action a sensorial feedback is received, while no such
feedback is given while simulating (Jeannerod, 2006).
Even if the activation of motor information elicited by
object presentation has been extensively studied in the last
years, the majority of studies have focused on how single
objects or object pairs (e.g., Riddoch et al., 2003) activate an

This study concerns the role of motor simulations in a memory
task performed by expert and novice climbers. In a behavioural
task, expert and novice rock climbers were shown three novel
climbing routes: an easy route, a route impossible to climb but
perceptually salient, and a difficult route. After a distraction task,
they were given a recall test in which they had to write down the
sequence of holds composing each route. No difference emerged
between experts and novices on the easy and impossible routes.
Differently, the performance of expert climbers was better than
that of novices on the difficult route. Results suggest that seeing a
climbing wall activates a motor, embodied simulation, which
relies not on perceptual salience, but on motor competence.
Crucially, it is shown that the ability to form this simulation is
modulated by individuals’ motor repertoire and expertise, and that
this strongly impacts recall.
Keywords: simulation, affordance, embodied cognition, grounded
cognition, canonical neurons, mirror neurons, motor memory,
memory for actions, motor chunks.

Introduction
A number of studies have shown that seeing an object, such
as a cup, affords simple actions, such as reaching and
grasping. According to the original definition by Gibson
(1979) affordances are possibilities for action offered by the
environment and perceived directly by an observer. A recent
view of affordances, which we endorse here, is that they are
potential action patterns activated in the observer’s brain
while observing objects. In other words, they are the product
of the conjoining, in the brain, of visual stimuli and action
responses (e.g., Ellis & Tucker, 2000), whose neural bases
can be found in the discovery, in the F5 area of the ventral
premotor cortex of the monkey, of visuomotor canonical
neurons which discharge in the presence of graspable
objects when no overt response is required (Murata et al.,
1997). Evidence in humans confirms the existence of a
parietopremotor circuit active during the observation of
manipulable objects (Grèzes et al., 2003). Overall, both
behavioural and brain imaging studies have shown that

266

internal simulation or even overt simple movements, such as
reaching or grasping. The role played by multiple
affordances for complex actions implying a sequence of
movements has not been widely investigated. Imagine
observing a mountain path before performing a complex
action composed by a sequence of movements, such as
hiking. One might observe whether the path is steep or not,
how the different stones are displayed, whether tree
branches represent obstacles for walking and how to avoid
them. In other words, both the characteristics of single
objects (e.g., the stones, their orientation and shape) and
their placement along the path might afford or impede
actions. The same is true for climbing.
Indoor rock climbing consists in reaching the top of a
specially-designed wall (i.e., a climbing wall), by grasping
climbing holds with the hands and the foots. Climbing
routes, which consist in carefully arranged sequences of
climbing holds, may have different difficulties depending on
the slope of the wall, the length of the route, as well as on
the number, kind, and arrangement of the climbing holds.
Usually climbers, both during their training and during
competitions, spend some time in “studying” climbing
routes before climbing them, especially when they have to
climb a route for the first time. Then, they can mentally
simulate which holds to take, which movements to do,
which rest positions they can find, etc. In some cases, they
also overtly mimic the hand (and foot) movements that they
expect to perform while climbing (see fig. 1).

Crucially, the motor competence of climbers also
determines what constitutes an affordance. Experienced
climbers can hold small holds that are difficult for weak
climbers to grasp, and can simulate sequences of actions
that are too complex to be picked up by novice climbers,
much like how expert chess players ‘see’ complex
strategies. We hypothesize that the proficiency of expert
climbers allow them to climb better the routes also by
understand them better, where understanding should be
intended as proficiency in the affordance calculus and in the
associated building of appropriate mental simulations before
climbing.

Figure 1. Athletes studying a climbing route before
climbing it. Note the overt hand movements.

Our study addresses the role multiple affordances play in the
recall of routes by rock climbers with different level of
expertise. An open issue in this field pertains to the extent to
which affordances are elicited automatically, upon seeing
objects, or are activated when a specific action goal is
pursued. In addition, studying recall in expert and novice
climbers can contribute by showing to what extent the
activation of affordances is modulated by observers’
experience and competence. Finally, we still know very
little on how affordances improve recall. Acquired motor
skills offer a unique way to test this question.
Here, novice and expert climbers were asked to observe and
recall the position of holds of 3 routes that they never
climbed: an easy route (ER), a difficult route (DR), and a
(motorically) impossible but perceptually salient route
(IPSR). Predictions were that their performances would not
differ for the ER, because both groups would be able to
perform a motor simulation, and for the IPSR route, when
for both it was impossible to form a motor simulation of
climbing. If this were true, this would demonstrate that the
simulation formed is a motor one, and would be activated
only when participants have the motor competence
necessary to perform the sequence of actions. Accordingly,
the performance of experts should overcome that of
nonexperts in the DR, when the actions required climbing
the route they are shown are part of their motor repertoire.

Figure 2. A sample sequence of movements in rock
climbing. Notice that (i) climbing holds afford different
grips, and (ii) the way holds can be grasped depend on
which holds were grasped before (and how) as well as
which holds the climber intends to reach.

Aims and objectives of the study

The simulation they build might include both information
on specific affordances, i.e. the characteristics of the holds
(shape, orientation, etc.), and information on their
displacement, i.e. the way they are arranged on the wall.
Given that routes involve multiple climbing holds, clearly
any simulation of a part of the route changes the way the
rest of the route is perceived. For example, simulating
grasping a certain hold with the right hand makes some
other holds affordable to be grasped with the left hand, and
some other holds out of reach; see fig. 2. At the same time,
the need of reaching a certain ‘goal’ hold determine which
holds are affordances retrospectively, and disrupts the
affordances of some holds (e.g., far holds) in the climbing
wall. For all these reasons, motor simulation in rock
climbing should be considered an affordance calculus rather
than a response to a sequence of individual affordances.

267

were given a folder containing three A3 sheets, each
displaying a picture of the climbing wall (which included all
the holds). After the first of the three routes had been
shown, they were asked to extract the first sheet and to mark
down as quickly as possible (with a time limit of 2 minutes)
the sequence of holds composing the first route. The same
procedure was repeated for the two remaining routes.
Participants were then required to fill in a post-experiment
questionnaire in which they were asked to report (by
responding yes or no) whether they mentally imaged
climbing the wall while being shown the route and while
recalling them, whether they believed that imagining the
route might be helpful for them, and which route appeared
to them the easiest to climb.

Method and Materials
Participants
Eighteen climbers who attended to the “Lanciani Climb”
arena in Rome volunteered to study. Experts had between 5
and 10 years climbing experience, whereas novices had less
than six months climbing experience. Groups were balanced
for gender (6 men and 3 women each group) and age. To
balance the order in which the different routes were
presented, as well as to avoid assigning the task to large
groups, we divided the participants in 6 groups of 3
randomly selected participants: 3 groups composed by
experts, and 3 by novices.

Materials

Results

Two climbing trainers set up three novel routes from a
climbing wall containing 110 holds. Each route was
composed of 10 holds (the typical average length for most
training routes). Route difficulty depends on the
configuration of the holds (their graspability) and the
configuration of the limbs in transition between the holds
(Smyth and Waller, 1999). Both experts and novices,
because of the orientation and arrangement of the holds,
could climb the Easy Route (ER) without difficulty. In order
to control for perceptual factors that might facilitate
memorization, the two other routes differed in perceptual
salience. The Difficult Route (DR) was difficult to climb
because the holds were not easily graspable due to their
shape and orientation, and only expert climbers could
benefit from their affordances. All holds in the ER and DR
were grey- or dark-coloured and did not differ in size or
other perceptual characteristics. The third route,
(motorically) Impossible but Perceptually Salient Route
(IPSR), was impossible to climb as a whole (but parts of it
could be climbed). The difficulty of such route was not due
to the fact that participants had to simulate biologically
impossible movements (Costantini et al., 2005) but rather on
the arrangement of the holds. Specifically, it was impossible
to benefit from the affordances offered by the holds and to
configure the limbs for a transition from one hold to the
other. To facilitate memorization, however, we rendered the
holds perceptually salient: they were vividly coloured,
compared to the standard grey- or dark-coloured holds.

All participants performed the task without difficulties. The
number of holds reported in a correct sequence for each
route was computed for each participant, and submitted to a
3x2 mixed ANOVA with Route (ER, DR and IPSR) as
within factor, Expertise (Expert vs. Novice) as between
factor and participants as the random factor. Data are plotted
in fig. 3. All analyses were conducted using a Type I error
rate of .05.
Figure 3. Results of the task. Legenda. ER - Easy Route; DR
- Difficult Route; IPSR – (Motorically) Impossible but
Perceptually Salient Route

Expertise factor was not significant (F (1, 16) = 1.35; MSe =
20.92; p = .26), whereas Route factor was highly significant
(F (1,32) = 15.45; MSe = 3.35; p < .0001). Post-hoc
Newman-Keuls showed this was due to the difference
between the ER (M = 6.44) and the two other routes, DR
and IPSR (M = 3.72; M = 3.33, respectively). As predicted,
the ER led to a better performance compared to the two
other routes, independently from the degree of expertise of
participants. It is worth noting that the average number of
remembered sequences was exactly the same for experts and
novices (M = 6.44).
Crucially to our hypotheses, the interaction between
Expertise and Route was significant (F (1,32) = 3.60; MSe =
3.35; p < .04). Post-hoc test confirmed that there was no
difference between Novices and Experts on the Easy Route
(p = 1). More importantly, the difference between Novices
and Experts was not significant with the IPSR (NewmanKeuls, p = .21, respectively M = 2.78, M = 3.89), whereas
the performance of Novices was significantly worse than

Procedure
Two experimenters and the trainer were present in the
Lanciani Climb arena to administer the task. Before entering
the arena, participants were instructed that they have to
memorize a route made up of 10 holds, and that later they
had to perform an additional task. Groups (of 3 participants)
were then invited to enter and to sit in front of the climbing
wall. The wall includes 110 holds with different size and
orientation, placed uniformly to cover its entire surface. The
trainer indicated twice the holds of each route with a stick.
After this demonstration, participants had to turn their backs
to the wall and perform a distracting task (i.e. to pronounce
the letters from A to L). The procedure was repeated for
each route. The presentation order of the routes (ER, DR
and IPSR) was balanced across participants. Participants

268

that of Experts with the DR (Newman-Keuls, p < .004,
respectively M = 2.11, M = 5.33). This suggests that the two
groups did not differ in memory capabilities when for both
of them it was impossible to mentally simulate the motor
task, i.e. in the IPSR. This indicates that the impossibility to
form a motor simulation clearly affects recall. The impact of
motor simulation on recall is confirmed by results with the
DR, where the difference between the two groups clearly
emerged. Namely, in the DR, the capability to climb the
wall was part of the experts’ motor repertoire, thus they
were able to build a motor simulation. In the postexperimental questionnaire, Experts and Novices did not
differ in responding to whether they mentally imagined
climbing the route while being shown it (55% of both
groups responded using imagination) and while recalling it
(44% for both groups responded positively). However,
compared to novices, experts seem more aware of the
effects of the simulation (22% of novices and 44% of
experts reported that imagination helped), even though
neither group seemed to believe that imaging was
strategically important, as participants did not believe it
helped them during recall (only 33% of athletes responded
positively for both groups). Experts and Novices differed
also in that Novices were less aware of the differences
between the routes (55% of novices did not distinguish
between them).

Namely, no simulation is activated when climbers observe
holds that are perceptually salient (i.e. having vivid colors)
but not useful for climbing the route, that is, when the holds
do not represent good affordances. This result helps to
qualify the kind of simulation evoked: holds (affordances)
elicit an embodied, motor simulation, not a purely visual
simulation.
Notice that in this study we do not consider the specificity
of the climbing method experts and non-experts adopt; we
simply focus on different climbing competence. A few
studies have addressed and demonstrated that experts and
novices might use different patterns of action. Boschker et
al. (2002) found that, differently from inexperienced
climbers, experts focused on the functional aspects of a
climbing wall, whereas they did not consider its structural
features. In Boschker and Bakker (2002) inexperienced
climbers who were shown a video of expert climbers
learned to use experts modes of climbing (e.g., arm
crossing) and climbed faster and with more fluent
movements than those who were shown videos of novice
climbers or a control video. Overall, our results fit well in
the embodied cognition (Glenberg, 1997) literature and have
implications, concerning the role of affordances for both
simulation and recall, as well as the relationship between
motor competence and the capability to form and use motor
simulations.
In addition, this finding helps us comprehend the
mechanisms on which memory of action relies (see for
example Daprati et al., 2005). Overall, our study suggests
that the ability to benefit from objects’ (holds’)
characteristics and from their arrangement can help a
climber form motor chunks, i.e. chunks based on sequences
of real action possibilities, which, in turn, leads to better
recall of a given route. The idea of “chunks” derives from
the study of Chase and Simon (1973) on how competence
influences recall of chess positions in novice and expert
chess players. The main finding of such study is that expert
chess players outperformed novices in the recall of
meaningful chess positions, but not in non-meaningful
positions. The authors proposed that this is due to the
experts’ larger set of ‘chunks’ of chess positions, which
permits them to recognize complex patterns of chess
positions as individual units and therefore to recall them
better. Our study shares resemblances with the study of
Chase and Simon (1973), the two main differences being
that: (i) we focus on motor competence rather than abstract
problems like chess, and (ii) unlike chess players, climbers
see the climbing routes for the first time, and there is an
immense variety of combinations of holds, orientations,
inclinations of the climbing walls, etc. Although the
climbers could still pick up abstract similarities between old
and new patterns of holds, these similarities are meaningless
if untied to body possibilities and more in general
(competence-specific) motoric information. For this reason,
we could hypothesize that a chunking mechanism could be
in play that is similar to the one described in (Chase and
Simon, 1973); it can be called motor chunking due to the

Discussion
Our results support the hypothesis that visually perceiving
multiple affordances (here, climbing holds disposed in a
climbing wall) leads to the activation of a motor simulation,
which improved recall. The activation of the simulation is
specific, and depends on whether or not the holds are
disposed so to afford climbing, and on climbers’ motor
competence.
We found that both experts and non-experts performed
equally well with the Easy Route. This suggests that, when
participants have the motor competence allowing them to
climb a given route, they simulate doing it, and this very
fact improves their recall of the route. In addition, our
results allow us to understand what happens with difficult
routes, that is, when, for some of the participants, it is
difficult or impossible to construe a simulation. Specifically,
the design we used allow us to distinguish situations in
which participants could rely on perceptual salience for
memorization and situations in which only a subset of
participants might build a motor simulation grounded on
previous climbing experience. We found that the expert
participants, who were able to rely on a mental simulation
strategy, had better performance than novice ones, who
were only able to rely on visual strategies. The advantages
of motoric vs. visual strategies were also highlighted by the
poor performance of both groups in the (motorically)
impossible but perceptually salient route, despite the high
salience of the holds that composed the route. Our results
indicate that a simulation is evoked only when the holds
have perceptual characteristics and also afford actions.

269

importance of motoric information. However, if this is the
case, motor chunks cannot be simply retrieved from
memory, but should be built anew (or at least reassembled)
as part of the planning (and simulation) process, which is of
course highly competence-specific, and involves the
(partial) re-enactment of motor processes. Note that this
view of motor chunking is compatible with the idea of
Glenberg (1997) that simulations can be meshed with
(episodic) memories. Overall, this view could explain why
memory performance is better when climbers are allowed to
form motor chunks, not when they use memory strategies
relying on the visual saliency of some holds. This finding is
also compatible with the idea that motor simulations elicit
procedural memories (see Pezzulo, 2008; in press; Pezzulo
and Castelfranchi, 2009, for a discussion).
Our results suggest also that the activation of a motor
simulation is possible only when performing a given
sequence of actions is part of participants’ motor
competence. The better recall of Experts compared to
Novices is totally due to the fact that, given that they were
able to climb the difficult route, they could mentally
simulate climbing (do the ‘affordances calculus’) and, with
the help of the affordances, they were able to recall the
sequence of required movements. Novices were impeded
from simulating because they did not possess the motor
capability to climb the Difficult Route. This suggests that
the ability to simulate is modulated by previous motor
experiences, in keeping with ideomotor theories of
perception and action (Hommel et al., 2001).
Differently from other sports, like dance, in rock climbing
both the simulation elicited by action observation (of
another rock climber) and the simulation elicited by
affordances (simply observing a rock or climbing wall) can
be studied. Therefore, our research extends also the results
showing that a motor resonance phenomenon occurs when
we observe others performing complex movements, such as
dancing and playing basketball (e.g., Cross et al., 2006).
This phenomenon has its neural basis in the mirror neuron
system, which, differently from canonical neurons, are
activated both during performance of an action (say,
grasping, manipulating and holding objects), and during
observation of others performing the same action (Gallese et
al., 1996). In line with our results, this motor resonance is
stronger when participants observe actors sharing their
motor repertoire. Aglioti et al. (2008) demonstrated with a
psychophysical study that elite basketball players predicted
the success of free shots at a basket earlier and better than
expert observers and novice players. The experts’ advantage
was due mainly to their higher capability to predict by
reading body kinematics in the early movement phases. A
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) study showed a
time-specific motor activation while observing videos of
errors. The results of the combined physiological and TMS
studie reveal that fine-grained motor resonance occurs after
motor practice and that motor expertise specifically
contributes to anticipating the actions of others.

Studying a special case, that of rock climbers, our
behavioural study showed for the first time that multiple
affordances activate a motor simulation, and that this
strongly impacts recall, which is then modulated by
participants’ motor expertise and motor repertoire. Further
studies are needed to better understand the neural
underpinnings of the complex mechanisms of recall based
on affordances and embodied simulation.
One alternative explanation for our results is that experts
might be better in fitting visual images of climbers’
postures, and thus they could use visual imagery rather than
motor simulations. Although our study cannot rule out this
possibility, there are reasons to believe that this is not the
case. First, while this hypothesis explains the advantage of
experts in the DR, it does not explain the good performance
of novices in the ER. To explain why novices are better in
recalling the ER than the DR, one should say that visual
imagery is specifically modulated by one’s own (motoric)
climbing competence. Second, the exclusive use of visual
imagery could hardly help solving our task. Namely,
climbers experience the routes for the first time, and cannot
see other climbers, so any visual simulation they build has
to be done anew. However, spatial and configurational
information (position of limbs in space) is not enough to
determine which are the climbing positions one should
remember, since valid climbing positions also depend on
which affordances are offered by the holds, and which are
the past and future movements. In other terms, although
climbers could use visual imagery as part of their strategies,
at least some of the processing required to recall climbing
positions is better understood in motoric than purely visual
terms. Another possibility is that experts are more
experienced with some patterns of holds, much like chess
players are supposed to be. As already discussed, however,
climbers see the routes for the first time, and there countless
dispositions of holds. More importantly, the visual
appearance and the spatial configuration of the holds is not
sufficient to understand the best path in a route, or its
difficulty. To do so, climbers have to take into account at
the same time the individual affordances offered by the
holds, the previous movements, etc. Overall, then, due to the
highly specific and situated nature of climbing, it is unlikely
that a memory retrieval strategy could be sufficient
(although it might help), and how memory retrieval could be
done in purely abstract terms, without accessing one’s own
motoric information. (This is why we suggested that motor
chunks should be built anew as part of the motor planning.)
Before concluding, it is worth mentioning that several
studies distinguish between two kinds of motor simulations:
conscious and unconscious (see Jeannerod, 2006 for a
discussion). Most of the afore-mentioned studies address
unconscious motor simulations; in this context, the idea is
that seeing a climbing wall automatically activates specific
motor processes in climbers. There is, however, another
kind of motor simulation, a conscious one, which can be
performed by climbers, and is indeed routinely done as part
of the athletes’ training, and before the start of competitions.

270

Jeannerod (2006) suggests that the representational content
of conscious and unconscious simulations are the same,
with different time constraints determining their level of
access (e.g., most unconscious motor images arise for the
demands of immediate action and simply do not have the
time to become conscious). In this study, the climbers were
not explicitly instructed to mentally simulate. However, the
procedure adopted in this study, and in the afore-mentioned
ones, does not permit us to discriminate whether or not
participants used a conscious strategy. Further studies are
necessary to shed light on the differences between conscious
and unconscious mental simulations, and their respective
roles in motor planning.

normal
subjects
and
schizophrenic
patients.
Neuropsychologia, 43, 281-293.
Ellis, R., & Tucker, M. (2000). Micro-affordance: the
potentiation of components of action by seen objects.
British Journal of Psychology, 9, 451-471.
Frith, C. D., Blakemore, S. J., and Wolpert, D. M. (2000).
Abnormalities in the awareness and control of action.
Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci, 355(1404):1771–
1788.
Gallese, V. (2009). Motor abstraction: a neuroscientific
account of how action goals and intentions are mapped
and understood. Psychological Research, 73, 486-498.
Gibson, J. (1979) The ecological approach to visual
perception. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc
Glenberg, A. (1997). What memory is for. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 20, 1-55.
Grèzes, J., Tucker, M., Armony, J., Ellis, R., and
Passingham, R. E. (2003). Objects automatically
potentiate action: an fmri study of implicit processing.
European Journal of Neuroscience, 17, 2735-2740.
Hommel, B.; Musseler, J.; Aschersleben, G. & Prinz, W.
(2001) The Theory of Event Coding (TEC): a
framework for perception and action planning
Behavioral and Brain Science, 24(5), 849-78
Jeannerod, M. (2006). Motor Cognition. Oxford University
Press.
Martin, A. (2007). The representation of object concepts in
the brain. Annual Review Psychology, 58, 25-45.
Murata, A., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., Gallese, V., Raos, V.,
and Rizzolatti, G. (1997). Object representation in the
ventral premotor cortex (area f5) of the monkey. Journal
of Neurophysiology, 78, 2226-2230.
Pezzulo, G. (in press). Grounding procedural and
declarative knowledge in sensorimotor anticipation.
Mind and Language.
Pezzulo, G. (2008). Coordinating with the Future: the
Anticipatory Nature of Representation. Minds and
Machines, 18, 179-225.
Pezzulo, G., and Castelfranchi, C. (2009). Thinking as the
Control of Imagination: a Conceptual Framework for
Goal-Directed Systems. Psychological Research, 73,
559-577.
Riddoch, M. J., Humphreys, G. W., Edwards, S., Baker, T.,
and Willson, K. (2003). Seeing the action:
neuropsychological evidence for action-based effects on
object selection. Nat Neurosci, 6(1):82–89.
Smyth, M. M. and Waller, A. (1999). Movement imagery in
rock climbing: patterns of interference from visual,
spatial and kinaesthetic secondary tasks. Applied
Cognitive Psychology, 12, 145-157.
Wolpert, D. M. and Kawato, M. (1998). Multiple paired
forward and inverse models for motor control. Neural
Networks, 11(7-8):1317–1329.
Wolpert, D. M., Doya, K., and Kawato, M. (2003). A
unifying computational framework for motor control and
social interaction. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci,
358(1431):593– 602.

Acknowledgments
The research has been partially funded by the European’s
Community, FP7 under grant agreements no. 216125
(ROSSI, Emergence of communication in RObots through
Sensorimotor and Social Interaction), no. PERG02-GA2007-224919 (WoRHD, Written language processing in
Hearing and Deaf), and no. FP7- 231453 (HUMANOBS,
Humanoids That Learn Socio-Communicative Skills
Through Observation). The authors thank Alessia Tessari
and Marco Tullio Liuzza for useful discussions.

References
Aglioti, S. M., Cesari, P., Romani, M., and Urgesi, C.
(2008). Action anticipation and motor resonance in elite
basketball players. Nature Neuroscience, 11, 1109-1116.
Borghi, A. M. (2004). Object concepts and action:
extracting affordances from objects parts. Acta
Psychologica, 115, 69-96.
Borghi, A.M., Riggio, L. (2009). Sentence comprehension
and simulation of objects temporary, canonical and
stable affordances. Brain Research, 1253, 117-128.
Boschker, M. S. J. and Bakker, F. C. (2002). Inexperienced
sport climbers might perceive and utilize new
opportunities for action by merely observing a model.
Perceptual Motor Skills, 95, 3-9.
Boschker, M. S. J., Bakker, F. C., and Michaels, C. F.
(2002). Memory for the functional characteristics of
climbing walls: perceiving affordances. Journal of
Motor Behavior, 34, 25-36.
Costantini, M., Galati, G., Ferretti, A., Caulo, M., Tartaro,
A., Romani, G. L., and Aglioti, S. M. (2005). Neural
systems underlying observation of humanly impossible
movements: an fmri study. Cerebral Cortex, 15, 17611767.
Cross, E. S., de C Hamilton, A. F., and Grafton, S. T.
(2006). Building a motor simulation de novo:
observation of dance by dancers. Neuroimage, 31, 12571267.
Daprati, E., Nico, D., Saimpont, A., Franck, N., and Sirigu,
A. (2005). Memory and action: an experimental study on

271

