UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Non-verbal responses to being ignored: Evidence of cognitive deconstruction?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3hp3z8mj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Krahmer, Emiel
Schaafsma, Juliette
Swerts, Marc
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Non-Verbal Responses to Being Ignored:
Evidence of Cognitive Deconstruction?
Emiel Krahmer (E.J.Krahmer@uvt.nl)
Juliette Schaafsma (J.Schaafsma@uvt.nl)
Marc Swerts (M.G.J.Swerts@uvt.nl)
Martijn Balsters (M.J.H.Balsters@uvt.nl)
Tilburg Centre for Cognition and Communication (TiCC), Tilburg School of Humanities, Tilburg University
PO BOX 90153, NL-5000 LE Tilburg, The Netherlands

Ad Vingerhoets (Vingerhoets@uvt.nl)
Tilburg School of Social and Behavioural Sciences, Tilburg University
PO BOX 90153, NL-5000 LE Tilburg, The Netherlands

Abstract
This study examined people’s non-verbal reactions to being
ignored or included during a social interaction. It was
hypothesized that external judges could determine, on the
basis of non-verbal cues, whether a person was ignored or
included. Moreover, we expecteded that people who were
ignored would become less non-verbally expressive, which
could be indicative of cognitive withdrawal. It was found
that persons who had been ignored reported lower average
mood scores than included persons. External judges were,
on average, also able to distinguish individuals who were
ignored from those who were included. In terms of people’s
specific non-verbal behaviors, however, the findings are
less clear. Even though persons who were ignored engaged
less in affiliative behaviors than included persons, they did
not display more non-verbal behaviors that are indicative of
withdrawal than included persons (e.g., flight). Limitations
of the study and future directions are discussed.
Keywords: Exclusion; non-verbal behaviors; cognitive
deconstruction

Introduction
Human beings are deeply motivated to form stable,
lasting connections with other people. They strongly
desire social attachments and seem inclined to form
relationships even in the absence of ulterior motives.
Moreover, they are willing to spend considerable
time and effort in fostering supportive relationships
with others and are generally reluctant to end
relationships, even when these relationships have
become unnecessary or dysfunctional. This tendency
to strive for strong social attachments presumably has
an evolutionary basis. There is evidence that, over
evolutionary time, human beings who were wellintegrated into social groups were most likely to
survive, reproduce, and succesfully raise their
offspring (Baumeister & Leary, 1995; Leary, 2001).
When people’s belonging needs are
threatened, they respond in a variety of negative

ways. Laboratory studies show that being excluded or
rejected, even if it is for only a short period of time, is
a painful experience (e.g., Eisenberger, Lieberman, &
Williams, 2003) that increases self-defeating
behaviors (e.g., Twenge, Catanese, & Baumeister,
2002) and may lead to aggression toward others (e.g.,
Twenge, Baumeiser, Tice, & Stucke, 2001; Twenge
& Campbell, 2003). For example, Twenge et al.
(2001) found that participants who had been excluded
by other participants or who had been told that they
would have a lonely future administered more
unpleasant noise blasts to others than those who had
been included or who had been told that they would
have rewarding relationships throughout their life
Surprisingly, however, researchers have not
always found relationships between social exclusion
and emotional distress (e.g., Twenge et al., 2001;
Twenge et al., 2003). Instead, several laboratory
studies suggest that people seem to respond to social
exclusion in a detached and emotionally indifferent
manner. To account for these findings, it has been
hypothesized that social exclusion or rejection may
initially lead to feelings of inner numbness or a state
of cognitive deconstruction. For example, Twenge et
al. (2003) found that rejected participants were more
lethargic, displayed slower reaction time, were more
likely to agree that life is meaningless and avoided
self-focused attention. According to Twenge et al.
(ibid.) such a deconstructed state may serve as a
temporary defense against the negative experience of
social rejection.
Most studies to date, however, have only
relied on self-reports of people’s affective states or
moods. So far, little research has focussed on the nonverbal behaviors of excluded persons. The purpose of
the current investigation was to how people respond
non-verbally when they are being ignored during a
conversation with others. It was hypothesized that
judges could determine, on the basis of non-verbal
cues, whether a person is ignored or included. In line
with the ‘numbness hypothesis’, it was also expected

2542

that, compared to included persons, people who were
ignored would become less non-verbally expressive,
which could be indicative of cognitive withdrawal.
One could argue that this could be an adaptive
response to cope with the emotional stress caused by
the exclusion. For example, according to Engel
(1962, 1975) psychological and physical inactivity
during stressful situations (e.g., the withdrawal of
attention, self-preoccupation or sleep) may protect
individuals from overstimulation or excessive trauma.
Persons who are being ignored or excluded may also
engage in displacement behaviors. For example,
Troisi (2002) argued that displacement activities may
be adaptive in that they reduce autonomic activation.
It is also possible, however, that people’s nonverbal reactions during social interactions are
influenced by how socially anxious they are. For
example, previous research has shown that
individuals with a higher fear of negative evaluation
try to avoid being evaluated unfavorably (Watson &
Friend, 1969), generally feel worse about receiving
negative feedback (Friend & Gilbert, 1973), and are
also more concerned with and try harder to make a
good impression on others during interactions (Leary,
1983). In our analyses, we therefore controlled for
fear of negative evaluation.

Method
Participants and Design
Participants were 58 undergraduate students (37
women) from the University of Tilburg who
participated for partial course credit (M age = 20.8,
SD = 2.4). Participants were randomly assigned to the
inclusion or exclusion condition (29 in each
condition).

Procedure
The experiment was presented as a study on group
decision-making under time pressure/stress, and
participants were led to believe that they would be
engaging in a decision-making discussion with two
other participants. In reality, they would
communicate with a pair of actors (one male, one
female) operating on an elaborate script.
At the start of the experiment, participants
were led into a room and told that the other two
“participants” were in separate rooms as well. After
the global procedure was explained, participants
signed a consent form, and six electrodes were
applied to measure heart rate. Following the APA
guidelines for ethics, participants were informed that
they could stop their participation at any moment,
without having to give a reason. None of our
participants used this right.
After having received the instructions abou the

experiment, participants filled out a first
questionnaire to assess their mood. Subsequently,
they were exposed to a 7-minute film fragment,
consisting of underwater scenes filmed in the Red Sea
and accompanied with relaxing music to make sure
that participants in both conditions were in a
comparable state of mind at the start of the
discussion. To check whether this was indeed the
case, participants were asked to fill out the same
mood questionnaire a second time. Subsequently,
participants were accompanied to the discussion
room, where they met with the other two
“participants” (the confederates). All three were
seated at a hexagonal table, so that each person had
one conversation partner on the left-hand and one on
the right-hand side, and each had a digital DV camera
(25 fps) in front. Both the participant and the
confederates were recorded, and participants were
told that these recordings would be needed to analyze
the decision making process afterwards.
At this point, participants read a text about the
case to be discussed, containing the description of a
communication problem in a local sport school.
Participants were instructed to collectively answer
two questions (How did the problems arise? And how
could they be solved?), and they were given 4
minutes to answer each one. The actual experimental
manipulation occurred during the discussion of the
second question. In the inclusion condition, the
confederates continuously focussed on the
contributions of the participant and emphasized how
much they appreciated these (“yes, that’s an excellent
suggestion!”); in the exclusion condition, the
confederates discussed the case solely among
themselves, ignoring any contributions from the
participant.
After 2 x 4 minutes, the experimenters reentered the discussion room, and each guided one
conversation partner (the participant or one of the two
confederates) back to one of the individual rooms.
Once there, participants were asked to fill in the
mood questionnaire once more. After this, they were
shown a second, 7-minute Red Sea underwater scene
with soothing music, in an attempt to bring the
participants’ mood back to more neutral levels.
Finally, participants filled out the mood questionnaire
one last time.
Subsequently, the participants were fully
debriefed about the experiment. None of them was
suspicious about the experimental set-up; in
particular, all believed that they had been interacting
with other, “real” participants. Participants also
signed a non-disclosure agreement, to make sure that
future participants were uninformed about the actual
nature of the experiment. Overall, the experiment
lasted about one hour.

2543

Measures
Nonverbal measures. The non-verbal behaviors of the
participants were analyzed in two ways. To examine
whether outside observers could actually see whether
a person is included or excluded, 25 undergraduate
students (8 women) judged, on the basis of two
fragments, whether participants had been included or
excluded. For each of the 59 participants in the
experiment, two fragments of 8 seconds (200 frames)
were selected. One fragment was selected from the
beginning of the four minutes experimental
manipulation (frames 1000 - 1200, i.e., 0.40 - 0.48
minutes), and one from the second half (frames 4000
- 4200, 2.40 - 2.48 minutes). This resulted in 59 x 2 =
118 stimuli. We opted for fragments of 8 seconds to
keep the overall length of the judgement study within
reasonable limits. The stimuli were presented to the
individual judges in one of two random orders, to
control for potential learning effects. Judges had to
indicate by forced choice for each fragment whether
they believed the person in the film-clip was included
or excluded, and on a five point scale how certain
they were of their choice. For data processing
perceived inclusion was mapped to “1” and perceived
exclusion to “-1”, and these scores were multiplied
with the certainty score. This resulted in a score
ranging from -5 (“very certainly excluded”) to +5
(“very certainly included”). The evaluation of the
fragments was preceded by a short training session of
five stimuli (consisting of random 8 second fragments
not used in the actual experiment), to make
participants acquainted with the experimental setting.
To examine the specific non-verbal behaviors of
the participants, two independent raters who were
blind to the experimental manipulation coded two 30second fragments (0.30 - 1.00 and 2.30 - 3.00) for
each participant. Fragments of 30 seconds were
choosen to obtain a good estimate of the different
non-verbal behaviors that participants showed. These
selections were coded using the Ethological Coding
System for Interviews (ECSI); see, for example,
Troisi (2002) or Troisi & Moles (1999). The ECSI is
a validated non-verbal behavior scale, consisting of 8
behavioral categories and a total of 37 easy to code
nonverbal cues. We selected four behavioral
categories for coding, namely “Affiliation” (which is
associated with ECSI behaviors 2-6, e.g., smile, head
tilt, eyebrow flash), “Flight” (behaviors 10-15, e.g.,
look away/down, chin to chest), “Displacement” (2432, e.g., hand-face touching, yawning), and
“Relaxation” (33-37, e.g., settle, fold arms, laugh).
Coding was done blind to condition, and without
sound (as required by the ECSI guidelines). For each
individual ECSI behavior, the agreement between the
raters was measures using Cohen’s kappa. We found
that kappa scores for the different behaviors indicate
moderate to substantial agreement, where discrete

behaviors (e.g., fold arms) generally resulted in
higher kappa scores than continuous ones (e.g., head
tilt). Disagreements between raters were resolved
after discussion.
Fear of Negative Evaluation. Participants
completed the brief Fear of Negative Evaluation
Scale (Leary, 1983). This scale consists of 10 items
(e.g., “I am afraid others will approve of me”) that
were measures on scales ranging from 1 (not at all
characteristic of me) to 5 (extremely characteristic of
me). Cronbach’s alpha was .83.
Control measures. At several points throughout
the experiment, participants were asked to fill out a
self-report mood scale derived from Mackie and
Worth (1989) and Krahmer et al. (2004). The scale
consisted of six 7-point bipolar semantic differential
scales (“At this moment, I feel . . . ”), using the
following adjective pairs (English translations of
Dutch originals): happy/ sad, pleasant/ unpleasant,
satisfied/ unsatisfied, content/ discontent, cheerful/
sullen and in high spirits/ low-spirited. Alpha’s were
> .80.

Results
Manipulation Check
To check whether the experimental manipulation
worked, we analyzed the self-reported mood scores.
Table 1 contains the average scores for the four mood
measurements.
Table 1: Average mood scores (standard deviations
between brackets)

Mood 1: Initial
Mood 2: After film 1
Mood 3: After
manipulation
Mood 4: After film 2

Ignored
5.09 (.81)
5.41 (.73)
4.92 (.83)

Included
5.21 (.76)
5.41 (.61)
5.69 (.64)

5.73 (.78)

5.56 (.68)

The average mood scores were submitted to a withinsubjects Analysis of Variance, with the experimental
manipulation (Ignored vs. Included) as a betweensubjects factor. Most relevant for our current
purposes is that a significant interaction was found
between Condition and Time, F(1, 57) = 7.69, p <
.001. In particular, as can be seen in Table 1, average
mood scores for the two conditions are exactly the
same after the first film fragment (as intended), but
after the experimental manipulation a clear difference
between the conditions can be observed: participants
who had been ignored reported lower average mood
scores than participants who had been included. After
watching the second film fragment this effect

2544

Figure 1: Randomly selected stills of 10 participants that were ignored (top panel) and of 10 participants that
were included (bottom panel).

disappeared again. Interestingly, there was also a
main effect of Time of the mood measurement, and
inspection of Table 1 reveals that participants actually
felt better after than before the experiment
(irrespective of the condition they had been in), F(1,
57) = 5.01, p < .01. In fact, various participants
indicated during the debriefing phase that they though
the experiment was about the effects of watching
underwater scenes, which indeed took up a large part
of the experimental procedure.

Perceptions of External Raters
To examine whether external raters could, on the
basis of non-verbal cues, determine whether
participants were included or ignored, we subjected
their evaluations of the second film fragments to an
Analysis of Variance. Raters’ evaluations of the first
film fragments were included as a covariate. We also
controlled for participant’s sex and their fear of
negative evaluation. This analysis revealed a main
effect for the experimental manipulation, F(1, 54) =
10.62, p < .01. Participants who were ignored were
perceived as more excluded (M = -1.36, SD = 2.48)
than included participants (M = 1.26, SD = 2.54).

Note, however, that the standard deviations are
relatively large. There was also a main effect for fear
of negative evaluation, F(1, 54) = 5.21, p < .05.
External raters more often considered persons with a
lower fear of negative evaluation as included than
persons with a higher fear of negative evaluation.
We also examined whether there was an
interaction between the experimental manipulation
and fear of negative evaluation. We also found an
interaction that was significant at the .10 level, F(1,
54) = 3.04, p < .09). Persons with a lower fear of
negative evaluation were perceived as more included
in the inclusion condition. There was no difference in
how persons with a higher or lower fear of negative
evaluation were rated in the exclusion condition.

Non-verbal behaviors
We also examined the specific non-verbal behaviors
of the excluded and included participants. For this
purpose, we first conducted a MANOVA, with the
four ECSI-categories (Affiliation, Displacement,
Relaxation, and Flight) as the dependent variables.
This analysis only revealed a main effect for
Affiliation, F(1, 55) = 12.76, p = .001). Included

2545

participants displayed more non-verbal affiliative
behaviors (M = 1.60) than participants who were
ignored (M = .88). The means for all the four
categories are presented in Table 2.
Table 2: Average number of non-verbal behaviors
across the 4 ECSI-categories
Category
Affiliation
Flight
Displacement
Relaxation

Ignored
0.88 (0.80)
1.20 (0.44)
2.12 (1.39)
0.85 (0.48)

Included
1.60 (0.97)
1.17 (0.38)
2.28 (1.46)
0.83 (0.50)

We then examined the non-verbal behaviors of
the participants in more detail. We conducted a series
of MANOVAs on the specific non-verbal behaviors
within each category of the ECSI coding system.
These analyses showed that included participants
more often quickly raised and lowered their eyebrows
(p < .01) or kept their eyebrows up for some time (p
< .05), and smiled more often than participants who
were ignored (p < .01). They also seemed somewhat
more relaxed (p < .10) and more often displayed a
neutral face (p < .05). Compared to included
participants, persons who were ignored touched their
face more often (p < .05) and twisted their mouth (p
< .01), licked their lips (p < .10) or bit their lips more
often (p < .10).

Conclusion and Discussion
Being excluded, rejected or ignored is a painful
experience that can evoke a host of negative reactions
within individuals, ranging from sadness to anger.
These reactions, however, may not always occur
immediately. Instead, it has been argued that people’s
immediate reaction to exclusion may be cognitive
withdrawal. This withdrawal may be adaptive, in the
sense that it may protect individuals from the pain of
being excluded.
In this study, we examined whether persons
who are being ignored also become less non-verbally
expressive. For this purpose, we compared the nonverbal behaviors of persons who were being ignored
to the non-verbal behaviors of persons who were
being included. We expected that external raters
could reliably determine, on the basis of a person’s
non-verbal behaviors, whether he or she was being
ignored or included and we also expected that
participants who were being ignored would display
non-verbal behaviors that reflect a tendency toward
withdrawal. Moreover, we expected that being
ignored would result in more displacement behaviors.
The results of this study are somewhat mixed.
On the one hand, we found that persons who had
been ignored reported lower average mood scores
than included persons. External judges also rated

participants who were ignored as more excluded than
included participants. Generally, persons with a lower
fear of negative evaluation were more often perceived
to be included than persons with a higher fear of
negative evaluation. In terms of people’s specific
non-verbal behaviors, however, the findings are less
clear. For example, even though persons engaged in
less affiliative behaviors when they were ignored,
they did not display more non-verbal behaviors that
are indicative of withdrawal than included persons
(e.g., flight). To some extent, however, they did
engage in more displacement behaviors.
The data suggest that persons who are being
ignored do, in terms of their non-verbal behaviors,
seem to become somewhat more lethargic than
included persons but do not entirely disengage from
the interaction. It is possible, however, that
participants may have evoked display rules to mask
or neutralize their feelings because they found
themselves in the presence of others. The fact that the
interaction was recorded may have also contributed to
this. Moreover, the ECSI-coding system that we used
to analyze people’s non-verbal behaviors may not
have been sufficiently detailed to assess the more
subtle non-verbal behaviors of our participants.
Nevertheless, the results of the study indicate
that even though it is distressful to be ignored or
excluded, it does not lead to an overt outburst of
emotional distress. Moreover, the tendency of
individuals to display less affiliative behaviors while
they are being ignored may also be useful, because it
may help them avoid doing or saying anything that
would make things worse. Future studies should,
however, examine in more detail how people cope,
cognitively and emotionally, with the stress they
experience while they are being ignored or excluded.

Ackowledgements
Thanks are due to Lennard van de Laar and Caifeng
Shan for technical assistance and to Rian
Blankenstein, Lotte Oostrom, Bregje van Rijbroek,
and Marjolein de Vries for their help with conducting
the experiments. Krahmer thanks the Netherlands
Organization of Scientific Research (NWO) for Grant
277-70-007.

References
Baumeister, R. F., & Leary, M. R. (1995). The need
to belong: Desire for interpersonal attachments as
a fundamental human motivation. Psychological
Bulletin, 117, 497-592.
Engel, G. L. (1962). Anxiety and depression withdrawal: The primary effects of unpleasure.
International Journal of Psychoanalysis, 43, 8997.

2546

Engel, G. L. (1975). Perspectives in depression.
Science, 190, 453-455.
Friend, R. M. & Gilbert, J. (1973). Threat and fear of
negative evaluation as determinants of social
comparison. Journal of Personality, 41, 328-340.
Eisenberger, N. I., Lieberman, M. D., & Williams,
K. D. (2003). Does rejection hurt? An fMRI study
of social exclusion. Science, 302, 290-292.
Krahmer, E., Dorst, J. van, & Ummelen, N. (2004).
Mood, persuasion and information presentation,
Information Design Journal, 12, 40–52.
Leary, M. R. (1983). Social anxiousness: The
construct and its measurement. Journal of
Personality Assessment, 47, 66-75.
Leary, M. R. (2001). Toward a conceptualization of
interpersonal rejection. In M. R. Leary (Ed.),
Interpersonal Rejection (pp. 3 – 20). New York:
Oxford University Press.
Mackie, D. & L. Worth (1989). Processing deficits
and the mediation of positive affect in persuasion.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57,
27-40.
Troisi, A. (2002). Displacement activities as a
behavioral measure of stress in nonhuman
primates and human subjects, Sress, 5, 47-54.
Twenge, J. M., Baumeister, R. F., Tice, D. M., &
Stucke, T. S. (2001). If you can’t join them, beat
them: Effects of social exclusion on aggressive
behaviors. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 81, 1058-1069.
Twenge, J. M., & Campbell, W. K. (2003). Isn’t it
fun to get the respect that were going to deserve?
Narcissism, social rejection, and aggression.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 29,
261-272.
Twenge, J. M., Catanese, K. R., & Baumeister, R. F.
(2002). Social exclusion causes self-defeating
behavior. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 83, 606-615.
Twenge, J. M., Catanese, K. R., & Baumeister, R. F.
(2003). Social exclusion and the deconstructed
state: Time perception, meaninglessness, lethargy,
lack of emotion, and self-awareness. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 85, 409-423.
Watson, D., & Friend, R. (1969). Measurement of
social-evaluative anxiety. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 33, 448-457.

2547

