UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Of parrots and parsimony: reconsidering Morgan's canon

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9q01g1bw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Author
Welsh, Matthew

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Of Parrots and Parsimony: Reconsidering Morgan’s Canon
Matthew Brian Welsh (matthew.welsh@adelaide.edu.au)
University of Adelaide, North Terrace
Adelaide, SA 5005 Australia

Abstract
Morgan’s Canon is a specific restating of Occam’s Razor that
dictates that any description of animal behavior should never
call upon higher order psychological processes if the behavior
could, fairly, be explained in terms of lower processes.
Herein, the Canon is discussed both historically and in light of
current research into animal behavior. A reconsideration of
the principle of parsimony, taking into account current states
of knowledge, is also considered. In short, it is argued that
Morgan’s Canon, while a useful guideline, may have been
over-enthusiastically applied in situations where the state of
knowledge about a species would dictate that descriptions of
its behavior in terms of higher order processes would be
equally or more parsimonious. The potential benefits of
reconsidering the Canon are then discussed.
Keywords: parsimony; animal behavior; comparative
psychology; theory of mind; individual differences.

Morgan’s Canon
In no case is an animal activity to be interpreted in terms of
higher psychological processes, if it can be fairly
interpreted in terms of processes which stand lower in the
scale of psychological evolution and development. (Morgan,
1903).
Comparisons between animal and human behaviors have a
long history, with scholars as far back as Aristotle
(340BC/1952) arguing that ‘reason’ divides humans from
the rest of the animal kingdom. This division, embedded in
the Christian distinction between the creation and place of
men and animals, was carried through the writings of such
philosophers as Descartes (1640/1988) who placed the seat
of reason in the soul; and little seems to have challenged this
view until the publication of Darwin’s Origin of Species
(1876/1988).
The arguments presented by Darwin, regarding the
common descent of all animals through natural selection
acting on ancestor populations, broke down the clear-cut
division between human and animal that had previously
held sway in Western thought and promoted the idea that,
across species, one should expect to see variation in traits –
including such mental attributes as intelligence (Darwin,
1899/1965). Thus, while humans might be the species
blessed with the greatest reasoning ability, one would
expect that other species would have this to a greater or less
extent – with the further understanding that closely related
species would, likely, have similar levels of intelligence.
Romanes (1882), following this parsimonious line of
reasoning, produced his book Animal Intelligence in which
he described a great variety of animal behaviors (both
collected by himself and sent to him by correspondents) in

terms of the mental states and understanding required to
produce them. The anecdotal nature of this work, however,
provoked the responses of Morgan (1903) and Thorndike
(1911), whose use of observational study of animals
convinced them that many of the cases of ‘intelligent’
behavior reported by Romanes were, in fact, easily
explained as the result of trial-and-error learning.
The reaction to Romanes’ book and the subsequent
research on conditioning by Pavlov (1927) led to a drastic
change in approach to animal behavior research. Rather than
considering the pre-existing knowledge of common lineage,
researchers were, instead, motivated to explain behavior in
the simplest, possible psychological terms. This was partly
the result of a genuine belief in the equipotentiality principle
(Pavlov, 1927) - which regarded all animals as largely
equivalent in terms of their ability to learn through
conditioning – but seems also to have resulted from a
revision of people’s interpretation of the principle of
parsimony with a greater focus on the simplicity of the
explanatory rules and less on the need for accord with prior
knowledge.
Thus, for the greater part of the 20th century, Morgan’s
Canon has held sway - and been interpreted to mean that
animal behaviors should be explained, wherever possible
using simple, conditioning-based explanations as these were
judged to be most parsimonious and, thus, best.

Occam’s Razor and Parsimony
Parsimony in scientific research is often regarded in terms
of Occam’s Razor, which literally translates as “entities
must not be multiplied beyond necessity” but is commonly
understood to mean that the simplest hypothesis explaining
an observation is the best (Kneale & Kneale, 1962).
However, this simple restatement ignores the key phrase in
the original: “beyond necessity”. Thus, a more complete
restatement would require that the best explanation be the
simplest one that accords with our state of knowledge about
the object or event in question.
The relevance of this to animal behavior research is that,
when considering the most parsimonious explanation for an
animal’s behavior, we must take into account what we
already know about that species, related species and even
animals in general. Imagine, for example, if one were to see
a small animal (of an unfamiliar species) moving along the
ground and were interested in starting to explain its
behavioral repertoire. Starting with the very broadest of
behaviors, for example, we might ask whether the creature’s
appearance in this location is indicative of its environmental
predilections and behaviors.

1798

That is, is the simplest (most parsimonious) explanation
for its presence that it is a terrestrial creature native to the
area? The answer, in the absence of additional information
should, clearly, be yes – this is the simplest explanation that
explains the limited data we have. It does not require us to
hypothesize about any alternative modes of movement
beyond the observed, terrestrial movement nor does it
require an additional explanation about why a non-native
creature might be here.
If, however, while still unfamiliar with the species in
question, you recognize that it is a type of bird this would,
almost certainly, change the description judged most
parsimonious. Given a general knowledge of birds, it would
seem reasonable to decide, instead, that the most
parsimonious explanation is that the creature is capable of
flight and only currently on the ground – as the vast
majority of birds are capable of flight. To take the example
a step further, imagine that, in addition to recognizing the
creature as a bird, you also recognize that it is, in fact, a type
of penguin. This would cause another revision in the best
explanation for its behavior (current and potential); in this
case, concluding that it is, most probably, flightless and
aquatic - as are all other penguin species.
Thus, knowledge about related species changes both the
description of current behavior and expected behavioral
repertoire of an animal; and, any attempt to find the simplest
(most parsimonious) explanation for an animal’s behavior
must incorporate this knowledge.

Animal Cognition
Few people, of course, would disagree with the above
examples and ethologists such as Tinbergen (1951) and
Lorenz (2002/1949), despite their largely behaviorist viewpoints would, doubtless, start any observations of a new
species with assumptions regarding its behavior based on
the behavior of known, related species. The behaviors
described by ethologists and those considered of greatest
import by those comparative psychologists holding to
Morgan’s Canon, however, differ in significant ways. For
the most part, ethologists deal with general types of
instinctive behavior in the natural environment whereas
comparative psychology concerns itself with animal
cognition to gain insight into human cognition. That is, to
what extent are animals capable of reason, learning and selfawareness and how can this knowledge be used to better
understand human behavior?
As noted above, the behaviorist school of psychology
(see, e.g., Skinner, 1938) applied Morgan’s Canon
uniformly and attempted to explain both human and animal
behavior in terms of conditioned responses as the
equipotentiality principle argued for all organisms learning
in, essentially, the same fashion with differences only in the
speed at which learning occurred.
The cognitive revolution, starting in the 1950s, however,
convinced most psychologists that attempts to explain
complex, human behaviors such as language use within a
simple, reinforcement-learning paradigm was infeasible

(see, e.g., Neisser, 1967). Perhaps the single greatest effect
of this revolution was to move psychology away from
regarding the mind as a black box about which nothing
could be known beyond inputs (stimuli) and outputs
(observed behaviors). Instead, it was recognized that: firstly,
the mind cannot be a blank slate prior to learning because a
blank slate will not react to inputs in any way (for a recent
summary of the cognitive revolution, see Pinker, 2003);
and, secondly, that observing the manner in which behaviors
change as stimuli change allows us to meaningfully
hypothesize about cognitive structures/processes.
This recognition of the need to understand an organism’s
cognitive processes or mind was not restricted to humans,
however. Breland and Breland (1961) identified instinctive
drift (the tendency for animals’ trained behaviors to revert to
the nearest equivalent instinctive behavior) and Garcia and
Koelling (1966) exposed the difficulties of training animals
when the conditioned and unconditioned stimuli did not
‘match’ (e.g., illness could be induced in rats by a flavor but
not by a light or sound). That is, it was demonstrated that, in
order to predict and understand experimental results, one
needs to know not just the stimulus and resultant behavior
but also the cognitive processes of the organism in question.
Despite such work, however, the shift from behaviorism
to cognitive psychology stalled in animal research – no
doubt partly because access to human cognitions is often as
easy as asking someone what they are thinking while animal
minds are much harder to read; but also, it seems, due to a
continued belief that the most parsimonious explanation are
those that posit the simplest possible processes without
reference to ‘human’ cognitive processes (see, e.g., Wynne,
2007).
The question, though, how should our understanding of
parsimony affect our beliefs regarding the best explanations
for animal behaviors in terms of psychological processes?
This is discussed in greater detail as regards two central
areas of animal cognition that have provoked significant
discussion: animal intelligence and theories of mind.

Animal Intelligence
Between Species Differences
Most people have very little difficulty in believing that
certain types of animal are more intelligent than others. This
seems to be one case where our understanding of the
concept of common lineage has led us to conclude that
animals more like us are likely to be more intelligent; and
experimental work has offered some support for this. Work
by Warren (1977), for example, comparing fish, chickens,
mice and cats on a learning task returned the expected order
of results – with the cats performing best, then the mice, the
chickens and, finally, the fish – although only the cats
performed significantly better than the other species.
The problem with such assessments, however, is clear.
The very differences described by the Brelands (1961) and
Garcia and Koelling (1966) make cross-species comparisons
difficult as differences in instinctive behaviors mean that
certain species learn particular tasks more easily, thus

1799

making it difficult to determine whether any differences
result from differences in “intelligence” or just differential
degrees of match between a species and the task/apparatus
being used.
Individual and Strain Differences
To avoid these problems, most researchers concentrate,
instead, on within-species analyses as these should eliminate
most differences in instinctive behavior and allow
meaningful conclusions to be drawn. However, between
research into human and animal intelligence lies a vast gulf
- in the form of differential treatment of individual and
group differences within a species.
In human research, individual differences is a major field
of research, while group differences are very much a
sideline – a result, Fraser (1995) argues, of the feeling that
research into group differences in intelligence (in particular)
is motivated by prejudice. By comparison, animal research
is dominated by comparisons between strains of the same
species – with tests of such attributes as spatial ability,
memory and even reasoning using pigeons (Wilkie &
Wilson, 1995), mice (Tang, et al., 1999) and rats (Anderson,
1992), respectively. These often include neuroanatomical
studies to associate the cognitive differences with particular
brain structures (the hippocampus, for example, is strongly
linked to spatial learning by the above studies).
Individual differences in animals, by comparison, have
been largely ignored or even dismissed – as by Warren
(1977), who claimed that there was no evidence of
individual animals performing above the level of their peers.
This dismissal, however, seems to be driven, in part at least,
by adherence to the narrow interpretation of Morgan’s
Canon described above. That is, individual differences in
animal intelligence are not discussed because intelligence
(which is largely understood in terms of studies of
individual differences in humans) is regarded as a ‘higher’
order cognitive process and, therefore, inappropriate to
apply to animal behavior.
This position, however, is at odds with both our everyday
experience – those people who interact with animals on a
regular basis such as animal trainers and researchers are
adamant that certain, individual animals are smarter than
others (see, e.g., Goodall, 1968; Kohler, 1925; Pepperberg,
1990) – and knowledge available to us from a variety of
fields, including evolutionary theory and the strain
differences studies mentioned above.
The first point, of course, relies on the same anecdotal
evidence that led to the formulation of Morgan’s Canon and
runs the risk of the Clever Hans effect (Pfungst, 1911)
where the trainer’s own unconscious behavior is responsible
for apparent differences in learning. As such, it must be
treated with caution.
The second point, however, argues strongly for there
being individual differences in animal “intelligence” –
broadly defined here as any cognitive faculty affecting
performance on a task. Specifically, according to the theory
of evolution by natural selection, it is individual, genetic

differences in traits that cause differential survival and
(eventually) speciation (Darwin, 1876/1988). As such, if the
argument is to be made that there are differences between
the cognitive abilities of different species (for example, that
humans have better reasoning abilities than other species)
then these differences must have their origins in individual
differences within the ancestral populations from which the
compared species are descended (Griffin, 1976). Thus, in
the ancestral species from which humans and chimpanzees
are both descended, there must have been individuals with
better reasoning abilities than their peers – otherwise these
reasoning abilities could not be selected for and, thus,
contribute to the evolution of differences between humans
and chimpanzees.
Logically, this argument holds at every point of speciation
where one believes there is a difference in cognitive abilities
between current species. While this argument does not, in
and of itself, make any statement regarding individual
differences within current species, any attempt to argue that
individual differences might, no longer, exist in species
other than our own would seem so unlikely as to strain
credibility. That is, the claim would have to be that: while,
at every point in the past, individual differences in cognitive
ability existed within a wide variety of species, now, for
unexplained reasons, only one species has such individual
differences.
In addition to the argument from parsimony proposed
above, we also have evidence for individual differences in
cognitive abilities in the form of our ability to selectively
breed strains of a species for particular cognitive tasks such
as maze-solving (Stewart, 1961); and the observation that
strain differences are known to exist on a variety of tasks
including those described above. Given the derivation of
these strains from common, ancestor populations, it seems
unavoidable to conclude that individual differences in the
various cognitive abilities discussed do exist and that strain
differences are just these writ large.
In addition to these logical arguments, there are also a
number of studies (see, e.g., Anderson, 1992; Locurto &
Scanlon, 1998; Welsh, 2002) that have shown individual
differences in the performance of not just specific tasks but
also the emergence of factor structures amongst various
tasks reminiscent of the structure of human intelligence as
described by Carroll (1993). Specifically, there is some
evidence for attributes akin to human spatial intelligence
and memory and learning (Gv and Gy in Carroll’s model).
Given this, it seems reasonable to argue that, when
attempting to explain animal behavior, appeals to
differential levels of cognitive ability between individuals is
not an ‘unnecessary multiplication of entities’ nor does it
violate Morgans’s Canon as, given the evidence for
individual differences in various cognitive abilities, animal
behavior cannot be fairly described without reference to
such higher order cognitive constructs. In fact, any
explanation for an animal’s behavior that excludes this
knowledge is likely to be overly simplistic rather than
parsimonious.

1800

Animal Theories of Mind
Another area of argument in which Morgan’s Canon is
frequently applied regards whether animals have a ‘theory
of mind’. That is, to what extent should animals be regarded
as possessing minds in the way that humans do; are they self
aware and aware of the minds of others (Premack &
Woodruff, 1978)? A number of tests of this are commonly
used and interpretations of experimental results are often
hotly debated in terms of whether the behavior of the
animals in questions indicates a theory of mind or can be
explained via simple, stimulus-response relationships.
The goal, herein, is not to attempt to fully restate the
debate; rather, key aspects of the debate will be considered
along with findings relating to these and the interpretations
will be discussed in terms of their parsimony in explaining
not just the specific behavior at hand but also prior
knowledge including phylogenetic relationships.
Attention
One of the preliminary tests for a theory of mind relates to
whether an organism reacts to another organism’s attention.
That is, if one animal is looking in a particular direction,
will the other animal look there as well. This is regarded as
a test of an organism’s theory of mind as it, theoretically at
least, requires that the second organism be able to determine
where the first creature is looking and what it could see
from there.
For example, chimpanzees have been shown to
understand point-of-view – that is, their behavior changes
according to what an observing creature could see from its
perspective (Hare, Call, Agnetta, & Tomasello, 2000).
Further tests of this ability to understand attention have
included observations of canine communication, where
dogs’ behaviors are affected by whether they can currently
be seen by other dogs (Horowitz, 2009) or people (Call,
Brauer, Kaminski, & Tomasello, 2003).
These tests of attention, however, are often criticized (in
terms of their relevance to animal theories of mind) as their
results can be explained in terms of selective rewards. That
is, in environments when a human is directly facing them, a
dog is more likely to have been punished for disobeying a
command than when a human is facing away. Thus,
differential learning could occur such that greater obedience
is observed when the dog-human dyad is in certain spatial
relations but not in others. This explanation requires only
simple psychological processes to be hypothesized and, as a
result, is often claimed to be a more parsimonious
interpretation of animals’ apparent ability to understand the
attentional states of others.
Whether it is, in fact, a simpler explanation, though, is
questionable. For example, the ability of the dog to
distinguish between the situations when a second creature is
and is not looking at it – as required by the stimulusresponse explanation – requires the dog to have been in
sufficient situations like this one to have learnt the
difference between the various orientations of other
creatures and their responses to various communication

methods. That is, it pre-supposes a history of learning for
which no evidence is presented.
Further, given that we know that one social mammal
(humans) definitely has the ability to determine where
another creature is attending (which assists with social
communication and cooperative behaviors), should our
starting assumption be that a species bred from another
highly sociable mammal (wolves) and further selected for
its ability to cooperate with humans does or does not have
the same ability?
Imitation
Another central theme is theory of mind research is
imitative behavior. That is, if an organism can observe
another organism and then imitate the behavior, then this is
argued to indicate its ability to understand the intentions of
the first creature. Of course, there are provisos added to this
simple description. The observer must be able to distinguish
between accidental and deliberate behaviors and must also
be able act in an intentional way – that is, the assumption
must be that the organism’s goal in imitating the behavior is
to achieve the outcome that they observed the other creature
achieving – rather than to simply mimic the action
(Tomasello, Kruger, & Ratner, 1993).
The ever-present difficulties in designing animal
experiments such that the animal is motivated to do as the
experimenter intends make such analyses difficult with
other species – to the extent that Zentall (2006) suggested
that, given the number of social and non-social learning
factors that need to be distinguished from imitation,
inclusion of the recognition of intent might preclude any
finding of imitation in non-verbal animals (including young
humans).
Instead, Zentall (2006) proposes controlling for a list of
pre-identified non-imitative learning behaviors and then, by
a process of elimination, calling any learning that still
occurs “imitative”. Using this looser definition, there are a
number of studies that compare how often organisms utilize
a particular method to achieve a specific task – having seen
conspecifics perform the task in one of the possible ways.
Such studies, using budgerigars (Dawson & Foss, 1965),
monkeys (Custance, Whiten, & Bard, 1999) and rats as
subjects, show that an animal’s preferred method of
achieving specific aims varies according to how it has seen
other animals perform the same task.
This has been demonstrated most clearly in chimpanzees
(Buttelmann, Carpenter, Call, & Tomasello, 2007) who
operated a device with their foot when an unencumbered
human demonstrated its operation in this way but used their
hands after seeing a human with his hands full operate the
device with his foot. That is, they seem capable of
differentiating between cases when the person could and
could not use their hands and concluding that, when he
could but didn’t, there must have been a reason for this.
Once again, we are left with a question to answer: is it
more likely, given the evidence we have seen from other
species, that so useful a learning mechanism (bridging the

1801

gap between instinctive and self-learnt behaviors, as Zentall,
2006, notes) is restricted to a single species or that imitative
learning is likely to be a common ability of many social
species?
False Belief
Perhaps the best known of the tests for theory of mind are
those for false beliefs. That is, whether an organism can
predict the actions of another organism based on the
differences between their knowledge about a situation. The
ability to understand false beliefs has proved very difficult
to demonstrate in animals – in part, no doubt because of the
required complexity of the task.
The classic design of such tests is to have an animal
observe a conspecific observe a reward being hidden and
then have the first animal observe the reward being moved
while the second is not watching (see, e.g., Call &
Tomasello, 1999; Hare, et al., 2000). The behavior of the
first animal is then used to attempt to determine whether it
realizes that the second animal’s belief about the location of
the reward is false.
The majority of attempts to test animals understanding of
false beliefs, however, have failed. Chimpanzees and other
great apes, generally regarded as the most likely of animals
to share any particular trait with humans, have not shown an
ability to distinguish between ignorance and false belief
(Call & Tomasello, 2008). In fact, other than humans aged 5
and over, only dolphins have shown significant evidence of
understanding false beliefs (Tschudin, 2006). Thus, false
beliefs may mark a qualitative difference between human
and (at least the majority of) animal minds. That said,
chimpanzees are able to distinguish between another
animal’s true beliefs and ignorance, indicating some
understanding of the complexities of other minds(Call &
Tomasello, 2008).

Discussion
There has been a tendency, when considering the results of
animal experiments to interpret parsimony as applying to
each, new experiment as if it is independent of all other
observations. That is, within each experiment, Morgan’s
Canon is applied and the researchers attempt to explain the
results in the simplest psychological terms, without
reference to our pre-existing stores of knowledge from
previous experiments, related fields, similar organisms and
so forth. It is like a physicist who, rather than attempting to
create universal laws, attempts to explain the results of each,
individual experiment in the simplest terms without
reference to the known laws of physics.
Given the research and argument presented above, it
seems difficult to conclude that restricting discussion of
animal behaviors to ‘lower’ level psychological process
(typically stimulus-reward learning) is an appropriate
approach. While an explanation of any behavior can be
attempted in stimulus-reward terms, the adequacy of said
explanation must be considered. Where such an explanation
has to posit the existence of a large number of unobserved

learning trials in a variety of different contexts, and
alternative explanations exist that accord with our
knowledge about the behavior of other species and the
relationships between them, a principled application of
parsimony would seem to require a reconsideration of
Morgan’s Canon.
That is, while recognizing the potential dangers of
anthropomorphism, it would seem that to adequately explain
the findings from a variety of animal studies requires the use
of higher-level psychological concepts such as intelligence
and an understanding that animals are likely to have at least
a limited theory of mind. In short, we need to consider
animal behavior from a more cognitive view-point.

Future Research
An acceptance that animal behavior can meaningfully be
discussed in similar, cognitive terms to that of humans
opens up a range of research opportunities. For example,
advancements in genetics and the mapping of the complete
genomes of various species allows for the use of synteny
homology (the fact that portions of one species genome
have corresponding regions on other species genomes where
large numbers of genes are found in the same order) would
allow the use of analyses to investigate the genetic basis of
cognition.
That is, those higher-level psychological processes that
have clear equivalents between humans and animals could
be isolated using animal genetic models, which have the
advantage of large litter sizes and short inter-generational
intervals, and then mapped to the human genome. This
approach is, in fact, already underway in the medical
sciences (see, e.g., Tang, et al., 1999) but its acceptance
within psychology has been limited (for exceptions, see
Anderson, 1992; Locurto & Scanlon, 1998; Welsh, 2002)
with the result that those best suited to isolating and
measuring the cognitive traits of animals have yet to start
playing a major role.

Conclusions
Morgan’s Canon has, over the past century been applied in a
manner which, while seeming rigorous, has actually reduced
the parsimony of explanations of animal behavior. Moving
away from this too-broad application of the Canon, in
addition to being necessary in order to develop the best and
most parsimonious explanations of animal behavior, will
allow animal research to join the cognitive revolution and
allow comparative, cognitive research which will shed
further light on human cognition.

Acknowledgments
I wish to thank Ted Nettelbeck and Nick Burns for their
comments on an earlier version of this manuscript.

References
Anderson, B. (1992). Rat reasoning: a reliability and
validity study. Psychbiology, 20(238-242).

1802

Aristotle (340BC/1952). The Works of Aristotle (Vol. 2).
Chicago: Encyclopedia Brittanica.
Breland, K., & Breland, M. (1961). The misbehavior of
organisms. American Psychologist, 16, 681-684.
Buttelmann, D., Carpenter, M., Call, J., & Tomasello, M.
(2007). Enculturated chimpanzees imitate rationally.
Developmental Science, 10(4), F31-F38.
Call, J., Brauer, J., Kaminski, J., & Tomasello, M. (2003).
Domestic dogs (Canis familiaris) are sensitive to the
attentional state of humans. Journal of Comparative
Psychology, 117(3), 257-263.
Call, J., & Tomasello, M. (1999). A nonverbal false belief
task: the performance of children and great apes. Child
Development, 70, 381-395.
Call, J., & Tomasello, M. (2008). Does the chimpanzee have
a theory of mind? 30 years later. Trends in Cognitive
Science, 12(5), 187-192.
Carroll, J. B. (1993). Human cognitive abilities: a survey of
factor-analytic studies. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Custance, D. M., Whiten, A., & Bard, K. A. (1999). Social
learning of artificial fruit task in capuchin monkeys
(Cebus apella). Journal of Comparative Psychology, 113,
13-23.
Darwin, C. (1876/1988). The Origin of Species. New York:
New York University Press.
Darwin, C. (1899/1965). Expression of Emotion in Man and
Animals. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Dawson, B. V., & Foss, B. M. (1965). Observational
learning in budgerigars. Animal Behaviour, 13, 470-474.
Descartes, R. (1640/1988). Selected Philosophical Writings
(J. Cottingham, R. Stoothoff & D. Murdoch, Trans.).
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Fraser, S. (1995). The bell curve wars: race, intelligence
and the future of America. New York: Basic Books.
Garcia, J., & Koelling, R. A. (1966). Relation of cue to
consequence in avoidance learning. Psychonomic Science,
4(3), 123-124.
Goodall, J. (1968). The behaviour of free living
chimpanzees in the Gomba Stream Reserve Tanzania.
Animal Behaviour Mongraphs, 1(161-311).
Griffin, D. R. (1976). The question of animal awareness:
Evolutionary continuity of mental experience. New York:
Rockefeller University Press.
Hare, B., Call, J., Agnetta, B., & Tomasello, M. (2000).
Chimpanzees know what conspecifics do and do not see.
Animal Behaviour, 59, 771-785.
Horowitz, A. (2009). Attention to attention in domestic dog
(Canis familiaris). Animal Cognition, 12, 107-118.
Kneale, W., & Kneale, M. (1962). The development of logic.
London: Oxford University Press.
Kohler, W. (1925). The mentality of apes (W. E. Winter,
Trans.). Oxford: Harcourt Brace.
Locurto, C., & Scanlon, C. (1998). Individual differences
and a spatial learning factor in two strains of mice (Mus
musculus). Journal of Comparative Psychology, 112(4),
344-352.

Lorenz, K. (2002/1949). King Solomon's Ring. London:
Routledge.
Morgan, C. L. (1903). An introduction to comparative
psychology (2nd ed.). London: W. Scott.
Neisser, U. (1967). Cognitive Psychology. New York:
Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Pavlov, I. (1927). Conditioned reflexes. Oxford, England:
Oxford University Press.
Pepperberg, I. M. (1990). Conceptual ability of some nonprimate species, with an emphasis on an African Grey
parrot. In S. T. Parker & K. R. Gibson (Eds.), "Language"
and Intelligence in monkeys and apes. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Pfungst, O. (1911). Clever Hans (the horse of Mr von
Osten): A contribution to experimental animal and human
psychology. (C. L. Rahn, Trans.). New York: Henry Holt.
Pinker, S. (2003). The Blank Slate. New York: Penguin.
Premack, D. G., & Woodruff, G. (1978). Does the
chimpanzee have a theory of mind? Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 1, 515-526.
Romanes, G. J. (1882). Animal Intelligence. London: Kegan
Paul.
Skinner, B. F. (1938). The behavior of organisms.
Cambridge, MA: Copley Publishing Group.
Stewart, J. (1961). Some behaviour characteristics of mazebright and maze-dull animals. Canadian Journal of
Psychology, 15(75-80).
Tang, Y., Shimizu, E., Dube, G. R., Rampon, C., Kerchner,
G. A., Zhuo, M., et al. (1999). Genetic enhancement of
learning and memory in mice. Nature, 401(6748), 63-69.
Thorndike, E. L. (1911). Animal Intelligence. New York:
Macmillan.
Tinbergen, N. (1951). The study of instinct. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Tomasello, M., Kruger, A. C., & Ratner, H. H. (1993).
Cultural learning. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 16,
495-552.
Tschudin, A. (2006). Belief attribution tasks with dolphins:
what social minds can reveal about animal intelligence. In
S. Hurely & M. Nudds (Eds.), Rational Animals. Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press.
Warren, J. M. (1977). A phylogenetic approach to learning
and intelligence. In A. Olivero (Ed.), Genetics,
environment and intelligence. New York: North Holland.
Welsh, M. B. (2002). Of Mice and Men: the structure and
bases of murine cognitive abilities. Unpublished Doctoral
dissertation, University of Adelaide, Adelaide.
Wilkie, D. M., & Wilson, R. J. (1995). More evidence of
robust spatial associative memory in the pigeon,
Colombia livia. Animal Learning and Behavior, 23(1),
69-75.
Wynne, C. D. L. (2007). What are animals? Why
anthropomorphism is still not a scientific approach to
behavior. Comprative Cognition and Behavior, 2, 125135.
Zentall, T. (2006). Imitation: definitions, evidence, and
mechanisms. Animal Cognition, 9, 335-353.

1803

