UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
On Attractiveness of Surprising Ideas: How Memory for Counterintuitive Ideas Drives
Cultural Dynamics

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9300h69p

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Author
Upal, M. Afzal

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

On Attractiveness of Surprising Ideas: How Memory for Counterintuitive Ideas Drives Cultural
Dynamics
M. Afzal Upal (Afzal.Upal@drdc-rddc.gc.ca)
Adversarial Intent Section
Defence Research & Development Canada (DRDC) Toronto
1133 Sheppard Ave W, Toronto, M3M 3B9
While a number of subsequent empirical studies (Atran,
2004; J. Barrett & Nyhof, 2001; Boyer & Ramble, 2001;
Gonce, Upal, Slone, & Tweney, 2006; Upal, 2005a; Upal,
Gonce, Tweney, & Slone, 2007) have found some support
for better memory for the MCI concepts, some cultural
scientists (Bloch, 2005; Harris & Koenig, 2002; Keller,
2004) have argued that a number of widespread religious
concepts such as Gods and ghosts are maximally
counterintuitive and not minimally counterintuitive as
implied by the minimal counterintuitiveness hypothesis.
Some cognitive scientists of religion (J. L. Barrett, 1997,
1999; J. L. Barrett & Keil, 1996; Slone, 2004) have
responded by suggesting that this is because believers hold
two different (“theologically correct” and “intuitive”)
conceptualizations of God and that only the intuitive
conceptualizations enjoy the transmission advantages
because they are the only ones that are minimally
counterintuitive. Barrett (1997, Page 124) says:
God, and perhaps other religious objects and entities,
are conceptualized on at least two different levels: the
basic, everyday concept used in real-time processing of
information, and the “T.C.” or theologically correct
level used in theological discussion of God’s properties
or activities outside of a real-time context. As was
shown in above, these two levels of conceptualization
may represent God in substantially different ways.
Thus, argue these cognitive scientists of religion, that the
MC hypothesis “does not apply” to the theological
conceptualizations of God or to any other cultural concepts
that do not involve violating expectations of intuitive
reflective thinking (J. L. Barrett, 1997) (Page 127). This
includes ideas that have been learned through explicit
training such as the socio-cultural and religious schemas,
scripts, and scientific concepts (J. L. Barrett, 2008).
Another hurdle in the applicability of the MC-hypothesis to
the spread of the cultural beliefs in contemporary social
groups is the often implicit assumption that the MChypothesis is only applicable to societies where oral
transmission is the primary source of the transmission of
cultural information. Since most of the modern cultural
ideas are spread through pen, paper, and the internet the
MC-hypothesis may not apply to them.
Previously (Upal, 2009a), I have argued against this
narrow interpretation of the MC-hypothesis and suggested
that memory advantages obtained by violating conceptual
expectations should not be limited to “intuitive concepts”.
Instead, I argued that ideas that violate cultural schemas,

Abstract
The emerging field of cognition and culture has had some success
in explaining the spread of counterintuitive religious concepts
around the world. However, researchers have been reluctant to
extend its findings to explain the widespread occurrence of
counterintuitive ideas in general. This article suggests a way to
generalize the minimal counterintuitive hypothesis, which argues
that such ideas spread because they are more memorable, to form
the outline of a model of cultural dynamism which can help
explain why strange and novel ideas spread more quickly than
ordinary seeming traditional ideas.

Keywords: ideology, shared beliefs, counterintuitiveness.

Introduction
Why do some aspects of group ideologies and cultural
worldviews change over time while others stay unchanged
for long periods of time? What explains the patterns of
persistence and change in shared beliefs of social groups
such as new religious movements and political parties? The
cognition and culture researchers argue that any attempt to
satisfactorily answer such questions must take the individual
cognitive tendencies for communication, comprehension,
and belief revision into account (Sperber, 1996). A key
finding of this research has been the minimal
counterintuitiveness hypothesis (Boyer, 1994, 2001) which
suggests that the reason why minimally counterintuitive
concepts, such as God and ghosts, dominate religious
concepts is that people remember them better than intuitive
and maximally counterintuitive ideas. This article first
reviews the minimal counterintuitiveness hypothesis and
then argues that it can be used to explain the spread of novel
ideas in general and not just in the context of religious ideas.

The Minimal Counterintuitiveness (MC)
Hypothesis
The minimal counterintuitive (MC) hypothesis posits that:
1. Most of the widespread religious concepts around the
globe are minimally counterintuitive.
2. The minimally counterintuitive (MCI) concepts that
violate a small number of intuitive expectations (such
as, a talking tree, a rock that eats, and an invisible cow)
are more memorable than either intuitive concepts
(such as, a green tree, a brown rock, and a good person)
or maximally counterintuitive concepts that violate a
larger number of intuitive expectations (such as, an
invisible talking tree that does not occupy any space
and a sad illuminant travelling rock).

742

easily retrieved and recalled. I hypothesized that for the
minimally counterintuitive ideas, readers are able to
construct such justifications and create a coherent concept
but that readers fail in their effort to construct a justification
and create a coherent concept for maximally
counterintuitive ideas. The memorability hypothesis (Upal,
2005a) suggests that memorability of a concept in a context
is a function of the difference between its degree of
expectation violation and its coherability as a new concept.
Besides explaining the past observations of why
minimally counterintuitive ideas are better remembered than
intuitive and maximally counterintuitive ideas, the
memorability hypothesis makes a number of predictions.
Since proposing this model (Upal, 2005a), I and others have
conducted a number of empirical experiments and found
that results generally support a context-based view of the
minimal counterintuitiveness effect (Gonce, et al., 2006;
Upal, 2007a, 2007b, 2009b; Upal, et al., 2007; Upal &
Harmon-Vukic, 2010). It predicts that, on average, readers
should spend more time to process counterintuitive concepts
than they do in processing intuitive concepts. This is
because counterintuitive concepts trigger cognitively taxing
process of justification creation while intuitive concepts do
not. A recent study has confirmed this finding (Upal &
Harmon-Vukic, 2010).
The
context-based
model
also
posits
that
counterintuitiveness is a property of the context in which a
concept appears as much as it is a property of the concept
itself. The context includes the mental knowledge that the
reader brings to the table as well as the prior parts of the text
in which the concept is embedded. This means that the same
concept may appear more unexpected in context A than in
context B and that the same concept may be more
memorable in one context and less memorable in another
context. Since knowledge structures in people’s memories
change over time, the same concept may be more
counterintuitive for a person at a time t1 than at a time t2. A
one-time exposure to an idea, however, does not guarantee
that the idea will not seem counterintuitive in the future. In
order for an idea to lose memorability advantages, the
knowledge in long term memory that generated the
expectation has to be revised so as to make the
counterintuitive idea as the new expected and the old idea as
the new unexpected (and therefore the new
counterintuitive). Since knowledge structures in memory
are richly connected with each other revising them requires
significant cognitive resources to untangle old connections
and establishing new ones. Thus it is not surprising that
people are very conservative when it comes to revising their
beliefs. People’s expectations guide what they see leading
them to sometimes miss the unexpected objects and events.
When the evidence of expectation violations is too
overwhelming to ignore, they prefer to generate elaborations
that allow them to preserve as much of their old beliefs as
possible. Even though observing a single instance of a
counterintuitive object or event can (at least in principle)
trigger belief change, this does not happen very often. For

scripts, and expert knowledge acquired through learning
should also enjoy memorability advantages. While details
of the context-based view of the MC effect has been
specified elsewhere (Upal, 2005a, 2007a, 2007b, 2009a,
2009b; Upal, et al., 2007), here I review its salient points as
they relate to the development of group ideologies.

The Minimal Counterintuitiveness Effect and the
Distintiveness Effect
One of the most robust findings in experimental psychology
has been the so called distinctiveness effect which indicates
that an item, that stands out as compared to other items in its
context, is more likely to be remembered than those other
items (Hunt & Worthen, 2006). For over a century,
experimental psychologists working with a variety of
stimuli have found support for this effect (Calkin, 1894,
1896; McDaniel, Dornburg, & Guynn, 2005; von Restorff,
1933). Thus unexpected events and entities in a story are
recalled better than expected events and objects (Davidson,
Larson, Luo, & Burden, 2000; Kintsch & Green, 1978;
Upal, 2005a), bizarre images are recalled better than
ordinary images (McDaniel, Einstein, DeLosh, & May,
1995), unexpected words in a list of words are recalled
better than expected words (Atran, 2004; von Restorff,
1933), orthographically distinct words are recalled better
than ordinary words, as are typographically distinct words
(Hunt & Worthen, 2006).
Cognitive scientists and
evolutionary psychologists argue that the distinctiveness
effect reveals the evolutionary pressures that guided the
evolution of animal and human memory systems. They
suggest that distinctiveness effect supports the view that the
ability to predict relevant aspects of one’s environment was
the primary driver for the evolution of animal and human
memory systems. People use the knowledge of their
environment to generate expectations about other hitherto
unobserved aspects of the environment (Schank, 1975,
1979, 1999; Schank & Abelson, 1977).
If these
expectations are not fulfilled, it indicates a gap in the
agent’s world model. Agents whose memory systems treat
expectation-violations as learning opportunities to revise
their world model to make them more accurate stand to gain
evolutionary advantages in terms of being able to collect
more food or find better mates.
In (Upal, 2005a), I argued that Schank’s learning theory
and findings in psycholinguistics (Graesser, Singer, &
Trabasso, 1994; Kintsch, 1998) explain that minimally
counterintuitive ideas are remembered better than intuitive
ideas because they violate a reader’s expectations.
Psycholinguists argue that when reading a text people
primarily ask why questions i.e., why did the author include
this information in this text? The cognitive processes of
readers accessing the knowledge structures in their long
term memory to construct a justification for the inclusion of
ideas in question result in establishment of strong memory
links between counterintuitive ideas and thematic cues about
the story. When these cues are presented to subjects, the
strongly connected minimally counterintuitive concepts are

743

person remembering details of her past lives may be
minimally counterintuitive to a western population that may
have a passing familiarity with the idea of reincarnation but
not to a Hindu population among whom the belief in
reincarnation is intricately woven into the fabric of socially
shared beliefs. Minimally counterintuitive social ideas have
a memorability advantage over intuitive cultural ideas that
do not violate any expectations generated by shared cultural
beliefs. Thus the notion of a person who remembers her
past life would have a memorability advantage in a western
population that did not expect the idea but can use their
passing knowledge to understand it. However, it will not
enjoy memorability advantages due to counterintuitiveness
in a Hindu population where it is already well entrenched.
Similar to the case with individual counterintuitiveness,
socially counterintuitive ideas can also become socially
intuitive overtime but the process is far more difficult and
involved because it involves changes in shared beliefs of a
large number of individuals. As advocates of social change
would attest, getting a new idea to become widely accepted
by a population is a long and painstaking process that
requires years of effort by dedicated individuals. This is
because, similar to ideas in individual memories, shared
cultural ideas are like a well-knit fabric and once this fabric
is ripped up by an expectation violating concept, a number
of threads become exposed. All of these threads have to be
stitched together in new and innovative ways to fully mend
the fabric such that the new idea becomes culturally
expected. This is why cultural conceptual change faces such
daunting prospects requiring years, if not a lifetime, of effort
by social leaders who dedicate their lives to the issue.
Previously, I have referred to such social leaders as
information entrepreneurs (IEs) (Upal, 2005b) because to
successfully lead conceptual change, these leaders have to
posses the following characteristics.
• They must have high social capital in the group whose
shared beliefs they are trying to change. This is needed
both to have the credibility needed to persuade others
and also because they can afford to be seen as
dissenting from group-think (Packer, 2008).
• They must have the marketing skills required to sell the
conceptual change to their target audience. Like all
good marketers, they are able to make their ideas seem
as inevitable as ideas whose time has come.
• They must have the cognitive skills required to
integrate the seemingly counterintuitive idea with the
group’s traditional thinking and make it seem as if the
new idea is intuitive and perfectly in line with the
group’s original thinking.
In (Upal, 2005b), I argued that the IE view helps us
understand that new religious movement leaders create
seemingly counterintuitive ideas because they believe that
these ideas are needed to solve problems being faced by the
group. Upal (2005c) argued that revision in socially shared
beliefs is driven by a belief among one or more of the
strongly identified group members that the group’s shared
beliefs are harmful to the long-term prosperity of the group.

instance, upon seeing an ostrich for the first time, one may
no longer be surprised when one hears of, “a healthy adult
bird that cannot fly” assuming one can create a justification
that an ostrich is still a bird because it has feathers but is not
able to fly because it is too heavy. Creation of justifications
in response to seeing an unexpected object or event does not
automatically lead to generation of different expectations in
a similar future context. One may for instance assume that
the expectation violation only happens in an overly
restricted context, for instance, assume that ostriches do not
fly on Tuesdays between 9 and10 am or that the ostrich
under observation is a mutant. Seeing a healthy adult ostrich
at a different time in the future may still lead to the
expectation that it will fly. It may take prolonged exposure
to numerous observations of unexpected objects and events
and significant cognitive effort for someone to revise
enough knowledge structures in their long term memory for
them to generate new expectations. Once all the relevant
memory structures are revised and the old unexpected
becomes the new expected, the once minimally
counterintuitive idea should no longer be so. Thus the
context-based
model
predicts
that
minimally
counterintuitive ideas should lose their memorability
advantages over time.
Since the context-based model does not support
differential processing for mental knowledge acquired
through intuitive and doctrinal modes of thinking, it predicts
that violations of online intuitive cognition should not have
a privileged status, at least when it comes to memorability.
Thus, ideas that violate expectations generated by offline
learned concepts such as cultural schemas and religious
doctrine should also be better remembered than ideas that do
not violate such expectations.
The context-based view emphasizes the role played by the
knowledge that an individual possesses when processing a
concept in making a concept a concept minimally
counterintuitive. This means that a concept that is minimally
counterintuitive for one person may not be minimally
counterintuitive for another person whose mental
knowledge differs from that of the first person. If
counterintuitiveness is not the property of the concept alone,
then a concept can only appear minimally counterintuitive
to a population if individuals within the population share
beliefs that are relevant to the concept i.e., if the concept
violates the expectations raised by those shared beliefs and
if the expectation violation can be justified using those
shared beliefs. Thus contrary to the traditional view that
ideas that violate cultural schemas should not have
memorability advantages, the context-based view suggests
that they should. I will refer to such ideas as socially
counterintuitive and point out the role that they play in
constantly reshaping the fabric of cultural beliefs.

Social Counterintuiveness
I define an idea as minimally socially counterintuitive for
a population if it violates a single expectation generated by
beliefs shared by that population. Thus the notion of a

744

Christian West? (Lewis, 2003). Such changes provide
opportunities for information entrepreneurs to step up and
offer their solution to the social problems. Groups have
various mechanisms for rewarding those who are thought to
be working for the group’s benefit especially at a personal
cost to their own welfare such as soldiers. Upal (2005a)
argued that those who pioneer change in group social beliefs
stand to gain an increase their social status if they come to
be credited with having successfully advocated for the
betterment of their group.
Ratcheting Up Social Counterintuitiveness
Once the efforts of information entreprenurs are
successful and a counterintuitive idea becomes fully
entrenched in a group, it no longer seems counterintuitive to
most members of that group and therefore loses its
memorability advantages. This resolves another paradox
that critics of cognitive science of religion have often
pointed out, namely, that while the counterintuitive beliefs
such as religious belief in gods, and ghosts as well in
popular culture beliefs about Draculas, vampires, Vulcans,
djinns, chupacabras, and leprechauns are counterintuitive in
the traditional cognitive science of religion sense, they do
not appear to be counterintuitive to the people whose
informational worlds are full of such creatures. Theists from
a variety of traditions, for instance, routinely point out that
they see God in everything such as people’s eyes, flower
petals, grass blades, running streams, stars, and singing
birds and that the concept of God appears no more
counterintuitive to them than air, energy, and kinetic
potential (Cook, 1883; Rasor, 2006). Cultural anthropologist
routinely point out that while mythical cultural creatures
such as djinns and ghosts seem counterintuitive to us, they
do not seem counterintuitive to the people who believe in
them (Bloch, 2005).
The answer I believe lies in acknowledging the criticism
that minimally counterintuitive ideas do indeed lose their
privileged status and do not have any memorability
advantages once they become embedded as part of a culture.
However, this does not mean that further cultural innovation
stops. New ideas continue to be created and communicated
to others and those ideas that have transmission advantages
continue to spread. In order to have memorability
advantages due to counterintuitiveness however, new ideas
must violate people’s expectations in the new context and
not the old context which is no longer relevant. This means,
for instance, that once as a minimally counterintuitive idea
such as the idea of a being who can see everyone becomes
widely culturally accepted, it loses its memorability
advantages because it no longer violates people’s
expectations. In order for a concept to achieve memorability
advantages and to spread in the new cultural context, an idea
has to seem counterintuitive in the new context. One way to
do that is to build on the counterintuitiveness. For instance,
the concept of a being who can see and hear everyone
would seem minimally counterintuitive in the new context.
In light of the model we develop here, one should not be
surprised to see maximally counterintuitive concepts to form

I focused on social identity beliefs which include, “who
belongs to the group and who does not, who is admitted to
the group, and who is not? This is particularly clear for
racist, ethnocentric, xenophobic or nationalist ideologies,
according to which only 'we, white Europeans' belong in
Europe, and others should not be admitted, at least not as
(equal) citizens”
(van Dijk, 1995) (Page 250).
Anthropologists studying ethnic groups find that
ethnocentric beliefs in “superiority of the ingroup’s culture
combined with condemnation of the outgroup as immoral
and inferior” are “commonplace (e.g., (LeVine & Cambell,
1972)). ‘Chosenness’ is a particularly prominent expression
of this belief” (Page 6). Van Evera (1994) argues that such
chauvinist myths are “hallmark of nationalism, practiced by
nearly all nationalists to some degree” (Page 27). He
provides a number of illustrative examples including Nazi
myth of Aryan supremacy, British and American beliefs in
rational and intellectual exceptionalism (Longley, 2003),
and Russian belief in their extra-ordinary inventiveness.
These could be complemented by Pakistani belief that one
Pakistani Muslim soldier can dominate 10 Indian Hindu
soldiers, American Indian belief that they are more spiritual
than the more material “white man”, Israeli belief that they
are more rational than crazy Arabs, Muslim belief that God
chose to favor them as his final chosen people after
Christians and Jews strayed from the prescribed path, and
the Nation of Islam belief that an evil black scientist created
the wicked white man. Group superiority myths are
reflected in the literature and art of a group and feature
prominently in its creation stories that form the master
narrative of a group.
Social psychologists argue that such beliefs are necessary
for people’s well being since people have a fundamental
need to feel good about themselves and that people derive
part of their identity from membership in social groups that
they associate with (Tajfel & Turner, 1985). To achieve and
maintain a positive self image, people view their group
more positively than comparison outgroups on some valued
dimensions (Hogg & Vaughan, 2002). This ingroup
favoritism is an essential part of group identity and such
beliefs arise even in minimal group settings. In a number of
lab studies where subjects were arbitrarily assigned to
groups (but told that they had something in common with
other group members who they may never meet),
participants gave more rewards to members of their group
(Hogg & Vaughan, 2002). Group superiority beliefs
permeate rumours, myths, and folktales of groups around
the world.
Events that manifest a higher status of the out-groups
along the dimensions of value to a group, violate group’s
cultural expectations and may cause some highly identified
group members to believe that the group myths are broken
and need to be fixed. For instance, Christian conquest of
Muslim lands in the 19th and 20th centuries, lead Muslims to
ask the question, “what went wrong.” If we are the chosen
people who have been promised dominance in the world
then how come we are losing so many battles to the

745

against the oppressive measures against innovation to have
their own voice heard when facing the same need to protect
the integrity of their own doctrine, disdain any attempts at
introducing further innovations into their doctrines. For
instance, the founder of Scientology, L. Ron Hubbard is
reported to have referred to those who modify his
techniques as “squirrels” who should be harassed, “in any
possible way" (Welkos & Sappell, 1990). Weapons used to
discourage any change in religious doctrine and practice
include ridicule, expulsion, and harassment. Continuity in
group ideologies is explained to the extent that such thought
control techniques are successful.

a significant part of religious beliefs. Indeed, it would be
surprising if they did not!
This ratcheting-up of counterintuitiveness not only
explains how seemingly maximally counterintuitive
concepts such as Judeo-Christian-Islamic God and ghosts
come to be widely distributed but it also predicts a
continuous transmission advantage for unorthodox ideas
that violate cultural expectations over traditional ideas. This
explains continuing evolution of cultural beliefs among
groups ranging from post-modern artists to new religious
movements. As arts historians know, each artistic trend is
both defined in opposition to the old one and also as a
continuation and improvement of the old trend. At the core
of each trend is a minimally counterintuitive idea that is
advocated by a group of innovators and becomes
widespread because it is unexpected according to socially
shared beliefs. However, once it becomes widely accepted
group it loses its memorability advantages making room for
a new layer of innovation. Similarly, new religious
movement scholars recognize (Bainbridge, 1985) that
splitting of a new religious movement (NRM) from an
existing movement often involves introducing an innovation
into the doctrinal beliefs of the existing movement. NRM
scholars Bainbridge and Stark (1979) provide a number of
examples of new religious movement leaders who created
the fundamental doctrine of new religious movements by
modifying the beliefs of existing NRMs. Indeed they argue
that tracing the history of such deviations, labeled “cultural
genetics”, may be a useful way to study NRMs. Idea
innovations leading to splits in NRMs are common.
Bainbridge (1985) counts over half a dozen movements that
split from Dianetics and the Church of Scientology in the
short period of 20 years from 1952 to 1972.
In this way, the context-based model explains cultural
innovation but what accounts for cultural continuity? In
particular, what explains the perception that cultural
concepts such as gods, ghosts, and angels have not changed
for a long time? As anthropologists and historians know,
despite the need for protagonists of conservative movements
to argue otherwise, cultural ideas are continually undergoing
change, so much so that social movements and societies
often have to build a number of safeguards to prevent
unwanted innovation. This includes writing down the
doctrines in books and elevating such books to the level of
the sacred, punishing any changes in the content of these
books, and instituting measures to discourage translation
and interpretation of these books.
Orthodox Christianity’s attempts at rooting out heresies
(Hogan, 2001) spanning over two thousand years illustrate
problems that organized religions face as they attempt to
maintain continuity over time. Both Judaism and Islam also
had to repeatedly put down various attempts at introducing
innovations in their religious doctrine and practices. In the
case of Islam, the Quran was not allowed to be translated in
any language other than Arabic until the 19th century.
Innovation in religion (termed as “bidah”) is explicitly
forbidden (Islam, 2008). NRMs, despite having had to fight

Conclusions
Cognitive scientists, including cognition and culture
researchers have long favored general models of cognition
over specific ones not just because they explain a larger
variety of phenomena but also because they are perceived as
more parsimonious and subject to a larger battery of tests
because of the availability of a larger number of data points
to test them on. This paper makes a contribution to this
literature by presenting a generalized version of the minimal
counterintuitiveness hypothesis to argue that better recall for
minimally counterintuitive ideas is part of a larger class of
memory preference for distinctive items and that ideas that
violate a small number of expectations generated by offline
cognition/doctrinal thinking should also be remembered
better than ideas that do not violate such expectations. The
secondary contribution of this article is the development of
the notion of social counterintuitiveness which allows us to
explain the spread of culturally counterintuitive ideas.

References
Atran, S. (2004). In Gods We Trust. Oxford, MA: OUP.
Bainbridge, W. S. (1985). Cultural Genetics Religious
Movements (pp. 157-198). New York: Paragon.
Bainbridge, W., & Stark, R. (1979). Cult Formation: Three
Compatible Models. Sociological Analysis, 40(4), 283291.
Barrett, J., & Nyhof, M. (2001). Spreading non-natural
concepts. Cognition and Culture, 1, 69-100.
Barrett, J. L. (1997). Anthrpomorphism, intentional agents,
and conceptualizing God. Cornell University, Ithaca, NY.
Barrett, J. L. (1999). Theological Correctness: Cognitive
Constraint and the study of religion. Method and Theory
in the Study of Religion, 11(4), 325-339.
Barrett, J. L. (2008). Coding and Quantifying
Counterintuitiveness in religious concepts. Method and
Theory in the Study of Religion, 20, 308-338.
Barrett, J. L., & Keil, F. C. (1996). Anthropomorphism and
God concepts: Conceptualizing a non-natural entity.
Cognitive Psychology, 31(3), 219-247.
Bloch, M. (2005). Are religious beliefs counter-intuitive. In
M. Bloch (Ed.), Essays on Cultural Transmission (pp.
103-123). New York: Berg.

746

Boyer, P. (1994). The Naturalness of Religious Ideas: A
Cognitive Theory of Religion. Berkeley, CA: University
of California Press.
Boyer, P. (2001). Religion Explained. New York, NY:
Basic.
Boyer, P., & Ramble, C. (2001). Cognitive templates for
religious concepts. Cognitive Science, 25, 535-564.
Calkin, M. W. (1894). Association. Psychological Review,
1, 32-49.
Calkin, M. W. (1896). Association. Psychological Review,
3, 32-49.
Cook, J. (1883). Advanced Thought in Europe, Asia,
Australia. London, UK: Richard D. Dickson.
Davidson, D., Larson, S. L., Luo, Z., & Burden, M. J.
(2000). Interruption and bizzareness effects in the recall
of script based text. Memory, 8(4), 217-234.
Gonce, L., Upal, M. A., Slone, D. J., & Tweney, R. (2006).
Role of Context in the Recall of Counterintuitive
Concepts. Cognition and Culture, 6(3-4), 521-547.
Graesser, A. C., Singer, M., & Trabasso, T. (1994).
Constructing
inferences
during
narrative
text
comprehension. Psychological Review, 101, 371-395.
Harris, P. L., & Koenig, M. A. (2002). Trust in Testimony:
How children learn about science and religion. Child
Development, 77(3), 505-524.
Hogan, R. M. (2001). Dissent from the Creed: Heresies
Past and Present Our Sunday Visitor.
Hogg, M. A., & Vaughan, G. M. (2002). Social Psychology
(3rd ed.). London, UK: Prentice Hall.
Hunt, R. R., & Worthen, J. B. (2006). Distinctiveness and
Memory. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Islam, M. (2008). Decline of Muslim States and Societies.
Xlibris.
Keller, E. (2004). Towards Complete Clarity: Bible Study
among Seventh-Day Adventists in Madagascar. Ethnos,
69(1), 89-112.
Kintsch, W. (1998). Comprehension. Cambridge, MA:
Cambridge University Press.
Kintsch, W., & Green, E. (1978). The role of culturespecific schemata in the comprehension and recall of
stories. Discourse Processes, 1(1), 1-13.
LeVine, S., & Cambell, D. T. (1972). Ethnocentrism:
Theories of conflict, ethnic attitudes, and group behavior.
New York: Wiley.
Lewis, B. (2003). What went wrong? The clash between
Islam and modernity in the Middle East. New York:
Harper Perennial.
Longley, C. (2003). Chosen People: The Big Idea that
Shaped England and America. London, UK: Hodder &
Stoughton.
McDaniel, M. A., Dornburg, C. C., & Guynn, M. J. (2005).
Disentangling encoding versus retreival explanations of
the bizareness effect: Implications for distinctiveness.
Memory and Cognition, 33, 270-279.
McDaniel, M. A., Einstein, G. O., DeLosh, E. L., & May,
D. P. (1995). The bizzarreness effect. Journal of

Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 22, 422-435.
Packer, d. (2008). On Being Both With Us and Against Us.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 12(1), 5072.
Rasor, E. (2006). The Journey of Modern Mystic. New
York: iUniverse.
Schank, R. C. (1975). Conceptual information processing
New York: American Elsevier.
Schank, R. C. (1979). Interestingness: Controlling
inferences. Artificial Intelligence, 12, 273-297.
Schank, R. C. (1999). Dynamic Memory Revisited. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Schank, R. C., & Abelson, R. (1977). Scripts, plans, goals,
and understanding: An inquiry into human knowledge.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Slone, D. J. (2004). Theological Incorrectnes. New York,
NY: Oxford University Press.
Sperber, D. (1996). Explaining culture: A naturalistic
approach. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers.
Tajfel, H., & Turner, T. J. (1985). An integrative theory of
intergroup conflict. In S. Worchel & W. Austin (Eds.),
Psychology of intergroup relations. Chicago: NelsonHall.
Upal, M. A. (2005a). Role of Context in Memorability of
Intuitive and Counterintuitive Concepts. The Proceedings
of the 27th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society.
Upal, M. A. (2005b). Towards A Cognitive Science of New
Religious Movements. Cognition and Culture, 5(2), 214239.
Upal, M. A. (2007a). The Optimal Cognitive Template of
Minimally Counterintuitive Narratives. Paper presented at
the the 29th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society.
Upal, M. A. (2007b). What is More Memorable
Counterintuitive Concepts Interpreted Metaphorically or
Literally? The 29th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society.
Upal, M. A. (2009a). An Alternative Account of the
Minimal Counterintuitiveness Effect. Cognitive Systems
Research.
Upal, M. A. (2009b). Counterintuitiveness, Coherence And
Memory for Folktales. DRDC Toronto Technical Report.
Upal, M. A., Gonce, L., Tweney, R., & Slone, D. J. (2007).
Contextualizing counterintuitiveness. Cognitive Science,
31(3), 415-439.
Upal, M. A., & Harmon-Vukic, M. (2010). Why Maximally
Counterintuitive Concepts Are Less Well Recalled,
Cognition & Culture.
van Dijk, T. (1995). Discourse semantics and ideology.
Discourse and Society, 6(2), 243-289.
von Restorff, H. (1933). Analyse von Vorgangen in
Spurenfield. I. Uber die Wirkung von Bereichtsbildungen
im Spurenfeld. Psychologishe Forschung, 18, 299-342.
Welkos, R. W., & Sappell, J. (1990, June 29, 1990). When
the Doctrine Leaves the Church. Los Angeles Times.

747

