UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
On the limits of dynamic imagination: A mental extrapolation task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1751c9gz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Levillain, Florent
Bonatti, Luca

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

On the limits of dynamic imagination: A mental extrapolation task
Florent Levillain (levillain@lutin-userlab.fr)

Laboratoire “Cognitions Humaine et Artificielle”
Université Paris 8 – 2 rue de la Liberté 93526 Saint-Denis France

Luca L. Bonatti (lucabonatti@mac.com)
ICREA and Universitat Pompeu Fabra

Carrier Roc Boronat, 138, 08018 Barcelona, Spain

Abstract
To mentally extrapolate the trajectory of a moving object
which disappears from sight, it is possible to exploit two
different sources of information. One source is the memory of
the last visible movement of the object, and the other is its
inferred movement through time. It is often assumed that
these cues are integrated into dynamical analog mental
representations. To investigate the nature of the mental
representation of imagined movements, we used a new
experimental paradigm for which a causality attribution task
was combined with motion prediction task. Participants were
instructed to imagine the trajectory of a moving object
disappearing behind a screen while estimating the degree to
which the movement was caused by another moving object.
We show that the predicted movement departs from a correct
extrapolation based on accurate memory for velocity.
Furthermore the mental representation of the physical and
causal structure of the dynamical events did not appear to be
as detailed as a theory of mental simulation would predict.
Keywords: mental imagery, prediction of motion, perception
of causality.

Introduction
Correctly performing actions on moving objects typically
requires a high level of accuracy. Tasks, such as hitting or
catching a ball show that humans can accurately and
consistently represent the timing of a visible moving object
and anticipate its future positions (Regan, 1982).
However, when the stimulus is not visible, such as when
it is temporarily occluded, it is not clear how precisely we
can time a non visible movement and whether we possess an
extrapolation mechanism that can time non visible
displacements. Interception tasks are mostly driven by
kinematic properties, whereas mental extrapolation may be
more influenced by cognitive factors, particularly by how
we represent the causal interactions of the objects within a
scene.
In studies of mental imagery, it is putatively assumed that
the mind builds analog representations that can be used ti
estimate possible outcomes of dynamical events (JohnsonLaird, 1983) or to reveal spatial properties of objects
( K o s s l y n , 1 9 9 4 ) . S i m i l a r l y, d y n a m i c a l a n a l o g
representations may subserve the ability to represent the
timing structure of an invisible dynamical event (Shepard &
Cooper, 1982; Schwartz, 1999).
Additionally, dynamical analog representations could
integrate variables related to the physical structure of the

environment. Results suggesting that humans are capable of
recognizing physically correct object movements (Kaiser et
al., 1992), along with findings showing that we can perceive
high-level properties of these stimuli, such as their causal
relations (Leslie, 1994), or agency status (Premack, 1990),
support this possibility. Indeed, it has been claimed that
internalizing invariant properties of the environment is
evolutionarily adaptive (Hubbard, 1995; Shepard, 2001).
Thus, it is plausible to conjecture that information
regarding the dynamic properties of a scene that we are
capable of representing (for example, their causal relations,
or the amount of physical forces acting upon an object) is
integrated in a unique mental simulation. This being the
case, such a dynamical representation may allow for
accurate prediction of future states of invisible events.
Alternatively, the prediction of motion and the
representation of other forms of physical information may
be independent, and hence not merged into a single optimal
simulation of dynamical events. In the present article, we
aim to determine the ability to accurately estimate motions
of invisible objects and to clarify how participants integrate
an intuitive causal understanding of the represented events
into a mental representation of motion .

Experiment 1
Experiment one determined the accuracy for predicting the
position of a moving object that is no longer visible.
Participants were required to predict the time-to-arrival of
an animated ball at different positions after its
disappearance.
We also tested how the representation of causal relations
influenced participants' accuracy for predicting invisible
dynamical events. If the information used to compute the
velocity of an object is integrated with the information used
to compute the causal structure of the scene, we would
expect that events considered as causally correct are
predicted more precisely than events considered as causally
anomalous. However, if the two kinds of information are
processed separately, we should observe a dissociation
between the accuracy of online predictions of imagined
position and the perception of causal correctness.
In every experimental condition, there were two moving
objects, a launcher and a target, the movement of the target
behind the occluder was to be predicted, while the causal
relation between the launcher and the target, which could
vary both in spatial and temporal contiguity, was to be
estimated.

1
2374

Method
Participants. Nineteen randomly chosen participants
completed the experiment (mean age = 24,4; range from 20
to 31 years).
Stimuli. We created video stimuli with the animation
software Cinema4D. The animation clips used were created
with some intent of realism. For example, objects' shadows
cast on the ground, had slight grooves, offering some depth
cues. In each clip, a white and a green ball moved onto an
earth-ground, below a blue, cloudy sky. A red screen
partially covered the movement of the green ball (see Figure
1).
After 1 s, a white ball with a 3° diameter appeared from
one side of the scene, and travelled horizontally at a
constant speed of either 25,8°/s, 19,3°/s or 12,9°/s toward a
green ball, which was stationary at the centre of the scene.
The white ball (the launcher) either did or did not contact
the green ball (the target), but the target always started its
movement as fast as the launcher and in the same direction.
A red rectangular screen was positioned such that its
border contacted the edge of the target and its length
covered the entire trajectory of the target. After initiating its
movement, the target continued its trajectory behind the
screen, until the end of the animation segment. Three
vertical black lines were drawn on the red screen, placed at
six different positions, yielding two configurations (see
Tables 1 and 2). The direction of the balls (movement to the
right, or left) was balanced across trials.
Three different spatio-temporal conditions were
implemented by either varying the spatial interval between
the launcher and the target at the end of the launcher's
movement, or by varying the delay between the end of the
launchers' movement and the beginning of the target's
movement.
Table 1: Angular speed and hypothetical arrival time (s)
in bar configuration 1 (in parentheses, distance from the
origin of each bar).
Bar Number
1 (44.2°)
4 (60.8°)
6 (71.8°)

12.9°/s
0.44
1.72
2.6

19.3°/s
0.28
1.16
1.72

25.8°/s
0.24
0.88
1.32

Table 2: Angular speed and hypothetical arrival time (s)
in bar configuration 2 (in parentheses, distance from the
origin of each bar).
Bar Number
2 (49.7°)
3 (55.3°)
5 (66.3°)

12.9°/s
0.88
1.28
2.16

19.3°/s
0.56
0.84
1.4

25.8°/s
0.44
0.68
1.12

In the Contact condition, the motion of the launcher
immediately ceased after having contacted the target, and
the target began to move immediately after contact with the

launcher. Neither the launcher nor the target exhibited
deformation as a result of contact.
In the Delay condition, an interval was introduced at the
moment the two balls made contact. The interval was 480
ms for the first condition and 640 ms for the second
condition.
In the Space condition, although the end of the movement
of the launcher and the beginning of the movement of the
target were simultaneous, the launcher stopped its trajectory
before contacting the target. The space between the
endpoint of the launcher’s path and the target’s starting
position was determined according to the delays previously
specified: the distance between the two balls was equal to
the distance the launcher would have covered during the
interval specified in the Delay condition had it continued its
movement (a distance of 100 pixels for the first condition
and 130 pixels for the second condition).

Figure 1. Overall sequence of events in a trial and causal
conditions (Contact, Space, Delay).
To reveal the impact of occlusion on the time-to-arrival
estimation, we designed another set of video sequences for
which the target remained visible. However, in these clips
the bars remained in the same positions as in the above
described segments, and had the same spatio-temporal
properties described previously. Also, the velocity of the
target was constant and equal to the velocity of the launcher.
Finally, in order to break the monotony resulting from the
horizontal movements of the launcher, we intermixed the
experimental animations with distractor segments in which
the launcher fell from above, landing in the same position
that the launcher stopped in the experimental sequences.
Finally, for all the animations, the launcher appeared either
from the left of the screen and moved right, or vice versa.
Thus, in total, 120 experimental animations were created (5
conditions of interest crossed with the other experimental
factors: Contact/Delay (x2)/Space (x2), target visibility (x2),
bar configuration 1/2, speed (x3), direction of movement
(x2) and 40 distractor animations).
A graded scale (from 0 to 9) was employed to collect
participants' causal judgments for each clip.

2
2375

Apparatus. Stimulus animations were displayed and the
data were collected using a PowerMac G4 running the GNU
software package PsyScope X (http://psy.cns.sissa.it). The
animations were projected on a 200x135 cm screen with an
Epson EMP 8100 projector. Reaction times were recorded
using a Newmicros Button Box. This response box, together
with a mouse and a numerical keypad were placed on a table
positioned in front of participants.

response after the target crossed the bar, while a negative
error value indicates the response was given before the
arrival time.

Procedure. Participants sat in a darkened room, 2.5 meters
from the screen. From their position, they could easily press
the button box.
Each session began with a practice trial (Contact
condition), with the velocity of the balls always set to 19.3°/
s. Participants were instructed to visually track the launcher
and, after the target disappeared behind the occluder, to
press the key on the button box each time they felt the target
would reach a bar on the red screen. They were encouraged
not to press the key only three times. They were also
informed that the balls would move at constant velocity and
that they had identical speed. This information could be
used to predict the position of the second ball on the basis of
the speed of the first ball. Participants were able to move
their head freely as they tracked the balls.
Participants were also informed that at the end of each
segment a 1-to-9 scale would be projected on the screen.
They were instructed to evaluate the perceived strength of
the causal relation between the two balls by moving the
mouse on the scale and clicking on the appropriate
magnitude (1= not at all causal; 9 = completely causal). No
explicit relation was drawn between the first online
prediction and the second causal judgment tasks.
Each trial was initiated by pressing a button on the
response box. The movement of the launcher started one
second after the beginning of the scene. According to the
velocity of the balls, the trial could last either 10, 11 or 12
seconds. At the end of the trial, a black screen, in which the
causality scale appeared, filled the scene. After participants
punched a number on a numerical keyboard, the next trial
started. The beginning of the novel segment was controlled
by participants. No feedback about response accuracy was
given. Animation segments were presented in blocks of 80
(60 experimental, 20 distractors), arranged in a semi-random
order, with the constraint that the same spatio-temporal
condition could not be presented more than three times in a
row. The first block contained only animations with
occluded targets, and the second block contained the
sequences with visible targets. The overall duration of the
experiment was one hour, with a pause between the two
blocks after thirty minutes.

Results
The mean timing error was computed as the difference
between the total response time to a tested position from the
beginning of the sequence and the total arrival time of the
target, from the beginning of the sequence to the moment
the target crossed a bar. The frame in which the invisible
target ball reached each bar was determined offline, as the
first frame where the target made contact with the bar. Thus,
a positive error value indicates that participants entered their

Figure 2: Mean timing error (in ms) for the main
experimental conditions (Contact/Space/Delay), separated
by target visibility. The horizontal axis indicates the position
of the bars on the trajectory of the target.
Trials were excluded from analysis if participants did not
press the button exactly three times, if they pressed the
button before the disappearance of the target, or if reaction
times exceeded 2.5 SD from the mean response time in the
relevant conditions.
We initially analyzed how the visible and invisible
conditions differ for each tested position. Figure 2 shows the
time differences between participants’ responses and arrival
time of the target ball, plotting together the three tested
positions of each experimental animation sequence (1,4,6
and 2,3,5). When the target was visible, participants were
accurate at determining the exact moment of arrival. Not
only does the result show participants' accuracy at
predicting contacts with direct visual feedback, but it also
reveals that the task of tracking three successive positions
with the spatio-temporal parameters we tested is perfectly
feasible. However, when the target was not visible, clearly
the average prediction systematically overestimated the time
of arrival of the target. A two-way repeated measures
ANOVA with individual means of timing error as a
dependent variable and object occlusion as independent
variable (visible/non visible) reveals an effect of occlusion
on timing error (F1,18 = 78.28, p < 0.0001). The error was
positive at every tested position, indicating an
overestimation of the time needed for the target to cover the
distance between the different bars. This response delay
increased with occlusion time, but neither linearly nor
continuously, as a simulation hypothesis would predict. In
fact, the timing error did not differ between any two close
bar pairs tested in the two bar position conditions. In other
words, participants could not distinguish between any two
close positions (as confirmed by post-hoc t-tests with
Bonferroni alpha adjustment) when tested separately, but
only in the invisible target condition, suggesting that the
ability to predict the position of an invisible target is, if at all
present, rather coarse.

3
2376

In successive analyses, we thus collapsed the two bar
position conditions, which did not differ. A two-way
repeated measures ANOVA, restricted to the invisible target
condition, with the sequence of response as independent
variable (R1/R2/R3) revealed an effect of response order
(F2,18 = 109.04, p < 0.0001). For each response, the timing
delay increased as confirmed by a post-hoc t-tests
(Bonferroni alpha adjustment) on the differences between
timing errors in the third, second, and first response (R2 –
R1 = 631.02, p < 0.0001; R3 – R1 = 1348.62, p < 0.0001).
Effect of causal conditions on timing accuracy. Figure 2
shows the timing error at each tested bar for the main
conditions of the experiment. Timing was not accurate in
any of the three tested conditions compared with the error
values obtained in the visible movement conditions. There
were also differences observed within the three conditions
in the target-occluded animations. A two-way repeated
measures ANOVA performed on individual error means for
the invisible target conditions, with the type of interaction
between the balls as the independent variable, indicated a
significant effect of the three causal conditions (F2, 18 =
84.43, p <0.0001). This main effect depended on the
difference between the Contact and the Delay conditions
(post-hoc, Bonferroni adjusted t-tests : Delay - Contact =
337.84, p <0.0001) and between the Space and Delay
conditions (post-hoc, Bonferroni adjusted t-tests : Delay –
Space = 293.14, p <0.0001), while there was no difference
between the Contact and Space condition (post-hoc,
Bonferroni adjusted t-tests : Space – Contact = 44.7, p =
0.53).
Thus, the Delay condition reveals a timing error that is not
only greater than the (almost null) error in the corresponding
visible condition, but also greater than both non-visible
conditions. Instead, timing errors in the Contact and Space
conditions remained relatively similar across the trajectory
of the target.
The effect of the spatio-temporal conditions did not
depend on the size of the temporal or spatial intervals, as
indicated by the lack of interaction between the two factors
in a two-way ANOVA restricted to the responses in the
Space and Delay conditions (F1, 18 = 0.02, p =0.89).
Effect of causal conditions on causal attribution. We
analyzed participants' estimates of the causal strength of the
scenes. A two-way repeated measures ANOVA with causal
attributions as the dependent variable and interval size and
causal conditions as independent variables revealed no
effect of interval size (F1, 18 = 3.39, p = 0.08) and no
interaction between size and conditions (F1, 18 = 0.66, p =
0.43). Thus, we collapsed the data across the interval
dimension in further analyses.
A two-way repeated measures ANOVA yielded a
significant effect of the type of interval introduced (F2, 18 =
66.99, p < 0.0001). The effect was mainly carried by the
difference between the Contact condition and Space
conditions, but all conditions were different (post-hoc,
Bonferroni adjusted t-tests : Contact - Space = 6.23, p <
0.0001; Contact - Delay = 4.52, p=0.03; Delay - Space =
2.18 , p <0.01).

As expected, in the Contact condition the relation
between the launcher and target was considered to be the
causally strongest. Instead in the Space condition causality
was considered non existent. Noticeably, causal interaction
in the Delay condition was judged higher than in the Space
condition. Combining such results with the prediction task,
and comparing the two conditions in which causal violations
were introduced, one can see that participants were better at
predicting the position of an invisible target in the condition
(Space) that was judged causally weaker than the other
(Time). That is, prediction abilities and perception of
causality do not align.
Effect of expertise on timing accuracy. Because many of
our participants were highly skilled in physics and had a
thorough understanding of real kinematics, we also checked
whether expertise had any effect on accuracy. We divided
the total number of participants in three groups based on the
number of years they received physics education (naive: up
to middle school; intermediate: up to high school; high:
Masters and Ph.D in Physics).
Overall, expertise had no effect on prediction accuracy, as
revealed by a two-way repeated measures ANOVA with
individual means of timing error as a dependent variable and
levels of expertise as independent variable (naive/
intermediate/high) (F2, 18 = 0.35, p = 0.71). Nor did any
effect appear when causal attributions were the dependent
variable (F2, 18 = 1.35, p = 0.29). Expertise did not interact
with spatio-temporal conditions in either predictive
accuracy or causal attributions.

Discussion
Experiment one revealed that participants were highly
accurate when predicting the time of contact of a moving
target when the target was continuously visible, regardless
of the type of interaction with the launcher. Yet, they were
highly inaccurate when the target moved behind an
occluder, making errors as high as 70% of the duration of
the full scene. Furthermore, the amount of overestimation
did not appear to increase continuously as the distance of
the arrival point increased, revealing a sort of quantization
of the error that is difficult to reconcile with a simulation
theory of imagined movement.
This overestimation is difficult to explain by the
violations of causal interactions in the events presented, as a
large overestimation error was also present when the events
were causally correct (Contact condition). Although we
cannot be certain that, at a perceptive level, the computation
of causal interactions does not interfere with the prediction,
we found that the attributions of causality were dissociated
from prediction accuracy: participants were better at
predicting the position of an unseen object in conditions that
they judged causally worse.
It is thus more likely that the variations in the amplitude
of timing error have a source in the time necessary to
integrate the two successive movements at a purely
kinematic level. As such, this experimental situation might
reveal particularly interesting in the exploration of
movements integration.

4
2377

Overall, these results suggest that our ability to predict
future states in a partially occluded dynamical event is
severely limited and probably does not integrate our
knowledge about causal interactions.

Apparatus and Procedure. The same set-up and procedure
used in Experiment one were used for Experiment two, with
the exception that we did not run the visible target
condition, as performance in this condition was previously
shown to be accurate.

Experiment 2
An alternative explanation for the large delays observed in
experiment one, which maintains the tenet that humans
simulate physical events, could be that participants do
simulate physical events, but they do it even better than
required. We showed animation sequences in which balls
rolled over flat terrain. If participants integrate real physical
constraints they may not avoid considering friction in their
simulation, thus 'mentally slowing down' the speed of an
unseen object. This integration of a physical variable might
explain why participants delayed their reactions in
imagination. Although the size of the delays we found is not
easily reconciled with a simple integration of real friction
parameters given the terrain in our videos, the point remains
valid. Indeed Hubbard (1995) suggested mental analogs of
gravity and friction are directly integrated in our simulations
of object motion, systematically biasing certain position
estimations. So the time-to-arrival overestimation in our
experiment could reflect the fact that participants are
simulating a deceleration instead of using their memory of a
constant velocity.
We tested this possibility by modifying the context of the
previous sequences, so as to prime certain physical
representations. Specifically, we tilted the slope of the track
such that the balls would either roll downwards or upwards.
A previous study has shown that such a transformation can
bias memory for position in a representational momentum
paradigm (Bertamini, 1993).
If the prediction is indeed driven by inferred dynamical
properties, we expect the timing error to be modified
according to the orientation of the slope. If, instead, the
prediction is not affected by the integration of physical
variables and the error we found in Experiment one was due
to limits in how we can simulate physical events (if we have
such an ability), then we expect the timing error to persist
unaffected by the conditions of Experiment two.

Results
Data exclusion criteria and error calculations were as in
Experiment one.
Effect of the orientation of the slope on timing accuracy.
Figure 3 represents the variation of timing error as a
function of slope. As in Experiment one, an overestimation
of the time-to-arrival, increasing with response order, was
observed. There was no obvious difference in timing
accuracy between the different slope conditions, although a
slight decrease in timing error appeared in the slope
downward condition.
A two-ways repeated measures ANOVA performed on the
timing error, with speed and slope as independent variables,
revealed a main effect of slope (F2, 12 = 4.61 , p = 0.02).
Post-hoc t-tests with Bonferroni adjustment revealed that the
effect was carried by the difference between the Slope up
and Slope down conditions (Slope up - Slope down =
175.34, p = 0.02), whereas no difference was found between
the two tilted conditions and the horizontal condition.
Furthermore, the difference between these conditions only
occurred at one speed. Indeed, speed and slope interacted
(F4, 12 = 2,87, p = 0.03); post hoc analyses showed that the
difference between Slope up and Slope down was
significant only when the balls moved at 19°/s (post-hoc
Bonferroni-adjusted t-tests: 19°/s Slope up – Slope down =
300,86, p <0.01; 13°/s Slope up – Slope down= 102,38, p =
0.99; 26°/s Slope up – Slope down = 122,78, p = 0.94).

Method
Participants. Thirteen randomly chosen participants were
recruited for the experiment. Their ages ranged from 19 to
30 years (mean age = 22,9).
Stimuli. We used the animations with occluded target
movement from Experiment one, but modified such that the
slope of the track was altered by rotating the images 20°
either clockwise or counterclockwise. Thus, in experiment
two there were three groups of animation stimuli: two
containing balls rolling on an inclined plane, and a third
group containing the same sequences used in Experiment
one, with the balls rolling on a horizontal plane. This
configuration allowed us to determine how gravity modifies
the results of Experiment one. No vertical movement
distractor was present in this experiment.

Figure 3. Mean timing error (ms) for the three plane
rotations (Slope up, Slope Down, Horizontal). The
horizontal axis indicates the position of the bars on the
trajectory of the target.

Discussion
In this experiment, we tested whether the prediction of the
position of an unseen object was influenced by the

5
2378

integration of physical variables in a mental simulation of
the dynamic of the action.
We observed a slight effect of slope on participants'
predictions, but only at one velocity. While the effect is
compatible with the mental simulation of physical
parameters, it remains mysterious as to why it should occur
only in the 19°/s velocity condition. Thus, overall, it is
difficult to entirely reconcile the results with the assumption
that our mental models faithfully simulate the dynamics of
object movements.

As a general conclusion, our results point toward the
existence of several independent systems, one of which may
compute object velocity, and another that may compute
causal relations in the world. Although it may be tempting
to unite the two kinds of systems, our results cast doubt on
the existence of a common substrate for the extrapolation of
trajectories in dynamical sequences of movements. These
results also cast doubts on the existence of richly detailed
analog representations that could assist us in knowing and
understanding the physical world.

General Discussion

Acknowledgments

How does the cognitive system deal with incomplete
information about the trajectory of a moving object?
Research on mental imagery and on the prediction of motion
frequently appeals to mental analog representations as a
potential substrate for spatial computations and dynamics
understanding. Here we provided evidence that this
conception may not offer an adequate account of how we
represent dynamic stimuli.
We devised a task for motion prediction that directly
probed participants' ability to estimate the position of a
moving object online, as opposed to other known paradigms
of motion prediction which test memory for past positions
rather than fast prediction of future positions (e.g., Hubbard,
1995). With this task, we demonstrated that estimations of
time-to-arrival are inaccurate, with a large overestimation of
the time necessary for the target to reach a position
(confirming and expanding upon previous results obtained
with different paradigms; e.g., Gilden Blake & Hurst,
1995),. This result supports the claim that there is no
predictive mechanism to estimate an object's position when
it is occluded, when a direct visual evidence is lacking
(Keane & Pylyshyn, 2006).
Furthermore, by coupling this task with causal strength
judgment task, we showed that intuitive perceptions of
causality do not integrate with online prediction of imagined
object movements, casting further doubts on the existence of
a representation that integrates physical variables into an
analog simulation of objects and physical forces in the
world. Finally, we showed that the system responsible for
the overestimation error we revealed, takes into account
very obvious physical properties, such as gravity, only
haphazardly. This aspect of our results is difficult to
reconcile with evolutionary accounts of cognition, according
to which integration of gravity should be a prime candidate
for a variable that evolutionary history may have embodied
into a mental simulator.
How then can we account for the overestimation error we
observed? Some studies suggest that when we track a
moving object, our time perception for rapidly moving
stimuli is lengthened as compared to static stationary stimuli
(Brown, 1995; Kanai et al., 2006). Such a phenomenon
could account in part for the present results, and as a
consequence it could indicate that rather than extrapolating
object position by means of an analog mental simulation of
real physical forces, we use an internal clock to make an
only coarse estimate of when an invisible object should be
at a given location.

Our thanks to J. Mehler and the members of the Language,
Cognition & Development lab in Trieste for helping us in
designing and testing our experimental paradigm. This
research was supported by a MICINN PSI2009-08232 grant
to L.B.

References
Bertamini, M. (1993). Memory for position and dynamic
representations. Memory & Cognition, 21, 449-457.
Brown, S. W. (1995). Time, change, and motion: The effects
of stimulus movement on temporal perception. Perception
& Psychophysics, 57, 105-116.
Gilden, D., Blake, R, & Hurst, G. (1995), Neural adaptation
of imaginary visual motion. Cognitive Psychology, 28,
1-16.
Hubbard, T. L. (1995). Environmental invariants in the
representation of motion: Implied dynamics and
representation momentum, gravity, friction and centripetal
force. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 2, 322-338.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1963). Mental Models: Towards a
cognitive science of language, inference, and
consciousness. Cambridge University Press.
Kaiser, M. K., Proffitt, D. R., & Anderson, K. A. (1985).
Judgments of natural and anomalous trajectories in the
presence and absence of motion. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 11,
795-803.
Kanai, R., Paffen, C. L. E., Hogendoorn, H., & Verstraten, F.
A. J. (2006). Time dilation in dynamic visual display.
Journal of Vision, 6, 1421-1430.
Keane, B., P., & Pylyshyn, Z., W. (2006). Is motion
extrapolation employed in multiple object tracking?
Tracking as a low-level, non-predictive function.
Cognitive Psychology, 52(4), 346-368.
Kosslyn, S.M. (1996). Image and Brain: The resolution of
the imagery debate. MIT Press, London, England.
Leslie, A. M. (1994). ToMM, ToBy, and agency: core
architecture and domain specificity. In L. Hirschfeld & S.
Gelman (Eds.), Mapping the Mind; Domain specificity in
cognition and culture. Cambridge University Press.
Premack, D. (1990). The infant’s theory of self-propelled
objects. Cognition, 36, 1-16.
Regan, D. (1992). Visual judgments and misjudgments in
cricket and the art of flight. Perception, 21, 91-115.
Schwartz, D. L. (1999). Physical imagery: Kinematic versus
dynamic models. Cognitive Psychology, 38, 433-464.

6
2379

Shepard, R. N. (2001). Perceptual-cognitive universals as
reflections of the world. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
24, 581-601.
Shepard, R. N., & Cooper, L. (1982). Mental Images and
Their Transformations. MIT Press.

7
2380

