UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Optimizing Learning Environments: An Individual Difference Approach to Learning and
Transfer

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6m76f1fv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Belenky, Daniel
Nokes, Timothy

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Optimizing Learning Environments: An Individual Difference Approach to
Learning and Transfer
Daniel M. Belenky (dmb83@pitt.edu)
Timothy J. Nokes (nokes@pitt.edu)
Learning Research and Development Center
University of Pittsburgh, 3939 O’Hara Street
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
manipulations of task goals through instructions can change
the ways students learn, similar to the effect of task
structure. If directly manipulating task goals produces
similar effects, it would offer a more direct way of
encouraging students towards desired learning outcomes
(whether towards transfer or skill). However, it is possible
that achievement goals within a learning activity are not
under conscious control, and task structure has more
influence on how a student engages than instructions that
attempt to prompt a particular achievement goal. It is also
possible that task structure and task goals operate
independently, leading to a three-way interaction in the
adoption of achievement goals based on students’ prior
dispositions. This study explores these possibilities.

Abstract
Prior work has found that the type of learning activity (direct
instruction or invention) interacts with achievement goals
(mastery or performance-oriented) such that invention tasks
can help facilitate mastery goal adoption and knowledge
transfer (Belenky & Nokes, 2009). In the current study, we
investigated how robust the effect is, and whether explicit
manipulations of the task goals can produce a similar effect.
We conducted an experiment with 98 college students in
which achievement goals were measured, while task goals
and task structure were manipulated between subjects. Results
indicated that task structure was generally a more effective
way of influencing which achievement goals are adopted
within a learning activity. However, task goals that promoted
an evaluative context interfered with transfer for masteryoriented learners from invention activities. The results are
interpreted in relation to theories of regulatory fit and multiple
goal hierarchies.

Background
Research on achievement goals has focused on two main
aims; classifying what the goals are and then correlating
those with predictors and outcomes. The prevailing
classification is a 2 x 2 framework that has been wellvalidated (Elliot & McGregor, 2001). This framework
separates the evaluative criterion (mastery or performance)
from the valence (approach or avoidance), which results in
four separable goals (mastery-approach, mastery-avoidance,
performance-approach, performance-avoidance). Mastery
goals refer to ones in which a person is basing his evaluation
on the skill or competence he is trying to develop (that is, in
comparison to an expectation or prior ability), while
performance goals refer to evaluating oneself based on a
normative standard (that is, in comparison to others).
Approach goals refer to seeking out positive outcomes,
while avoidance goals refer to averting negative ones. For
example, a mastery-approach goal is one in which a person
is seeking to improve his ability or knowledge, based on an
internally-referenced criterion (“My aim is to completely
master the material in this class”), while a performanceavoidance goal is one in which a person is seeking to not
look bad compared to others (“My aim is to avoid doing
worse than other students;” see Elliot & McGregor, 2001).
Students can have different levels of each of these goals,
and studies have validated that these four goals are separate
factors (Elliot & McGregor, 2001). Because we are most
interested in studying how different paths of successful
learning affect what knowledge is gained, our work focuses
on mastery-approach and performance-approach goals.
Mastery-approach (MAP) goals have been correlated with
a host of positive outcomes, such as intrinsic motivation,
interest, better self-regulation, and deeper strategy use.

Keywords: learning; transfer; skill acquisition; motivation;
achievement goals.

Student’s achievement goals have a large influence on their
behaviors and experiences in academic settings. The
literature surrounding Achievement Goal theory shows that
these goals lead to very different patterns of affect, interest
and achievement (e.g., Harackiewicz et al., 2005). However,
this literature has not focused on how the goals influence
what is learned. That is, although “achievement” is
frequently measured as an outcome, it is almost always done
at a coarse-grain level, such as final grades in a course. It is
not clear how different achievement goals (mastery versus
performance) are related to different kinds of learning, such
as learning procedural skills, simple facts, or conceptual
knowledge.
To begin to address this gap, Belenky & Nokes (2009)
examined how achievement goals impact the type of
knowledge gained from different kinds of instruction. That
study found that mastery-oriented learners do better on
transfer measures, regardless of whether the masteryorientation came from a stable predisposition or whether the
open-ended structure of an “invention” task led to masteryoriented feelings and goals in the specific context.
Conversely, performance-oriented learners did better on
skill acquisition when the instruction seemed to match their
goals, by presenting a well-structured, simple task through
direct instruction.
This initial work has provided evidence that task structure
interacts with existing achievement goals to influence
learning. In the current work we examine whether direct

459

However, MAP goals are generally unrelated to
achievement scores (usually operationalized as exam scores
or final grades). Performance-approach (PAP) goals have
been correlated with some positive outcomes, such as
perseverance, task engagement, enjoyment and topic
interest, as well as some negative outcomes, such as test
anxiety, poor help-seeking and, most importantly for the
current study, shallow cognitive strategies. PAP goals are
also positively correlated with achievement scores (see
Elliot, 1999 for a review). One potential reason that MAP
goals are unrelated to achievement scores but PAP goals
correlate positively could be due to the type of knowledge
being assessed on achievement measures. Scores on a final
exam, for example, may reflect a person’s ability to recall
factual information (a performance-oriented outcome) more
than a deep conceptual understanding (a mastery-oriented
outcome).
Belenky & Nokes (2009) examined the possibility that
different types of knowledge were being generated due to
students’ existing achievement goals. This work found that
MAP goals led to more flexible use of knowledge on a
transfer assessment, while PAP goals led to better
procedural skill with a formula. That study also showed that
an ill-structured, invention-based learning task promoted
mastery-goal adoption. This goal adoption was particularly
beneficial for those who entered the study low in MAP
goals; this group performed one standard deviation better
than low-MAP counterparts who completed a wellstructured, direct instruction-based approach.
The paradigm and tasks used in the current work are
based on previous work on “Preparation for Future
Learning” (Belenky & Nokes, 2009; Schwartz & Martin,
2004). This paradigm allows one to measure a person’s
ability to use knowledge acquired in one situation to help
learn in a new situation. The work that established this
paradigm contrasted two types of learning activities, direct
instruction and invention (Schwartz & Martin, 2004). The
direct instruction condition was similar to a well-structured,
“tell-and-practice” style of pedagogy, where a student is
shown a method and asked to use it to solve similar
problems. The invention activity was modeled on a form of
“discovery learning” where students are asked to construct
their own knowledge in an open-ended, ill-structured
problem. All students were given a subsequent transfer
problem on an extension of the concept. Half of the students
from each of the group were given a learning resource (a
worked example) embedded in the assessment, while half
were not (see Figure 1). They found that only those
students who had invented and were given the worked
example showed large improvements in the ability to solve a
transfer problem. Belenky & Nokes (2009) found evidence
that this benefit was due, at least in part, to the adoption of
different goals. Support for this view was based on a
questionnaire given right after the learning activity showing
that students given invention activities were more concerned
about their understanding of the concepts than those given
tell-and-practice activities, as well as a benefit in transfer

Invention

Tell-and-Practice

Worked Example in
Test

Transfer problem

Figure 1. The general Preparation for Future Learning
paradigm which measures the ability to
transfer from an initial learning experience to
a later one.

performance among those students who entered the study
low in MAP goals but performed invention activities as
opposed to those who performed tell-and-practice activities.
The current study further explores the issue of how
achievement goals influence and are influenced by different
task structures, by using the same tasks and adding task
instructions to try and directly manipulate the achievement
goals students adopt. We have evidence that goal adoption,
whether due to individual dispositional differences or task
structure, influences the form of the knowledge gained from
instruction. The robustness of this effect is being examined,
by adding the factor of task instructions to the framework.
Hypotheses
We are investigating how explicit, task-based goal
instructions influence the effects of existing achievement
goals and task structure on learning and transfer. We predict
that the task structure will have a larger effect than the taskbased instructions on which achievement goals students
adopt and their impact on learning and transfer. However,
there are several possibilities for interesting interactions
between task structure, task goals, and existing achievement
motivations. We are most interested in exploring whether
there is evidence for a “multiple-goals” framework
(Harackiewicz et al., 2002) or a “regulatory fit” viewpoint
(Higgins, 2005).
The multiple goals hypothesis states that a mix of
performance-approach and mastery-approach goals is
optimal for learning (Harackiewicz et al., 2002). If this
hypothesis is correct then we would expect that crossing
mastery and performance goals would promote the best
overall learning. Alternatively, a “regulatory fit” view states
that the alignment of task structure, task-based goals and
dispositional orientations should facilitate the best learning
(Higgins, 2005). This suggests that matching students’ goals
with instructions that support pursuit of those goals would
improve learning, (e.g., mastery-oriented achievement goals
with invention tasks and mastery-oriented instructions). If
this is the case, we would also expect to see that
incongruous goals would harm learning. We will examine
these possibilities by assessing three-way interactions

460

between existing goals, task structure and instructions on
different learning outcomes.
We also predict replications of our basic prior findings
that invention activities promote more mastery-oriented
learning behaviors and feelings than tell-and-practice. We
also predict that existing mastery-approach goals will lead
to better transfer, while performance-approach goals will
lead to better performance on a skill measurement.

The structure of the standardization activity was similar to
the mean deviation activity. The invention group was asked
to evaluate which of two world records was “more
shattered,” given two small data sets and the corresponding
world record for each. The tell-and-practice group was
given the exact same problem to solve, but was first shown
how to graphically arrive at a solution, by divvying up a
visual representation of the distributions through a worked
example.
We manipulated task goals through instructions.
Immediately below the tell-and-practice or invention
instructions, participants saw instructions about the purpose
of the task. These were constructed to spur participants
towards either a mastery or performance orientation while
working on the learning activities. The motivation goal
instructions were modeled on previous work that had
experimentally manipulated goals (i.e., Elliott & Dweck,
1988; Elliot & Harackiewicz, 1996). The mastery goal
instructions were: “Many people see problems like this one
as a challenge, and feel like they are developing their skill to
solve these types of problems. While working on this
problem, you may make mistakes and feel a little confused
at times, but in the end you will have learned some things
and developed your skill to solve problems like this one.”
The performance goal instructions were: “This problem
assesses your mathematical ability. People who can solve
this problem generally have the capability to solve similar
problems. While working on this activity, you can gauge
how good you are at these types of math problems.” These
were presented underlined, to make them more salient.

Methods
This study closely followed the methods and materials of
prior studies (Belenky & Nokes, 2009; Schwartz & Martin,
2004). Participants completed a pre-test, went through a
series of learning activities on basic statistical concepts, and
then took a post-test in a 2-hour laboratory session. They
were given questionnaires at the beginning, middle, and end
of the experiment.
Participants
Ninety-eight undergraduates from the University of
Pittsburgh participated in this study (M = 19.4 years old, SD
= 2.5 years) in exchange for course credit.
Design and Materials
This study had a 2 (task structure: invention or tell-andpractice) x 2 (task goal: mastery-oriented or performanceoriented instructions) between-subjects design. Materials
were presented as packets in binders. These packets
consisted of an initial questionnaire; a pre-test; learning
activities (with an activity questionnaire after the first one);
a post-test; and final questionnaires, including a
demographic sheet.

Test Materials
The pre-test consisted of three items: a skill measure, a data
representation problem, and a transfer problem. The posttest contained isomorphic versions of these problems, as
well as an adaptive use and a qualitative reasoning problem.
We will only focus on the transfer and skill measures here.
The skill measures presented small data sets and explicitly
asked the participants to calculate mean, mode, median and
mean deviation. The transfer problems were both word
problems that presented descriptive statistics for two data
distributions and one exceptional score from each, and
asked which individual score was more impressive. While
similar to the standardization activity, this problem assesses
transfer because it requires reasoning from descriptive
statistics, not raw data, and because simpler heuristic
processing would lead to an incorrect answer (i.e., reasoning
about range, or because one value is higher than the other).
The skill measure was scored dichotomously as a 0 if
incorrect, while a 1 was awarded if the student flawlessly
used the formula. All other problems were coded as a 0 if
incorrect, 1 if conceptually correct but there was a
computational error, and 2 if the answer was conceptually
and computationally correct. For the transfer problem, this
meant calculating standardized scores and using them to
decide which value was more impressive.
The test also included a worked example on how to
calculate a standardized score. This was presented just like

Learning Materials
The learning materials consisted of one activity on mean
deviation, instruction on the correct calculation of mean
deviation (a narrated PowerPoint video), and then a new
activity on standardization. The first learning activity
presented four different data sets representing the spread of
a number of pitches thrown by different pitching machines.
The students’ task was to decide which of the machines is
the most reliable. The invention and tell-and-practice
students both attempted this problem, but the instructions
each received was different. The tell-and-practice group was
given a worked example demonstrating how to calculate
mean deviation immediately prior to attempting to solve this
problem. The invention group was not given this worked
example, and was instructed “Your task is to invent a
procedure for computing a quantity that expresses the
variability for each of the pitching machines and decide
which is most reliable. There is no single way to do this, but
you have to use the same procedure for each machine, so it
is a fair comparison.” Both groups were given access to
scrap paper and a calculator during this activity.
The video demonstrated a brief introduction on variability
before walking through the calculation of mean deviation in
a worked example. This was followed by two simple
problems to work on, with solutions demonstrated to make
sure students understood the basics of the formula.

461

the other test problems, and described a situation in which
one would want to calculate a standardized score to compare
values from different samples. The text then introduced the
formula to do so and computed the values for the data
presented. This was followed by a second, very simple data
set, and asked the students to use the formula on these data.
The worked example always came at least two problems
before the transfer problem, so if a student used the formula
on the transfer problem, it was because they noticed that it
applied and could recall it, not due to temporal contiguity.

by looking at the interactions of existing goals, learning
tasks, and instructions.
Motivational effects on questionnaires
On the activity questionnaire, administered directly after
the first learning problem, there were telling differences
between responses from the invention and tell-and-practice
groups (see Table 1). Namely, students who invented felt
more concerned with understanding, challenged, and
frustrated, Fs (1, 94) > 6.87, ps < .01. While frustration is
generally considered a negative outcome, it may signal to a
student a lack of understanding that drives further cognitive
engagement. Notably, there were no differences due to our
task goal manipulation, nor interactions. This is evidence
that that the structure of the task led to very different
experiences for the learner, both in terms of affective
response and goals adopted, and that this structure has more
influence on goal adoption than explicit instructions about
the purpose of the task.
We also asked a similar set of reflective questions at the
end of the experiment. The only observed significant
differences were that students who completed invention
tasks reported being able to be more creative, while those
who received mastery instructions reported enjoying the
activity more. There was also an interaction between the
experimental manipulations on the item “it was a challenge
to come up with the correct solution.” This interaction was
driven by the lower ratings on this item provided by those
who completed the tell-and-practice activities with
performance- oriented task goal. This manipulation seems to
have led students to feel less challenged, even compared to
the students who completed the same activity but were told
that the task could help them improve. The results from the
reflective questionnaire seem to suggest that manipulations
of goals do not produce large differences in students’
conscious, reflective experience of learning.

Motivation Measures
To assess achievement goals, we used the Achievement
Goal Questionnaire (AGQ; Elliot & McGregor, 2001). This
12-item scale has 3 items for each of the 4 achievement goal
constructs. We focus only on mastery-approach and
performance-approach goals in this study. The questions
were phrased to be specifically about math classes, and were
assessed on a 7-point Likert scale. Cronbach’s alphas for
each of the scales was high (MAP = .839, PAP = .932).
There was also an activity questionnaire, which was the
same as that used in Belenky & Nokes (2009). This 8-item
measure asked about student’s focus and affect while
working on the first learning activity. At the end of the
study, the participants completed additional questionnaires –
the AGQ again, and a questionnaire we developed to assess
how students reflected on and our goal manipulations.
Procedure
The study was run in groups of up to six participants in a
two-hour laboratory session, with all participants working
individually. Inside the packet was: an initial questionnaire;
a pre-test; a learning activity; the activity questionnaire;
space to work on problems presented in the video; another
learning activity; a post-test; a final set of questionnaires; a
demographics sheet. Participants took as long as they
needed to complete the questionnaires, with no one taking
longer than three minutes for any one questionnaire. Both
learning activity and the video took fifteen minutes each.
Participants were given five minutes for each test item.

Interactions
We predicted that we would see three-way interactions
between existing achievement goals, task structure, and task
goals, specifically looking at performance-approach goals
(PAP) when considering skill acquisition and masteryapproach goals (MAP) for transfer. To assess the effect of
existing achievement goals, we performed a median split
within each experimental group on the performanceapproach and mastery-approach construct scores, based on
the initial questionnaire, administered at the start of the
experiment. We used the mean deviation skill measurement
as the dependant variable in a 2 (task structure) x 2 (task

Results
Our hypotheses focused on the conceptual replication of
earlier findings, as well as exploring how explicitly
manipulating task goals and task structure would influence
learning. First, we assess whether task structure and
instructions influenced students’ self-reported experiences
during the learning activity. Then, we examine the
competing “regulatory fit” and “multiple-goals” hypotheses

Table 1. Activity questionnaire items with differences between Tell-and-Practice (TP) and Invent. † p < .1, * p < .05 .
Questionnaire Item
Invent
TP
Effect Size d
I was concerned with how well I understood the procedure I was using.* 3.7 (1.2)
3.0 (1.4)
0.54
I was concerned that the procedure I was using was not correct.*
4.0 (1.1)
2.5 (1.4)
1.17
I felt engaged. †
3.1 (1.3)
3.6 (1.0)
-0.37
I felt frustrated.*
3.5 (1.4)
2.6 (1.3)
0.65
I felt challenged. *
3.7 (1.1)
2.8 (1.2)
0.86

462

Adjusted Transfer Score

Adjusted Transfer Score

2

Low MAP Goals

1.5
1
0.5
0
Performance

Mastery

Tell-and-Practice

Performance

Mastery

2

High MAP goals

1.5
1
0.5
0
Performance

Mastery

Performance

Tell-and-Practice

Invent

Mastery

Invent

Figure 2. Adjusted transfer score (out of 2, post-test minus pre-test), for those below median in mastery-approach goals
(MAP) in the left graph, and those above median in mastery-approach goals on the right, +/- 1 S.E.
context, changes the pattern of learning a mastery-oriented
student might normally engage in, harming their ability to
flexibly transfer their knowledge.

goal instructions) x 2 (high or low performance-approach)
ANOVA. There was no effect of instructional goal, F (1,
88) < 1, ns, but there was an effect of task structure, F
(1,88) = 4.09, p < .05, with tell-and-practice leading to
better performance (77% correct) than invention (57%
correct). There was also a significant effect for PAP goals;
those high in PAP goals (77% correct) did better than those
who entered low in such goals (56% correct, F (1, 88) =
4.59, p < .05. However, the experimental manipulations did
not interact with existing goals, nor was the three-way
interaction significant, Fs (1, 88) < 2.48, ns. For learning a
simple skill, the dispositional goal of being able to perform
leads to better acquisition, as does a well-structured learning
task.
To look at transfer, an adjusted score was calculated. This
value is the post-test score minus pre-test score on two
isomorphic transfer problems, which were counterbalanced.
Participants who were at ceiling on pre-test were taken out
of subsequent analyses of transfer, as they already had
knowledge of the formula, and when it applies. No effect of
either task structure or task goals on transfer performance
was found. Invention activities produced the same level of
transfer as tell-and-practice, as did mastery task goals and
performance task goals, and there was no interaction
between these factors, Fs (1,70) < 1.16, ns. However,
students high in MAP goals did better (M = 1.36, SD = .84)
than those low in MAP goals (M = .90, SD = .94) on the
measure of transfer, F (1, 70) = 5.85, p < .05. When paired
with the result that PAP goals lead to better skill, this is
clear evidence that existing student goals affect the type of
learning students exit instruction with. There was also a
significant three-way interaction, F (1, 70) = 4.36, p < .05
(see Figure 2). This interaction is due to the invent structure
and performance task goals condition behaving differently
than all of the other conditions in terms of the effect of
existing MAP goals. In the other conditions, high MAP
goals produce better transfer than low MAP goals, as per the
main effect. However, within the invention/performanceoriented cell, those low in MAP goals did slightly better
than those high in MAP goals (Ms = 1.18, .9, SDs = .98, 88,
respectively). It appears that an ill-structured environment
like the invention activity, when presented in an evaluative

Discussion
This study examined whether explicit task goals would
affect learning the same way task structures have been
shown to. The evidence shows that they do not. Task
structure was a bigger determinant in the learning outcome,
as evidenced by the main effect of a well-structured domain
helping with skill acquisition, and the difference in goal
adoption on the activity questionnaire, which showed
differences based on task structure, but not based on the task
goals received. It seems that telling students which goal to
adopt is not a particularly effective way to change learning
behaviors or affect, and that task structure is a better way to
change a student’s focus during an instructional event.
The results provide strong evidence that existing student
achievement goals change what a student learns during the
course of instruction. Those high in performance-approach
goals did better on skill measures, regardless of which task
structure they learned with, while those high in masteryapproach goals did better on the transfer measure. These
differences on their own are illuminating in light of the null
effects for mastery-approach goals on achievement
measures (see Harackiewicz et al., 2002). This may be due
to the types of measures used when achievement is
measured in schools. A grade on the test at the end of the
semester may reflect factual knowledge that a performanceoriented student has been more focused on attaining than the
deep understanding a mastery-oriented student focused on.
Finally, this work also examined whether having multiple
goals would help one to learn, or if incongruous goals
would produce a poor “fit” and interfere with successful
learning. Within a given outcome (i.e., skill or transfer), we
do not see evidence that multiple goals are best. On the skill
measure, we see no interaction between existing goals, task
structure and instructional goals. For transfer, we see
evidence for a “regulatory fit” model, where a task goal that
did not fit with the task structure and an existing
achievement goal harmed learning. The focus on ability
created by performance-oriented instructions may have

463

changed the way in which these students would have
normally processed the material, which, based on the
performance of their equivalent group who received
mastery-oriented instructions, and from our prior study,
would have performed much better. The evaluative context
brought on by the performance instructions appears to have
fundamentally changed the way these students engaged in
the learning activity, producing worse transfer. Though we
have discussed this in terms of regulatory fit, this adverse
effect could also be due to anxiety, or the use of simpler
learning strategies related with performance goals (Elliot,
1999).

(Hatano & Inagaki, 1986). If the multiple-goals viewpoint is
correct, a critical question left to examine is if students
flexibly switch between these goals, and how they do so. It
may be that the time course is a critical factor in explaining
why, across a semester, multiple goals may be optimal. A
more fine-grained, microgenetic study of when and how
each goal contributes could shine light on this possibility.
Future work should also further explore the mechanisms
by which achievement goals affect the type of learning
done. It could be due to different representations used and
formed and/or different types of learning strategies (i.e.,
self-explanation versus rehearsal). Achievement goals
remain an important individual difference to consider, and
one that could greatly impact how we can use cognitive
science to improve education.

Conclusion
The study of student motivation has much to offer
researchers focused on how students learn. It seems naïve to
believe that the goal a student has in a learning environment
does not influence the form and utility of the knowledge
generated, and this line of work is bearing this out
empirically. Specifically, research has found that the way
information is represented and processed will have an effect
on how that information is used to solve new problems and
learn new concepts (e.g., Nokes & Ohlsson, 2005). A
student’s goals for a learning environment can be a catalyst
for different types of processing and representations, as
demonstrated by performance-approach goals predicting
performance on measures of skill and mastery-approach
goals predicting performance on transfer tests.
That we can reliably show these differences in a
laboratory setting seems to be evidence that these results
have high external validity, as student goals should be even
more salient in authentic academic environments than in the
lab. Also, while our attempts to manipulate these goals did
not produce effects similar to existing achievement goals,
stronger interventions conducted over longer periods of time
may have very profound effects on student learning,
especially when they succeed in changing the goal itself
(i.e., Blackwell, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2007).
Within a task, it appears that making the learning goals,
task structure, and instructions as coherent as possible
promotes better learning. Those high in mastery-approach
goals who invented were disrupted by instructions which
placed the task into a more evaluative context. While the
results within a given learning measure (e.g., skill or
transfer) do not support a “multiple-goals” viewpoint, the
study as a whole does. The separation of skill and transfer
seems to illustrate one potential mechanism in support of a
multiple-goals viewpoint, which claims that a combination
of performance-approach and mastery-approach goals is
optimal (Harackiewicz et al., 2002). Our work illustrates
that having both goals would allow for the development of
efficient skills at routine aspects (i.e., performance-approach
goals lead to improved formula use) as well as innovative
ability to use the underlying concept (i.e., mastery-approach
goals lead to improved transfer). This combination of
efficiency and innovation is hypothesized to be necessary
for adaptive expertise, a desired outcome of education

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation,
Grant Number SBE-0354420 to the Pittsburgh Science of Learning
Center (http://www.learnlab.org).

References
Belenky, D.M., & Nokes, T.J. (2009a). Motivation and transfer:
The role of achievement goals in preparation for future learning.
In N.A. Taatgen & H. van Rijn (Eds.), Proceedings of the 31st
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 11631168).
Blackwell, L.S., Trzesniewski, K.H., & Dweck, C.S. (2007).
Implicit theories of intelligence predict achievement across and
adolescent transition: A longitudinal study and an intervention.
Child Development, 78 (1), 246-263.
Elliot, A.J, & Harackiewicz, J.M. (1996). Approach and avoidance
achievement goals and intrinsic motivation: a meditational
analysis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70 (3),
461-475.
Elliot, A.J., & McGregor, H.A. (2001). A 2 X 2 achievement goal
framework. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
80(3), 501-519.
Elliot, A.J. (1999). Approach and avoidance motivation and
achievement goals. Educational Psychologist, 34 (3), 169-189.
Elliott, E.S., & Dweck, C.S. (1988). Goals: An approach to
motivation and achievement. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 54 (1), 5-12.
Harackiewicz, J.M., Barron, K.E., Pintrich, P.R., Elliot, A.J., &
Thrash, T.M. (2002). Revision of achievement goal theory:
Necessary and illuminating. Journal of Educational Psychology,
94 (3), 638-645.
Hatano, G., & Inagaki, K. (1986). Two courses of expertise. In H.
Stevenson, H. Azuma, & K. Hakuta (Eds.), Child development
and education in Japan (pp. 262-272). New York: Freeman.
Higgins, E.T. (2005). Value from regulatory fit. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 14 (4), 209-213.
Nokes, T. J., & Ohlsson, S. (2005). Comparing multiple paths to
mastery: What is learned? Cognitive Science, 29, 769-796.
Schwartz, D.L., & Martin, T. (2004). Inventing to prepare for
future learning: The hidden efficiency of encouraging original
student production in statistics instruction. Cognition and
Instruction, 22(2), 129-184.

464

