UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Pedagogical Cues Influence Children's Inductive Inference and Exploratory Play

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4jx5s52x

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Butler, Lucas
Markman, Ellen

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Pedagogical Cues Influence Children’s Inductive Inference and Exploratory Play
Lucas P. Butler (lpbutler@stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology, Stanford University
Building 420, 450 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA 94305

Ellen M. Markman (markman@stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology, Stanford University
Building 420, 450 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA 94305

Abstract
A hallmark of human cognition is the ability to learn from
others—both via language and via non-linguistic cues.
Children are sensitive to actions done for their benefit,
treating pedagogical acts as conveying important information
(Csibra & Gergely, 2009). The current research tapped
children’s exploration to investigate whether seeing a causal
property either demonstrated pedagogically or produced
accidentally influences children’s expectations about that
property’s extension to other kind members. Experiment 1
found striking differences in 3- and 4-year-olds’ exploration
when a property was demonstrated intentionally rather than
accidentally. Experiment 2 replicated this effect while also
investigating possible influences of the emotional valence of
causal events and the salience of property information. These
experiments reveal that preschoolers use pedagogical cues to
make inferences about generalizability and guide their
exploration.
Keywords: Pedagogy; Exploratory Play; Inductive Inference;
Causal Learning.

Introduction
One fundamental aspect of human cognition is our ability to
learn from and teach others. Our abilities to read others’
intentions and engage in collaborative learning may provide
the necessary foundation for human culture, from law and
government to industry and education (Gergely & Csibra,
2005; Tomasello, 1999). Children’s understanding of
intentions is inherent to many domains, including word
learning (Baldwin, 1991, 1993a, 1993b) and imitation
(Carpenter, Akhtar, & Tomasello, 1998; Meltzoff, 1995).
Recent work has elaborated on the importance of explicit
teaching and demonstration, which fundamentally rely on
children’s ability to read intentions. Tomasello and
Carpenter (2007) argue that “instructed learning” is key to
acquiring cultural knowledge, such as what we call objects
and how we use them, and Csibra and Gergely (2006, 2009)
suggest that humans have adapted a faculty for “natural
pedagogy,” enabling efficient social learning. On this
account, children should treat pedagogical cues (e.g., eye
gaze, pointing) as signaling that information is not only
important, but that it is culturally agreed-upon and
generalizable.
Indeed, pedagogical cues appear to influence processing
of information even in infancy. For example, 8-month-olds

expect eye gaze to be directed at referent objects when
accompanied by pedagogical cues (Csibra & Volein, 2008).
Further, pointing leads 9-month-olds to privilege a novel
objects’ identity over current location in memory (Yoon,
Johnson, & Csibra, 2008). And when 14-month-olds see a
person pedagogically convey affective information (e.g.,
disgust) about an object, they treat it as a stable property of
the object (Gergely, Egyed, & Király, 2007), and expect
others to react similarly towards it (Egyed, Király, Krekó,
Kupán, & Gergely, 2007).
Thus, even infants treat pedagogy as communicating
important information about novel objects. However, it is as
yet unclear whether children take such information as
generalizable to a kind, rather than merely to a particular
object. Assessing whether novel information should be
generalized to a kind is critical in category and concept
formation, where children rely on others to impart often
otherwise unknowable information (Gelman, 2009; Harris,
2002; Harris & Koenig, 2006). Such knowledge
transmission is often linguistic, using language that refers to
kinds and categories, and children make a variety of
inductive inferences on the basis of kind-referring language.
For example, children take labels as referring to kinds that
share nonobvious properties, and generalize novel properties
on the basis of shared labels—which signal shared category
membership—rather than perceptual similarity (e.g., Booth
& Waxman, 2002; Gelman & Coley, 1990; Gelman &
Markman, 1986, 1987). Moreover, recent work has
demonstrated that preschoolers expect novel objects that
share a label to share a novel causal property, and
selectively explore those objects more when that property
fails to extend to additional kind members (Schulz,
Standing, & Bonawitz, 2008). Children also understand that
information conveyed in a generic statement (e.g., “dogs
bark”) has greater inductive potential than information
conveyed non-generically (e.g., “this dog barks”) (Cimpian
& Markman, 2008; Gelman, Star, & Flukes, 2002;
Hollander, Gelman, & Raman, 2009), and information
conveyed generically becomes more central to their kind
representations (Cimpian & Markman, 2009).
However, it is important to note that while linguistic cues
such as kind labels are powerful in driving generalization,
they are not always used pedagogically. One can use object
or kind labels without having any intention of pedagogically
conveying information, and certainly without intending such
information to be taken as generalizable. Thus it might be

1417

important for children to make use of non-linguistic cues
when assessing the generalizability of novel information.
Indeed, Gergely and Csibra (2009) suggest that at the core
of generic knowledge transmission is pedagogical intent—
an intent to explicitly impart new information to a
recipient—and that children are sensitive to whether or not
information is communicated for the purpose of teaching
them something important. Similar to a Gricean view of
communication (cf. Clark, 1996; Sperber and Wilson,
1986), in which we expect speakers to be clear and
informative, children may infer that when an adult
intentionally communicates information for their benefit, it
is because the adult intends to teach them something
relevant and important, and thus children may use
pedagogical cues to gauge generalizability. Given this, we
hypothesize that, even given a shared label, children may
make stronger inferences about the whether a property is
generalizable when it is demonstrated pedagogically,
treating it as more conceptually central and inferring that
other kind members should share that property.
To test this, our methodology builds on prior research
which has established that exploratory play is a window
onto children’s implicit inductive processes. Having learned
that an exemplar of a kind has a causal property, young
children, even infants, explore more upon encountering
exemplars that share a kind label, but which lack that
property (Baldwin, Markman, & Melartin, 1993; Schulz et
al., 2008). In the current research, we tapped children’s
natural exploration to investigate whether, even given
objects that share a kind label, they would form different
expectations about generalizability depending on whether a
novel property was demonstrated intentionally or produced
accidentally. If so, then when a property is intentionally
demonstrated for them, but fails to obtain for other kind
members, children should explore more than when that
same property is produced accidentally.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1 we taught children a name for a novel
object, and either intentionally demonstrated or accidentally
produced a novel causal property (magnetically picking up
paperclips). We then presented children with an identical set
of exemplars with the same label but which lacked the
property (they were not magnetic), and let them play.

Methods
Participants Thirty-two three-year-olds (16 girls; M = 42
months; range = 36-46 months) and 32 four-year-olds (16
girls; M = 54 months; range = 48-61 months) from a
university preschool participated. Children came from
predominantly middle- and upper-middle-class families,
representing a variety of ethnic groups. Children were
randomly assigned to condition, equating for gender and
age.

Materials The novel objects were small wooden blocks.
The active block had magnetic tape on one end, while the
inert blocks had non-magnetic tape. All were covered with
black tape, with green tape covering the magnetic/nonmagnetic end.
Procedure All children were tested in a private room in
their preschool by a trained experimenter. Children first
learned a novel label (blicket) for the active block. When
asked for the blicket, all children successfully selected it
from 4 distracters on two trials, without error.
After learning the word, children did a short distracter
task (making paper houses). This served two goals. First, it
distanced the word-learning, which was necessarily
pedagogical, from the demonstration. Otherwise, children
may have remained in a pedagogical “mindset.” Second, it
provided a plausible excuse for placing a pile of paperclips
on the table.
The experimenter then started to clean up the toys. He put
away each the distracters saying, “Let’s put this away. He
then picked up the active block, and again said “Let’s put
this away,” which served as an implicit invitation to attend
to the blicket In the intentional condition, he said, “Look,
watch this!” He deliberately placed the it on the paperclips,
picked it up (with paperclips attached), and looked at it,
saying “Hmmm” in a neutral tone. He then placed it next to
the paperclips. Next, he placed 10 inert blocks on the table,
saying, “here are some blickets.” The accidental condition
was identical, except that the experimenter appeared to
“accidentally” drop the block on the paperclips as he was
putting it away, exclaiming “Oops!” As in the intentional
condition, he picked it up with paperclips attached, looked
at it, said, “Hmmm,” and placed it next to the paperclips.
The experimenter then told the child to “go ahead and
play” while he left the table and sat facing away from the
child for 60 seconds. Upon returning, the experimenter
introduced a puppet and asked the child, “Can you tell Mr.
Monkey about blickets?”

Results
None of the 3-year-olds explored the blickets in the
accidental condition (leading to zero variance in that cell of
the design), precluding parametric analyses. We analyzed 3and 4-year-olds’ responses separately, using non-parametric
Mann-Whitney U and χ2 tests.
4-year-olds Although there were no differences across
conditions in whether or not 4-year-old children explored
the blickets, they showed striking differences across
conditions in the nature of that exploration, specifically the
amount of time they spent exploring and the number of
times they tried to elicit the property from the inert blickets.
When 4-year-olds saw the property demonstrated
intentionally, they spent more time trying to pick up
paperclips with the blickets (M = 46.94 s, SD = 21.38) than
when they saw it produced accidentally (M = 24.69 s, SD =
25.02), U = 66.0, N = 32, p = 0.019.

1418

Four-year-olds also made more attempts to pick up
paperclips with the blickets (M = 9.25, SD = 7.62) in the
intentional condition than the accidental condition (M =
2.94, SD = 3.45), U = 61.5, N = 32, p = 0.011.
3-year-olds Three-year-olds showed an analogous effect of
condition, which was even starker than for the 4-year-olds.
In the accidental condition, zero out of 16 children explored
at all, compared with 8 out of 16 in the intentional
condition, χ2(1, N = 32) = 10.67, p = 0.001. Thus, despite
lower overall levels of exploration, 3-year-olds were
sensitive to how the property was produced, and this guided
their inferences and exploration

Discussion
These results provide compelling evidence that children use
pedagogical cues to guide their inductive inference and
exploration. When 4-year-old children were deliberately
shown a causal property of a novel object in a pedagogical
manner, they explored more upon discovering that the
property did not obtain for additional kind members,
indicating that they expected the property to generalize.
Furthermore, 3-year-olds explored only in the Intentional
condition, suggesting a sensitivity to intentional
demonstration even at a younger age.
Two additional factors beyond the pedagogical cues may
have influenced children’s exploration. First, to convey that
it was accidental the experimenter said “Oops!” after
producing the property in the accidental condition. But this
may have also marked the property as negative, potentially
inhibiting exploration. Additionally, the conditions may
have produced slightly different evidence—more paperclips
may have stuck to the block in the intentional condition,
making the property potentially more salient. Experiment 2
explored the possible effect of these factors on children’s
exploration. We added an enthusiastic exclamation
(“Wow!”) in both conditions to mitigate any influence of
negative affect, and also equated the number of paperclips
picked up across conditions.

Experiment 2
The results of Experiment 1 make clear that, even when
objects share a kind label, whether or not a property is
demonstrated in an intentional, pedagogical manner has a
powerful effect on children’s inferences about the
generalizability of that property and their exploration of
novel kind members. Further, as mentioned above, there are
other potentially interesting factors that could also be
influencing children’s exploration—specifically the inherent
negativity of accidental events and the varying salience of
the property information. If children are sensitive to the
affective valence of causal events and attuned to the
saliency of particular properties in making inferences and
guiding exploration of novel kinds, then we might expect
that equating these factors across conditions could dampen

the effect of the manner of demonstration. However, if
children’s sensitivity to pedagogical cues is singularly
important in guiding inference and exploration, equating for
other facets of the event might have little impact on the
effect of intentional demonstration.

Methods
Participants The participants were an additional 32 3-yearolds (16 girls; M = 41 months; range: 39-46 months) and 32
4-year-olds (16 girls; M = 52 months; range: 48-57 months),
with comparable backgrounds to children in Experiment 1.
Procedure The procedure was identical to Experiment 1
with several modifications. First, while maintaining the
manipulation of saying either “Look, watch this” or “Oops!”
the experimenter also exclaimed, “Wow!” after producing
the property in both conditions, rather that simply saying,
“Hmm.” This should mitigate any inhibitory effect that
exclaiming “Oops!” in the accidental condition might have
had on children’s exploration. Second, we controlled for the
number of paperclips picked up across conditions. The
experimenter always picked up 2 paperclips in the
intentional condition, while in the accidental condition the
mean was 2.41 paperclips.

Results
Unlike Experiment 1, in which not one 3-year-old in the
accidental condition explored, some 3-year-olds in both
conditions of Experiment 2 did explore. However,
violations
of
assumptions
of
normality
and
homoscedasticity precluded parametric comparisons across
age groups. Instead, we used non-parametric ordinal logistic
regressions (see Cimpian, 2009), with condition and age as
predictors, to compare exploration across the two age
groups and two conditions.
These analyses revealed a main effect of condition on
children’s exploration, with children in the intentional
condition spending more time exploring (Wald χ2 = 10.05,
df = 1, p = 0.002) and making more attempts to elicit the
property (Wald χ2 = 18.29, df = 1, p < 0.001) than children
in the accidental condition. The analyses also revealed a
main effect of age, with 4-year-olds spending marginally
more time exploring (Wald χ2 = 3.21, df = 1, p = 0.073) and
making significantly more attempts to elicit the property
(Wald χ2 = 6.82, p = 0.009) than 3-year-olds. To explore
these effects further, we followed up these analyses by
conducting Mann-Whitney U tests within each age group.
4-year-olds As in Experiment 1, 4-year-olds spent more
time exploring in the intentional condition (M = 40.63 s, SD
= 19.57) than in the accidental condition, (M = 20.75 s, SD
= 22.27), U = 70.5, N = 32, p = 0.029.They also made more
attempts to elicit the property in the intentional condition (M
= 7.63, SD = 4.53) than in the accidental condition (M =
2.81, SD = 2.46), U = 44.5, N = 32, p = 0.001.

1419

3-year-olds As in Experiment 1, significantly more 3-yearolds explored in the intentional condition (12 children; 75%)
than in the accidental condition (5 children; 31%), χ2(1, N =
32) = 6.15, p = 0.013. Additionally, 3-year-olds spent more
time exploring in the intentional condition (M = 32.38 s, SD
= 23.48) than the accidental condition (M = 11.56 s, SD =
21.09), U = 68, N = 32, p = 0.023, and made more attempts
to elicit the property in the intentional condition (M = 5.63,
SD = 6.29) than the accidental condition (M = 1.00, SD =
2.76), U = 59.5, N = 32, p = 0.008. Thus, as with the older
children, 3-year-olds used pedagogical cues to assess the
generalizability of new information and guide their
exploration.

Discussion
Even when controlling for the emotional valence of the
event and the salience of the property, children showed
different patterns of inductive inference and exploration on
the basis of whether a property was demonstrated
intentionally. Having seen a property intentionally
demonstrated rather than produced accidentally, 3- and 4year-olds showed increased exploration when that property
failed to obtain for other kind members.

General Discussion
These experiments provide initial purchase on the question
of how intentional demonstration influences children’s
inductive inferences. While previous research has
documented an early sensitivity to pedagogy (Csibra &
Volein, 2008; Egyed et al., 2007 Gergely et al., 2007; Yoon
et al., 2008), the current work directly investigates the role
of pedagogical cues in the process of theory-based
categorization and concept formation in young children. As
early as age 3, children take intentionally demonstrated
information as more kind-relevant and generalizable than
identical evidence produced accidentally.
Recent work has suggested that pedagogy might be a
“double-edged sword,” potentially dampening children’s
natural curiosity and constraining learning to only what is
being taught (Bonawitz et al., 2009). However, our data
indicate that children do not merely learn exactly what is
taught (in our case, that a particular novel object is
magnetic), but rather infer from pedagogical cues that this is
an important and generalizable property of the novel kind.
Upon encountering evidence conflicting with this inference,
having seen the property demonstrated pedagogically
increased curiosity and exploration. Thus, pedagogy may
facilitate deeper learning of socially or culturally important
information. Particularly to the extent that children are
intuitively geared towards to learning not simply everything
one can do with an object, but rather what we as a group or
society use such artifacts for (Kelemen, 1999; Kelemen &
Carey, 2007), selective use of pedagogical cues in this
manner may be particularly important.

It is important to note that in the current research, we have
not directly addressed the distinction between pedagogical
as opposed to simply intentional action. In the current
studies, the intentional condition was both intentional and
pedagogical, while the accidental condition was neither. It is
possible that simply seeing an artifact used in an intentional
manner is enough to lead children to infer that other objects
of the same kind can be used in the same way. However,
children may remain particularly attuned to whether or not
that action was done with pedagogical intent—that is, with
the purpose of teaching them something new—or merely
with the intent of carrying out a particular function. This is
an important question, and one which we are addressing in
further research.
Another open question what children are learning from,
on one hand, information conveyed by the demonstration,
and on the other hand, evidence produced by their own
exploration. It is precisely this conflict between inferences
about generalizability made on the basis of pedagogical cues
and evidence that the property in fact fails to generalize
which appears to drive continued exploration. But of course
this conflict remains even after exploration, and how
children resolve this conflict is as yet unclear.
More broadly, these results support the idea that, as
generic language conveys information about the
generalizability and conceptual importance of new
information (Cimpian & Markman, 2009; Gelman et al.,
2002; Hollander et al., 2009), so too does intentional,
pedagogical action. When presented with the same novel
causal property in a pedagogical manner rather than an
accidental one, children make appear to make generic, kindbased inferences that drive their exploration. Furthermore,
this obtains even when objects in both conditions share a
label. Kind labels are known to license category-based
inductive inferences, (e.g., Gelman & Markman, 1986), and
having shared versus distinct kind labels does influence
exploratory play (Schulz et al., 2008). Our research
demonstrates that pedagogical cues play an important role
above and beyond that of the kind label.
When facing inductive problems in generalization,
children have many sources of information available to
them, both non-social (e.g., observation, exploration, and
prior knowledge) and social (e.g., labels, generic language,
intentional and pedagogical cues). Children’s ability to
integrate sources of information—especially when they
conflict—is an important skill. The current research
suggests that this ability is developing during the preschool
years, and that by as young as 3 children are particularly
sensitive to intentionally communicated information as they
form and test hypotheses about the world.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a NSF Graduate Research
Fellowship to the first author. We are grateful to the
teachers, staff, parents, and children at Bing Nursery School

1420

and the Arboretum Child Care Center for their participation,
to Hannah Jaycox and Cole Murphy-Hockett for their
assistance with data collection and coding, to Andrei
Cimpian for comments on a previous draft of this paper, and
to Krishna Savani for advice on statistical analyses.

References
Baldwin, D. A. (1991). Infants' contribution to the
achievement of joint reference. Child Development, 62(5),
875-890.
Baldwin, D. A. (1993a). Early referential understanding:
Infants' ability to recognize referential acts for what they
are. Developmental Psychology, 29(5), 832-843.
Baldwin, D. A. (1993b). Infants' ability to consult the
speaker for clues to word reference. Journal of Child
Language, 20(2), 395-418.
Baldwin, D. A., Markman, E. M., & Melartin, R. L. (1993).
Infants' ability to draw inferences about nonobvious
object properties: Evidence from exploratory play. Child
Development, 64(3), 711-728.
Bonawitz, E., Shafto, P., Gweon, H., Chang, I., Katz, S.,
Schulz, L., et al. (2009). The double-edged sword of
pedagogy: Modeling the effect of pedagogical contexts on
preschoolers' exploratory play. Proceedings of the Thirtyfirst Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Booth, A. E., & Waxman, S. R. (2002). Word learning is
"smart": Evidence that conceptual information affects
preschoolers’ extension of novel words. Cognition, 84(1),
B11-B22.
Carpenter, M., Akhtar, N., & Tomasello, M. (1998).
Fourteen- through 18-month-old infants differentially
imitate intentional and accidental actions. Infant Behavior
and Development, 21(2), 315-330.
Cimpian, A., & Markman, E. M. (2008). Preschool
children’s use of cues to generic meaning. Cognition,
107(1), 19-53.
Cimpian, A., & Markman, E. M. (2009). Information
learned from generic language becomes central to
children's biological concepts: Evidence from their openended explanations. Cognition, 113(1), 14-25.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using Language. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Csibra, G., & Gergely, G. (2006). Social learning and social
cognition: The case for pedagogy. In Y. Munakata & M.
H. Johnson, Processes of Change in Brain and Cognitive
Development (Vol. XXI., pp. 249-274). New York:
Oxford University Press.
Csibra, G., & Gergely, G. (2009). Natural pedagogy. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 13(4), 148-153.
Csibra, G., & Volein, Á. (2008). Infants can infer the
presence of hidden objects from referential gaze
information. British Journal of Developmental
Psychology, 26(1), 1-11.
Egyed, K., Király, I., Krekó, K., Kupán, K., & Gergely, G.
(2007, March). Understanding object-referential attitude

expressions in 18-month-olds: The interpretation
switching function of ostensive-communicative cues.
Poster presented at the Biennial Meeting of the SRCD,
Boston.
Gelman, S. A. (2009). Learning from others: Children’s
construction of concepts. Annual Review of Psychology,
60, 115-140.
Gelman, S. A., & Coley, J. D. (1990). The importance of
knowing a dodo is a bird: Categories and inferences in 2year-old children. Developmental Psychology, 26(5), 796804.
Gelman, S. A., & Markman, E. M. (1986). Categories and
induction in young children. Cognition, 23(3), 183-209.
Gelman, S. A., & Markman, E. M. (1987). Young children's
inductions from natural kinds: The role of categories and
appearances. Child Development, 58(6), 1532-1541.
Gelman, S., Star, J., & Flukes, J. (2002). Children's use of
generics in inductive inferences. Journal of Cognition and
Development, 3(2), 179-199.
Gergely, G., & Csibra, G. (2005). The social construction of
the cultural mind: Imitative learning as a mechanism of
human pedagogy. Interaction Studies, 6(3), 463-481.
Gergely, G., Egyed, K., & Király, I. (2007). On pedagogy.
Developmental Science, 10(1), 139-146.
Harris, P. L. (2002). What do children learn from
testimony? In P. Carruthers, S. Stich, & M. Siegal, The
cognitive basis of science (pp. 316-334). New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Harris, P. L., & Koenig, M. A. (2006). Trust in testimony:
How children learn about science and religion. Child
Development, 77(3), 505-524.
Hollander, M. A., Gelman, S. A., & Raman, L. (2008).
Generic language and judgements about category
membership: Can generics highlight properties as central?
Language and Cognitive Processes, 24(4), 481-505.
Kelemen, D. (1999). Function, goals and intention:
Children's teleological reasoning about objects. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 3(12), 461-468.
Kelemen, D., & Carey, S. (2007). The essence of artifacts:
Developing the design stance. In E. Margolis & S.
Laurence, Creations of the mind: Theories of artifacts and
their representation (pp. 212-230). New York: Oxford
University Press.
Meltzoff, A. N. (1995). Understanding the intentions of
others: Re-enactment of intended acts by 18-month-old
children. Developmental Psychology, 31(5), 838-850.
Schulz, L. E., Standing, H. R., & Bonawitz, E. B. (2008).
Word, thought, and deed: The role of object categories in
children's inductive inferences and exploratory play.
Developmental Psychology, 44(5), 1266-1276.
Sperber, D., & Wilson, D. (1986). Relevance:
Communication and cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Tomasello, M. (1999). The cultural origins of human
cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

1421

Tomasello, M., & Carpenter, M. (2007). Shared
intentionality. Developmental Science, 10(1), 121-125.
Yoon, J. M., Johnson, M. H., & Csibra, G. (2008).
Communication-induced memory biases in preverbal
infants. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
USA, 105(36), 13690-13695.

1422

