UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Perspectivizing Space in Banja Discourse

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/24p7p312

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Karmakar, Samir
Kasturirangan, Rajesh

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Perspectivizing Space in Bāŋlā Discourse
Samir Karmakar (samirk@nias.iisc.ernet.in)
Cognition Programme, School of Humanities, NIAS, IISc Campus
Bangalore 560012, India

Rajesh Kasturirangan (rkasturi@nias.iisc.ernet.in)
School of Humanities, NIAS, IISc Campus
Bangalore 560012, India
conceptual categories (Clark 1973). These categories are
termed as frames of reference (Levinson 1996; Landau &
Hoffman 2005; Majid et al. 2004; Neggers et al. 2006). A
frame of reference can function egocentrically or
allocentrically. An egocentric frame of reference invokes
body-based asymmetries to organize spatial coexistences. In
interpreting coexistences, allocentric frames of reference
employ external reference frames such as landmark based
cognition.
The importance of a frame of reference, as it follows from
Piaget and Inhelder (1948), lies in its capacity to mirror the
invariant aspects of a category with respect to which
perspectives are interpreted. Researchers – see Heine
(1989), Heine et al. (1991), Levinson (1996, 2003), Gibbs
(2005), Levinson and Wilkins (2006) and others – have
studied the linguistic realization of frames of reference at
the sub-sentential level in order to answer the following
question: how does the linguistic realization of space project
the underlying conceptualization of different frames of
reference? The answer to this question, in turn, sheds light
on old puzzles about the relation between world, language
and thought. These ‘Whorfian’ concerns led researchers to
explore spatial universals and their lexicalization in
different languages. They are extremely useful in
understanding the representation of space in language and in
setting correlations between spatial language and spatial
cognition.
In spite of these advances in exploring the linguistic
realization of space, what remains unanswered is how the
users of a language access those representations and
correlations while processing a discourse. So, a further
investigation of perspective taking is long overdue.
Additionally, a shift of interest from studying sub-sentential
expressions to the study of discourse, as Fauconnier (1981)
stressed, will offer “a conceptually different, theoretically
more promising, and empirically more broader, system of
understanding natural language logic.” At the level of
discourse, a static correlation between linguistic and
cognitive categories is not enough. We also need to
understand how these categories are grounded and situated;
and, how higher order inferential judgments are integrated
during the transformation of one spatial perspective into
another (Karmakar 2009). The current investigation seeks to
unveil the cognitive structures underlying the

Abstract
The paper attempts to conceptualize the production and
comprehension of spatial perspectives as the synchronization
of intentions and contentions in a linguistic discourse. In
doing so, it investigates the acts of intending and contending
in invoking and instantiating the categories. The paper
explains perspective setting and taking in terms of intending
and contending which are crucial in shaping the conceptual
route for the gradual revelation of the communicative intent.
Answer to these questions, in turn, results into an
understanding of what constitute the perspectivization process
in a discourse.
Keywords: intention; contention;
perspective taking; perspective setting.

conceptual

route;

Introduction
This paper investigates how spatial perspectives are
represented and accessed in discourse due to the activation
of linguistic expressions. We also explore how these
explicitly languaged elements are situated and grounded.
The term ‘languaging’ refers to the manner in which
meaning potentials are invoked and realized at the time of
discourse production and comprehension. The role of
languaging in producing and/or comprehending a discourse
is primarily an act of interpretation, since the emergence of
meaning in a communicative situation is actually an
outcome of the interpretive acts that unfold the structure of
the communicative situation and the structuring capacities
of the habitual attitudes of the mind (Rochberg-Halton
1982): While producing a discourse, we interpret our
thought
into language;
whereas
the
discourse
comprehension presumes the interpretation of language into
the thought. We argue that linguistic expressions trigger two
distinct cognitive functions – namely, intending and
contending – while languaging spatial perspectives. These
two cognitive functions are crucial in accommodating
commonsense knowledge into the discourse interpretation
through the act of languaging. We test our approach using
spatial perspectives in Bāŋlā discourse, but the underlying
ideas apply to the general question of how meaning is
produced and comprehended in discourse.
Researchers have addressed questions related to the issues
of spatial perspectives in language from different theoretical
persuasions: In these studies, it has been shown that the
production and comprehension of spatial descriptions
presuppose the activation of asymmetries intrinsic to

826

perspectivization1 process through the study of discourse.
We investigate the following two questions: what cognitive
functions are at work in perspectivizing space in discourse?
How does the languaging of discourse manipulate these
cognitive functions? These two questions will be discussed
in this paper with reference to Bāŋlā language data.

and functional aspects (like dining table, computer table,
drawing table etc.). Depending on the communicative
situation, one or more of these structural and functional
aspects are selected. This selection procedure is guided by
the act of contending provided by an expression like ‘on’ as
in ‘on the table’ in contrast to the ‘under the table’. The role
of ‘on’ – while contending – is to delimit the cognitive
capacity of a category to window the cognizer’s attention to
a specific conceptual configuration.2 Similarly, in an
expression like ‘tabletop’, the categorial capacity of ‘top’ is
delimited by the modifier ‘table’, when compared with an
expression like ‘mountaintop’. The act of contending is a
complex phenomenon: It is crucial not only in situating the
categorial information in a conceptual configuration (such
as when we concatenate ‘table’ with ‘top’ or ‘mountain’
with ‘top’); but also equally significant in situating the
conceptual configuration in a perceptual set up (as in ‘this
tabletop’, ‘that mountaintop’ etc.). This issue will be
discussed later in this paper.

Outline of the Approach
Spatial descriptions are perspectival, like any other
linguistic communication (Mead 1938; Chakraborty 1992;
Moore 1997; Coventry et al. 2009). In discourse, the
descriptions of space, i.e. viewing arrangements, are
languaged with respect to certain vantage points. A viewing
arrangement, as Langacker (2008) defines it, is the ‘overall
relationships between the “viewers” and the situation being
“viewed”’. The process of producing and comprehending
spatial viewing arrangements in discourse is termed here as
perspespectivization – that is the languaging of perspectives.
The act of perspectivization is a consequence of shared
linguistic capacity (Akman 2000; Stalnaker 2002; Gibbs
2005), evolving through the generalization process (Mead
1934; Noe 2002; Kristiansen 2008; Langacker 2008) and
enabling the interlocutors to understand one another’s
communicative intent (Lewis 2002; Millikan 2004;
Gehlbach 2004; Ganeri 2006). It is a complex phenomenon
consisting of perspective setting and perspective taking
(Graumann 2002).
The languaging of (spatial) viewing arrangements in
discourse can be studied in terms of two cognitive functions
associated with linguistic expressions that we term
intending and contending. The function of an expression,
while intending is to invoke the relevant conceptual
category. A conceptual category is a systematic
representation of interrelated knowledge systems (Laurence
& Margolis 1999; Aarts 2006). For our purposes, a
conceptual category is conceived as a cognitive capacitance,
storing all possible perspectives of a phenomenon (MerleauPonty 1945/2002; Millikan 2000). As a cognitive
capacitance, a category is useful in presupposing and
entailing large numbers of facts associated with it, because
on activation it illuminates a cluster of other categories with
which it is associated (Givon 2005). However, intending
alone is not enough to language a discourse, since linguistic
communication is always embedded in a specific context.
We need another cognitive function, whose role is to situate
conceptual categories in that context (Zilberman 1938/1988;
Langacker 2008). We call this act of relativization
contending. The function of a linguistic expression, while
contending, is to choose a particular perspective in a
discourse context. Consider the expression, ‘table’. The act
of intending, associated with ‘table’, invokes the
corresponding category which includes information about
its structural aspects (like shape, size, constituencies etc.)

In our view, expressions are not the ready-made items
stored in a mental inventory, but “a made-to-order product
reconstructed on each occasion for use” in any linguistic
construction (Hirtle 2007). The meaning construing
capapcity of an expression in a discourse is determined by
the way underlying domains of our cognition are grounded
and situated by the respective functions associated with an
expression – i.e intending and contending. This way of
grounding and situating is what we call the conceptual route
that a cognizer follows - though intuitively - in order to
access the communicative intent. In fact, study of the
conceptual route is an effort to explore the way
conceptualization processes are structured.

Perspectivizing Space
Though the earlier investigations – as is briefed in the
introductory section of this paper, led by different
researchers – explore how linguistic realization of oriented
space reflects its conceptual structure in different linguistic
communities, very little has been done to answer how we
language relevant representations and correlations at the
time of perspectivizing space in discourse. At the level of
discourse, puzzles about the relation between language and
thought do not end with setting a correlation between
linguistic and cognitive categories; we also need to answer
how the above mentioned functions work together while
licensing inferences that gradually reveal the conceptual
route.
The mental locomotions involved in the construction of
the conceptual route do not have an explicit linguistic
realization. As we will see in the next two sections, the
conceptual route is a combination of first-order
perspectivizations that are explicitly languaged, and higher-

1

2

In stead of using ‘perspectivation’ as is used by Graumann
(2002), we use ‘perspectivization’ which is borrowed from Taylor
(2003).

In case of the example ‘on the table’, ‘the’ also acts as
contender. However, this issue is not discussed here since it has no
direct relevance in this paper.

827

intended categorial information both in conceptual as well
as perceptual environments. The situating of communicative
intent in conceptual and perceptual worlds often follows
different conceptual routes depending on the types of
categories invoked by the intenders. This point will be
elaborated further with a discussion of example (2).
The interpretation of dān-dik in (2) also requires the
existence of a body in the real world with which the
intended body-schema can be identified. However, unlike
(1) it does not has an explicit contender whose function can
provide schematic support. The function of the table as
intender presupposes a frame of reference that does not
support the left/right opposition. In order to satisfy the
semantic expectancy activated by the expression dān-dik in
(2), the act of contending invokes a frame of reference
which has no explicit linguistic realization: This implicit
reference indexes the presupposed body-schema with either
addressee or addresser. In discourse, addressee and
addressor are the ‘last resort’ to solve any problem related to
the act of contending. Therefore, the act of contending first
scans for a local solution which is often explicitly available
in
discourse;
otherwise
the
function
invokes
contextualization cues as is shown in case of (2). The
mechanism of last resort, as it follows from Lewis (2002),
lies with “a system of concordant expectations capable of
producing coordination at the salient equilibrium”.

order inferential tasks that go beyond what is available in
the linguistic input alone. We argue that the formation of the
conceptual route is determined by the interactions among
various intendings and contendings, activated at the time of
setting perspective in discourse.

Phrase level Discourse
The claim outlined above is first explored at the phrase level
discourse, like (1) and (2); and then elaborated further in
discourse larger than the phrase as is exemplified in (3).
(1)
(2)

tomār
dān
dik-e
you-of
right
direction-on
On your right
tebil-er
dān
dik-e
table-of
right
direction-on
On the right side of the table

The interpretations of (1) and (2) presume frames based
on bodily asymmetries. It is worth noting that these two
phrases are grounded and situated in different ways
resulting in two different conceptual routes: (1) is
interpreted with respect to the addressee’s ego-centric
perspective; (2) is interpreted from the addresser’s egocentric perspective, since the conceptual category ‘table’
does not have an inbuilt left/right orientation. More
specifically, the right side of the table is interpreted with
respect to the cognizer’s understanding of his/her own
physical asymmetry. Here, the intended asymmetry is
extrinsic to the conceptualization of tables. In contrast, an
extrinsic frame of reference is not required in interpreting a
phrase like on/under the table, since tables have an inbuilt
sense of vertical opposition. The different interpretation of
(1) and (2) is a consequence of the interactions holding
between intentions and contentions at the time of conceptual
integration.
The act of intending associated with the expression dān
dik invokes our background knowledge of asymmetries
intrinsic to the human body. This schematic representation
of the human body is an abstract and general invariant
cognitive standard, applicable to a range of situations.
Consequently, in every concrete situation, the abstract
standard needs to be identified with a real world
entity/situation in order to convey meaning. In case of (1),
the body-schema is identified with the body of a person
addressed by the genitive form of the second person
pronominal form in Bāŋlā. The function associated with the
genitive case marker, here in this context, is crucial in
contending the relation between pronominal (tomār) and
nominal (dān dik) forms. The genitive marker functions in
situating the intended categorial information in a conceptual
configuration, as opposed to the function of the pronoun in
situating intended categorial information into a perceptual
set up: Since the body indexed by the pronominal form is
identified with the body-schema presupposed by the
expression dān dik, the intended orientation in space is now
referred with respect to the indexed body in the real world
situation. This shows how the act of contending situates the

The above discussion shows how the formation of the
conceptual route at the time of perspective taking (which is
a part of discourse comprehension) is influenced by the way
perspectives are set at the time of discourse production.

Discourse: Sequence of Connected Phrases
So far, we have discussed how the synchronization of
intending and contending is crucial in languaging phrase
level discourse that invokes a single frame of reference. In
this section, we will investigate how different frames of
reference are mapped into one another when more than one
frame of reference is languaged in discourse, under the
assumption that complexities arise at the level of discourse
not because of the multiple perspectives set by the different
intenders, but because of the inter-translatability of different
perspectives.
Consider the example cited in (3), where various
categories are intended, and also contended in order to
describe a situation.
(3)

āmi
I
hāt-ch-i
is walking
kset
field
sāman-e
front-in

nadī-r
river-of
āmār
my
ār
and
sūrya
sun

dhār
bank
bām-dik-e
left-side-on
dān-dik-e
right-side-on
asta
setting

diye
through
dhān-er
of-paddy
nadī
river
jācche
is going

I am walking along the river side. The paddy fields are
on my left, and the river is on the right. In front, the sun
is setting.

828

Discussion: Perspectivization as a Process

The lexical expressions marked bold in (3) are egocentric,
in the sense that they are defined in terms of asymmetries
intrinsic to the cognizer’s/ego’s body-schema; and they
produce an egocentric perspective of the landscape
described by the cognizer. Further, while egocentric
perspectives are the only reference frames that are explicitly
languaged in the above discourse fragment, an allocentric
frame of reference also plays a crucial role. In (3) the
cognizer narrates that the sun is setting in front of him/her.
From our commonsense knowledge we know that the sun
sets in the west. This fact provides an allocentric frame of
reference. Due to the interaction between egocentric and
allocentric frames of reference, the following inferences are
licensed about the landscape described in (3).

Our analysis of (1-4) above shows that the viewing
arrangement in discourse evolves due to the fixation and
translation of vantage points. The translation of vantage
points is governed by the relative salience that a vantage
point has with respect to other vantage points. In discourse,
the viewing arrangement is not a fixed arrangement of
different isolated vantage points; rather it is an emergent
phenomenon evolving gradually due to the shift of attention
from one vantage point to other vantage point with every
contention/assertion, as is also argued by Fauconnier and
Turner (2002). We identify this process as second order
perspectivization, in contrast to first order perspectivization
triggered at the time of setting a perspective.
In brief, first order perspectivization activates the relevant
frames of reference to construe the context of interpretation.
First order perspectivization, then in turn, intends
background information necessary for second order
perspectivization; whereas, second order perspectivization
contends the interactions between the conceptual categories
invoked by the process of the first order perspectivization.
Therefore, the viewing arrangement at the level of discourse
is a consequence of a two tiered complex cognitive process.

(4) (a) The cognizer’s motion is west-directed;
(b) The river, which is on the left of the cognizer, is to
his/her south;
(c) The paddy field, which is on the right of the
cognizer, is to his/her north;
The information enumerated in (4) is not directly stated in
(3). Inferencing, on the basis of the commonsense
knowledge, is a significant feature of languaging discourse;
it is one way to accommodate the commonsense knowledge
in discourse interpretation (Stalnaker 1998).
The inferences enumerated in (4) are drawn out of the
conceptual route that emerge through the process of
designed coordination among the discourse participants on
the basis of the functions associated with different
expressions in discourse, just in the fashion it happens in
case of (1) and (2). What seems to be of significance, here,
is that the inter-translatability of ego and allo-centric frames
needs to be viewed as an act of contending – mapping
different domains of our cognition.

Conclusion
The paper views the production and comprehension of
spatial viewing arrangements as the synchronization of
intentions and contentions in linguistic discourse. In doing
so, it investigates the role of two cognitive functions,
namely intending and contending (associated with a
linguistic expression), in invoking and instantiating
conceptual categories. These two processes underlie
cognitive capacities like perspective setting and perspective
taking at the level of discourse. We have argued for a bilayered perspectivization process in order to understand the
way ego- and allo- centric perspectives interact in discourse
to shape the conceptual route.

Observations
Translating one perspective into another presupposes two
facts: (i) the structural parallelisms intrinsic to the intended
categories used in setting two different perspectives; and,
(ii) a capacity to interpret the (asymmetric) configuration of
one intender with respect to the other. This process of
setting up a relational equivalence among different
cognitive domains and facilitating higher order inferential
tasks is an act of contending, which remains implicit in
discourse level languaging. We will consider this type of
contending as a covert function crucial to higher-order
perspectivization.
While setting a correspondence between the ego- and
allo-centric construals of space narrated in (3), the first
inference (i.e. (4a)) acts as the vantage point with respect to
which ego- and allo-centric references are translated into
each other. The relative salience of (4a) over (4b) and (4c)
also suggests a higher order perspectivization process.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Harish Karnick (IIT Kanpur),
Narayanan Srinivasan (CBCS Allahabad), and Leonard
Talmy (University of Buffalo) for their comments and
suggestions on an earlier version of this paper, presented in
the “International Conference on Language and Cognition
Interface: State of the Art” at CBCS Allahabad in 2009. We
are also indebted to the four anonymous reviewers of
CogSci 2010 for their useful comments and suggestions.
This study is supported by National Institute of Advanced
Studies, India.

References
Aarts, B. (2006). Conceptions of categorization in the
history of linguistics. Language Sciences, 28, 361-365.
Akman, V. (2000). Rethinking context as a social construct.
Journal of Pragmatics, 32, 743-759.

829

D.P. Wilkins (Eds.), Grammars of Space. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Lewis, D. (2002). Convention. Oxford: Blackwell
Publishers.
Langacker, R.W. (2008). Cognitive Grammar. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Majid, A., Bowerman, M., Kita, S., Haun, D.B.M., &
Levinson, S.C. (2004). Can language restructure
cognition? The case for space. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 8(3), 108-114.
Mead, G.H. (1934). Mind, Self, & Society. In W.C. Morris
(Ed.), Works of George Herbert Mead, Vol. I. Chicago:
The University of Chicago Press.
Mead, G.H. (1938). The Philosophy of the Act. In W.C.
Morris (Ed.), Works of George Herbert Mead, Vol. III.
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1945/2002). Phenomenology of
Perception, Translated by Colin Smith, London:
Routledge.
Millikan, Ruth G. (2004). Varieties of Meaning,
Massachussetts: MIT Press.
Moore, A.W. (1997). Points of View, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Neggers, S.F.W., Van der Lubbe, R.H.J., Ramsey, N.F., &
Postma, A. (2006). Interactions between ego- and
allocentric
neuronal
representations
of
space.
NeuroImage, 31, 320-331.
Noe, A. (2002). Is Perspectival Self-Consciousness NonConceptual? The Philosophical Quarterly, 52(207), 185194.
Piaget, J. & Inhelder, B. (1948/1977). The Child’s
Conception of Space. In H.E. Gruber & J.J. Voneche
(Eds.), The Essential Piaget. New York: Basic Books,
Inc.
Rescoria, M. (2007). Convention. In Edward N. Zalta (Ed.),
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Sep. 6, 2007),
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/convention/.
Rochberg-Halton, E. (1982). Situation, Structure, and the
Context of Meaning. The Sociological Quarterly 23(4),
455-476.
Stalnaker, R. (2002). Common Ground. Linguistics and
Philosophy, 25, 701-721.
Stalnaker, R. (1998). On the Representation of Context.
Journal of Logic, Language and Information, 7(1), 3-19.
Taylor, John R. (2003). Linguistic Categorization. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

Chakrabarti, A. (1992). I Touch What I Saw. Philosophy
and Phenomenological Research, 52(1), 103-116.
Clark, H.H. (1973). Space, Time, Semantics, and The Child.
In T.E. Moore (Ed.), Cognitive Development and The
Acquisition of Language, New York: Academic Press.
Coventry, K.R., Lynott, D., Cangelosi, A., Monrouxe, L.,
Joyce, D., & Richardson, C. (2009). Spatial Language,
visual attention, and perceptual simulation. Brain &
Language, doi:10.1016/j.bandl.209.06.0001.
Fauconnier, G. (1981). Pragmatic Functions and Mental
Spaces. Cognition, 10, 85-88.
Fauconnier, G., & Turner, M. (2002). The way we think,
New York: Basic Books.
Ganeri, J. (2006). Artha: Meaning, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Gelbach, H. (2004). A New Perspective on Perspective
Taking:
A
Multidimensional
Approach
to
Conceptualizing an Aptitude. Educational Psychology
Review, 16(3), 207-234.
Gibbs, Jr. R.W. (2005). Embodiment and Cognitive Science,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Givon, T. (2005). Context as Other Minds: The Pragmatics
of Sociality, Cognition and Communication. Amsterdam:
John Benjamins Publishing Co.
Graumann, C.F. (2002). Explicit and implicit perspectivity.
In C.F. Graumann & W. Kallmeyer (Eds.), Perspective
and Perspectivation in Discourse. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins Publishing Co.
Heine, B. (1989). Adpositions in African Languages.
Linguistique Africaine, 2, 77-127.
Heine, B., Ulrike, C., & Hunnemeyer, F. (1991).
Grammaticalization: A Conceptual Framework, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Hirtle, W. (2007). Language in the mind: An introduction to
Guillaume’s theory. Montreal/Kingston: McGill-Queen’s
University Press.
Karmakar, S. (2009). Temporal Ordering in Discourse: A
Study of Baŋla. Unpublished PhD Dissertation, Kanpur:
Indian Institute of Technology.
Kristiansen, G. (2008). Idealized cultural models: The group
as a variable in the development of cognitive schemata. In
R.M. Frank, R. Driven, T. Ziemke, & E. Bernardez
(Eds.), Body, Language and Mind: Socio-Cultural
Situatedness, Vol. 2, Berlin: Mouton De Gruyter.
Landau, B., & Hoffman, J.E. (2005). Parallels between
spatial cognition and spatial language: Evidence from
William syndrome. Journal of Memory and Language,
53, 163-185.
Laurence, S., & Margolis, E. (1999). Concepts and
Cognitive Science. In E. Margolis & S. Laurence (Eds.),
Concepts, Massachusetts: The MIT Press.
Levinson, S.C. (1996). Language and Space. Annual Review
of Anthropology, 25, 353-382.
Levinson, S.C. (2003). Space in Language and Cognition.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Levinson, S.C., & Wilkins, D.P. (2006). The background to
the study of the language of space. In S.C. Levinson &

830

