UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Preferences in Cardinal Direction

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9312g43j

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Ragni, Marco
Becker, Benedikt

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Preferences in Cardinal Direction
Marco Ragni (ragni@cognition.uni-freiburg.de)
Department of Cognitive Science, University of Freiburg
Germany

Benedikt Becker (beckerb@informatik.uni-freiburg.de )
Department of Cognitive Science, University of Freiburg
Germany
Abstract

into a spatial array and back again, but the reasoning process
itself relies on model manipulation only. A mental model is
an internal representation of objects and relations in spatial
working memory, which matches the state of affairs given in
the premises. The semantic theory of mental models is based
on the mathematical definition of deduction, i.e. a propositional statement ϕ is a consequence of a set of premises P ,
written P |= ϕ, if in each model A of P , the conclusion ϕ is
true.

How do we reason with imprecise spatial descriptions? Do
reasoners typically prefer one conclusion (over another) consistent with the imprecise descriptions? Based on empirical
findings we are able to give a positive answer for the second
question for spatial reasoning with cardinal direction relations.
Analyzing further the pattern of the preferred conclusion reflects the idea of informativeness of the description. In consequence, we briefly explain heuristics and present a Bayesian
model representing subjective belief of the reasoner.
Keywords: Probabilistic Reasoning; Preferential Reasoning;
Qualitative Reasoning

Introduction
Reasoning with spatial information requires sometimes to
reason with incomplete information. Take for example,
Berlin is north-east of Paris.
Paris is north-west of Rome.
You can (based on this information alone, e.g. no background knowledge, no map) easily infer that Berlin must be
north of Rome. But you cannot infer (based on this information alone) if Berlin is eastern or western of Rome. But if you
have to reason without having assumptions about geographic
positions – do we prefer certain relations? The question on
how humans solve such deduction problems is at the core of
qualitative reasoning. In other words, how do we infer new
knowledge (a conclusion) from given knowledge, and moreover, what are the differences to formal approaches in artificial intelligence?
Formally, there are two main approaches in AI on how
such reasoning problems can be solved: By the application
of (transitivity) rules or by the construction and inspection of
models. Principally, both approaches are equivalent (Russell
& Norvig, 2003), i.e. it is not possible to derive more information with each of these methods. This equivalence, however, makes it harder to distinguish which method(s) is applied by humans while solving such problems. Nonetheless,
a number of empirical studies investigates this research question by psychological means. The most prominent and best
supported theory with respect to the number of effects that
can be accounted for is the theory of mental models (MMT)
(Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991) (to name only a few: the indeterminacy effect (Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991), the form
of premises and the figural effect (Knauff, Rauh, Schlieder, &
Strube, 1998), the wording of conclusions (Van der Henst &
Schaeken, 2007), etc.). According to the MMT, linguistic processes are relevant to transfer information from the premises

N
NW

W

NE

EQ

SW

E

SE
S

Figure 1: The nine base relations of the cardinal direction
calculus in the projection based representation. Other representations are cone-based representations (Ligozat, 1998)
An interesting finding is the so-called preference effect,
i.e. in multiple model cases (nearly always) one preferred
model is constructed from participants and used as a reference
for the deduction process (Rauh, Hagen, Schlieder, Strube,
& Knauff, 2000). Further findings showed that during the
validation phase alternative models are constructed by small
modifications to the initially constructed model. This was the
reason why the mental model theory for spatial reasoning was
extended within the framework of preferred mental models
(Rauh et al., 2000).
A new research line (Oaksford & Chater, 2007) focuses on
Bayesian explanations for preferred solutions, e.g. for syllogistic reason. The authors use here the notion of informativeness to explain why a certain quantifier is used. The question
is still open, if the Bayesian approach is sufficient to model
spatial reasoning.
This paper is structured as follows: First, we will present
an empirical investigation analyzing the question about pref-

2117

erences in cardinal direction. Our empirical findings are then
analyzed w.r.t. the main theories in the field (Theory of Mental Models, Theory of Mental Logic) with heuristics and we
present a Bayesian model representing subjective belief of the
reasoner. Finally, we discuss the different findings.

Preferences in Cardinal Direction
The language of cardinal direction consists of points in the
euclidean plane R2 . Based on the point algebra it is possible
to distinguish 9 base relations a, b ∈ R2 :
CD EQ
N
NE
E
SE
S
SW
W
NW
PA (=,=) (=,>) (>,>) (>,=) (>,<) (=,<) (>,<) (<,=) (>,>)

In other words a N b := ax = bx ∧ ay > by , b is a northly.
An assignment of a set of CD constraints C over the vocabulary B = {N, NE, E, SE, S, SW, W, NW, EQ} is a function
α : V (C) → R2 , mapping each variable x, occuring in C to
coordinates in the real plane.
Over the euclidean plane these jointly exhaustive and pairwise disjoint-base relations (cp. Fig. 1) with the composition table (cp. Figure 2) form a relation algebra. In the
first experiment discussed here we used relations from the
set B ′ := B \{EQ} to construct a type of relational reasoning task that is referred to as three-term-series-problems (3tsproblems) in cognitive research (e.g. (Hunter, 1957)). In
these tasks always two statements are used as premises and
the task of the participants is to generate a statement that is
consistent with the premises – the conclusion. E.g.,
A is northeast of B.
B is west of C.
Which relation holds between A and C?
The 3ts-problems can be formally described by the composition of two base relations and the question for a satisfiable
relation. The set of all possible relations with premises a R1 b,
b R2 c are denoted by the composition R1 ◦ R2 . Normally, it
is presented as a composition table (cf. Figure 2).
For the above example NE ◦W contains the following three
relations: NE, N, NW. Since CD consists of nine base relations, there are without EQ 64 possible compositions of two
base relations. In other words, exactly 64 different threeterm-series problems exist. If we omit all one-relation cases
(cells with one entry in Figure 2), it results in 40 multiple
relation cases out of the 64 possible compositions. The participants of our studies were confronted with all 64 problems
and had to infer a conclusion.

Figure 2: The preferred relations in reasoning with cardinal
direction. In each cell, the first number gives the number of
correct relations and the relations. In the second row we have
the preferred relation, then in the indeterminate case the relative frequency of this relation, i.e. how often it was chosen
by the participants and then the error rates.

Materials. The experiment used the whole set of Cardinal
Direction relations presented in Fig. 1. In the main part of
the experiment all participants had to solve the same set of 64
3ts-problems. Here is an example-problem:
A is northwest of B.
B is southeast of C.
Which relation holds between A and C?
In half of the trials we asked for the relation between A and
C and in half of the trials between C and A.
Procedure and Design. The experiment was conducted as
a web experiment (partially conducted at our site for control)
using webexp2. Tasks were presented in a randomized order. The premises were presented sequentially, i.e. the first
premise disappeared when the second premise appeared. In
other words, the participants were forced to hold the premise
information in the working memory. All premises were presented in a self-paced procedure. Finally, the participants had
to give a relation as an answer.
Overall, 87% of the problems were correctly solved. The
results regarding the preference effects can be found in Figure 2.

Empirical Data
The first central question we are interested in is: How do people reason about cardinal directions? Do they construct preferred mental models, and if so, what are the principles? An
answer to this question might give hints of how preferences
differ between large-scale spaces and small-scale spaces. For
the latter scale of space, preferences have already been identified (Ragni, Fangmeier, Webber, & Knauff, 2007).
Participants. 24 students of the University of Freiburg took
part in this web experiment (14m/10f, M = 23.5/22.1, SD =
2.3/2.1). They were paid for their participation.

As shown in Figure 2 out of the given 64 problems exactly
24 are determinate problems and 40 are indeterminate problems. Most of the indeterminate problems exactly 90% (only
4 relations were not significantly preferred: N ◦ S, W ◦ SE,
W ◦E, SW ◦E) were solved with a clear preference for one relation. However, it is remarkable that several relations could
have been chosen as a possible conclusion, but, in fact, the
participants chose just one of them and their preferences also
often corresponded.

2118

Discussion. There are differences between preferred relations in small-scale spaces and in large-scale spaces. Contrary to the small-scale spaces (Ragni, Fangmeier, et al.,
2007) where the first-free fit strategy has been identified in
relational reasoning in large-scale spaces participants used a
first-fit strategy. In other words they inserted the third object C in-between A and B (cp. the relations S ◦ N and E ◦W
where in the first case S and in the second W has been reported). The inverse composition N ◦ S and W ◦ E are not
statistically significant.
By a formal analysis it was possible to explain the preferred mental model in indeterminate cases by the following
distinction
• Principle 1 (In-between Insertion Principle): If the two relations of the composition are inverse (e.g. S and N, W
and E) then the third object C is inserted in-between A and
B,(e.g. A is S of C and B is north of C, and so on).
• Principle 2 (Cut Principle): Choose always the relation in
the geometrical cut of the two relations, i.e. if NE ◦ NW is
composed and the relations NW, N, NE are possible than
the relation N is chosen.
The participants preferred the cut between relations, e.g. in
the composition of NE ◦ NW and NW ◦ NE they preferred the
relation N. The same pattern holds as well for SW ◦ NW and
so on. This gives an indication that without additional information they use (independently of projection based or cone
based representation of Cardinal Direction) similar distances.

Theories of Deduction
In this section we ground the intuitively used theories formally (and mathematically) and analyze them with respect to
their reasoning power.
A relational structure is a tuple (D, (Ri )(i∈I) ) consisting
of a domain D (sometimes called discourse universe) and a
set of (usually binary) relations Ri (Russell & Norvig, 2003).
For example, geographic knowledge like New York is northeast of Washington can be expressed by cardinal direction
relations N, NE, E, SE, . . . over the domain of cities. More
complex expressions can be formed by using connectives
like conjunctions (New York is north-east of Washington and
New York is in the U.S.) and disjunctions (. . . or . . . ). By allowing negations, we have a propositional relational language
L over cardinal direction relations. Such relational structures
can be used to describe knowledge representation. But how
can new information be derived?

Theory of mental logic
The theory of mental logic (Rips, 1994) assumes that we use
(transitivity) rules to draw conclusions, whereas the classical model theory argues that we use models for this inference process. The classical mental model theory (Byrne &
Johnson-Laird, 1989) claims that in multiple model cases (i.e.
more than one model is consistent with the premises) other
models are inspected.

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

West(x, y) & North(z, x) → West(z, y)
West(x, y) & North(z, y) → West(x, z)
West(x, y) & West(y, z) → West(x, z)
West(x, y) ↔ East(y, x)
(West(y, x) & West(z, x)) → (West(y, z) or West(z, y))
(West(y, z) or West(z, y)) & North(w, z) →
(West(y, w) or West(w, y))

Figure 3: Set of (incomplete) inference rules specified for
spatial reasoning adapted from Van der Henst (2002).

The central idea of this approach can be characterized as
follows: “Reasoning consists in the application of mental inference rules to the premises and conclusion of an argument.
The sequence of applied rules forms a mental proof or derivation of the conclusion from the premises, where these implicit proofs are analogous to the explicit proofs of elementary logic” (Rips, 1994, p. 40). Hagert (1984) defined a first
set of spatial inference rules (cf. Fig. 2). This set of rules has
been extended by two additional rules (cf. the rules 5 and 6 in
Fig. 2) to deal with indeterminacy by Van der Henst (2002).
The rules in Fig. 2 are successively applied to the premises of
a problem description.
There is, however, no recent theory in explaining the construction of the preferred relations (Figure 2).

Theory of mental models
The mental model theory assumes that the human reasoning
process consists of three distinct phases: The model generation phase, in which a first model is constructed out of
the premises, an inspection phase, in which the model is inspected to check if a putative conclusion is consistent with
the current model. In the validation phase, finally, alternative models are generated from the premises that refute this
putative conclusion. The indeterminacy effect is mainly responsible for human difficulty in reasoning (Johnson-Laird,
2001).
Recent findings indicate a phenomenon encountered in
multiple-model cases, namely that humans generally tend to
construct a preferred mental model (PMM). This model is easier to construct, less complex, and easier to maintain in working memory compared to all other possible models (Knauff
et al., 1998). The principle of economicity is the determining
factor in explaining human preferences (Manktelow, 1999).
This principle also explains that a model is constructed incrementally from its premises. Such a model construction
process saves working memory capacities because each bit of
information is immediately processed and integrated into the
model (Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991). In the model variation
phase, this PMM is varied to find alternative interpretations of
the premises (Rauh et al., 2000). From a formal point of view,
however, this theory has not been formalized yet and is therefore not fully specified in terms of necessary operations to
process such simple problems as were described above.
A model A is called consistent with a set of premises Φ
over a relational language L (mathematically A |= Φ) if all

2119

expressions of Φ are true in A . Then a conclusion Ψ can
be derived from the premise set Φ (mathematically Φ |= Ψ,
whereby |= is called the consequence relation) if
Φ |= Ψ

⇔
⇔

The following models1 are to reproduce the frequency distribution of the 3ts-task on cardinal directions this way.

All models of Φ are models of Ψ.
There is no model A with
A |= Φ and A |= ¬Ψ.

A model A with the property A |= Φ and A |= ¬Ψ is called
counter-example. It follows if there is a counter-example to
Φ and Ψ then Φ |= Ψ cannot hold.
This classical (mathematical) consequence relation, however, does not explain how initial mental models are constructed and varied (Rauh et al., 2000). Since there is a huge
empirical evidence supporting the preferred mental model
theory for different calculi (Rauh et al., 2000; Ragni, Fangmeier, et al., 2007; Ragni, Tseden, & Knauff, 2007) it seems
worth to ground this theory mathematically.

Spatial Bayesian Models The spatial reasoning task of
the previous section uses the set of cardinal relations B ′ =
{N, E, S, W, NE, SE, SW, NW}. The statement of an item in
the 3ts-task is given by a pair of relations R1 , R2 ∈ B ′ with
aR1 b and bR2 c for three locations a, b, c. The subject’s guess
for the relation between a and c is another relation R3 ∈ B ′ .
The relative frequency of R3 for an item R1 , R2 will be referred to as fR1 ,R2 (R3 ).
The objective of a Bayesian model for the 3ts-task is to implement a probability distribution of R3 parametrized by the
task item R1 , R2 , i.e. PR1 ,R2 (R3 ). This probability distribution
is assumed to be a prediction of the experiment’s relative frequencies fR1 ,R2 . Thus, model M’s preferred relation given the
task’s relations R1 and R2 is
M(R1 , R2 ) := arg max PR1 ,R2 (R3 ).

A Probabilistic Approach
As already stated, a new approach are probabilistic models
(Oaksford & Chater, 2007) to explain preferred relations.
Those are based on the consideration to use probabilities instead of truth values as the representation of semantics. This
is a valid consideration as a probability might be interpreted
in a subjective manner describing a subjective degree of belief
rather than a relative frequency of an event. Following this
subjective interpretation probability theory can be utilized for
belief updating and inference. The probabilistic approach to
inference is based on:
P(“If p then q”) = P(q|p).

(1)

Thus, the probability of a conditional proposition is identified
with the conditional probability of the proposition. The aposteriori belief in the fact q in face of certainty about the
fact p is given by the a-priori conditional probability: P1 (q) =
P0 (q|p), if P1 (p) = 1. This is called “conditionalization”. It
constitutes the basis of probabilistic inference.
The probabilistic representation of conditionals as given in
equation 1 enables the application of Bayes’ theorem:
P(q|p) =

P(p|q) P(q)
P(p)

(2)

This has two advantages: First, whereas P(q|p) is a rather abstract value, the probabilities of its right hand side can often
be derived from the agent’s experience. Second, it implies
basic patterns of performance while reasoning with conditional propositions which appear as “errors and biases” from
a logicistic standpoint.
Bayesian Rationality arises from a rational analysis of the
problem, the environment, and the constraints of an agent
while conducting deductive tasks. As such, it is not a theory of the actually psychological processes in use, but a description of general regularities. It is further independent of
cognition about probabilities. It shows that cognition often
obeys the laws of probabilistic theory.

R3 ∈B ′

The per-item probability distribution of R3 can be identified with the probability of R3 conditioned by the item’s relations. Therefore, it further allows the application of Bayes’
theorem (equation 2):
PR1 ,R2 (R3 ) := P(R3 |R1 , R2 ) =

P(R1 , R2 |R3 ) P(R3 )
P(R1 , R2 )

(3)

Consequently, it is sufficient for a Bayesian model of the 3tstask to specify merely the reversed conditional probability
P(R1 , R2 |R3 ) as well as the marginal probabilities P(R3 ) and
P(R1 , R2 ).
The following sections will describe such implementations. The quality of each model M will be compared to the
empirical data by three factors: a) the mean correlation CM
between PR1 ,R2 and the empirical data fR1 ,R2 , b) the sum E M
of the squared differences between PR1 ,R2 and fR1 ,R2 and c) the
number N M of correctly predicted preferred relations.
The Unit Layout (Model M1 ) The computation of
PM1 (R1 , R2 |R3 ) is based on a heuristic for detours when moving by R3 in the so called unit layout. R1 and R2 describe the
detour. The farther the detour the smaller is the conditional
probability of R1 , R2 .
The unit layout is a rectangular subset of Z2 and separately
defined for each direction R3 . The brackets [·]R3 map the locations a and c each to a field in Z2 such that [a]R3 R3 [c]R3 .
Each pair of relations R1 , R2 with R3 ⊂ R1 ◦ R2 is likewise
mapped to a field in Z2 by [·]R3 such that
[a]R3 R1 [R1 R2 ]R3 and [R1 R2 ]R3 R2 [c]R3 .
The fields [a]R3 and [c]R3 must be chosen in such a way that
each [R1 R2 ]R3 is definite. That way, the unit layout is definite
in Z2 up to translations. Figure 4 shows the unit layout for
R3 = NW.

2120

1 The

source code is available at http://tiny.cc/hmi3f.

1

S-NW

SW-NW

SW-N

SW-NE

E-NW

a

W-NW

W-N

W-NE

NW-N

NW-NE

N-NW

NW-NW

NE-W

N-W

NW-W

c

NW-E

NE-SE

N-SE

NW-SE

NW-S

NW-SE

Figure 4: The unit layout for R3 = NW. Field a is to the northwest of c. All other field are uniquely labeled with relations
R1 -R2 . It holds for each of them that field a is R1 -wards of it
and it is R2 -wards of c.
For R3 ⊂ R1 ◦ R2 , the unit layout entails the costs of a “detour” moving from field [a]R3 via [R1 R2 ]R3 to [c]R3 utilizing a
metric d on Z2 .
R3

R

cR31 ,R2 :=

R3

R3

R3

d([a] , [R1 R2 ] ) + d([R1 R2 ] , [c] )
d([a]R3 , [c]R3 )

R

The costs cR31 ,R2 for R3 6⊂ R1 ◦ R2 are defined by the model
parameter distimposs. This cost measure entails the wanted
conditional probability:
R

M1

P

(R1 , R2 |R3 ) :=

cR31 ,R2

R2 = NE

R2 = E

R2 = SE

R2 = S

R2 = SW

R2 = W

R2 = NW

−1

0

1

NE-NW

R2 = N

0

SE-NW

N

NE

E

SE

S SW

NW N

NE

E

SE

S

SW

W

NW N

NE

E

SE

S

SW

W

NW N

NE

E

SE

S

SW

W

NW

Figure 5: Relative frequencies of R3 for task items with R1 =
NE from the experiment (circles: ◦) as well as M1 ’s (pluses:
+), and M2 ’s (crosses: ×) probabilities .
A Secondary Strategy (Model M2 ) Model M2 is an extension of the model presented in the preceding section. It
adds a probability gain gR1 ,R2 to the value of PRM11,R2 . This
gain implements priming effects on the relations R1 and R2 .
The amounts of priming towards R1 and R2 are controlled by
the model parameters firstprim and secondprim, respectively.
Values of 0 each void the priming effect.
The extent of this probability gain is in turn controlled per
task item by the certainty zR1 ,R2 of M1
zR1 ,R2 := max PRM11,R2 (R3 ).

−1
R
∑R′1 ,R′2 ∈B ′ cR3′ ,R′ .
1 2

R3 ∈B ′

This points out the influence of the model parameter
distimposs: For infinity, the model performs accurate and it
simulates errors for positive numbers.
This is how model M1 computes the conditional probability of the right-hand side of equation 3. The marginal probability of PM1 (R3 ) is a unit distribution which can be furnished with a probability gain for the main cardinal directions by cardinalgain and an additional gain towards the west
by westgain. The probability of PM1 (R1 , R2 ) is assumed to be
a unit distribution.
Parameter Variations Varying the metric d between Euclidian, Manhattan, and maximum had no noteworthy effect
on the quality estimation factors (CM , E M , N M ). So we chose
the euclidian metric, as it matches the intuitive concept of distance best. The model parameter distimposs was varied systematically between 20 and 200, the parameters cardinalgain
and westgain were varied between 0.1 and 0.9.
We found a maximal convergence against the empirical data with model parameters distimposs = 150,
cardinalgain = 0.2, and westgain = 0.2.
It has a mean correlation CM1 = 0.91, a summed error of
M
E 1 = 2.82 and predicts the preferred relation correctly in
N M1 = 59 cases. This instance of model M1 has a mean correlation of 0.96 in 60 items of the task. Nevertheless, the
mean correlation for the task items with opposing intermediate directions is as little as 0.17. This suggest the appearance
of another strategy in these cases.

The (yet to be normalized) probability distribution of M2 is
defined as
PRM12,R2 (R3 ) := zR1 ,R2 ·PRM11,R2 (R3 ) +(1−zR1 ,R2 )·gR1 ,R2 (R3 ).
It weakens M1 ’s probability distribution PRM11,R2 and strengthens the priming effect gR1 ,R2 as a function of decreasing certainty.
Parameter Variations In a systematic search through the
parameters of model M1 as well as firstprim and secondprim
we found an instance of M2 with mean correlation of CM2 =
0.94, summed error E M2 = 2.67 and N M2 = 62 correctly predicted items. Along with it, this instance has a mean correlation of 0.73 for the task items with opposed intermediate directions. The parameters were distimposs = 180, cardinalgain
= 0.1, westgain = 0.2, firstprim = 0.3 and secondprim = 0.2.
Figure 5 shows results both from model M1 and M2 for
R1 = NE. M2 ’s improvement is apparent for R2 = SW.

Interpretation
The following lines give a clue of how the found model parameters can be read as a hints on the underlying cognitive
processes.
Utilizing Experience The first model, M1 , shows that the
spatial reasoning task can be modelled by a Bayesian approach. The computation of P(R3 |R1 , R2 ) is based on an “intuition of the benefit” to move towards R1 first and then towards R2 to attain towards R3 overall. This intuition might

2121

reflect complying knowledge of the subject arising from basic experience navigating through the world.
It was possible to further increase the convergence of
the model towards the empirical data by means of higher
marginal probabilities of the cardinal directions, and additionally the west. This might reflect frequency effects for the
cardinal directions as well as an effect of the reading direction
for the western direction.

the diverse spatial calculi.
One point, however, is certain: the role of heuristics has
been vastly underestimated in explaining the preferences in
spatial reasoning.

References

Shifting Strategies Whereas model M1 behaved poorly for
tasks with opposed intermediate directions, model M2 ’s correlation on those could be improved by simulating priming
effects on the relations given by the current task item. Those
tasks excel in a high uncertainty about the answer. This suggests the subjects shift their strategy to be driven by priming
effects under uncertainty.

General Discussion
If incomplete information is available only (i.e. several relations are possible), humans tend to take a relation more into
account than others. This finding complements a series of
findings for preferred spatial reasoning with intervals (Rauh
et al., 2000), with the spatial relations right and left (Jahn,
Knauff, & Johnson-Laird, 2007), and with topological relations (Ragni, Tseden, & Knauff, 2007).
Our starting point was the question if it is possible to model
preference effects for cardinal directions in both theories (the
Mental Model Theory and the Bayesian rationality) based on
heuristics. Only by a formalization it is possible to compare
human reasoning to approaches in AI. A formal handling of
the preferred mental model theory by a consequence relation
allows to make precise predictions about which kind of conclusion(s) are drawn (from a given set of premises) and which
are neglected. These heuristics can be described by two principles: the in-between insertion principle and the cut principle. Both together can explain the preferences in the composition table (Figure 2) and support the theory of cognitive
economicity (Manktelow, 1999).
The primer raised question, if the Bayesian approach is expressible enough to model preference effects in spatial reasoning (with cardinal directions) can be positively answered.
Moreover, it reproduces the full frequency distribution quiet
well: The first model is based on a heuristic for detours which
explains the preferences (Figure 2). It has a mean correlation
of 0.91 and predicts the preferred relation correctly in 59 from
64 cases. The second model which adds a priming effect leads
to an increase from 0.17 to 0.73 in the correlation in the four
cases of opposed intermediate directions.
A possible limitation of the Bayesian model is connected
to the certainty of the conclusion. While each statement is
given with absolute certainty (Berlin is north-east of Paris)
a conclusion has only a degree of certainty. Taken together,
the results clearly indicate that the preference effect can be
explained by heuristics in both mental models and bayesian
approach. Further research necessarily requires an investigation for a general heuristic explaining preference relations for

Byrne, R. M., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1989). Spatial reasoning. Journal of Memory & Language, 28(5).
Hagert, G. (1984). Modeling mental models: Experiments in
cognitive modeling spatial reasoning. In T. O’Shea (Ed.),
Advances in artificial intelligence. Elsevier.
Hunter, I. M. (1957). The solving of three-term series problems. Br J Psychol, 48(4), 286–98.
Jahn, G., Knauff, M., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2007). Preferred mental models in reasoning about spatial relations.
Memory and Cognition.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2001). Mental models and deduction.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 5(10).
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (1991). Deduction.
Hove (UK): Erlbaum.
Knauff, M., Rauh, R., Schlieder, R., & Strube, G. (1998).
Continuity effect and figural bias in spatial relational inference. In Proceedings of the 20th cognitive science conference (pp. 573–578). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Ligozat, G. (1998). Reasoning about cardinal directions.
Journal of Visual Language Computing, 9(1), 23–44.
Manktelow, K. (1999). Reasoning and Thinking. Hove: Psychology Press.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (2007). Bayesian rationality
the probabilistic approach to human reasoning. Oxford
University Press.
Ragni, M., Fangmeier, T., Webber, L., & Knauff, M. (2007).
Preferred mental models: How and why they are so important in human spatial reasoning. In C. Freksa, M. Knauff,
B. Krieg-Brückner, B. Nebel, & T. Barkowsky (Eds.), Spatial cognition v. Berlin: Springer.
Ragni, M., Tseden, B., & Knauff, M. (2007). Cross cultural similarities in topological reasoning. In S. Winter,
M. Duckham, L. Kulik, & B. Kuipers (Eds.), Proceedings
of 8th International Conference on Spatial Theory, COSIT
2007 (Vol. 4736). Springer.
Rauh, R., Hagen, C., Schlieder, C., Strube, G., & Knauff, M.
(2000). Searching for Alternatives in Spatial Reasoning:
Local Transformations and Beyond. In Proceedings of the
22nd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Rips, L. J. (1994). The psychology of proof: Deductive reasoning in human thinking. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Russell, S., & Norvig, P. (2003). Artificial intelligence: A
modern approach (2nd ed.). Prentice-Hall.
Van der Henst, J. (2002). Mental model theory versus the
inference rule approach in relational reasoning. Thinking
and Reasoning, 8, 193-205.
Van der Henst, J., & Schaeken, W. (2007). The wording of
conclusions in relational reasoning. Cognition, 97, 1–22.

2122

