UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Probabilistic language acquisition: Theoretical, computational, and experimental analysis

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9bb0s32g

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Hsu, Anne
Chater, Nick

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Probabilistic language acquisition:
Theoretical, computational, and experimental analysis
Anne S. Hsu (ahsu@gatsby.ucl.ac.uk)
Division of Psychology and Language Sciences, 26 Bedford Way
London, WC1H 0AP

Nick Chater (n.chater@ucl.ac.uk)
Division of Psychology and Language Sciences, 26 Bedford Way
and Centre for Economic Learning and Social Evolution (ELSE)
London, WC1H 0AP

Abstract
There is much debate over the degree to which language
learning is governed by innate language-specific biases, or
acquired through cognition-general principles. Here we
examine the probabilistic language acquisition hypothesis on
three levels: We outline a theoretical result showing that
probabilistic learning in the limit is possible for a very general
class of languages. We then describe a practical
computational framework, which can be used to quantify
natural language learnability of a wide variety of linguistic
constructions. Finally, we present an experiment which tests
the learnability predictions for a variety of linguistic
constructions, for which learnability has been much debated.
We find that our results support the possibility that these
linguistic constructions are acquired probabilistically from
cognition-general principles.

Tenenbaum, 2009; Grünwald, 1994; Perfors, Regier, &
Tenenbaum, 2006; Regier & Gahl, 2004).
Here we examine language acquisition from a
probabilistic perspective on a theoretical, computational and
experimental level. We first revisit Gold’s theorem and
show that language identification is possible from a
probabilistic perspective. Next we mention a recently
proposed, general framework which can quantify
learnability of constructions in natural language. This
flexible framework allows for predictions to be made
concerning the natural language learnability of a wide
variety of linguistic rules. Finally, we experimentally test
the learnability predictions obtained from this framework by
comparing these predictions with adult grammaticality
judgments for a wide range of linguistic constructions.

Keywords: child language acquisition: Gold’s theorem;
poverty of the stimulus; probabilistic learning; simplicity
principle; adult grammar judgments; natural language

Introduction
A central debate in cognitive science revolves around
how children acquire their first language. A significant
portion of this debate centers on how children learn complex
linguistic structures, such as restrictions to general rules.
An example restriction-rule can be seen in the contraction of
‘going to’: ‘I’m gonna leave’ is grammatical whereas ‘I’m
gonna the store’ is ungrammatical. Language
communication requires the speaker to generalize from
previously heard input. However, research shows children
rarely receive feedback when they produce an over-general,
ungrammatical sentence. Children also aren’t explicitly told
which generalizations are allowed and which are not
(Bowerman, 1988). These observations evoke the question:
how do children learn that certain overgeneralizations are
ungrammatical without explicitly being told?
Traditionally, linguists have claimed that such learning is
impossible without the aid of innate language-specific
knowledge (Chomsky, 1975; Crain, 1991; Pinker, 1989;
Theakston, 2004). However, recently, researchers have
shown that statistical models are capable of learning
restrictions to general rules from positive evidence only
(Dowman, 2007; Foraker, Regier, Khetarpal, Perfors, &

Gold revisited: probabilistic language
acquisition with a simplicity prior
Inherent in a simplicity-based approach to language
acquisition is the trade-off between simpler vs. more
complex grammars: Simpler, over-general grammars are
easier to learn. However, because they are less accurate
descriptions of actual language statistics, they result in
inefficient encoding of language input, i.e. the language is
represented using longer code lengths. More complex
grammars (which enumerate linguistic restrictions) are more
difficult to learn, but they better describe the language and
result in a more efficient encoding of the language, i.e.,
language can be represented using shorter code lengths.
Under simplicity models, language learning can be viewed
in analogy to investments in energy-efficient, money-saving
appliances. By investing in a more complicated grammar,
e.g. one which contains a restriction on a construction, the
language speaker obtains encoding savings every time the
construction occurs. This is analogous to investing in an
expensive but efficient appliance that saves money with
each use. A linguistic restriction is learned when the
relevant linguistic context occurs often enough that the
accumulated savings makes the more complicated grammar
worthwhile. Because complex grammars become worth
while as linguistic constructions appear more often,

1720

simplicity models are able to learn restrictions based on
positive evidence alone (See Figure 1).

Figure 1: MDL simple grammar vs. efficient language
encoding trade off. A) A simpler grammar is often overgeneral, i.e., allows for ungrammatical sentences as well as
grammatical ones. Such an over-general grammar may be
easy to describe (i.e., short grammar encoding length), but
results in less efficient (longer) encoding of the language
data. B) A more complex grammar may capture the
language more accurately, i.e., allows only for grammatical
sentences and doesn’t allow for ungrammatical sentences.
This more complex grammar may be more difficult to
describe (i.e., longer grammar encoding length), but will
provide a shorter encoding of language data. C) Initially,
with limited language data, the shorter grammar yields a
shorter coding length over-all, and is preferred under MDL.
However, with more language input data, the savings
accumulated from having a more efficient encoding of
language data correctly favour the more complex grammar.
A central theoretical question is: given sufficient exposure
to the language, can the learner recover a perfectly accurate
description of that language? Gold (1967) famously showed
that, under certain assumptions, this is not possible.
However, a range of more positive results have since been
derived, e.g., (J. A. Feldman et al 1969; Chater & Vitányi
2007). Here we show that under a simplicity-based
probabilistic formulation, a new and strong positive result
can be derived.
Suppose that the learner encounters sentences, s, which
are independently sampled generated from a computable
probability distribution, CP(s), which has Kolmogorov
complexity K(CP). Here we will define learning a language
as the process of identifying this distribution. CP(s)
generates a corpus Sn = s1, s2,...sn,... which continues
indefinitely. We assume that CP(s) allows all and only
grammatical sentences in language L. That is, the
probability of generating all sentences s, that are
grammatical in L, is greater than zero, CP(s) > 0; and

conversely, if the probability of a sentence being generated
is greater than zero, then it is grammatical according to L.
There is one additional mild constraint that we need to
impose: that CP(s) has a finite entropy, i.e.,
∞
 1 
<∞
H (C p ) ∝ ∑ C p (s j )log
 C (s ) 
j =1
p
j


This is a modest constraint, because it follows from the
assumption that the mean sentence length under distribution
CP(s) is finite, which is clearly true for natural language.
The learning problem proceeds as follows: A learner is
given an initial sample of the corpus Sn. The question then
is: how should the learner assign probabilities to the various
possible computable distributions CQ that might have
generated the corpus? This is equivalent to learning:
Pr(CQ|Sn) ∝ Pr(Sn|CQ)Pr(CQ)
Also, we ask how these probabilities change as the corpus
grows arbitrarily long, i.e., as n tends to infinity? In
particular, can the learner identify the true probability
distribution, CP, in the limit?
Intriguingly, it turns out that this is possible – and indeed
that an ideal learner (Chater & Vitányi 2007)) will
‘converge’ on the true probability distribution, CP, with
probability of measure 1, given a sufficiently large corpus.
Suppose, for concreteness, that the learner “announces” its
current most probable generating distribution each time a
new sentence i arrives, based on the i sentences that he has
received so far Si = {s1, s2,..., si}. More formally, the
following theorem holds: Consider any computable
probability distribution CP, from which samples, si, are
drawn independently to generate a semi-infinite corpus S.
Let m’ be the number of initial items of S so that Sm’ is a
“prefix” of S (i.e., a corpus consisting of the first m’ items of
s). With probability greater than 1-ε, for any ε > 0, there is
an m such that, under the simplicity principle, for all m’≥m,
the most probable CQ, given Sm’ is the generating
distribution CP, i.e., argmax(Pr(CQ|Sm’))=Cp.
Why is this true? A full proof is beyond the scope of this
paper (see Chater & Hsu, in preparation); but the essence of
the argument is the following. We know that almost all
random samples from P will be incompressible (i.e., n
sentences generated by the true generative model P will
have no shorter description than the entropy nH(P)). This
implies that, for typical data generated by P (which have
summed probability arbitrarily close to 1), K(P)+nH(P) ≥
K(Sn)≥nH(P). Now for each Sn, consider the set of
probability distributions Q which satisfy this criterion:
K(Q)+nH(Q)≥K(Sn)≥nH(Q). For each n, there will be
finitely many such Q; and, by our argument above, these
will include the true distribution P. Now, for each n, the
learner “announces” the simplest Q’, i.e., the Q’ such that
for all Q, K(Q)≥K(Q’). We know that P will always be in
this set, by the argument above. However, there are only
finitely many Q that are simpler than P. Once these simpler
Q have been eliminated, then P will be the shortest element
in the set, and will be announced indefinitely thereafter. We
know that each of this finite set will be eliminated for

1721

sufficiently large n, because the expected excess cost of
encoding data generated by P with distribution Q is
nD(Q||P), where D(Q||P) > 0 unless Q=P; this excess cost
tends to infinity as n tends to infinity. Hence, for some n’>
n, after all probability distributions Q with shorter codes
than P have been eliminated, P will be announced
indefinitely.

Practical framework for quantifying
learnability
The positive learnability results indicate that the
probabilistic approach can be practically applied to the
problem of language acquisition. Recently, researchers have
used probabilistic models to show that many complex
linguistic rules can be acquired by directly learning the
probability distribution of grammatical sentence structures
in language. These models learn this probability distribution
under a cognition general prior for simplicity (Dowman,
2007; Foraker et al., 2009; Grünwald, 1994; Perfors et al.,
2006; Regier & Gahl, 2004). Many of these studies used
restricted language sets. In the context of natural language, a
few studies have addressed specific linguistic cases such as
anaphoric one (Foraker et al., 2009) and hierarchical phrase
structure (Perfors et al., 2006).
Recently, a general quantitative framework has been
proposed which can be used to assess the learnability of any
given specific linguistic restriction in the context of real
language, using positive evidence and language statistics
alone (Hsu & Chater, 2010). This framework built upon
previous probabilistic modeling approaches to develop a
method that is generally applicable to any given
construction in natural language. This new tool can be used
to explicitly explore the learnability in a corpus relative to
well-known information theoretic principles given a
grammatical description. When using this framework to
analyze learnability of a linguistic construction, there are
two main assumptions: 1) The description of the
grammatical rule for the construction to be learned. 2) The
choice of corpus which approximates the learner’s input.
Given these two assumptions, the framework provides a
method for evaluating whether a construction is present with
adequate frequency to make it learnable from language
statistics. The framework allows for comparison of different
learnability results which arise from varying these two main
assumptions. By making these assumptions explicit, a
common forum is provided for quantifying and discussing
language learnability.

Minimum Description Length hypothesis
Because this framework is detailed elsewhere (Hsu &
Chater 2010), we will only provide a brief overview here.
Learnability evaluations under a simplicity prior can be
instantiated through the principle of minimum description
length (MDL). MDL is a computational tool that can be
used to quantify the information available in the input to an
idealized statistical learner of language as well as of general
cognitive domains (Jacob Feldman, 2000). When MDL is

applied to language, grammars can be represented as a set of
rules, such as that of a probabilistic context free grammar
(PCFG) (Grünwald, 1994). An information-theoretic cost
can then be assigned to encoding the grammar rules as well
as to encoding the language under those rules.
Hsu & Chater (2010) used an instantiation known as 2part MDL, which we will refer to as just MDL for brevity.
In the context of language acquisition, the first part of MDL
uses probabilistic grammatical rules to define a probability
distribution over linguistic constructions, which combine to
form sentences. Note that these probabilities are not
necessarily the real probabilities of sentences in language,
but the probabilities as specified under the current
hypothesized grammar. The second part of MDL consists of
the encoded representation of all the sentences that a child
has heard so far. MDL selects the grammar that minimizes
the total encoding length (measured in bits) of both the
grammatical description and the encoded language length1.
According to information theory, the most efficient
encoding occurs when each data element is assigned a code
of length equal to the smallest integer greater than or equal
to -log2(pn) bits, where pn is the probability of the nth
element in the data. For our purposes, these elements are
different grammar rules. The probabilities of these grammar
rules are defined by the grammatical description in the first
part of MDL. Because efficient encoding results from
knowing the correct probabilities of occurrence, the more
accurately the probabilities defined in the grammar match
the actual probabilities in language, the more efficient this
grammar will be.
Under MDL, the grammatical description is updated to be
the most efficient one each time more data input is obtained.
Savings occur because certain grammatical descriptions
result in a more efficient (shorter) encoding of the language
data. In general, more complex (i.e., more expensive)
grammatical descriptions allow for more efficient encoding
of the language data. Because savings accumulate as
constructions appear more often, more complex grammars
are learned (i.e., become worth investing in) when
constructions occur often enough to accumulate a sufficient
amount of savings. If there is little language data (i.e., a
person has not been exposed to much language) a more
efficient encoding of the language does not produce a big
increase in savings. Thus, when there is less language data,
it is better to make a cheaper investment in a simpler
grammar as there is not as much savings to be made. When
there is more language data, investment in a more costly,
complicated grammar becomes worthwhile. This
characteristic of MDL learning can explain the early
overgeneralizations followed by retreat to the correct

1
The MDL framework can also be expressed as a corresponding
Bayesian model with a particular prior (Chater, 1996; MacKay,
2003; Vitányi & Li, 2000). Here, code length of the model (i.e.,
grammar) and code length of data under the model (i.e., the
encoded language) in MDL correspond to prior probabilities and
likelihood terms respectively in the Bayesian framework.

1722

Table 1: Grammatical and ungrammatical sentences used in experiment.
Construction
is
arrive
come
donate
fall
disappear
what is
shout
pour
vanish
whisper
create
who is
going to
suggest
that
want to

Grammatical usage
She's as tall as he is.
The train arrived.
The train came.
He donated some money to the charity.
The ornament fell.
The rabbit disappeared.
What's it for?
I shouted the news to her.
I poured the pebbles into the tank.
The rabbit vanished.
I whispered the secret to her.
I created a sculpture for her.
Who's it for?
I'm gonna faint.
I suggested the idea to her.
Who do you think that she called?
Which team do you wanna beat?

grammar that has been observed in children’s speech
(Bowerman, 1988). The output of the framework described
in Hsu & Chater (2010) results in an estimated number of
occurrences needed for a specific linguistic rule to be
learned and corpus analysis is then used to assess how many
years on average are needed for the sufficient number of
occurrences. The general applicability of this framework
and its ability to produce clear learnability predictions allow
us to take the crucial next step in addressing the language
acquisition problem: experimentally assessing whether
language might actually be probabilistically acquired.

Ungrammatical usage
She is as tall as he's.
He arrived the train.
I came the train.
He donated the charity some money.
He fell the ornament.
He disappeared the rabbit.
What's it?
I shouted her the news.
I poured the tank with pebbles.
He vanished the rabbit.
I whispered her the secret.
I created her a sculpture.
Who's it?
I'm gonna the store.
I suggested her the idea.
Who do you think that called her?
Which team do you wanna win?

results showed a large spread in learnability. Some
constructions appeared readily learnable within just a few
years whereas other constructions required years that far
outnumbered human life spans. Hsu & Chater (2010)
compared predicted MDL learnablity with child grammar
judgments of constructions for which there was data
collected from previous experimental work (Ambridge,
Pine, Rowland, & Young, 2008; Theakston, 2004). It was
found that child grammar judgments for the constructions
were more correlated with learnability than frequency
counts (the entrenchment hypothesis (Theakston, 2004)).

Testing learnability predictions
Hsu & Chater (2010) used the above framework to assess
language learnability of constructions, whose learnability
have been commonly debated. These all involve restrictions
on a general linguistic rule, which was described using
PCFG’s. Predictions for learnability in terms of years
needed was made for constructions whose learnability have
been commonly debated in the language acquisition field.
These included restrictions on the following 17
constructions2: contractions of want to, going to, is, what is
and who is; the optionality of that reduction; dative
alternation for the verbs donate, whisper, shout, suggest,
create, pour; transitivity for the verbs, disappear, vanish,
arrive, come, fall. See Hsu & Chater (2010) for the explicit
grammar descriptions of linguistic rules to be learned. The
2
Hsu & Chater (2010) also included analysis of two more
linguistic rules concerning the necessary transitivity of the verbs
hit and strike. Though these verbs are traditionally known to be
transitive, in colloquial speech they have evolved to have a
ambitransitive usage: e.g. The storm hit. Lightening struck. In
COCA there are 3678 and 1961 intransitive occurrences of hit and
strike respectively. Thus we did not assess rules regarding the
intransitivity of these verbs in our experiment.

Figure 2: Estimated years required to learn construction.
The constructions are sorted according to learnability: 1) is
2) arrive 3) come 4) donate 5) fall 6) disappear 7) what is
8) shout 9) pour 10) vanish 11) whisper 12) create 13) who
is 14) going to 15) suggest 16) that 17) *want to. *Predicted
years for learning want to is 3,800years.
Here we propose that construction learnability should also
correlate with adult grammaticality judgments: The more
difficult a construction is to learn, the greater the difference

1723

should be between judgments of the ungrammatical vs.
grammatical uses of the construction.

ungrammatical) 5) Sounds extremely odd (Definitely
ungrammatical).

Model Predictions

Results
Results show a strong correlation between averaged relative
grammaticality vs. log learnability as predicted by MDL,
r=.35; p=.0045 (see Figure 3). Relative grammaticality for a
given linguistic construction is the grammatical rating for
the ungrammatical sentence subtracted by the rating for the
grammatical sentence. Note that 4 is the maximum possible
relative grammaticality because the lowest ungrammatical
rating is 5 and the highest grammatical rating is 1. In
contrast, there is no correlation between relative
grammaticality and construction occurrence frequency, as
would be predicted by entrenchment (see Figure 4).

We conducted our learnability analysis using the full Corpus
of Contemporary American English (COCA), which
contains 385 million words (90% written, 10% spoken). We
believe this is a reasonable representation of the
distributional language information that native English
language speakers receive. Learnability results using the
British National Corpus were similar to that from COCA
(Hsu & Chater, 2010). Figure 2 shows the estimated
number years required to learn the 17 constructions. We
quantified learnability as log(1/Nyears), where Nyears was the
number of estimated years needed to learn a construction
(Hsu & Chater, 2010).
Learnability vs. entrenchment To verify that our
experimental results are not also trivially explained by a
simpler hypothesis, we will also compare experimental
results with the predictions of entrenchment theory.
Entrenchment is the hypothesis that the likelihood of a child
over-generalizing a construction is related to the
construction’s input occurrence frequency. There is some
relation between learnability and entrenchment predictions
because high construction occurrence frequencies do aid
learnability. However, learnability differs from mere
frequency counts because MDL also takes into account the
complexity of the grammatical rule that governs the
construction to be learned. Additionally, learnability is
influenced by whether the restricted form would be
commonly or uncommonly expected, if it were
grammatically allowed. Here, we propose that under
entrenchment hypothesis, the relative grammar judgment
difference should be related to the construction’s input
occurrence frequency. (Frequencies estimated from COCA).

Figure 3: Human grammar judgments vs. learnability
analysis. Learnability is log of the inverse of the number of
estimated years needed to learn the construction. Correlation
values: r=.35; p=.0045

Experimental method
Participants 105 participants were recruited for an online
grammar judgment study (age range: 16-75 years, mean=34
years). Results were included in the analysis only for
participants who answered that they were native English
speakers (97 out of 105 participants). The majority (74%) of
our participants learned English in the United States. Other
countries included the UK (14%), Canada (5%), Australia
(4%). The rest learned English in either Ireland or New
Zealand.
Procedure Participants were asked to rate the
grammaticality of grammatical and ungrammatical
sentences using the 17 constructions whose learnability
were quantified above. These sentences (34 total) are
shown in Table 1. Grammar judgments ranged from 1-5: 1)
Sounds completely fine (Definitely grammatical) 2)
Probably grammatical (Sounds mostly fine) 3) Sounds
barely passable (Neutral) 4) Sounds kind of odd (probably

Figure 4: Human grammar judgments vs. log of occurrence
frequency. Frequencies were estimated using Corpus of
Contemporary American English.

1724

Summary and Conclusions
This presented work helps evaluate how much of first
language is probabilistically acquired from exposure. We
show that, despite Gold’s theorem, language is identifiable
with a cognition general prior of simplicity under fairly
general assumptions. We then describe a recently
formulated framework which allows probabilistic
learnability to be quantified in the context of natural
language. This framework makes concrete predictions in
terms of years needed to learn particular linguistic rules,
given an assumed formulation of the rules to be learned and
the corpus which represents a learner’s language input.
There has now been a substantial body of work showing
that probabilistic language learning is theoretically and
computationally possible. The important next step in
research on language acquisition is to assess whether
probabilistic learning actually occurs in practice. Here we
make the supposition that if language is probabilistically
acquired, then there should be evidence of this in adult
grammar judgments. There is a subtle leap of logic in this
supposition. MDL learnability assumes that a grammar is
learned in an absolute sense: once a grammar is chosen
under MDL, that is the one used and there is no gradation of
knowledge. However, here we are conjecturing that
learnability should not only correlate with how long it takes
for linguistic rule to be acquired, but also with how certain
is one’s knowledge of that rule. The more certain one is of
a grammatical rule, the greater the difference should be
one’s acceptability rating of the ungrammatical form
relative to the grammatical form. Experimental results show
that predicted learnability correlates well with relative
grammar judgments for the 17 constructions analyzed,
chosen as controversial cases from the literature. Our
experimental results support the possibility that many
linguistic constructions that have been argued to be innately
acquired may instead be acquired by probabilistic learning.
Our learnability predictions were calculated using a large
corpus (COCA) to represent the distributional language
input that native English speakers receive. This assumes
that the distributional information estimated from this
corpus is representative of that which influenced the
language acquisition process in our adult participants. It also
allows for the possibility that a speaker’s certainty about
different linguistic rules is updated through adulthood using
probabilistic learning. If so, older adults might more certain
in their grammar judgments, is a direction for future work.

References
Ambridge, B., Pine, J., Rowland, C., & Young, C. (2008). The
effect of verb semantic class and verb frequency
(entrenchment) on children's and adults' graded judgements
of argument-structure overgeneralization errors. Cognition,
106, 87-129.
Bowerman, M. (1988). The 'No Negative Evidence' Problem:
How do Children avoid constructing an overly general

grammar? In J.Hawkins (Ed.), Explaining Language
Universals (pp. 73-101). Oxford: Blackwell.
Chater, N. (1996). Reconciling simplicity and likelihood
principles in perceptual organization. Psychological Review,
103, 566-581.
Chater, N. & Hsu, A. (in preparation). Language learning in
the limit: theory and practice.
Chater, N. & Vitányi, P.M.B. (2007). `Ideal learning' of
natural language: Positive results about learning from
positive evidence, Journal of Mathematical Psychology,
51,135-163.
Chomsky, N. (1975/1955). The Logical Structure of Linguistic
Theory. London: Plenum Press.
Crain, S. (1991). Language Acquisition in the Absence of
Experience. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 14, 597-612.
Dowman, M. (2007). Minimum Description Length as a
Solution to the Problem of Generalization in Syntactic
Theory. Machine Learning and Language, (in review).
Feldman, Jacob (2000). Minimization of boolean complexity
in human concept learning. Nature, 403, 630-633.
Feldman, J.A., Gips, J., Horning, J. J., & Reder, S. (1969)
Grammatical complexity and inference. Technical Report
CS 125, Stanford University.
Foraker, S., Regier, T., Khetarpal, N., Perfors, A., &
Tenenbaum, J. B. (2009). Indirect Evidence and the Poverty
of the Stimulus: The Case of Anaphoric One. Cognitive
Science, 33, 300.
Gold, E. M. (1967). Language identification in the limit.
Information and Control, 10, 447-474.
Grünwald, P. (1994). A minimum description length approach
to grammar inference. In S.Scheler, Wernter, & E. Rilof
(Eds.), Connectionist, Statistical and Symbolic Approaches
to Learning for Natural Language. (pp. 203-216). Berlin:
Springer Verlag.
Hsu, A. & Chater, N. (2010). The logical problem of language
acquisition: A probabilistic perspective. Cognitive Science,
2nd revision submitted.
MacKay, D. (2003). Information Theory, Inference, and
Learning Algorithms. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Perfors, A., Regier, T., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2006). Poverty of
the Stimulus? A rational approach. Proceedings of the
Twenty-Eighth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society, 663-668.
Pinker, S. (1989). Learnability and Cognition: The acquisition
of argument structure. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Regier, T. & Gahl, S. (2004). Learning the unlearnable: The
role of missing evidence. Cognition, 93, 147-155.
Theakston, A. (2004). The role of entrenchment in children's
and adults' performance on grammaticality judgment tasks.
Cognitive Development, 19, 15-34.
Vitányi, P. & Li, M. (2000). Minimum Description Length
Induction, Bayesianism, and Kolmogorov Complexity.
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, IT, 46, 446-464.

1725

