UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Prospective Perception

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/414524dd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Jordan, Jerome Scott
Witt, Jessica
Riley, Michael

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Prospective Perception
J. Scott Jordan (jsjorda@ilstu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Illinois State University, Campus Box 4620
Normal, IL 61761

Jessica K. Witt (jkwitt@purdue.edu)
Department of Psychological Sciences, Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907

Michael Riley (michael.riley@UC.Edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Cincinnati, 429-A Dyer Hall ML 0376
Cincinnati, OH 45221-0376

Abstract

moving stimuli), and implied friction (i.e., FD decreases as
a stimulus appears to move across a surface). Traditionally,
such findings are accounted for in terms of representationalmomentum, the idea being that the brain evolved to
represent dynamic as well as static stimulus properties.
Thus, when the moving stimulus vanishes, its representation
entails momentum and continues moving, as it were, in the
direction of represented motion. In a series of recent papers,
Jordan and colleagues have researched an alternative
account; namely, that FD is due to the anticipation
underlying action control. This interpretation is based on the
Theory of Event Coding (TEC; Hommel, Muessler,
Aschersleben, & Prinz, 2001) which assumes the following:
(1) actions are planned in terms of the distal effects they are
to produce, and (2) action-planning and perception share
overlapping neural dynamics. According to TEC therefore,
FD occurs because the stimulus’ movements are perceived
in terms of the action plans participants generate as they
interact with the stimulus. In one study (Jordan &
Hunsinger, 2008) it was discovered that when participants
simply observed the movements of the stimulus, FD was
larger for observers who had just recently learned to control
its movements via key presses on a computer keyboard.
According to TEC, when observers were simply observing
the movements of the stimulus, they were ‘perceiving’ those
movements in terms of the plans they had learned while
controlling it, due to the neural overlap of perception and
action-planning. In short, perception entails plans, and these
plans render perception inherently prospective.

In recent years, more and more data have come to fore that
indicate perception to be inherently prospective (i.e.,
anticipatory). The purpose of the present symposium is to
examine the research of three scholars who investigate
prospective perception from three different theoretical
perspectives: the Theory of Event Coding, the ActionSpecific Perception account, and Ecological theory. Panelists
will examine differences between theories and address the
extent to which prospective perception affords a means of
potentially integrating these theories.
Keywords: Prospective control; sensory-motor learning;
ecological psychology; Action-Specific Perception account:
affordances; anticipation.

What is Prospective Perception?
In recent years, more and more data have come to fore that
indicate perception to be inherently prospective (i.e.,
anticipatory). The purpose of this symposium is to present
research from three scholars who investigate prospective
perception. Each will discuss the types of dependent
variables they measure, the variables they manipulate, and
the theoretical frameworks they use to interpret their data.
Emphasis will be placed on differences and similarities
between theories, as well as possible means of overcoming
such differences. In the end, the panel will address what
exactly it means for perception to be prospective, and how
this might impact current theorizing in cognitive science.

The Theory of Event Coding

Action-Specific Perception Account

J. Scott Jordan is a cognitive psychologist who
investigates the well known finding that the perceived
vanishing point of a moving stimulus is displaced beyond
the actual vanishing point, in the direction the stimulus was
traveling just before it vanished (Hubbard, 2005). Numerous
studies have revealed that the magnitude of this forward
displacement (FD) varies systematically as a function of
stimulus factors such as velocity (i.e., FD increases as
stimulus velocity increases), movement direction (i.e.,
upward moving stimuli give rise to less FD than downward

Jessica Witt is a cognitive psychologist who also studies
perception, and does so in terms of a framework known as
the action-specific perception account. According to this
framework, perception is scaled to the abilities and
intentions of the perceiver. For example, when participants
intend to reach with a tool to targets that are just beyond
their reach, the targets look closer than they do when
participants intend to reach without the tool or when the
participants hold the tool but never intend to reach (Witt,

344

Proffitt, & Epstein, 2005). As another example, targets on
the ground look farther away to participants who intend to
throw a heavy ball to them compared with participants who
intend to throw a light ball (Witt, Proffitt, & Epstein, 2004).
However, after throwing a heavy ball, targets only look
farther away for participants who intended to throw again,
but not to participants who intended to walk (Witt et al.,
2004). Only effort for the action-about-to-be-performed
influences perception. In addition, as was reported in
Jordan & Hunsinger (2008), performance of a task and the
plans one generates during such performance, can influence
later perception. For example, softball players who were
hitting better selected a larger circle as matching the size of
the softball used during the game (Witt & Proffitt, 2005),
and golfers who are putting better select a larger circle as
matching the size of the hole (Witt, Linkenauger, Bakdash,
& Proffitt, 2008). This implies that better athletic
performance led players to perceive the target as larger.
Collectively, these findings are consistent with the actionspecific perception account, and support the assertion that
perception is scaled relative to the behavioral possibilities of
anticipated actions. Again, as was the case with Jordan, this
implies that perception is inherently anticipatory.

Discussion
Common to the Theory of Event Coding (TEC), the
Action-Specific Perception account (ASPA), and Ecological
Theory (ET), is the notion that perception is prospective.
The theories do differ, however, with TEC focusing on
overlapping neural structures, ASPA focusing on task
specificity, and ET focusing on information structures
available in the optic array. While these may seem to reduce
to an internal versus external difference, the members of the
panel will address the issue of whether or not this common
notion of prospective perception might constitute a means of
overcoming the computational-ecological divide that has
plagued cognitive science for decades..

References
Hommel, B., Müsseler, J., Aschersleben, G. & Prinz, W.
(2001). The theory of event coding (TEC): A framework
for perception and action planning. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 24, 849-937.
Hubbard, T. (2005). Representational momentum and
related displacements in spatial memory: A review of the
findings. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12, 822, 851.
Jordan, J. S., & Hunsinger, M. (2008). Learned patterns of
action-effect anticipation contributes to the spatial
displacement of continuously-moving stimuli. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 34, 113–124
Ramenzoni, V. C., Riley, M. A., Shockley, K., & Davis, T.
(2008). An information-based approach to action
understanding. Cognition, 106, 1059-1070.
Witt, J.K., Linkenauger, S.A., Bakdash, J.Z., Proffitt, D.R.
(2008) Putting to a bigger hole: Golf performance relates
to perceived size. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review,
15(3), 581‐585.
Witt, J. K., & Proffitt, D. R. (2005). See the ball, hit the
ball: Apparent ball size is correlated with batting average.
Psychological Science, 16, 937–938.
Witt, J.K., Proffitt, D.R., & Epstein, W. (2004). Perceiving
distance: A role of effort and intent. Perception, 33, 570590.
Witt, J. K., Proffitt, D. R., & Epstein, W. (2005). Tool use
affects perceived distance, but only when you intend to
use it. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 31, 880–888.

Ecological Theory
While on the one hand, the notion that perception takes
place in terms of behavioral possibilities might seem new to
cognitive science, the idea has been a foundational concept
in Ecological Psychology, where perception is argued to
take place in terms of affordances. That is, ecological theory
assumes we perceive the environment in terms of the
behaviors it affords. Michael Riley is an ecological
psychologist who studies affordance perception during
action perception. That is, he and his colleagues investigate
the patterns of environmentally-available information
generated by body-object systems and the ways perceivers
use such information. In one study (Ramenzoni, Riley,
Shockley, & Davis, 2008) he and his colleagues asked both
short and tall participants to indicate maximum overhead
reaching capabilities for both themselves and another
participant. The available perceptual information was
manipulated by changing the participants’ optically
specified eye-height. Participants were able to accurately
perceive the maximum overhead reach for both the ‘self’
and the ‘other’. However, when the perceiver’s eye-height
was increased, the perceived maximum overhead reach
increased for both judgments about both self and other.
Riley and his colleagues interpret these results as revealing a
rich source of environmentally-available information that
perceivers use when perceiving action possibilities. Given
these perceived possibilities refer to possible future
behaviors, they are, by definition, prospective.

345

