UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Risk attitude in decision making: A clash of three approaches

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/53k828j9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Yechiam, Eldad
Ert, Eyal

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Risk attitude in decision making: A clash of three approaches
Eldad Yechiam (yeldad@tx.technion.ac.il)
Faculty of Industrial Engineering and Management, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, 32000 Isreael

Eyal Ert (eert@hbs.edu)
Harvard Business School, Baker Library, 447
Boston, MA 02163, USA

We contrast this “latent constructs” approach with two
alternative views. The first is the classical economic
approach that addresses risk attitude as sensitivity to
differences in payoff variances (e.g., Pratt, 1964;
Preuschoff, Bossaerts, & Quartz, 2006). The second is a
recent view which suggests that “risk acceptance,” the
tendency of people to prefer (or avoid) risk over certainty is
a single primitive construct that cannot be further dissected
into the effect of gains and losses and the effect of
diminishing sensitivity, but does not necessarily reflect
sensitivity to variance (e.g., Brachinger & Weber, 1997).
There are different formulations of the risk acceptance
approach. For simplicity purposes we chose to focus on a
simplified interpretation, referring to risk acceptance as the
individual’s sensitivity to certain versus probable outcomes.
Thus, the risk acceptance hypothesis can be viewed as an
extreme case of the sensitivity to variance hypothesis. That
is, it suggests that the difference in variance is a necessary
but insufficient condition of individual sensitivity to risk.
The other necessary condition for risk sensitivity is a
condition activating the individual’s preference for certainty
versus uncertainty.
The three aforementioned approaches are related but have
distinct predictions that, surprisingly, have not been
previously contrasted. The first such prediction involves the
consistency between risk taking propensities in the gain and
loss domain. Under the latent construct approach, supposing
that indeed diminishing sensitivity underlies risk taking
between domains, then a negative association is expected
between risk taking in the gain and loss domains as implied
by the reflection effect (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979). For
example, if an individual discounts $1200 to a higher degree
than she discounts $600 and is consistent in this diminishing
sensitivity then she should be risk averse while choosing
between a sure win of $600 and a bet with equal chances to
win $1200 or nothing, but should be risk seeking when
these values are framed as losses. In contrast, models based
on the sensitivity to variance, as well as models of risk
acceptance would predict a positive correlation between
risky choices in the two domains, as individuals would
either seek or avoid variance in both domains. However,
the risk acceptance approach will have this prediction only
when the choice alternatives also differ in their levels of
certainty. These contrasting predictions are examined in
Experiment 1.

Abstract
We evaluate the consistency of different constructs affecting
risk attitude in individuals’ experiential decisions across
different levels of risk. Three major views concerning the
psychological constructs that underlie risk attitude are
contrasted. The first is the classical economic approach which
views risk as the sensitivity to differences in variance. The
second is the latent components approach suggesting the
importance of sensitivity to losses and diminishing sensitivity
to marginal increases in payoffs. The third approach, risk
acceptance, relates to the willingness to accept probable
outcomes over certainty. The results of three studies indicate
that: (1) Individuals do not exhibit consistency in their
sensitivity to variance (2) Across domains individuals are
consistent when deciding between constant versus probable
outcomes, refuting the prediction based on diminishing
sensitivity. (3) Risk acceptance entails different psychological
constructs when the decision involves co-occurring gains and
losses. The results are modeled with a quantitative index of
subjective risk.
Keywords: risk; choice; individual differences; cognitive
style.

Introduction
A dominant view of the psychological construct of
sensitivity to risk (or risk attitude) suggests that it in fact
represents the consistent sensitivity to different latent
components. The most prominent example of this idea is
prospect theory (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979) which
explains contingent risk taking in different domains by the
assumption that subjective values (or utilities) are based on
relative judgments reflecting the effect of two main
constructs: (a) Loss aversion – the idea that losses loom
larger than equivalent gains, and (b) Diminishing sensitivity
to marginal changes in payoff – the assertion that the
subjective impact of a change in the absolute payoff
decreases with the distance from zero. Recent cognitive
models of individual choice in decisions from experience
(see Hertwig et al., 2004) have adopted this view by
implementing these factors as two core components of
subjective utility: (a) loss sensitivity – the assumption that
individuals weigh gains and losses in a consistent fashion
(e.g., Busemeyer & Stout, 2002; Worthy, Maddox, &
Markman, 2007), and (b) diminishing sensitivity – the
assertion that people are consistent in discounting payoffs
magnitudes with the distance from zero (e.g., Ahn et al.,
2008).

320

The second prediction, which is the focus of Experiment
2, involves the consistency of the weighting of gains and
losses. Under the latent construct model’s assumption of
weighting of gains and losses, a positive correlation should
appear between choice problems differing in the magnitudes
of gains and losses regardless of factors like variance or
certainty. In contrast, the sensitivity to variance model
predicts that the largest consistencies would appear between
problems where the alternatives have the same levels of
variance. The risk acceptance approach predicts choice
consistency mostly when there are distinguishable
differences in levels of certainty, such as in the choice
between fixed and probabilistic outcomes. Experiment 3
focuses on the argument that risk acceptance involves a
single primitive construct, even when gain domain problems
are contrasted with choice problems involving both gains
and losses.
Our comparison of different potential accounts for
individual consistency in risk taking across tasks is closely
related to previous studies of consistency in risk taking
(Schoemaker, 1990) and to studies that compared models of
risk taking (e.g., Battalio, Kagel, & Jiranyakul, 1990;
Wakker et al., 2007). There are two major differences from
these previous studies: First, these studies have tended to
focus on the latent construct approach and did not
systematically investigate alternative approaches to the
psychological constructs underlying risk sensitivity.
Secondly, these studies have focused on one-shot choices
between described prospects, whereas we focus on risk
taking in decisions from experience (Hertwig et al., 2004).
In such decisions, Individuals do not get explicit
information about the distributions that underlie the
alternatives they face (e.g., the probabilities and payoff
sizes). However, by choosing repeatedly between the
different alternatives, and realizing the outcome of each
choice (which is drawn from the relevant distribution) they
can learn the potential outcomes associated with each
alternative and their likelihoods. Previous studies have
demonstrated that experience-based decision tasks have
many attractive features for studying individual risk taking.
It has been shown, for example, that such tasks have high
external validity in assessing individual differences in
decision making and that they are also relatively more
resistant to social desirability than descriptive gambles (see
review in Koritzky & Yechiam, 2010).

lower variance payoffs than the other (“H”). The main
within-subject manipulation pertained to the domain in
which choices were made. In the Gain condition choice
alternatives yielded positive outcomes, whereas in the Loss
condition outcomes were negative.
In order to differentiate between the “sensitivity to
variance” and the “risk acceptance” hypotheses, the tasks
were also distinguished with respect to the difference in the
levels of uncertainty. In two of the tasks selecting the safer
option eliminated probabilistic outcomes. We refer to these
tasks as the “Avoidable Uncertainty” (AU) condition. In the
other two tasks uncertainty could not be avoided since both
alternatives included probable outcomes. These tasks are
referred to as the “Unavoidable Uncertainty” (UU)
condition.
The diminishing sensitivity assertion implies negative
association between both domains in both the avoidable and
the unavoidable uncertainty conditions because high
diminishing sensitivity leads to risk seeking in the loss
domain and risk aversion in the gain domain. Notice that
this assertion also implies positive correlations between the
two gain problems, and between the two loss problems. The
risk acceptance assertion, however, suggests a positive
association between the two avoidable uncertainty
problems, and no association between the two unavoidable
uncertainty problems. In the avoidable uncertainty problems
there are clearer environmental signals concerning the
differences in uncertainty level, which supposedly trigger
risk acceptance tendencies. Finally, the sensitivity to
variance model predicts positive association between all
four choice problems due to one option being higher in
variance than the other, even in the unavoidable uncertainty
problems.
Forty undergraduates (20 males and 20 females)
participated in the experiment. The participants’ average age
was 24 (ranging between 19 and 27). Payoffs ranged
between NIS 14 and NIS 26 (NIS 1 = $4.5).
Each participant made 100 choices in each of the four
choice problems. The participants were informed that they
would be playing different games in which they would
operate “computerized money machines” which include two
unmarked buttons, and that their final payoffs would be
sampled from one of the “machines” but received no prior
information about the payoff distributions or the number of
trials. Their task was to select one of the machine’s two
unmarked buttons in each trial. The payoffs in each task
were contingent upon the button chosen and were randomly
drawn from the relevant distributions described in Table 1.
Final take-home amounts were determined according to the
accumulating score in one choice problem that was
randomly selected at the end of the experiment. The
performance score was converted into cash money at a rate
of 0.01 agora per 1 point (1 agora = 0.24 cents). The final
payoff was then determined by summing this amount with
the participation fee (NIS 25).
Two types of feedback immediately followed each
choice: (1) the basic payoff for the choice, which appeared

Experiment 1
The main purpose of our first study was to contrast the
“diminishing sensitivity” assertion (appearing in latent
component models such as prospect theory) with the
“sensitivity to variance” hypothesis, and the “risk
acceptance” assertion, by focusing on the main implication
of the diminishing sensitivity construct, namely the
contingent risk taking in the gain and loss domains. Each
participant was presented with four repeated choice tasks, as
described in Table 1. Each task included two alternatives
and one (referred to as “L”) was always associated with

321

on the selected button for two seconds, and (2) an
accumulating payoff counter, which was displayed
constantly, but was initialized at the beginning of each task.
The order of the Gain and Loss conditions was
counterbalanced, and the order of the two problems within
each condition was randomized. The location of alternatives
L and H was randomized across different participants. The
measure used in each task was simply the proportion of
choices of H across trials. There are therefore four variables
in this study (and subsequent ones) conforming to the rate of
H choices in each of the four choice problems.

and supports the risk acceptance assertion. Taking the UU
condition into account, the results show that in this
condition there was no association between the loss and gain
domains (r = .03, NS), which further supports the risk
acceptance assertion, since in the UU condition the
probabilistic outcome could not be avoided (or accepted). In
addition, participants were consistent between the two Gain
problems (r = .63, p < .0001) and between the two Loss
problems (r = .32, p < .02), suggesting that individuals
might exhibit diminishing sensitivity to a certain degree.
Therefore, it seems that the reflection effect, implied by
the diminishing sensitivity assertion, was not observed at
the individual level. Instead, participants exhibited a
consistent preference between a constant outcome and a
probable outcome across the gain and loss domains. This
suggests that risk acceptance modulates the consistency
across the gain and loss domain and that diminishing
sensitivity alone cannot account for it.
Additionally, the suggestion that the consistent sensitivity
to risk is due to mere variance differences cannot account
for the null correlations between gain and loss domain
problems in the Unavoidable Uncertainty condition. Still,
the variance difference in this condition was somewhat
smaller than in the Avoidable Uncertainty condition (and
thus it could be argued that this produced lower correlations
in this condition). In the next experiment we examine
problems that have the same exact differences in variance.

Table 1: Payoff schemes of the four experimental
conditions of experiment 1.
Domain
Gain

Condition
Avoidable
Uncertainty

Gain

Unavoidable
Uncertainty

Loss

Avoidable
Uncertainty

Loss

Unavoidable
Uncertainty

Payoff
L: win 600
H: 50% to win 1200,
50% to win 0
L: 50% to win 500,
50% to win 400
H: 50% to win 890,
50% to win 10
L: lose 600
H: 50% to lose 1200,
50% to lose 0
L: 50% to lose 500,
50% to lose 400
H: 50% to lose 890,
50% to lose 10

P(H)
0.26

0.31

0.45

0.49

Experiment 2
The second experiment was designed to examine whether
loss sensitivity indeed modulates risk taking behavior in
problems involving gains and losses, or whether its effect
are due to risk acceptance (or sensitivity to variance) as
well. This was accomplished by contrasting two conditions
involving losses and gains: A condition with strong
differences in uncertainty level (i.e., the participants could
opt for not selecting the gamble and get a sure outcome of
zero) and a condition where the differences in uncertainty
were smaller (i.e., selecting the safer option decreased the
magnitude, but not the frequency of losses). We examined
whether participants would still be consistent in their
response to losses (across two choice problems) in the latter
condition.
Under the latent component approach the loss-sensitivity
construct involves pure sensitivity to the magnitude of
losses compared to gains. Therefore, consistency is expected
to be maintained regardless of the differences in uncertainty.
Similarly, under the sensitivity to variance approach a
positive correlation is expected to emerge as long as the
alternatives maintain the same difference in variance.
However, under the risk acceptance approach consistency is
only expected to emerge in the condition where there are
substantial differences in the level of uncertainty.
Each participant was presented with four repeated choice
tasks, as described in Table 3. The tasks involved two
conditions differing in the capacity of decision makers to
avoid probabilistic outcomes. In two of the tasks selecting

Table 2: Spearman correlations between risk-taking in the
different tasks in Experiment 1 (AU = Avoidable
Uncertainty; UU = Unavoidable Uncertainty).
AU
AU
UU

Gain
Loss
Gain
Loss

Gain
1.00
.45*
.63*
.17

UU
Loss
1.00
.22
.35*

Gain

1.00
.03

Loss

1.00

* p < .05

Results
The choice proportions under the different conditions are
summarized in the rightmost column of Table 1. The
findings at the aggregate level show that people took more
risk in the loss domain than in the gain domain (t(39) =
3.98, p < .001). There were no significant differences in risk
taking between the AU and the UU conditions (t(39) = 1.41,
NS).
The consistency of individuals’ risk taking across the
different tasks is presented in Table 2. The results show that
in the AU condition there was a positive association
between the gain and loss domains (r = .45, p < .01), which
stands in contrast to the diminishing sensitivity hypothesis,

322

aggregate level it seems that the participants tended to take
more risk in the AU than in the UU condition (t(29) = 3.15,
p < .01). Additionally, in both conditions participants did
not appear to exhibit loss aversion, consistent with previous
findings in experience-based tasks (e.g., Erev et al., 2008).
Table 4 presents the consistency of individuals’ risk
taking across tasks. The results reveal that despite showing
no loss aversion on average, participants were highly
consistent between the AU problems, in which risks could
be avoided (r = .54, p < .01) but not in the UU problems,
where risks could not be avoided (r = .13, NS).
Also, the participants did not show consistency across the
two High-Variance and Low-Variance tasks, inconsistently
with implication of the risk as variance. The correlations
within each of the two pairs of High and Low variance tasks
were small (r = .07, .13) and insignificant. This suggests that
what makes participants respond consistently to high and
low variance alternatives is not their mere variance.
This pattern suggests that the consistency in risk taking
with losses is not driven by an accounting balance that
inflates gains or losses (e.g., a weighted average of gain and
loss amounts) nor is it driven only by sensitivity to variance.
Rather, the participants were only consistent when a risky
alternative involving losses and gains was contrasted with a
safe alternative offering a fixed outcome. This indicates that
the consistent construct in the mixed domain involves risk
acceptance. Without strong signals of differences in risk
level in the form of constant versus probabilistic outcomes,
the correlation appears to disappear.

the safer option eliminated the probability of losing. We
refer to these tasks as the “Avoidable Uncertainty” (AU)
condition. In the other two tasks uncertainty differences
between alternatives were smaller and both alternatives
included possible losses occurring with the same frequency
(but differing in magnitude). Accordingly, these tasks are
referred to as the “Unavoidable Uncertainty” (UU)
condition. A second within-subject manipulation pertained
to the level of variance associated with the riskier option. In
condition “Low Variance” the standard deviation associated
with alternative H (SD = 100) was one fifth of that
associated with the corresponding alternative in condition
“High Variance” (SD = 500). This enabled us to evaluate
the consistency across different levels of variance and
compare the consistency in the AU and UU conditions.
Thirty (15 males and 15 females) undergraduate students
participated in the experiment. Their average age was 24
(ranging from 20 to 27). Payoffs varied between NIS 25 and
NIS 33. The procedure was as in Experiment 1 except that
the experiment focused on the tasks described in Table 3,
and the conversion rate was 1 agora per 1 point.
Table 3: Payoff schemes of the four experimental
conditions of Experiment 2.
Condition
Avoidable
Uncertainty

Variance
Low

Avoidable
Uncertainty

High

Unavoidable
Uncertainty

Low

Unavoidable
Uncertainty

High

Payoff
L: win 0
H: 50% to win 100,
50% to lose 100
L: win 0
H: 50% to win 500,
50% to lose 500
L: 50% to win 50,
50% to lose 50
H: 50% to win 150,
50% to lose 150
L: 50% to win 250,
50% to lose 250
H: 50% to win 750,
50% to lose 750

P(H)
0.64

0.61

Experiment 3
From the results of Experiments 1 and 2 one can conclude
that the main construct modulating people’s responses is
risk acceptance. Yet an alternative suggestion is that while
risk acceptance consistently affects people’s responses, this
is limited to situations involving no explicit comparisons
between gains and losses. Under the latent construct model,
in the latter situation risk taking (i.e., selecting the high
variance option) is solely due to the weighting of gains and
losses and not due to diminishing sensitivity (because
diminished sensitivity is balanced for gains and losses).
While the pure weighting of gains and losses hypothesis
was rejected in Experiment 2, it can still be argued that risk
acceptance is an independent psychological construct when
gains and losses are explicitly compared. The goal of
Experiment 3 was therefore to examine whether risk
acceptance is a single psychological construct or whether it
implicates a second construct when the outcomes involve
frequently appearing gains and losses. This was examined
by comparing the consistency of risk taking across Gain and
Mixed domain problems (as shown in Table 5). A second
within-subject manipulation pertained to the level of risk. In
Condition “Low Variance” alternative H was associated
with a standard deviation smaller by half than in condition
“High Variance” (SD = 1000, 2000, respectively).
Fifty (25 males and 25 females) undergraduate students
participated in the experiment. Their average age was 24

0.52

0.51

Table 4: Spearman correlations between risk-taking in the
different tasks in Experiment 1 (AU = Avoidable
Uncertainty; UU = Unavoidable Uncertainty).

AU Low var
High var
UU Low var
High var

Low var
1.00
.54*
.07
.20

AU
High var
1.00
-.08
.13

UU
Low var High Var

1.00
.13

1.00

* p < .05

Results
The choice proportions under the different conditions are
summarized in the rightmost column of Table 3. At the

323

(ranging from 21 to 28). Payoffs varied between NIS 20-30.
The procedure was as in Experiment 1 except that the
experiment focused on the tasks described in Table 5. The
conversion rate was 1 agora per 1 point.

A quantitative index of subjective risk
The results of the current studies support the “risk
acceptance” approach although suggesting that the
psychological construct of risk acceptance could be different
in a domain with both gains and losses. Yet a more
challenging goal is to use these findings in an attempt to
develop a quantitative index for what makes people respond
consistently to risk. Individual differences studies indicate
that a trait should be measured in a situation when it is
relevant, which therefore involves a decision between a nontrivial amount of risk and a very low amount of risk.
Therefore, the subjective difference in the risk of the
alternatives is expected to lead to increased behavioral
consistency in risk taking levels. We evaluated two
quantitative indices for the emergence of consistency based
on such subjective differences. A simple index was based on
the idea that variance differences lead to consistency.
According to this idea, the larger the differences in variance,
the better a person differentiates between alternatives; and is
thus more consistent in his or her risk taking behavior.
An alternative account involves the assumption that
differences in subjective risk level (and therefore individual
consistency) increase as a function of differences in
variance but also decrease as a function of the distance from
zero. This actually incorporates the two constructs that
received only limited support in the experimental studies
(sensitivity to payoff variance and diminishing sensitivity to
marginal returns) into one construct that was largely
supported by the experimental data (risk acceptance). This
account can lead to a following index for subjective risk
differences:
S = Sdiff / ∑(|pi⋅xi|)
(1)
Where S is the Risk-Difference Signal (RDS), Sdiff is the
difference in standard deviation of the two distributions, pi
is the probability for each outcome i and and xi is its size.
Under both accounts the risk differences in a problem pair
are assumed to aggregate as follows:
C = S1⋅ S2
(2)
This yields a parameter-free index C (of predicted
consistency). The problems of Studies 1-3 were re-arranged
into 18 pairs (representing all possible pairs within each
study), and the risk difference in each pair was determined
according to the two alternative indices. Then, the predictive
ability of the two indices was determined by calculating the
correlations between the predicted consistency of each pair
and its actual consistency in risk level. The variance based
index produced a correlation of 0.23, while the RDS index
produced a correlation of 0.37 when predicting the
consistency across all 18 comparisons.
A post-hoc version of the RDS, which differentiates nonmixed (gain or loss domain) from mixed (gain and loss)
problems and is otherwise identical to the original index
was also examined. It yields an average correlation
(between predicted and actual consistency) of 0.80 for 14
relevant pairs: r = 0.68 for non-mixed problems (n = 7) and
0.91 for mixed problems (n =7). For the variance-based

Table 5: Payoff schemes of the four experimental
conditions of Experiment 3.
Condition
Mixed

Variance
Low

Mixed

High

Gain

Low

Gain

High

Payoff
L: win 0
H: 50% to win 1000,
50% to lose 1000
L: win 0
H: 50% to win 2000,
50% to lose 2000
L: win 1000
H: 50% to win 2000,
50% to win 0
L: win 2000
H: 50% to win 4000,
50% to win 0

P(H)
0.55

0.56

0.28

0.30

Table 6: Spearman correlations between risk-taking in the
different tasks in Experiment 3.

Mixed Low var
High var
Gain
Low var
High var

Mixed
Gain
Low var High var Low var High Var
1.00
.57*
1.00
.06
.11
1.00
.14
.14
.55*
1.00

* p < .05

Results
The choice proportions under the different conditions are
summarized in the rightmost column of Table 5. The results
show that people took more risk on average in the Mixed
condition than in the Gain condition under relatively low
risk (t(49) = 4.71, p < .01) and also under higher risk (t(49)
= 2.93, p < .05). This pattern is again inconsistent with loss
aversion. It does replicate previous results in experiencebased tasks (e.g., Erev et al., 2008).
The consistency of individuals’ risk taking across the
different tasks is presented in Table 6. The results reveal
that participants were highly consistent between the two
Mixed problems (r = .57, p < .01) and between the two Gain
problems (r = .55, p < .01). However, participants were not
consistent across the two problems: the association between
the proportions of H choices in the two domains was small
(average r = .11) and insignificant. These results suggest
two separate construct for gains and losses of similar
magnitudes. Another interpretation rests on the special case
of a constant outcome of zero. It might be that the mixed
condition was dissociated from the gain condition because
participants have a special psychological tendency to
respond to the absolute zero.

324

index the correlations are only 0.47 and 0.63, respectively.
Thus, the results of the current three studies cannot be
interpreted by a parsimonious model resting just on variance
differences. Rather, two additional assumptions must be
made: (a). Subjective risk differences decrease as a function
of the distance from zero, and (b). Two constructs of risk
acceptance should be assumed: one for gain or loss domain
problems and a unique construct for mixed outcomes.

participants exhibit consistency in their risk taking levels.
Yet the current analysis also shows that the consistencies
found are far from being coincidental, and it sheds light on
the factors that modulate this behavioral consistency. A
construct that seems to trigger the consistent tendency to
take risk is the “risk acceptance” factor denoting
individuals’ sensitivity to differences in risk level when
such differences are clearly perceived (such as in a decision
between a constant outcome and a riskier prospect). When
differences in risk level are less clear, lower consistency
between different decision problems is observed.

Discussion
The main purpose of the current study was to shed light on
the constructs leading to internal consistency in individuals’
risk taking in experience-based decisions. Three approaches
were contrasted: One suggesting that loss-sensitivity and
diminishing sensitivity are the main factors that underlie
individual differences in risk taking (see Busemeyer &
Stout, 2002; Ahn et al., 2008), the other suggesting that the
acceptance or the rejection of uncertainty is the principle
factor modulating people’s risk taking (Brachinger &
Weber, 1997), and the third suggesting that sensitivity to
differences in variance guides risk preferences (e.g., Pratt,
1964). To our knowledge, no previous studies have
systematically evaluated the contrasting predictions of these
approaches for the consistency of individual predispositions.
The findings of the three studies have important
implications for the definition of subjective risk.
Throughout the paper, and following the common
convention in experimental studies of risky decisions in
general and decisions from experience in particular, we have
associated risk taking behavior with choices of the option
with the higher variance as our point of departure.
Nevertheless, our findings show that differences in
variances alone do not drive individual consistencies in
choosing the risky (higher variability) option. Rather, we
have highlighted a second necessary condition: the presence
of certainty. We view this finding as an example of a more
general factor modulating individual consistencies,
involving the extent to which the alternatives differ in their
level of (un)certainty, with the case of certainty versus
uncertainty being an extreme contrast along this axis. It
appears that such a contrast is necessary in order to obtain
consistency in risk taking even in problems that are
relatively similar in terms of their payoff domain (e.g., the
mixed domain problems of Experiment 2).
Additionally, the results of Experiment 1 confirmed the
predictions of the risk acceptance construct for the
consistency across domains (gains versus loss outcomes). In
particular, this construct indicates positive consistency
across domains, implying that people who take risks with
gains also take risks with losses. This pattern contradicts the
prediction based on diminishing sensitivity, which implies a
negative correlation across domains (as explained above). It
appears that the more consistent construct is risk acceptance.
In conclusion, as in previous examinations of individual
risk taking, this construct was found to be consistent only in
limited settings. Only in 6 out of 18 possible comparisons
between simple experiential decision tasks did the

References
Ahn, W.Y., Busemeyer, J.R., Wagenmakers, E.J., & Stout,
J.C. (2008). Comparison of decision learning models
using the generalization criterion method. Cognitive
Science, 32, 1376-1402.
Battalio, R.C., Kagel, J.H., & Jiranyakul, K. (1990). Testing
between alternative models of choice under uncertainty:
Some initial results. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 3,
25-50.
Brachinger, H.W., & Weber, M. (1997). Risk as primitive:
A survey of measures of perceived risk. OR Spectrum, 19,
235-250.
Busemeyer, J.R., & Stout, J.C. (2002). A contribution of
cognitive decision models to clinical assessment:
Decomposing performance on the Bechara gambling task.
Psychological Assessment, 14, 253-262.
Erev, I., Ert, E., & Yechiam, E. (2008). Loss aversion,
diminishing sensitivity, and the effect of experience on
repeated decisions. Journal of Behavioral Decision
Making, 21, 575-597.
Hertwig, R., Barron, G., Weber, E.U., & Erev, I. (2004).
Decisions from experience and the effect of rare events in
risky choice. Psychological Science, 15, 534-539.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An
analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica, 47, 263291.
Koritzky, G., & Yechiam, E. (2010). On the robustness of
decision tasks to response distortion. Journal of
Behavioral Decision Making, 23, 83-99
Pratt, J.W. (1964). Risk aversion in the small and in the
large. Econometrica, 32, 122-136.
Preuschoff, K., Bossaerts, P., & Quartz, S.R. (2006). Neural
differentiation of expected reward and risk in human
subcortical structures. Neuron, 51, 381-390.
Schoemaker, P.J.H. (1990). Are risk-attitudes related across
domains and response modes? Management Science, 36,
1451-1463.
Wakker, P.P., Köbberling, V., & Schwieren, C. (2007).
Prospect-Theory’s
diminishing
sensitivity
versus
economic’s intrinsic utility of money: How the
introduction of the Euro can be used to disentangle the
two empirically. Theory and Decision, 63, 205-231.
Worthy, D. A., Maddox, W.T., & Markman, A.B. (2007).
Regulatory fit effects in a choice task. Psychonomic
Bulletin and Review, 14, 1125-1132.

325

