UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Seeing Language Learning Inside the Math: Cognitive Analysis Yields Transfer

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2n8407gq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Koedinger, Ken
McLaughlin, Elizabeth

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Seeing Language Learning inside the Math: Cognitive Analysis Yields Transfer
Kenneth R. Koedinger (koedinger@cmu.edu)
Human-Computer Interaction Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15217 USA

Elizabeth A. McLaughlin (mimim@cs.cmu.edu)
Human-Computer Interaction Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15217 USA

(Heffernan & Koedinger, 1997; 1998). Table 1 shows
examples of symbolization problems, which ask students to
translate a story problem into an algebraic expression. The
obvious potential connection between language learning
processes and this task is in learning to read and
comprehend story problems. While such learning is indeed
a significant challenge for elementary students (Cummins,
Kintsch, Reusser, & Weimer, 1988), our past data provided
evidence that comprehending story problems is no longer a
major sticking point for most beginning algebra students.
This claim can be illustrated by an analogy to foreign
language translation: Translating a story problem to algebra
is like translating English to Greek. For an English speaker,
the difficulty in translating to Greek is not comprehending
the English, but generating the Greek. Similarly, the
challenge for older students in a beginning algebra course is
much less in understanding the English in which the story
problems are written and more in being able to express that
understanding algebraically, that is, in the language of
algebra.
One indication that comprehension of algebra story
problems is not a major sticking point for beginning algebra
students comes from Heffernan and Koedinger’s (1998) data
showing that students can solve story problems (produce a
value for the dependent or “y” variable when a value for the
independent or “x” variable is given) much more accurately
(63% correct) than they can symbolize (write an equation
relating x and y) a story problem (18% correct). Since
solving requires comprehension of the story, the
performance difference is suggestive that symbolizing is
problematic for students in ways beyond the demands of
sentence comprehension. A second indication presents a
contrast with a difficulty experienced by Artificial
Intelligence systems programmed to solve story problems,
namely that of understanding the arithmetic relationships
between quantities described in the story (Bobrow, 1968).
We created problems where natural implicit descriptions of
such relationships (e.g., “Ms. Lindquist teaches 62 girls.
Ms. Lindquist teaches b boys.”) are supplemented
(Heffernan & Koedinger, 1997) or replaced (Koedinger,
Alibali, & Nathan, 2008) with explicit descriptions (e.g.,
“The number of students Ms. Lindquist teaches is equal to
the number of boys plus the number of girls.”), which are
much easier for a program to process. We found, however,
that providing such explicit descriptions does not

Abstract
Achieving and understanding effective transfer of learning
requires a careful analysis of the hidden knowledge and skills
to be transferred. We present an experiment that tests a subtle
prediction of such an analysis. It concluded that a critical
difficulty in students’ learning to translate algebra story
problems into symbolic expressions is in learning the
grammar of such expressions. We hypothesized that exercises
requiring students to substitute one algebraic expression into
another would enhance students’ algebraic grammar
knowledge. This hypothesis led to a counter-intuitive
prediction that learning to symbolize story problems could be
better enhanced through practice on dissimilar looking
substitution exercises than through practice on more similar
looking story problems. We report on an experimental
comparison involving 303 middle school students that
supports this prediction. We discuss how having learners
externalize a uniform abstract form and get interactive
feedback on it may be important factors in enhancing transfer.
Keywords: cognitive task analysis; transfer; grammar
learning; mathematics education.

Introduction
Humans learn language before they have a language to use
to learn. Might the learning processes that make this
amazing feat possible, like the capability to learn
grammatical structures through experience without explicit
instruction, be useful for other kinds of learning tasks?
Once children have acquired language, are the cognitive
functions employed in language learning no longer useful?
For instance, as students take courses in complex academic
topics, like algebra, does all that brain matter for language
learning have nothing to do? Or is it possible that some of
the same implicit learning mechanisms employed in
language learning are useful for learning math and science?
This paper does not aim to provide conclusive answers to
these questions, however, it does provide a compelling
demonstration that grammar learning processes may be
important in learning mathematics. Students may engage in
such learning without explicit awareness and such implicit
learning may be more prevalent in academic learning than is
generally recognized (e.g., Alibali & Goldin-Meadow,
1993; Landay & Goldstone, 2007). In earlier work, we
performed a cognitive task analysis of the important task
domain of “symbolization”, that is, the ability to model
problem situations or “story problems” in algebraic symbols

471

Table 1. Eight two-step symbolization items in order from easiest to hardest.
name
cds

mcdona

children

sisters

students
rowboat
trip

jacket

Item

Answer

Mary opened a new music store. She got CDs delivered on her first day. She got 5 truck loads of CDs
delivered. Each truck that arrived dropped off 12 boxes. Each box she received had c CDs. Write an
expression for how many CDs were delivered that first day.
Mike starts a job at McDonald's that will pay him 5 dollars an hour. Mike gets dropped off by his parents at the
start of his shift but he takes a taxi home that costs him 7 dollars. Mike works an h hour shift. After taking
into account his taxi ride, write an expression for how much he makes in one night.
John and his wife Beth have been saving to give their 5 children presents for the holidays. John has saved 972
dollars for presents and Beth has saved b dollars. They give each child the same amount. Write an expression
for how much each child gets.
Sue made 72 dollars by washing cars to buy holiday presents. She decided to spend m dollars on a present for
her mom and then use the remainder to buy presents for each of her 4 sisters. She will spend the same amount
on each sister. Write an expression for how much she can spend on each sister.
Ms. Lindquist is a math teacher. Ms. Lindquist teaches 62 girls. Ms. Lindquist teaches f fewer boys than girls.
Write an expression for how many students Ms. Lindquist teaches.
Ann is in a rowboat on a lake. She is 800 yards from the dock. She then rows for m minutes back towards the
dock. Ann rows at a speed of 40 yards per minute. Write an expression for Ann's distance from the dock.
Bob drove 550 miles from Boston to Pittsburgh to visit his grandmother. Normally this trip takes him h hours,
but on Tuesday there was little traffic and he saved 2 hours. Write an expression for what was his average
driving speed.
Mark went to the store to buy jackets that cost d dollars. When he got there the store was having a sale of 1/3
off the usual prices. Write an expression for how much the jacket cost him.

5*12*c

5*h-7

(972+b)/5

(72-m)/4

62+62-f
800-40m
550/(h-2)

d-1/3*d

The comprehension demands of the two one-operator
problems are quite similar to that of the two-operator
problem as the words and sentences used in each are
substantially overlapping if not quite identical.
The
production demands, however, have an important
difference. To correctly produce the algebraic expression
for the one-step problems, 62+b and 62-f, learners need only
acquire the mental equivalent of the grammar rule
“expression => quantity operator quantity”. However, this
syntactic knowledge is not sufficient to produce twooperator symbolic expressions, like 62+62-f. To do so,
requires the acquisition of knowledge equivalent to
additional grammar rules that allow for an expression to be
embedded inside another expression. More formally,
producing two-operator symbolic expressions requires the
equivalent of grammar rules like “expression => quantity
operator expression” and “expression => expression
operator quantity”. Figure 1 illustrates how the first two of
the three grammar rules above can combine to produce twooperator expressions like 62+62-f.

significantly improve the performance of beginning algebra
students (77% on explicit vs. 79% on implicit in Koedinger,
Alibali, & Nathan, 2008 and 53% vs. 50%, respectively, in
Heffernan & Koedinger, 1997).
A third indication that problem comprehension is not a
major sticking point identifies difficulties on the production
side of the translation process (i.e., going from
understanding to the target language, Algebra in this case)
rather than the comprehension side (i.e., going from the
source language, English story problems, to understanding).
Heffernan and Koedinger (1997) contrasted the two-step
problems shown in Table 1 (e.g., see the students problem
in the fifth row) with matched one-step counter parts (e.g.,
see the first two rows in Table 2 for the one-step
counterparts of the two-step students problem). In each
matched set, the two one-step problems are designed to have
essentially the same content as the two-step problem. Using
the students problem as an example, the two-step problem
requires the solver to understand that 1) the total number of
Ms. Lindquist's students is the sum of the number of girls
and number of boys and 2) that the number of boys is
difference between the number of girls and the variable f.
The one-step problem "a" in Table 2 requires understanding
of first of these relationships and the other one-step problem
"b" requires understanding the second of these. Heffernan
and Koedinger (1997) found that student performance on
symbolizing two-operator problems was significantly worse
(40% correct) than combined performance on two matched
one-operator problems (62% correct). (Note that average
performance on a single one-operator problem is even better
at 79% correct.)

Figure 1: Grammar tree for a two-operator expression.

472

so that students never saw an item that has the same answer
(or answer part) as another. The items were organized in
three phases: 1) five pre-test items, 2) seven integrated
instructed and post-test items, and 3) four filler items. The
first two phases are relevant to the study design and are
illustrated in Table 3. (The filler items are the one-step or
substitution items the other condition received as instruction
and were included to collect data on item difficulty.)

To be sure, we are not saying that students need to learn
such grammar rules explicitly, but simply that they need to
implicitly acquire the skills that are consistent with the
patterns these rules describe. But the difference between
two-step and one-step performance implicates such
syntactic skill. In other words, that students are significantly
worse at solving a single two-step problem than they are at
solving both of the matched one-step problems is evidence
that they lack implicit knowledge of grammar for combining
expressions. There are alternative hypotheses to be sure
(some of which were explored in Heffernan & Koedinger,
1997, 1998), but a strong test is to use this hypothesis to
design purportedly better instruction and test whether it is
indeed better.
So, for instruction, the ideal would be to find a task that
isolates learning of these implicit “hidden” grammar rules.
A task that does so is a substitution exercise, as illustrated in
the last row of Table 2. This task requires students to
produce of two operator expressions (and thus should
exercise the hidden grammar rules) but without any of the
requirements of comprehending a two-step story problem.
This leads us to a counter-intuitive hypothesis that
instruction (substitution) that looks unlike the target
objective (two-operator story problem symbolization) is
going to lead to learning and transfer and, further, may do
so better than instruction (one-operator story symbolization)
that looks much more like the target objective. In particular,
we hypothesize that practice on substitution exercises will
transfer to better performance on translating algebra story
problems into symbolic expressions. We will measure
improvement by examining the differences on posttest twostep symbolization items between students who do
substitution problems embedded within a problem set and
students who only practice one-step symbolization problems
within the problem set. As a pretest, both the treatment and
control conditions begin with a measure of their ability to
write one-step expressions before being presented with a
two-step problem.

Table 2. The matched one-step problems (a & b) and
substitution problem (c) for the two-step student item.
Item
a

b

c

Ms. Lindquist is a math teacher. Ms Lindquist
teaches 62 girls. Ms Lindquist teaches b boys.
Write an expression for how many students Ms.
Lindquist teaches.
Ms. Lindquist is a math teacher. Ms Lindquist
teaches 62 girls. Ms Lindquist teaches f fewer
boys than girls. Write an expression for how
many boys Ms. Lindquist teaches.
Substitute 62-f for b in 62+b
Write the resulting expression.

Answer
62+b

62-f

62+62-f

In the pre-test phase, both groups did the same four one-step
problems (labeled a or b in Table 3) depending on which
version of the problem set received, followed by one twostep problem (labeled 0 in Table 3) depending on which
version and order received. We created two “versions” to
be evenly matched in difficulty by selecting two-step
problems going down this list, cds, sisters, students, and
jackets for version A and mcdonalds, children, rowboat, and
trip for version B. Version A, then, had one-step and
substitution items corresponding with cover stories
mcdonalds, children, rowboat, and trip and vice versa for
version B. We also created two orders of each version by
reversing the sequence of the two-step problems, easy to
hard (0, 1,2,3) vs. hard to easy (3,2,1,0). Thus, we expected
order to have a significant effect on a pre-post comparison
and controlled for it in the analyses below.
In the integrated instruction and post-test phase, students
started with two instructional problems (either ab or cc in
Table 3) and then alternated between two-step problems (13 in Table 3) and further instructional problems. As noted
above, the four instructional problems come from the four
base cover stories not used for the two-step problems,
whether version A or B. The instructional problems
corresponded with condition, one-step problems for the onestep condition and substitution problems for the substitution
condition. For the one-steps, which come in a-b pairs (as
illustrated in Table 2), two of type a and two of type b were
selected from the four available cover story sets.
The two-step problems were ordered by difficulty based
on a pilot study with students from the same grade and
district and this order, from easiest to hardest, is shown in
Table 1.

Method
The experiment was implemented inside the ASSISTment
system and run in middle school classrooms in an urban
school district outside of Boston, MA. The ASSISTment
system is a web-based computer tutor authoring and
delivery system designed to be used for both formative
assessment and instruction (Razzaq et al., 2007). Instruction
is provided by feedback on errors, on-demand hints, and
scaffolding questions that reduce a problem into its
components much like a simplified version of a Socratic
dialogue.

Materials and Design
The materials for this study were the eight two-step story
problems shown in Table 1 along with matched one-step
and substitution items for each as illustrated in Table 2.
This produces a pool of 32 items of which students saw 16
in one of two versions. Items were placed into the versions

473

scores. With regards to condition, students in the
substitution condition had similar pretest scores (M=.56) as
students in the one-step condition (M=.57); however, the
substitution group posttest scores (M=.39, SD=.35) were
higher than the one-step group scores (M=.33, SD=.33).
We used the ANCOVA results to compute adjusted posttest
scores (M=.39 for substitution, M=.32 for one-step) and an
effect size (Cohen’s d = .29).

Table 3. Sequence of items for both conditions.
Condition
One-step
Substitution

Pre-test
abab0
abab0

Instruct & test
ab1a2b3
cc1c2c3

a & b = one-step, c = substitution, 0-3 = two-step
Given the nature of the ASSISTment system, all items
are both assessment items (based on students’ first response)
and instructional items (based on feedback, hints, and
scaffolding questions that may follow an incorrect
response). The only difference between the two conditions
is the placement of the substitution versus one-step items
during the instruction.

How Does Substitution Practice Help
To better understand how substitution practice may enhance
learning of algebra symbolization skills, we investigated the
errors students made on the posttest items. A common error
category on two-step symbolization problems is to provide a
1-operator answer, for instance, “62-f” rather than “62+62f”. This error is consistent with a student whose only algebra
grammar knowledge is “expression => quantity operator
quantity”. We hypothesized that substitution practice should
aid the acquisition of grammar rules that allow for
embedded expressions, like “expression => quantity
operator expression”. The addition of such knowledge
should reduce the 1-operator responses to two-step
problems.
We coded incorrect solutions in four error categories: 1operator, 2-operator, missing parentheses, or hint/other. The
most common error for both conditions is a 1-operator error.
We found that the one-step group produces the 1-operator
error (34%) somewhat more often than the substitution
group (30%). This difference is larger for some problems
and, in particular, appears to account for improved
performance on four of the problems (cds, students, rowboat
and trip) on which the one-step group is 9% worse than the
substitution group (23% vs. 32%) and makes 12% (47% vs.
35%) more 1-operator errors. We found no consistent
differences between conditions for 2-operator or hint/other
errors. Three post-test problems require parentheses (sisters,
children and trip) and on these, missing parentheses errors
account for condition differences. The one-step group is 8%
(34% vs. 42%) worse on these problems than the
substitution group and makes 12% (25% vs. 13%) more
missing parentheses errors.
We did not discuss parentheses in our brief
characterization of the algebra grammar above, but the
correct use of parentheses is clearly an important part of
algebra expression structure. Consistent with the hypothesis
that substitution practice should enhance algebra grammar
learning, we indeed found a reduction in missing
parenthesis errors in the substitution group relative to the
one-step group.
One way grammar learning can be achieved is through the
kind of implicit or non-verbal statistical learning
mechanisms that are presumably used in first language
acquisition. If these mechanisms are in part responsible for
algebra grammar learning (see Li, Koedinger & Cohen,
2010 for a demonstration of the feasibility of such), then we
might expect to see more frequent use of grammatical forms
seen by those students who have seen such forms more

Participants
The original data included 318 middle school students
(N=158 one-step practice, N=160 substitution practice)
using an on-line system during the 08-09 school year. The
final data set included only those subjects who completed all
16 of the items in the problem set (four two-step, eight onestep, and four substitution) for a total of 303 participants
(N=154 one-step, N=149 substitution).

Measures
The pre-test was designed to assess students’ prior
knowledge of translating story problem to algebraic
expressions. It was the first five items in the item sequence
and consisted of four one-step items and the first one twostep item. A pre-test measure was computed as the average
of the two-step score and the average of the four one-step
scores, thus appropriately giving more weight to the twostep item that is the goal of instruction. The posttest score
was computed as the average of the scores on the last three
two-step items. All pre and post-test scores were based on
students’ first attempt at an item such that either an incorrect
entry or a hint request counted as an error.

Results
To test the main hypothesis that instruction on substitution
tasks leads to better transfer of learning to two-step
symbolization problems than does instruction on one-step
symbolization problems, we performed an ANCOVA with
pre-test as a covariate, condition and item order (easy-tohard vs. hard-to-easy) as factors, and post-test as the
dependent variable. As noted above, we included the order
factor because of its obvious likely influence. We found
significant effects of both factors, condition (F(1,299) =
4.45, p < .05) and order (F(1,299) = 39.57, p < .001), and of
the pre-test covariate (F(1,299) = 78.62, p < .001). We
found no other significant effects when we explored more
complex models involving problem set version and the
possible two- and three-way interactions with condition,
version, and order.
Not surprisingly, high pre-tests are associated with higher
post-tests and the easy-to-hard order yields lower post-test

474

knowledge the learner acquires from a source task and
transfer occurs to the extent that that knowledge is relevant
and employed in the target task (cf. Singley & Anderson,
1989). Careful cognitive task analysis regarding the
underlying nature of the knowledge demands of tasks can
thus provide insight into how best to achieve transfer. We
presented an experiment that tested a subtle prediction of a
prior data-driven cognitive task analysis. That analysis
suggested that comprehending story problems tends not to
be a major source of difficulty for students learning to
translate story problems to algebra. Instead, learning to
produce longer symbolic expressions is a more significant
challenge and that students must acquire more sophisticated
algebra grammar knowledge to meet this challenge. We
hypothesized that practice on substitution tasks would assist
students in extending their algebra grammar and, counterintuitively, that such practice would yield better transfer to
story problem symbolization than practice on simple story
symbolization would. A classroom-based study with some
300 middle school students provided support for this
hypothesis.
It may seem surprising that we found transfer from
instruction on symbolization tasks, which have little natural
language content, to story problem tasks and, even more,
that such transfer is greater than from instruction on story
problem tasks themselves (albeit simpler ones). After all,
the literature and theory on analogical transfer (e.g.,
Gentner, 1983; Gick & Holyoak, 1983) suggests that people
are particularly sensitive to surface features and have great
trouble transferring experience from one situation (e.g.,
converging radiation treatment) to another with dissimilar
surface features (e.g., converging military forces). How,
then, does the instruction used in this study apparently help
students acquire a relevant deep structure and transfer it
from substitution tasks to surface-dissimilar story problem
symbolization tasks?
An important observation here is that while these task
categories (substitution and two-step story) do not have
common surface features in their stimulus structure, they are
similar in their response structure. The answer in both cases
is a two-operator algebraic expression. To be sure, the
correct responses to the instructional problems (analogical
sources) and post-test problems (analogical targets) are not
identical, nor even similar in surface characteristics -- for
instance, “800-40x” has little or no surface similarity with
“62+62-f”. However, the structure of these responses,
whether generated from a story problem or a substitution
problem, is similar in underlying grammatical form
(“expression => quantity operator expression”).
Similarity in response structure is not enough to produce
transfer. The well-known convergence tasks of Gick and
Holyoak (1983) have an arguably similar response structure,
yet learners show little transfer between such tasks under
most instructional variations. What may be critical is that
the learner externalizes the response, gets feedback and
support to get the response right, and the external form is
abstract and uniform (e.g., if a common converging arrow

frequently. Indeed, the one-step group sees 1-operator
expressions more frequently and generates such expressions
more frequently on post-test problems than the substitution
group. In contrast, the substitution group sees more
expressions with parentheses and generates such
expressions more frequently on post-test problems than the
one-step group.
In fact, these patterns appear not only in student errors, as
discussed above, but also in their correct responses. On
some two-step posttest problems (cds, students, and jackets)
it is possible to produce a correct 1-operator solution (e.g.,
“60c” for 5*12c”,“124-f” for “62+62-f”, 2/3 *d for d1/3*d). The one-step group, despite doing generally worse
on these problems (23% vs. 31%), actually produces twice
as many correct 1-operator solutions as the substitution
group (7.2% vs. 3.5%). It is also possible for students to
produce correct answers that include parentheses on
problems that do not require them (e.g., “62+(62-f)”).
Again, consistent with the hypothesis that statistical
properties of learning, like frequency, are operative even in
formal domains like algebra, we find that the substitution
group has more correct solutions that involve unnecessary
parentheses than the one-step group (15% vs. 9.3%).
An astute reader may wonder about the following
alternative interpretation of the observed overall differences
in learning. Might the one-step group’s experience
generating 1-operator solutions simply be interfering with
production of 2-operator solutions needed for correct
performance on the two-step post-test problems? Or, to put
it in more stark terms, might students in the substitution
group simply be learning a shallow bias to generate 2operator solutions and the one-step group students simply
learning a shallow bias to generate 1-operator solutions? It
is first worth emphasizing that, because of the instructional
scaffolding for all on the two-step problems, neither group
was exclusively seeing one response type or the other.
Certainly though, part of our hypothesis is that a shift in
bias is causing improvement, but that that shift is in
probabilities on implicit grammatical structure knowledge
not in shallow or surface features. To be better, the
substitution group students must not only avoid generating
1-operator solutions (note that they are not so easily biased
that they stop making 1-operator errors), but also learn how
to generate correct 2-operator solutions, including
appropriate use of parentheses. If substitution group
students were simply shallowly biased toward 2-operator
solutions, we would expect them to perform worse on the
four one-step problems they were given in the filler phase
than the one-step group did on the same problems during
instruction. In fact, both groups were 72% correct on onestep problems. Thus, the substitution group was not blindly
over-generating 2-operator solutions.

Discussion and Conclusion
When we think about learning and transfer, it is tempting to
think just in terms of the observable tasks between which
transfer may occur. However, the vehicle of transfer is the

475

diagram was used in response to convergence tasks). In this
study, the demands of both substitution and symbolization
problems put the solution response into the world where it
can be "re-perceived" (c.f., Goldstone, Landy, & Son, in
press). Further, the kind of interactive instruction we
employed (use of the ASSISTment tutor) guarantees that
students get the response right before moving on. By
generating, or at least perceiving a correct response,
students may (implicitly) engage the same perceptuallygrounded, similarity-based generalization processes on the
response that they use on the task stimulus. Thus, they may
develop better mental representations, whether grammar
rules or "perceptual chunks" (Chase & Simon, 1973), of
those response representations. Further, it may be important
to the transfer result that the response representation is a
uniform abstraction (i.e., algebraic expressions). This
concise, unadorned representation may make it easier for
pattern recognition mechanisms to learn the deep patterns
(i.e., the algebraic grammar rules) needed for transfer (c.f.,
Kaminski, Sloutsky, & Heckler, 2008).
More practically, this research illustrates how a general
instructional principle like starting simple (or mastery-based
learning, Bloom, 1984) may not be effective if it is not
accompanied with a careful cognitive task analysis of the
target subject matter domain. Instruction that helps students
master parts before helping them master the whole may
seem obvious, however, what seem like "parts" on the
surface may not be the right "cognitive parts" a learner
needs to acquire. It is not particularly hard to identify the
part-whole relationship between one-step and two-step story
problems. Thus, the control condition in this study is not a
straw man, but a reasonable application of part-task training
principles and is representative of sequencing in math
textbooks.
It is not a priori obvious, however, that substitution tasks
are a "part" of two-step story problem symbolization. We
came to that conclusion after a data-driven cognitive task
analysis (cf., Clark, Feldon, van Merriënboer, Yates, &
Early, 2007) that involved the analytic use of computational
modeling (e.g., the grammar rule analysis). We believe that
there is great promise for greatly improving the efficiency
and effectiveness of instruction, even in well-investigated
domains like algebra, through a combination of domaingeneral instructional principles and such detailed cognitive
task analysis.

Bloom, B.S. (1984). The 2-sigma problem: The search for
methods of group instruction as effective as one-to-one
tutoring. Educational Researcher, 13, 4-16.
Bobrow, D. G. (1968). Natural language input for a
computer problem-solving elementary word problems.
Cognition and Instruction, 1, 245-296.
Chase, W. G., & Simon, H. A. (1973). Perception in chess.
Cognitive Psychology, 4, 55-81.
Clark, R. E., Feldon, D., van Merriënboer, J., Yates, K., &
Early, S. (2007). Cognitive task analysis. In J. M. Spector,
M. D. Merrill, J. J. G. van Merriënboer, & M. P. Driscoll
(Eds.), Handbook of research on educational
communications and technology (3rd ed., pp. 577–593).
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Cummins, D.D., Kintsch, W., Reusser, K., & Weimer, R.
(1988) The role of understanding in solving word
problems. Cognitive Psychology, 20, 405-438.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy, Cognitive Science, 7, 155- 170.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema induction
and analogical transfer. Cognitive Psychology, 15, 1-38.
Goldstone, R. L., Landy, D. H., & Son, J. Y. (in press). The
education of perception. Topics in Cognitive Science.
Heffernan, N. & Koedinger, K.R. (1997). The composition
effect in symbolizing: The role of symbol production vs.
text comprehension. In Proceedings of the Nineteenth
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, (pp.
307-312). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Heffernan, N. & Koedinger, K. R. (1998). A developmental
model for algebra symbolization: The results of a
difficulty factors assessment. In Proceedings of the
Twentieth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society, (pp. 484-489). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Kaminski, J. A., Sloutsky, V. M., & Heckler, A. F. (2008).
The advantage of learning abstract examples in learning
math. Science, 320, 454-455.
Koedinger, K. R., Alibali, M. W., & Nathan, M. M. (2008).
Trade-offs
between
grounded
and
abstract
representations: Evidence from algebra problem solving.
Cognitive Science, 32(2): 366-397.
Landy, D., & Goldstone, R. L. (2007). Formal notations are
diagrams: Evidence from a production task. Memory &
Cognition, 35, 2033-2040.
Li, N., Cohen, W. W., & Koedinger, K. R. (2010). A
computational model of accelerated future learning
through feature recognition. To appear in Proceedings of
the 10th International Conference of Intelligent Tutoring
Systems.
Razzaq, Heffernan, Koedinger, Feng, Nuzzo-Jones, Junker,
Macasek, Rasmussen, Turner & Walonoski (2007). A
Web-based Authoring Tool for Intelligent Tutors:
Assessment and Instructional Assistance. In Nadia
Nedjah, et al. (Eds.) Intelligent Educational Machines.
Intelligent Systems Engineering Book Series. Springer.
Singley, K., & Anderson, J. R. (1989). The transfer of
cognitive skill. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by grants from the U.S.
Department of Education Institute of Education Sciences
(Grant #R305K030140 and Grant #R305A07044). We
would like to thank the members of the ASSISTment team
especially Neil Heffernan and Hui Cheng.

References
Alibali, M. W., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (1993). Transitions in
learning: What the hands reveal about a child's state of
mind. Cognitive Psychology, 25, 468-523.

476

