UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Selective attention and development of categorization: An eye tracking study

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0wb721vj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Yao, Xin
Sloutsky, Vladimir

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Selective attention and development of categorization:
An eye tracking study
Xin Yao (yao.64@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science
The Ohio State University
209C Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place
Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Vladimir M. Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science
The Ohio State University
208C Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place
Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Abstract
Some researchers argue that categorization in early
development is knowledge-based rather than perceptually
based. This approach requires young children to be able to
attend to unobservable properties instead of perceptual
features, which are usually more salient. However, potential
immaturity of selective attention makes this possibility
questionable. Current study tested both young children and
adults with a match-to-sample task in which perceptual
features were in conflict with the matching rule. Both
behavioral and eye tracking data were collected. Eye-tracking
results suggested that young children (3- and 4-year-olds)
could not inhibit attention to the perceptual features, although
behaviorally, 4-year-olds could. These findings are discussed
with respect to theoretical accounts of category learning in
early development.
Keywords: Cognitive Development, Categorization, Attention,
Psychology, Human Experimentation.

Introduction
The ability to learn categories is a critical component of
human cognition and this ability is present early in
development (e.g., see Eimas & Quinn, 1994; Madole &
Oakes, 1999, for reviews). However the mechanisms
underlying category learning remain highly contested.
Some researchers argue that early categories are
perceptually-based, whereas other argue that even early in
development, unobservable conceptual properties (such as
animacy) play an important role in infants and young
children’s category learning and category use (see
Rakison & Poulin-Dubois, 2001; Sloutsky, in press, for
reviews).
According to the latter view, early
categorization (some have argued that as early as at 7
months of age) is based on features that are not given
directly in the input. However, to be able to do so, infants
and young children have to be able to selectively attend to

these unobservable properties. This problem is
particularly evident when salient perceptual features
are in conflict with less salient, often unobservable,
“conceptual” features. For example Gelman &
Markman (1986) presented 4-year-olds with an
inductive inference task. The task was structured as a
match to sample triad, such that one of the items
belonged to the same kind as the target (but was
dissimilar) and another looked similarly (but
belonged to a different kind. The authors argued that
the unobservable conceptual feature (i.e., taxonomic
kind) would override the salient observable features
(e.g., appearance similarity). In this case, in addition
to the ability to attend selectively to less salient input,
young children should also have the ability to inhibit
more salient (yet irrelevant) choice option. Given the
critical immaturities in the executive function early in
development (see Rueda, Fan, McCandliss, Halparin,
Gruber, Lercari, & Posner, 2004, Davidson et al.,
2006, for reviews), such selectivity seems
questionable.
Current research addresses this issue by presenting
participants with a simple match-to-sample task and
examining their eye movement in the course of the
task. This task is substantially simpler than the
match-to-sample task used by Gelman and Markman
(1986). First, in the current task, participants were
explicitly told which aspect of the stimuli they should
focus on. And second, instead of pitting appearance
versus unobservable properties, we pitted more
salient features against less salient ones. Our
reasoning was as follows. If participants focus on
unobservable information in a more difficult
induction task, they should have no difficulty
focusing on less salient information in this highly
simplified task.

1980

The task includes a target and two test items. There are
three within-subjects conditions. In the Supportive
condition, the test item that shares the matching rule with
the target is also similar to the target. In the Neutral
condition, both items are equally similar to the target,
with one test item sharing the matching rule. And finally,
in the Conflict condition, one test item shares the
matching rule, whereas the other one looks similar to the
target.
Therefore, the latter condition required
participants to reject a salient appearance-based item in
favor of less salient rule-based item. In sum, the task
requires the ability to attend selectively that is critical for
many category learning and inductive inference tasks.
Given that the task is exceedingly simple, participants’
failure in the conflict condition might be particularly
informative. If they cannot resolve the conflict in this
simple task, it is reasonable to ask: how could they
resolve a conflict in more difficult and demanding
categorization and induction tasks?

kind of cookies as the target) came from the same
category as the target. So the one that looked more
similar to the target item also shared the matching
rule with the target item. Therefore, the perceptually
irrelevant information was consistent with and
supportive of the critical features. In the Conflict
condition, the “matching distracter” came from the
opposite category than the target distracter. So the
perceptual information was in conflict with the
matching rule. Finally, in the Neutral condition, both
test distracters and the target distracter came from the
same category. As a result, the matching rule was
neither supported, nor in conflict. The right and left
sides of the stimuli were counterbalanced.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants Sixteen adults (6 women and 10 men, M =
20.1 years, SD = 2.7 years) participated in this experiment.
Adults were undergraduate students from The Ohio State
University participating in the experiment for course
credit. The experiment used a within subject design and
each subjects took all the three conditions in the
experiment: Supportive, Neutral, and Conflict conditions.
All the participants were tested in a quiet room on campus.

Figure 1: An example of the stimuli in the supportive
condition

Stimuli consisted of triads of artificial creatures, which
were irrelevant components of the task. Each triad also
included three rows of circles (referred to as cookies that
creatures eat). Examples of stimulus triads are presented
in Figures 1-3. These cookies were the critical features
that participants were instructed to focus on in the current
matching task. To make the irrelevant features
perceptually more salient, creatures were bigger and
colorful, while the critical features were smaller and
shared the same color. The only difference for the critical
features was different patterns on the cookies. Two had
wave lines on them while the remaining one had diagonal
lines. The irrelevant features were drawn from two
categories. One category consisted of objects with hands
and feet, and the other consisted of bug-like objects with
wings and tails. In each triad, the bottom object was the
target item, and the two top ones were test items. Half of
target and test items were selected from one category and
half were selected from the other category. The top two
sets of cookies were always different with only one
matching the target set. At the same time, irrelevant items
varied across the conditions. In the Supportive condition,
the “matching distracter” (i.e., the one that had the same

Figure 2: An example in the conflict condition

1981

each subject. Six areas of interest (AOIs) for fixations
were defined: three circular areas encompassing the
creatures and three rectangular areas encompassing
the cookies displayed on the screen. All fixations
outside the AOIs were discarded.

Results and Discussion
Behavioral Data The average of accuracy across the
three conditions was 97% (SE = 2.1%) and exceeded
chance level, one-sample t compared to 50%, t (15) =
22.94 p = .01. No difference was found between
different conditions, F (2, 30) = .92, p = .41.
Figure 3: An example in the neutral condition
The locations of the cookies and the creatures were
fixed for each trial. The distracters were subtended at
visual angles equaling to 6.2° horizontally and 5.2°
vertically. The cookies were subtended at visual angles
equaling to 4.2° horizontally and 1.6° vertically. The
distance between the creatures and the cookies were 2.6°
vertically.
Procedure Eprime 2.0 was used for controlling the
experiment and Tobii T60 with the sampling rate of 60 Hz
was used for collecting eye tracking data.
Before the task, the eye tracker was calibrated to each
participant. Participants were told that in this matching
task they should choose one of the objects on the top to
match the object at the bottom by matching the cookies.
They were also instructed to make the choice as quickly
as possible. If it was the left creature that matched, they
should press “1”, and press “4” if it was the right one.
They were given the following instructions: This is a
matching game. The game is to decide which one on the
top goes with the one at the bottom. To win the game, you
need to choose the one likes the same as cookies as the
one as the bottom.
Prior to testing, participants had three warm-up trials at
first, one for each condition. Feedback was provided for
the three warm-up trials. During the test phase,
participants were given 30 trials, with 10 Supportive, 10
Neutral, and 10 Conflict trials. The trials were mixed and
pseudo-randomly assigned into 3 blocks, with 10 trials in
each block. The order of the three blocks and the order of
the trials within each blocks were randomized. Each trial
was preceded by a fixation point at the center of the
screen. The duration of the fixation varied between 300
ms to 800 ms. No feedback was provided during the test
phase.
Eye tracking Dependent Variables A stream of eye
fixations corresponding to their x-y locations on the
screen were collected by the eye tracking software for

Eye Tracking Data The primary analyses focused on
the proportion of the eye fixation on the critical
features, which were the kinds of cookies in this
study. The proportion was calculated by total
fixations on the triads of cookies divided by the sum
of fixations on the triads of cookies and the fixations
on the triads of creatures. The absence of a
preference would result in comparable looking across
the areas of interest. Before 200 ms, all the eye
fixations were at the center of the screen which
indicated that participants did focus on the fixation
stimulus and did not exhibit eye movements during
that period. The time window for eye tracking
analysis was two standard deviations above the mean
reaction time (M = 1013.8 ms, SD = 480.7).
Therefore, the time window for eye tracking analyses
was between 200 ms and 2000ms. The proportions of
looking at the critical feature in the Conflict
condition across time are presented in Figure 5. The
overall proportion of looking at the critical features,
i.e., the cookies, was 84.4% (SE= 5%). No difference
was found across the three conditions, F (2, 30) =
765, p = 474. Perhaps not surprisingly, these
findings indicate that adults had little difficulty
focusing on the critical features and ignoring more
salient distracters. As a result, participants exhibited
near ceiling accuracy in all three conditions. The
importance of these data is that they represent a
necessary point of comparison for children’s data.
Experiment 2 focused on performance of 3- and 4year-old children.

Experiment 2
Method
Participants Young children were recruited from
the suburbs of Columbus, Ohio. There are 15 4 year
olds (9 girls and 6 boys, M = 50.5 months, SD = 2.5
months) and 15 3 year olds (8 girls and 7 boys M =
41.8 months, SD = 3.4 months). All participants were
tested in a lab on campus.

1982

Procedure The procedure for young children was almost
identical to that for adults, except for the following
differences. First, a female experimenter presented the
task to the participants, controlled the pace of the
experiment, and pressed the key based on children’s
verbal response during the experiment. And second, the
instructions “Choose the one that likes the same kind of
cookies as the one at the bottom” were repeated before
each trial.

Results and Discussion

Proportion of Accuracy

Behavioral Data Accuracy data are presented in figure 4.
For 3-year-olds, difference was found in accuracy across
the three conditions, F (2, 28) = 6.81, p < .01. Specifically,
accuracy in the conflict condition did not exceed chance,
one-sample t compared to 50%, t (14) = 1.56, p = .14,
two-tailed. However, the accuracy was above chance in
the neutral and supportive condition, ts (14) > 5.78, ps
< .01. For 4-year-olds, accuracy for all the three
conditions exceeded chance, one-sample t compared to
50%, ts (14) >3.67, ps < .01, one-tailed. Difference was
also found across the three conditions, F (2, 28) = 3.7, p
= .037. In particular, participants were less accurate in the
conflict condition than the other two conditions.
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

conflict
neutral
supportive

Adults

4 yos

3 yos

Figure 4 Behavioral data of different age groups
Note: * -- Above chance, p < .05.
Eye Tracking Data The time stream between 1000ms
and 3000ms was used for analysis. Before 1000ms, eye
fixations did not reliably move from the center of the
screen to the areas of interest. Data were analyzing by
averaging across trials and individuals. The proportions of
looking at the critical feature in the Conflict condition by
sampling rate (16 ms) and age are presented in Figure 6.
Main effect of age was found in proportion of looking at
the critical feature, F (1, 238) = 408.219, p < .01. 4 year
olds showed more fixations on the critical features than 3
year olds. Difference between conditions was found, F (2,
476) = 109.4, p < .01. There was an age by condition
interaction, F (2, 476) = 14.94, p < .01, with larger age
difference in looking at the critical feature found in
Conflict condition. Therefore, 4-year-olds were not only
more accurate in the conflict condition, but also were

more likely to look at the critical feature in the
Conflict condition. At the same time, the proportion
of looking at critical features by 3- and 4-year-olds
was consistently below 50%.
Individual patterns of responses were also analyzed.
We were particularly interested whether individuals
who were more likely to look at the critical features
in the Conflict condition also exhibited greater
accuracy. For 3-year-olds, a significant correlation
was observed between the accuracy and the overall
proportion of looking at the critical features in the
Conflict condition (r = .574, p = .03). This indicated
that accurate participants were more likely to pay
attention to the critical features. However, there was
no significant correlation in 4-year-olds, r = .29, p
= .29. This is probably because there was very little
variability in the accuracy of 4-year-olds.
To further examine the connection between
looking and response accuracy, we split the children
into two groups according to their accuracy in the
Conflict condition. Those with accuracy above .5
were assigned to the high accuracy group, and those
with accuracy below or equal to .5 were assigned to
the low accuracy group. Difference in overall
proportion of looking was found in conflict condition
between these two groups. Those high accuracy
children were more likely to focus on the critical
features (M = 36.1%, SE = 5%) than those low
accuracy children (M = 16.5%, SE = 6%), t (28) =
2.26, p = .016, one-tailed.
Further analysis was carried out for examing the
online learning during the task. If there was any
learning or strategy optimization happening during
the task, we should expect the difference in looking
across trials. The participants should show more
looking to the critical featuers during the later part of
the task than during the earlier part. To test this, data
was divided into the earlier 5 and later 5 trials of each
condition. Comparison between these two half of the
task were made for each condition and each age
group. However, no difference was found, t (14)
< .05, p > .16, one-tailed. Therefore, in the absence of
feedback given to participants, there was little
evidence of on-line learning to allocate attention to
critical features.

1983

Figure 5: Adults’ eye tracking data in Conflict condition

Figure 6: Childrens’ eye tracking data in Conflict
condition

General Discussion
The results point to several important findings. First,
under comparable experimental conditions, adult
participants and 4-year-olds were less likely to be
distracted by the appearance of the stimuli, which were
the irrelevant features in this study. When the critical
features conflicted with the irrelevant features, their
behavioral performance was still above chance, although
performance of 4-year-olds (but not of adults) decreased
in the Conflict condition. However 3-year-olds could not
ignore the irrelevant features and their performance was at
chance in the Conflict condition.
Second, performance in the Conflict condition was
associated with the proportion of looking to the critical
feature. This proportion in adults was greater than in 4year-olds, and in 4-year-olds greater than in 3-year-olds.
In addition in 3-year-olds, correlation was found between
the proportion of looking to the critical features and the
accuracy on the task in the Conflict condition. Moreover,
when children were divided into the groups by their
performance in conflict condition, difference was
observed in their looking pattern. Thus, the proportion of
looking to the target in the Conflict condition was a
predictor of performance on the task in this condition.
Third, for 4 year olds, the pattern of their behavior data
looked more like adults data, while their pattern of eye
tracking data was closer than that of 3 year olds. During

the task, most adults’ fixations were focusing on the
critical features, while children spent more looking
on the irrelevant features. Proportions of looking at
the critical features in 4-year-olds were above of
those in 3-year-olds, but were remarkably lower than
that of adults and never excelled that of looking at the
irrelevant features. This indicated that even though 4year-olds exhibited high accuracy in the Conflict
condition, they could not inhibit looking at the
irrelevant features. Unlike adults, 4-year-olds’
performance was not optimized and their choice
between critical features and irrelevant features was
not as efficient as adults. This suggested that
children at this age were more likely to be attracted to
the salient perceptual features instead of the critical
but less salient one. Therefore, it is likely that if task
demands were increased, 4-year-olds’ performance in
the Conflict condition would decrease as well.
Fourth, there was no evidence for the learning
during the task. Participants did not look more to the
critical features later in the task. This indicated that
participants used the same strategy throughout the
task and the trend that young children could not
inhibit looking at more salient perceptual features
was robust.
These findings indicate that young children have
difficulty attending to less salient but critical task
features, while ignoring more salient, but irrelevant
features. Even in the very simple task used in the
current research with warm up trials and instructions
repeated on every trial, 3-year-olds failed in the
Conflict condition, whereas 4-year-olds exhibited
significant performance decrease. These findings
present interesting challenges to the knowledge-based
assumption that young children (and even infants) are
capable of learning and using categories by
spontaneously focusing on unobservable features,
while ignoring salient observable features.
At the same, the study also raises a number of
important questions for future research. One of them
is how the low proportion of looking to critical
features explained the high accuracy for 4-year-olds
and whether the pattern will change for more difficult
tasks. We have preliminary evidence addressing this
issue. In an ongoing study, young children were
presented with a more challenging induction task.
While the stimuli and the procedure are the same as
in the current talk, participants are asked a more
difficult questions. They are informed about an
unobservable property of the creature at the bottom
and asked which at the top had the same property.
For instance, on one trial, experimenter pointed to the
creature at bottom, told children that “this one has
thick blood”, and asked them “Which one on the top
do you think also has thick blood”. The instructions
that those like the same kind of cookies go together

1984

in the matching task were changed into that those like the
same kind of cookies have the same thing inside. Similar
to the current task, this rule of induction was also repeated
every time before each trial. Compared to the matching
task, the induction task was more challenging to young
children as there was more information they needed to
keep track during the task. As a result, the working
memory demand was higher and so was the executive
function demand. Considering the results of the matching
task presented here (i.e., 4-year-olds spent most of the
time looking at the irrelevant features), we expected that
accuracy of 4-year-olds will drop in the Conflict condition.
The results support this prediction: 4-year-olds exhibited
low accuracy in the Conflict condition, and it did not
exceed accuracy of 3-year-olds in the current study.
Another issue that has to be addressed in future
research is related to the online strategy learning and
whether children could move from a less efficient
learning strategy to a more efficient one during the task.
For instance, whether the time pressure and the feedback
will help children pay less attention to the irrelevant
features.
Finally, an investigation of whether training on
selective attention would accelerate children’s category
learning in general would provide some insight into the
development of this ability and also the interaction
between the development of executive function and
generalization ability.
In summary, many studies have examined how young
children learn new categories. The current study provided
evidence indicating that young children have difficulty
inhibiting attention to irrelevant information.
This
evidence provides challenges to the knowledge-base
approach assuming the ability of infants and young
children to focus on less salient aspects of the input, while
ignoring more salient.

Acknowledgments
This research has been supported by grants from the
grants from the NSF (BCS-0720135), from the
Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of
Education (R305B070407), and from NIH
(R01HD056105) to Vladimir M. Sloutsky.

References
Davidson, M. C., Amso, D, Anderson, L. C., &
Diamondd, A. (2006). Development of cognitive
control and executive functions from 4 to 13 years:
Evidence from manipulations of memory,
inhibition, and task switching. Neuropsychologia,
44, 2037–2078.
Eimas, P. D., & Quinn, C. (1994). Studies on the
formation of perceptually based basic-level
categories in young infants. Child Development,
65(3), 903-917.
Gelman, S. A., & Markman, E. (1986). Categories
and induction in young children. Cognition, 23,
183 – 209.
Madole, K. L., & Oakes, M. (1999). Making sense of
infant categorization: Stable processes and
changing representations. Developmental Review,
19(2), 263-296.
Rakison, D. H., & Poulin-Dubois, D. (2001).
Developmental origin of the animate-inanimate
distinction. Psychological Bulletin, 127, 209-228.
Rueda, M., Fan, J., McCandliss, B. D., Halparin, J.,
Gruber, D., Lercari, L., & Posner, M. I. (2004).
Development of attentional networks in childhood.
Neuropsychologia, 42, 1029- 1040.
Sloutsky, V. M. (In Press). From perceptual
categories to concepts: What develops? Cognitive
Science.

1985

