UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Self-esteem and the Matching Effect in Mate Selection

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0tp4w0mz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Kaznatcheev, Artem
Brown, Kyler
Shultz, Thomas

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Self-esteem and the Matching Effect in Mate Selection
Artem Kaznatcheev (artem.kaznatcheev@mail.mcgill.ca)
Department of Physics and School of Computer Science,
McGill University, 3600 University Street, Montreal, QC H3A 2T8 Canada

Kyler Brown (kyler.brown@mail.mcgill.ca)
Laboratory for Natural and Simulated Cognition, Department of Psychology,
McGill University, 1205 Penfield Avenue, Montreal, QC H3A 1B1 Canada

Thomas R. Shultz (thomas.shultz@mcgill.ca)
Department of Psychology and School of Computer Science,
McGill University, 1205 Penfield Avenue, Montreal, QC H3A 1B1 Canada
Abstract

the most promising early experiments (Berscheid, Dion,
Walster, & Walster, 1971) showed only a weak matching effect (Wetzel & Insko, 1982) that was overpowered
by the attractiveness effect. So, why has the matching
hypothesis survived?
Direct experiment is not the only way to test the hypothesis; one can also observe existing couples. The
matching theory has been consistently supported when
the correlation between the attractiveness of male and
female partners in real couples was studied (Kalick &
Hamilton, 1986). In average couples correlations of
.38 (Murstein, 1972a), .39 (Price & Vandenberg, 1979),
.42 (Feingold, 1981) and .53 (Citelli & Waid, 1980) were
found. Further studies (White, 1980) expanded their investigation to differentiate between the type (and associated longevity) of relationships, observing intra-couple
attractiveness correlations of .18 for casual dates, compared to the correlation of .56 and .63 for serious daters
and engaged or married couples, respectively. The strong
correlations in real couples provide the main evidential
support for the matching hypothesis.
The stark dichotomy between direct experiment and
observations of existing couples raises the question:
is the matching hypothesis a good model for human
courtship? By itself the matching hypothesis fails to
match experiment but corresponds well to correlation
studies in existing couples. It is the goal of this paper to
provide a synthesis of the hypothesis and the apparent
preference for the most attractive partner into a single
computational model.
The computational approach was famously pursued by
Kalick and Hamilton (1986). The Kalick and Hamilton
simulation assumed every person has access to both their
own attractiveness rating and their partner’s attractiveness rating. Experimentally, the latter assumption is
valid. Cunningham and Wu (1995) found a correlation
of .9 between a single rating and the average rating of
pictures of women. This correlation remains high if either the female picture of the rater is from a different
culture. The assumption of access to own attractiveness, however, is not supported by experiment. Rand

The matching effect is the empirical finding that romantic couples have a high correlation in physical attractiveness. It remains a debate as to whether this correlation
is based purely on similarity preference - the matching
hypothesis - or marketplace forces. We present a new
marketplace model for romantic relationships. Previous
models granted every person access to his/her own attractiveness. In reality, people have only a vague idea
of their own attractiveness ratings. We introduce a concept analogous to self-esteem to model this phenomenon.
Further, we extend beyond previous models by dealing
explicitly with both the initialization and development
of a relationship. Our model accounts for the experimental tendency to choose more attractive partners,
while still explaining observed intra-couple attractiveness correlation and the difference in correlation between
casual and serious daters.
Keywords: mate selection; matching hypothesis; selfesteem; social cognition

Introduction
The study of dating behavior in humans has both shed
light on and raised many questions about the dynamics
of human relations. A common parameter across myriad
studies of human partner selection has been the physical attractiveness of individuals (Cash, 1981). Walster,
Aronson, Abrahams, and Rottman (1966) attempted to
address the tyranny in the advantages of attractive individuals by proposing the matching hypothesis. Basing their hypothesis on the Level of Aspiration Theory (Lewin, Dembo, Festinger, & Sears, 1944), they predicted that, in making a realistic social choice, an individual would choose a partner similar in social desirability. Simply, when faced with a realistic choice, one would
choose a romantic partner of nearly identical physical attractiveness.
The theoretical sanctuary that the matching hypothesis offers from physical misgivings has not been well supported by direct experimental tests (Kalick & Hamilton,
1986). When homely men estimated attractive women
as more likely to reject them compared to their handsome brethren, no significant difference in their choice of
prospective partners was observed: both groups opted to
choose the more attractive women (Huston, 1973). Even

972

and Hall (1983) found that people are very inaccurate
at rating their own attractiveness. Females tend to have
a .5 correlation between their self-perception of attractiveness and the rating of male judges. Males have only
a .1 correlation between self-attractiveness ratings and
the ratings of female judges. The inability of people
to accurately judge their own attractiveness cannot be
disregarded when simulating the matching hypothesis.
Hence, for a model to have ecological validity, it must
incorporate the inaccuracy of judging self-attractiveness.
Our model incorporates this self-perceptive inaccuracy through the effect of a variable self-esteem (or
body-image) rating. We use a simple model of selfesteem based on sociometer theory (Leary, 2005). As
suggested by naturalistic studies, self-esteem mediates
self-perception of attractiveness (Fleming & Courtney,
1984; Feingold, 1988; Leary, 2005) and changes based
on acceptance (or rejection) in the initiation of relationships and by the dissolution of relationships (Helgeson,
1994; Leary, 2005; Pass, 2009; Pass, Lindenberg, &
Oark, 2010). We also extend beyond previous models
by dealing explicitly with both the initialization and development of a relationship. This allows us to study
the expected difference in attractiveness correlation between casual and serious daters (Cavior & Boblett, 1972;
White, 1980) and track the effects of break-ups on selfesteem.

heterosexual relationships were considered. The simulation proceeds in discrete steps (epochs). On each epoch
we follow the procedure:
1. existing couples are examined for a potential break up,
2. agents from dissolved couples are reintegrated into the
pool of singles,
3. new couples are formed from the pool of singles, and
4. statistical data collected.
Any changes to self-esteem are incorporated at the
instant they occur.

Formation and dissolution of relationships
The probability of date formation is based around the
empirical observations that individuals seek the most
attractive partners regardless of their own attractiveness (Huston, 1973; Kalick & Hamilton, 1986). In the
simulation, each single man i is paired with a single
woman j and each decides if they want to accept the
date based on a probability of acceptance equal to the
attractiveness of their potential partner (P (mij ) = αj ).
If both partners accepts, then the pair become a couple,
lij is initialized and self-esteem is modified as detailed in
the next subsection.
For established couples, the break up probability is
based on equity theory and the matching hypothesis.
Since a break-up is seldom mutual (Hill, Rubin, & Peplau, 1976) we compute a separate break up probability for each member of the couple. Given a couple of
woman x and man y the break up probability, P (bxy )
and P (byx ), is calculated for each person, respectively,
according to equation 1. The probability of i breaking
up with j is linearly dependent on the absolute difference
between i’s perceived attractiveness, Ai , and his partner’s actual attractiveness αj . The dependence on absolute difference in perceived attractiveness is based in equity theory (Murstein, 1972b; Walster, Hatfield, Walster,
& Berscheid, 1978) and the empirically observed importance of similar physical attractiveness to the longevity
of relationships (Hill et al., 1976; Feingold, 1988). The
values of 0.15 and 0.85 are arbitrary, but by rescaling
time we can always assume the values we chose add up
to 1.

Method
The method of simulation is widely used to help understand certain types of complex systems. Models of human courtship lend themselves particularly well to simulation, since the goal is to define relatively simple rules
for individual parts (people) and observe a more complex
behavior and trend in the whole system (group). In our
model, each individual i is parametrized by two values: a
static αi ∈ (0, 1) to represent the person’s attractiveness
and a dynamic si ∈ (−1, 1) (referred to as ‘self-esteem’).
Together these parameters are used to derive Ai ∈ (0, 1)
— the person’s perception of their own attractiveness.
The two parameters that describe a person (αi and si )
are generated randomly from a uniform distribution. If
two individuals i and j form a couple, then the relationship caries an extra parameter, lij ∈ N, called longevity.
Longevity counts the number of ‘dates’, or amount of
time, i and j have been in a relationship. The longevity
parameter is used to track the longest lasting couples
and is reset to zero upon relationship dissolution.
Individuals are not explicitly given a gender, but the
simulation is constructed such that males only ever show
up in the list of male individuals (or the male side of a
relationship) and vice-versa for females. For simplicity,
the simulation is restricted to have the same number of
male and female individuals. At the start all individuals
are initialized as singles (not part of a couple) and only

P (bij ) = 0.15 + 0.85|Ai − αj |

(1)

If the couple ij remains, then one more ‘date’ is added
to their longevity (lij ← lij + 1). If at least one of i or j
decides to break up with the other then the relationship
ends, both individuals are added to the singles list before
new couples are formed, and lij is reset to zero. The
impact on individual’s self-esteem depends on whether
the dissolution was mutual or unilateral.

973

Self-esteem effects

from the agent’s esteem. If an agent has a negative selfesteem (si < 0) then we need to worry about potentially
reducing it past −1 and so we do as equation 2: lower
self-esteem linearly from di (0) = si to di (1) = −1. The
same procedure is used in equation 4 except with negative and positive esteem swapped and raising instead of
lowering. ui (x) and di (x) allow us to increase and decrease an agent i’s self-esteem in a simple and consistent
way without leaving the range (−1, 1).
During the relationship forming stage, if both agents
accept the relationship then each receives a self esteem
boost: si ← ui (0.3). This corresponds to the feeling
of well being individuals receive from the social acceptance of relationship formation as predicted by sociometry theory (Leary, 2005). On the other hand, if agent
i proposes the relationship, but agent j declines, then
agent i suffers a self-esteem loss from rejection (in our
model: si ← di (0.2)) and agent j receives a small selfesteem boost from the flattery and reassurance of their
attractiveness(sj ← ui (0.1)) (Pass et al., 2010). If both
agents reject the potential pairing then self-esteem is left
unchanged because neither individual proposed a relationship.
The most drastic effects on self-esteem are in the case
of unilatteral termination of a relationship (Helgeson,
1994). If one of the individuals decides to break up with
the other, then the dumped agent’s self-esteem is lowered
to a new level: si ← di (0.4). However, if both individuals
want the relationship to end, then neither self-esteem is
affected. Although the specific values 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, and
0.4 in our model are chosen for simplicity, the relative
ordering of them is meant to correspond to the general
ordering observed by Helgeson (1994): break-ups are the
most damaging (di (0.4)), with rejection less damaging
(di (0.2)) and the awards for acceptance higher for a new
relationship (ui (0.3)) compared to just the flattery of an
offer (ui (0.1)).

The primary effect of the self-esteem variable si is on i’s
perception of its own attractiveness. Our model of the
effect of self-esteem on self-perception is grounded in the
Fleming and Courtney (1984) finding that self-ratings of
attractiveness loaded heavily on self-esteem factors. In
particular, we use equation 2 to determine an individual’s self-perceived attractiveness Ai in terms of their
actual (externally determined and static) attractiveness
αi and their varying self-esteem si .

 αi + (1 − αi )si , si ≥ 0
Ai =
(2)

αi (1 + si ),
si < 0
Equation 2 is the simplest choice of equation that ensures that any value of actual attractiveness αi ∈ (0, 1)
and self-esteem si ∈ (−1, 1) results in a perceived selfattractiveness Ai in the correct range of (0, 1). From the
upper clause of equation 2 we can see that a positive
si produce a linear increase in perceived attractiveness
from Ai = αi for si = 0 to Ai = 1 for si = 1. Thus,
si > 0 corresponds to an overly high self-esteem or even
arrogance and an overestimation of one’s own physical
attractiveness. In the lower clause of equation 2 we see
that si < 0 produce a linear decrease in perceived attractiveness from Ai = αi for si = 0 to Ai = 0 for si = −1.
Negative si model a low self-esteem. A perfect judgement of one’s own attractiveness is achieved with the
‘perfect’ esteem of si = 0.
Through its effect on Ai , self-esteem is important for
the duration of relationships. However, in the formation
of couples we only consider the actual attractiveness αi
and self-esteem plays no role. We do not incorporate
self-esteem in the selection of a mate because Walster
(1970) established that self-esteem has no effect on the
tendency to prefer the most attractive choice of partner.
The key difference between αi and si is that αi is
static throughout the simulation and si varies depending on social interactions. In other words, a person’s
physical attractiveness is not affected by social interactions, but their self-esteem, self-image, or body-image is
affected (Leary, 2005; Pass, 2009). To lower an agent i’s
self-esteem by a factor x without exceeding the range of
(−1, 1) we use di (x):

si − x,
si ≥ 0

di (x) =
(3)

si − (1 + si )x, si < 0
and to raise it by a factor x we use ui (x):

 si + (1 − si )x, si ≥ 0
ui (x) =

si + x,
si < 0

Results
To provide an idea of how effective the model is while
keeping errors and simulation times reasonable, the simulation was run 50 times with 300 men and 300 women
courting for 50 epochs. The main observed quantity was
the mean intra-couple attractiveness correlation for the
couples in each epoch. Figure 1 provides a visualization of the collected data. The mean correlation was
collected for all of the couples in each epoch (blue), as
well as the top 30% by longevity (red). Effectively, the
blue points represent the ‘average’ daters and asymptote at around r = .23. The top 30% correspond to the
‘serious’ daters and asymptote near r = .60 which is in
the observed range of .56 to .63 for serious and engaged
or married couples (White, 1980). The large gap between between the attractiveness correlation in average
and serious daters is consistent with White’s (1980) em-

(4)

If an agent has a positive self-esteem (si ≥ 0) and we
lower it by x with equation 3 then we simply subtract x

974

allowing for the experimental tendency to choose more
attractive partners. The simulation could be extended
to allow one of the sexes to select a potential partner
(instead of random assignment). We believe that such
a modification is essential to account for the asymmetry
in male and female perception of self-attractiveness. In
particular, if males select a potential partner more often,
then they will face rejection more often than females and
produce more variation in self-esteem and hence a lower
correlation between self-perceived and externally judged
attractiveness. However, the most important part of the
model that needs more attention and study is the selfesteem variables and the choices of weights in various
equations. As it stands, lack of knowledge about the
self-esteem factor is the largest limitation of the model.
To truly test and understand the model and simulation,
experiments are essential.

Figure 1: The intra-couple attractiveness correlation versus epochs with statistical error. The blue data points
are the correlations of all of the couples in an epoch. The
red data points are of the oldest 30% of the couples. The
data were generated by averaging over 50 simulations of
50 epochs with 300 men and 300 women courting

The structure of the simulation and relative simplicity
of the model, lends itself nicely to empirical studies. Our
model’s predictions could be tested with human participants. The attractiveness score of each individual could
be evaluated by a panel of judges or by querying participants of the other gender. Individuals’ self-esteem
parameter could be estimated by comparing their own
evaluation of attractiveness, Ai , to the attractiveness assigned by judges, αi . The dates and choices to break up
or accept partners can be carried out as in existing studies. The computer simulation can be run with the same
initial population of parameters and results compared.
By doing parameter fitting on the inputs for equations 3
and 4 we could estimate the effects of rejection and acceptance on self-esteem.

pirical results. The lower correlation value of our model
also matches empirical data much better than the unreasonably high correlations of earlier models (Kalick &
Hamilton, 1986).

Discussion
Earlier simulations (Kalick & Hamilton, 1986) yielded
an intra-couple attractiveness correlation of approximately .9, .85, and .55 for the matching hypothesis,
combined, and mate attractiveness selection rules respectively. Kalick and Hamilton (1986) concluded based
on these simulations that the matching hypothesis alone
could not explain intra-couple attractiveness correlations
as they were simply too high. By introducing modified
rules that incorporated both formation and development
of relationships, our model provided realistic correlations of .23 for average daters and .60 for serious and
engaged or married couples. We matched experimental
results of attractiveness selection by allowing partners
to favour accepting dates with more attractive partners.
We incorporated the matching hypothesis in the breakup probability instead of relationship formation. This
allowed our model to track both the formation and development of relationships. Allowing couples to break-up
also addressed an important shortcoming of earlier models (Aron, 1988). By allowing individuals to be single
instead of eventually forcing everyone into a relationship
we ensure that there is always choice of potential partners.
Our model has provided promising results, but only a
portion of its potential has been examined. The model
and simulation were used to show how the matching hypothesis can be present in a place other than the probability of date acceptance. This approach accounts for
matching effects (especially in long-lived couples) while

A further contribution of our simulation is the clarity a formal model brings to theories of human romantic
relationships. This clarity allows us to easily generate
hypotheses and, more importantly, to relate our model
to work in the nearby fields of evolutionary and cognitive
psychology. In particular, we hope that — using attractiveness as a proxy for fitness (Singh, 1993; Hönekopp,
Rudolph, Beier, Liebert, & Müller, 2007) — future work
can connect our social/psychological model to evolutionary and cognitive models. The methods of evolutionary
game theory have already been used to study parts of
equity theory such as the evolution of fairness in the ultimatum game (Nowak, Page, & Sigmund, 2000; Bolton
& Ockenfels, 2000) and the predominance of ethnocentrism (Hammond & Axelrod, 2006; Shultz, Hartshorn,
& Kaznatcheev, 2009). Recently, Kaznatcheev (2010)
incorporated cognition into these evolutionary models.
Recasting our model of mate selection in such a setting
can provide important insights into the basis of romantic
relations. By looking at the evolutionary and cognitive
underpinning of mate selection (Miller & Todd, 1998),
future work could explain not only how romantic relationships progress, but why this is the case.

975

Our model offers a new and alternative look at the
dynamics of romantic relationships. Unlike earlier studies (Kalick & Hamilton, 1986), not only the initialization
of a relationship is examined, but also its longevity. As
any romantic can tell you, knowing how to start a relationship is nothing compared to keeping an existing one
going. Hopefully, this model and simulation can illuminate the mysteries of dating and help us understand
human interaction a little better.

Hill, C., Rubin, Z., & Peplau, L. (1976). Breakups before
marriage: the end of 103 affairs. Journal of Social
Issues, 32 , 147-168.
Hönekopp, J., Rudolph, U., Beier, L., Liebert, A., &
Müller, C. (2007). Physical attractiveness of face and
body as indicators of physical fitness in men. Evolution
and Human Behavior , 28 (2), 106–111.
Huston, T. (1973). Ambiguity of acceptance, social desirability, and dating choice. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 9 , 32-42.
Kalick, S., & Hamilton, T. (1986). The matching hypothesis reexamined. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51 , 673-682.
Kaznatcheev, A. (2010). The cognitive cost of ethnocentrism. In S. Ohlsson & R. Catrambone (Eds.), Proceedings of the 32nd annual conference of the congnitive
science society. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Leary, M. (2005). Sociometer theory and the pursuit
of relational value: Getting to the root of self-esteem.
European Review of Social Psychology, 16 , 75-111.
Lewin, K., Dembo, T., Festinger, L., & Sears, P. (1944).
Level of aspiration. Personality and the Behavior Disorders, 1 , 33-378.
Miller, G., & Todd, P. (1998). Mate choice turns cognitive. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2 (5), 190–198.
Murstein, B. (1972a). Physical attractiveness and marital choice. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 22 , 8-12.
Murstein, B. (1972b). Physical attractiveness and marital choice. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 22 , 8-12.
Nowak, M., Page, K., & Sigmund, K. (2000). Fairness versus reason in the ultimatum game. Science,
289 (5485), 1773.
Pass, J. (2009). The self in social rejection. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, University of Groningen.
Pass, J., Lindenberg, S., & Oark, J. (2010). All you
need is love: Is the sociometer especially sensitive to
one’s mating capacity? European Journal of Social
Psychology, 40 , 221-234.
Price, R., & Vandenberg, S. (1979). Matching for physical attractiveness in married couples. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 5 , 398-400.
Rand, C., & Hall, J. (1983). Sex differences in the accuracy of self-perceived attractivness. Social Psychology
Quarterly, 46 , 359-363.
Shultz, T. R., Hartshorn, M., & Kaznatcheev, A. (2009).
Why is ethnocentrism more common than humanitarianism? In N. Taatgen & H. van Rijn (Eds.), Proceedings of the 31st annual conference of the congnitive
science society (p. 2100-2105). Austin, TX: Cognitive
Science Society.
Singh, D. (1993). Adaptive significance of female physical attractiveness: Role of waist-to-hip ratio. Journal

References
Aron, A. (1988). The matching hypothesis reconsidered
again: Comment on Kalick and Hamilton. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 54 , 441-446.
Berscheid, E., Dion, K., Walster, E., & Walster, G.
(1971). Physical attractiveness and dating choice: A
test of the matching hypothesis. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 19 , 78-92.
Bolton, G., & Ockenfels, A. (2000). ERC: A theory of
equity, reciprocity, and competition. American Economic Review , 90 (1), 166–193.
Cash, T. (1981). Physical attractiveness: An annotated
bibliography of theory and research in the behavioral
sciences. JSAS: Catalog of Selected Documents in Psychology, 11 .
Cavior, N., & Boblett, P. (1972). Physical attractiveness
of dating versus married couples. Proceedings of the
80th annual conference of the American psychological
association, 7 , 175-176.
Citelli, J., & Waid, L. (1980). Physical attractiveness,
romantic love, and equity restoration in dating relationships. Journal of Personality Assessment, 44 , 624629.
Cunningham, M., & Wu, C. (1995). “Their ideas of
beauty are, on the whole, the same as ours”: Consistency and variability in the cross-cultural perception of
female physical attractiveness. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 68 , 261-279.
Feingold, A. (1981). Testing equity as an explanation
for romantic couples ‘mismatched’ on physical attractiveness. Psychological Reports, 49 , 247-250.
Feingold, A. (1988). Matching for attractiveness in romantic partners and same-sex friends: A meta-analysis
and theoretical critique. Psychological Bulletin, 104 ,
226-235.
Fleming, J., & Courtney, B. (1984). The dimensionality
of self-esteem: II. Hierarchical facet model for revised
measurement scales. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 46 , 404-421.
Hammond, R., & Axelrod, R. (2006). The evolution
of ethnocentrism. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 50 ,
926-936.
Helgeson, V. (1994). Long-distance romantic relationships: sex differences in adjustment and breakup. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 20 , 254-265.

976

of Personality and Social Psychology, 65 (2), 293–307.
Walster, E. (1970). The effect of self-esteem on liking
for dates of various social desirabilities. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 6 , 248-253.
Walster, E., Aronson, V., Abrahams, D., & Rottman,
L. (1966). Importance of physical attractiveness in
dating behavior. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 4 , 508-516.
Walster, E., Hatfield, E., Walster, G., & Berscheid, E.
(1978). Equity: Theory and research. Allyn & Bacon.
Wetzel, C., & Insko, C. (1982). The similarity-attraction
relation: Is there an ideal one? Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 18 , 253-276.
White, G. (1980). Physical attractiveness and courtship
progress. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 39 , 660-668.

977

