UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Semantic network connectivity is related to vocabulary growth rate in children

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9xm7v9nq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Beckage, Nicole
Smith, Linda
Hills, Thomas

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Semantic Network Connectivity is Related to Vocabulary
Growth Rate in Children
Nicole M. Beckage (nbeckage@indiana.edu)
Linda B. Smith (smith4@indiana.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science, Indiana University, 819 Eigenmann, 1910 E. Tenth Street
Bloomington, IN 47406 USA

Thomas Hills (thomas.hills@unibas.ch)
Department of Psychology, University of Basel, Missionsstrasse 64A
4055 Basel, Switzerland
Abstract
Adult semantic networks show small-world structural
properties that are believed to support language processing and
word retrieval. The focus of this paper is to understand when
these properties emerge in lexical development. We believe
that they relate to the rate of word acquisition and vocabulary
size. To address this, we examine the connectivity patterns of
semantic networks of individual children and compare
children on faster and slower vocabulary growth trajectories.
The results show that small-world properties emerge early.
However, children on slower growth trajectories, who are at
risk for significant language delay, do not show these
properties. The differences between typical and these so-called
“late-talkers” persist, even when vocabulary size is equated.
Late talkers’ vocabularies are not only acquired later, but also
less cohesively, a fact that may relate to future language
processing difficulties for these children. In brief, the results
suggest that properties of network connectivity may play a
role in early lexical development.
Keywords: semantic networks, language acquisition, corpus
analyses, late talkers

Words connected to other words
Words exist in a sea of other words. The semantic
relations among these words play an explanatory role in
language comprehension and processing (e.g., Lund &
Burgess, 1996; Jones & Mewhort, 2007). These relations are
often studied in terms of semantic networks (Collins &
Quillian, 1969; Steyvers & Tenenbaum, 2005). Recent
advances in graph theory reveal that adult semantic networks
have properties that may be important to language
processing, and potentially also to word learning.
Graph theory, or network analysis, can be applied to any
structure that consists of nodes connected to each other
through links or edges. For example, nodes might be cities
and links might be roads; or nodes might be proteins and
links might be the molecules that bind with and activate
them; or, nodes might be words and the links indices of
semantic connectedness such as association strength or cooccurrence.
The semantic networks may be built from various sources,
including corpora collected from written or spoken language,
free association data, and hand-coded collections of words
(e.g., Steyvers & Tenenbaum, 2005; Hills et al., 2009b). As
such, they describe the typical mature language user. These

mature semantic networks exhibit what is known as small
world properties (see Steyvers & Tenenbaum, 2005; Hills et
al., 2009a). Small world characteristics allow for local
structure but global access. In a network with small world
characteristics, there are often clusters of densely connected
nodes. The connections between the nodes of a cluster tend
to connect to nodes in the same cluster. This contributes to
the high local structure. However, there are also a few nodes
in these dense clusters that have connections to nodes in
other potentially distant clusters. This is the global access
that allows easy movement and transition from one cluster to
another. Quantitatively, these features are apparent in a high
clustering coefficient (a measure of local connectivity) and
an average geodesic distance (the shortest path between two
nodes) on par with a random network of similar size and
connection density. To aid in exposition, these properties
are illustrated in Figure 1. Small-world properties are
believed to support efficient processing, word retrieval,
categorization and robustness to damage and deletion (Hills
et al., 2009a; Griffiths, Steyvers & Firl, 2007, Steyvers &
Tenenbaum, 2005).

Figure 1: Characteristics of small world structure.
Although it is known that adult semantic networks have
small world characteristics, only a few studies have
addressed their development and the role of network
structure in language acquisition (e.g. Vitevitch 2008, Hills
et al., 2009a, Hills et al., 2009b). Here, for the first time, we
examine the network structures of the vocabularies of
individual children at different points in development. We
ask whether small-world properties are dependent on
acquiring some number of English words and whether, for
any vocabulary size, some children’s networks might show
more robust connectivity patterns than other children’s

2769

networks. Is network connectivity a general fact about the
structure of language, or can we show that it is a relevant
property at the scale of an individual? Finally, is the
connectivity pattern for individual children related to rate of
vocabulary growth?
To these ends, we examine the connectivity within the
semantic networks of individual children who –by normative
standards –are on a path of typical development and children
who are on a slower path and one that past research shows is
predictive of later language difficulties (e.g., Thal et al.,
1997; Bishop & Leonard, 2000; Heilmann, et al, 2005).

Trajectories of Early Vocabulary Growth
Early word learning is first slow and then accelerates
(Bloom 2000; Dale & Fenson, 1996), a fact that suggests
that already learned words help new word acquisition (see
Mitchell & McMurray, 2009). Vocabulary size at any point
in development is thus a predictor of future vocabulary
growth rates (Dupuy, 1974; Raven, 1948; Bates et al., 1992;
Fenson et al., 1993; Thal et al., 1997). Figure 2 illustrates the
normative vocabulary size as a function of age for children
at the 50th percentile and the 20th percentile (Fenson et al,
1993; see also Dale & Fenson, 1996). Percentile is calculated
by considering a child’s age, number of words in their
productive vocabulary and gender.

Figure 2:Trajectories of early vocabulary growth,
representing children in the 50th percentile and children in
the 20th percentile (drawn from Fenson et al, 1993).
The trajectory at the bottom–for children whose
vocabulary size falls at or below the 20th percentile of
children their same age–has attracted considerable attention
in the study of early word learning. Many of these children
not only stay on this slower trajectory, but about half go on
to have serious deficiencies in language processing and even
those who might seem to “catch up” often have measurable
difficulties in language tasks (including reading) when they
reach school age (e.g Anderson & Freebody, 1981; Bishop &
Leonard, 2000; Thal et al., 1997; Moyle et al, 2007).
Moreover, early as well as later in development, these
children show retrieval errors and word-finding difficulties
(Bishop & Leonard, 2000).
Accordingly, we ask how vocabulary size in young
children relates to the structure of semantic relations within
those vocabularies and whether this structure is related to

individual children’s rate of vocabulary growth. We examine
a broad sample of children and specifically compare
vocabularies of children not at risk for language deficits with
children whose vocabulary size for their age puts them at
risk for language difficulties. In the literature, these at-risk
children are often called “late talkers;” we will also use that
term although it is somewhat of a misnomer because they are
not simply “late” but rather on a slower path of vocabulary
growth. If small-world properties are important to the
efficiency of language use–and perhaps also to new word
acquisitions–then vocabulary structure and not just
vocabulary size may be different for these children. Does the
connectivity of words in the emerging semantic networks of
late talkers differ from the network structure of children
whose vocabulary has grown at a more typical pace?

Rationale for the Approach
We analyzed vocabularies from a broad sample of children
who differed in age and vocabulary size but whose
vocabulary size for age was above the 20th percentile and
also from a sample of children, also varying in age and
vocabulary size, whose vocabulary size fell below the 20th
percentile for age at the time the vocabulary was collected. A
semantic network was built for each vocabulary yielding a
large set of individual networks that could be ordered by age
and separately by vocabulary size.
To build individual networks, we connected the words in
an individual’s vocabulary, using co-occurrence in a large
corpus of child-directed speech as the index of semantic
relatedness. The co-occurrences in this corpus of child
directed speech is presumed to index the relatedness of the
individual words in the language (and that part of the
language relevant to children) and in the learning
environment in general.
This measure of semantic
relatedness is not the co-occurrences in the specific learning
environments of individual children, a key point we will
consider in the general discussion. Co-occurrences of words
within the corpus formed the edges or links of a semantic
network and the nodes were based on the words in each
individual child’s productive vocabulary.
In sum, the key question is whether and how semantic
network connectivity changes as children’s vocabularies
grow and whether this differs for children whose vocabulary
growth rate is sufficiently slow that they are considered at
risk for language disorders.

Methods
Vocabularies.
Vocabularies from 73 children ranging in age from 16.2 to
34.6 months were selected for this study. These vocabularies
derive from one-time visits of children to the Cognitive
Development Laboratory at Indiana University and are
measures of productive vocabulary via the Bates-MacArthur
Communicative Developmental Inventory (Toddler or Infant
form as appropriate to the child’s age, Fenson et al, 1993).
This is a parent checklist and parents were asked to indicate

2770

which words on the checklist their child produced (Fenson et
al, 1993). Total vocabulary as indicated by the parent was
used to determine the percentile of the vocabulary size for
the child’s age. From this repository of child vocabularies
we selected a random sample of vocabularies of children
whose vocabulary size for their age fell above the 20th
percentile and as large a sample as possible of children
whose vocabulary size for their age fell below the 20th
percentile (see Fenson et al, 1993). Table 1 provides the
number of children in each group, means and ranges of their
vocabulary size, age, and percentile.
Table 1: Age and percentile of children in study

All children
Late talkers
Typical talkers

#
children
73
38
35

Age range in
months (mean)
16.2-34.6 (22.1)
16.3-34.6 (24.3)
16.2-26.6 (19.8)

Percentile
range (mean)
5-99 (25.6)
5-20 (12)
25-99 (40.4)

Words.
For the network analysis, only the 291 words that are on
both the Toddler and Infant forms were used. This allowed
for a more accurate comparison across ages. Of the included
words, 204 are nouns, 51 are verbs and the remaining 36 are
adjectives, adverbs and function words.

Networks.
To build the networks, links between words were defined
in terms of co-occurrences in the CHILDES database
(MacWhinney, 2000). The co-occurrence method was taken
from prior analyses by Riordan and Jones (2007) and related
lemmas (cat, cats, hit, hitting) were counted as instances of
the same lexeme. The matrix of co-occurrences was built
using a process similar to the Hyperspace Analogue to
Language (HAL) (Lund & Burgess, 1996) and the word cooccurrence detector (Li, Farkas & MacWhinney, 2004). For
the 291 unique words, we formed a 291x 291 matrix, where

# of words
Median in-degree
Clustering coefficient
Geodesic dist.
Redundancy

256
53.5
.472
1.720
16.04

each cell, ij, is filled according to the following rule: a
moving window of size 15 moves word-wise through the
corpus, with each cell ij, changed to a value of 1 if word j
occurs both downstream and together in the same window
with word i. This produces a directed network where each
word is connected to another word by a directed link if it cooccurs downstream of that word in child directed speech.
Frequency counts were taken as the number of occurrences
of a given word in the corpus.

Results
The analyses reported here use four network statistics:
median in-degree, global clustering coefficient, redundancy,
and geodesic distance. Each provides a means of assessing
connectivity within networks. Figure 3 shows four networks
for four typically developing children and the index of
connectivity for each of these networks. The four individual
networks show considerable small-world structure with as
few as 106 (or even 55) words. This suggests that these
properties–characteristic of mature semantic networks–are
evident even from the earliest stages of lexical development.
This could merely reflect the structure of language such that
any learner (or random sample of words from early
vocabularies) would show these properties. Or, these
properties could be more fundamentally related to how
individual children build semantic structures for efficient
language learning and processing. The comparison of
typically-developing and late-talking children provides the
relevant evidence.

In-degree.
In-degree is a measure that captures how many
connections each node has directed towards it from other
nodes. In the present case, the in-degree of the target word or
node is the number of distinct words that occurred 15 or
fewer words after the target in the CHILDES corpus. The
median in-degree provides an overall picture of how sparse
or dense a network is. In a sparse network, the words in the

149
29
.494
1.737
14.15

106
36
.555
1.608
9.23

55
22
.606
1.566
4.84

Figure 3: These semantic networks of typically developing children show that children develop small world structure even with
relatively few words. Throughout development the semantic networks of children show high clustering coefficients and low
average geodesic distance. The networks also quickly develop a high number of connections and multiple traversable pathways.

2771

0.8

1.0

(ß=34.53, SE=18.33, p=0.0638). Figure 5 shows the
clustering co-efficient as a function of vocabulary size for
the two groups. As is apparent from the data points, there is
both more variability by this measure among the youngest
later-talkers than typically developing children and typically
developing children appear to move toward a stable
clustering coefficient earlier than do late talkers. The lower
average clustering coefficient of late talkers suggests that
they are less likely to learn words that fill out categories of
closely related words that they already know, a result that
again suggests that there may be fewer dependencies
between new acquisitions and already learned words. Being
unable to fill out categories of closely related words, these
late talkers may have trouble reorganizing their current
semantic understanding to create new categories and
concepts.

0.6
0.4
0.2

40

0.0

30
20

indegree

50

60

clustering coefficient

70

vocabulary are not as related to each other and so there can
be more words than connections. In a dense network, many
words are connected to each other; e.g., the median indegree is nearly equal to the total number of words or nodes,
many words in the network are semantically related and cooccur frequently in speech.
Regression analysis, with median in-degree as the
independent variable and the child’s MCDI percentile as the
dependent, yielded a significant relation between in-degree
and percentile with lower median values characterizing latetalkers even when age (p<.001) and vocabulary size (p=
.0162) were controlled. The relation between in-degree and
vocabulary size for the two groups is shown in Figure 4.
This indicates that there are more links in a typical talker’s
network than in a late talker’s network even when the
networks have the same number of nodes. Typical talkers
learn words that are semantically connected to each other but
late talkers are less likely to do so, as if perhaps, they learn
words as individual islands, as if the next word learned is
somehow independent of the prior learned words.

50

10

0

100

150

200

250

0

vocabulary size

0

50

100

150

200

250

Figure 5: A graph of the clustering coefficient as a function
of vocabulary size. The black line indicates typical talkers
and the lighter line, late talkers (lm, p=0.064).

vocabulary size

Figure 4: A graph of the median in-degree as a function of
vocabulary size. The black line indicates typical talkers and
the lighter line, the late talkers. (p=0.016).

Global clustering coefficient.
The clustering coefficient provides a measure of how well
connected a node’s neighbors are to each other. Small-world
networks have high clustering coefficients, relative to
networks of the same size (number of nodes) and density
(ratio of observed links to possible links). A clustering
coefficient of 1 indicates that all of a node’s neighbors are
themselves connected.
A clustering coefficient of 0
indicates that none of a node’s neighbors are connected to
one another. This provides a measure of local clustering, as
opposed to more global measure of density assessed with indegree above. The late-talkers in the present study show a
lower average clustering coefficient than late talkers when
age is controlled (ß=-54.6, SE=21.991, p=0.0154) and a near
significant effect when vocabulary size is controlled

Redundancy.
Redundancy captures the robustness of the network: in a
highly redundant network, if a random connection is deleted,
the deleted link will not alter the likelihood of a connected
path between two words. For example, with a road network,
if there are multiple ways to get between two places, then a
road closure is not an insurmountable problem. However, if
only one road connects two locations, then a closure of that
road makes the two locations inaccessible to one another.
Higher redundancy means more possible paths. As opposed
to clustering coefficient and in-degree, redundancy provides
a measure of the ease of accessibility in the network (from
one node or word to another). Compared with the clustering
coefficient, this provides a more global measure of cohesion
across the network.
Regression analyses yielded significant differences
between the two groups, with late talkers having less
redundant networks when controlling for age (p<.001) and

2772

vocabulary size (p=0.015). To quantify this, for a given
network of 200 words, a late talker would have on average
11 possible pathways compared to 13 possible paths in a
network for a typical talker (t-test, p= 0.016, comparing all
late talkers/typical talkers). Though this difference is small,
the actual implication of this difference is that late talkers
have many words that have only one or two connections,
whereas typical talkers have fewer words with low
redundancy suggesting a network more robust to change.
The difference in the number of possible pathways
between nodes across the two groups suggests that the
robustness of the two groups is also different. The typical
talkers, building more redundant networks, are less likely to
have trouble transitioning from one area of the network to
another. The fluidity of their productive speech also would
be less hampered by the forgetting of a few words. By
having multiple ways of getting from one word to another,
the typical talkers may more easily access one word
following another. These differences may relate importantly
to the word-finding and word-retrieval difficulties of late
talkers, an important question for future work.

Average geodesic distance.
Geodesic distance represents shortest path length between
two nodes. We computed the geodesic distance between all
nodes excluding isolates or unconnected nodes. We then
averaged the geodesic distance for all nodes, further
excluding all cases in which there was no traversable path
between two nodes. As networks grow larger, more
connections are possible and the geodesic distance, or the
shortest distance between two nodes, will often trend toward
less than 2. This happens when a word that connects to all
other words, such as “you”, is added to the semantic
network. If word A is not directly connected to word B,
word A is connected to word B through “you”, resulting in
an average geodesic distance of approximately 2.
Late talkers have significantly different geodesic distances
from typical talkers. When considering networks of similar
size (i.e. words known), we see that typical talkers having a
mean geodesic distance of 1.82 and late talkers having a
mean geodesic distance of 2.55 (t-test, p=0.0276).
Another indication that these at-risk children are building
networks with less global structure is the number of
components in a network. Components are isolated clusters
or words of a network that do not connect to other
components in a network. Early on in vocabulary learning, it
is possible to learn a word, or words, in complete isolation
that is not semantically related to any other word or cluster.
For example a child might learn a bunch of animals and a
bunch of food words but be missing words like milk that
would link the two clusters. Of the children in this study
only 17 children showed networks that had more than one
component, 14 of which are classified as late talkers.
The difference in geodesic distance and number of
components suggests that late talkers are not building
networks that allow for the same level of global access.

Discussion
The present study is the first analysis of the network
structures of early vocabularies for individual children and
the first to reveal potentially meaningful individual
differences in the structures of these emerging networks. As
such, there are still open questions and limitations that will
need to be addressed. These include comparisons to
randomly selected vocabularies of different sizes, linking of
these differences in vocabulary structure to performance
(such as word retrieval), and following individual children’s
vocabulary growth. Nonetheless, the results provide three
new insights: (1) Small-world properties are evident in the
network structure of even very small and early vocabularies;
(2) these properties are not the consequence of just learning
any subset of early English words since–at any vocabulary
size–there are individual children with more robustly
connected networks than other children; and (3) the structure
of these individual differences in network connectivity
appears related not just to vocabulary size but to the rate of
vocabulary development with children at risk for serious
language deficiencies (by normative standards) showing less
cohesive and less efficiently structured networks.
The broad sample of typically-developing children,
children above the 20th percentile and who are not at risk for
language deficiencies, show less variance in network
structure, specifically clustering coefficient in our analysis,
than do the late-talking children, a remarkable fact in its own
right. These typically-developing children seem to be
building semantic networks with many of the small-world
properties found in adult semantic networks, showing higher
in-degree, clustering coefficient, and redundancy, indicating
that typical talkers are learning words more cohesively, with
more semantic connectivity between learned words—both
globally and locally—than do the networks of late talkers.
Late talkers are not only learning more slowly but appear to
be learning differently. One possibility consistent with the
present pattern is that typically developing children build
their vocabularies in ways such that learning itself is
dependant on the semantic relations among already learned
words or the semantic relations in the learning environment
(Hills et al, 2009b) whereas late talkers just learn words,
adding words as individual and unrelated items, not picking
up on the semantic relations in the learning environment.
Because the semantic relations in these networks are
themselves normative–reflecting the structure of the general
learning environment and not the child’s specific learning
environment-it is also, in principle, possible that these
children’s learning environments present less semantic
connectivity. Previous research has shown that learning
environments, in terms of the kind and number of words that
are spoken to children, do influence the kinds and number of
words that children learn (e.g., Hurtodo, Marchman &
Fernald, 2008; Rowe, 2008; Hoff & Naigles, 2002:
Huttenlocher et al, 1991). However, contemporary
understanding of language-delayed children suggests that
this may not be the sole factor in these delays (see Bishop &

2773

Leonard, 2000). Still, a more detailed examination of
individual language learning environments is in order.
Our evidence suggests that typical talkers are more likely
to acquire words that share semantic associations with words
they already know. This may be a consequence of the fact
that they are more sensitive to semantic associations in the
environment (what has been called preferential acquisition),
or that they are more likely to use known words to direct the
acquisition of new words (called the lure of the associates).
Previous work has shown that both of these processes are
predictive of word acquisition (Hills et al., 2009b), but these
processes may also represent individual strategies for
learning. This suggests an interesting direction for future
research in individual differences in language acquisition.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported
HD028675 to Linda Smith.

by

NICCHD

grant

References
Anderson, R. C., & Freebody, P. (1981). Vocabulary
knowledge. In J. T.Guthrie (Ed.), Reading comprehension
and education (pp. 77–117). Newark, DE: International
Reading Association.
Bates, E., Marchman, V., Thal, D., Fenson, L., Dale, P.,
Reznick, J. S., Reilly, J. & Hartung, J. (1992).
Developmental and stylistic variation in the composition
of early vocabulary. CRL Technical Report, UCSD.
Bishop, Dorothy V. M. (Ed) (1), & Leonard, L. B. (. (Eds.).
(2000). Speech and language impairments in children:
Causes, characteristics, intervention and outcome. New
York, NY, US: Psychology Press.
Bloom, P. (2000). How children learn the meanings of
words. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Collins, A.M., & Quillian, M.R. (1969). Retrieval time from
semantic memory. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 8, 240-248.
Dale, P.S., & Fenson, L. (1996). Lexical development norms
for young children. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, & Computers, 28, 125–127.
Dupuy, H. P. (1974). The rationale, development and
standardization of a basic word vocabulary test (DHEW
Publication No. HRA 74-1334). Washington, DC: U.S.
Government Printing Office.
Fenson, L., Dale, P. S., Reznick, J. S., Thal, D., Bates, E.
and Hartung, J. P., et al. 1993, The MacArthur
Communicative Development Inventories: User’s Guide
and Technical Manual (San Diego: Singular)
Griffiths, T.L., Steyvers, M., & Firl, A. (2007). Google and
the mind: Predicting fluency with PageRank.
Psychological Science, 18, 1069–1076.
Heilmann, J., Weismer, S. E., Evans, J., & Hollar, C. (2005).
Utility
of
the
MacArthur-bates
communicative
development inventory in identifying language abilities of
late-talking and typically developing toddlers. American
Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 14(1), 40-51.

Hills, T., Maouene, J., Sheya, A., Maouene, M., and Smith,
L. (2009a). Emergent categories in the feature structure of
early-learned nouns. Cognition, 112, 381-396.
Hills, T., Maouene, J., Sheya, A., Maouene, M., and Smith,
L. (2009b). Longitudinal analysis of early semantic
networks:
preferential attachment or preferential
acquisition? Psychological Science, 20, 729-739.
Hoff, E., & Naigles, L. (2002). How children use input to
acquire a lexicon. Child Development, 73, 418-433
Hurtado, N., Marchman, V. A., & Fernald, A. (2008). Does
input influence uptake? links between maternal talk,
processing speed and vocabulary size in spanish-learning
children. Developmental Science, 11, F31-F39.
Huttenlocher, J., Haight, W., Bryk, A., Seltzer, M., & Lyons,
T. (1991). Early vocabulary growth: Relation to language
input & gender. Developmental Psychology, 27, 236-248.
Jones, M. N., & Mewhort, D. J. K. (2007). Representing
word meaning and order information in a composite
holographic lexicon. Psychological Review, 114(1), 1–37
Li, P., Farkas, I., MacWhinney, B. (2004). Early lexical
development in a self-organizing neural network. Neural
Networks 17, 1345-1362.
Lund, K., & Burgess, C. (1996). Producing highdimensional semantic spaces from lexical co-occurrence.
Behavioral Research Methods, Instruments, and
Computers, 28(2), 203-208.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES project: Tools for
analyzing talk (3rd ed.). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Mitchell, C., & McMurray, B. (2009). On leveraged learning
in lexical acquisition and its relationship to acceleration.
Cognitive Science, 33, 1503-1523.
Moyle, M. J., Weismer, S. E., Evans, J. L., & Lindstrom, M.
J. (2007). Longitudinal relationships between lexical and
grammatical development in typical and late-talking
children. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing
Research, 50(2), 508-528.
Raven, J. C. (1948). The comparative assessment of intellectual ability. British Journal of Psychology, 29, 12–19.
Riordan, B., and Michael N. J.. (2007). Comparing semantic
space models using child-directed speech. In D. S
MacNamara & J. G. Trafton (Eds.), Proceedings of the
29th Annual Conference of the CogSci. 599-604.
Rowe, M. L. (2008). Child-directed speech: Relation to
socioeconomic status, knowledge of child development &
child vocabulary skill. Journal of Child Language, 35,
185-205.
Steyvers, M., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2005). The large-scale
structure of semantic networks: statistical analyses and a
model of semantic growth. Cognitive Science, 29, 41-78
Thal, D., Bates, E., Goodman, J., & Jahn-Samilo, J. (1997).
Continuity of language abilities: An exploratory study of
late and early-talking toddlers. Developmental Neuropsychology, 13, 239–273.
Vitevitch, M.S. (2008). What can graph theory tell us about
word learning and lexical retrieval? Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 51, 408–422.

2774

