UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Simple Pointing to Objects may Facilitate Remembering

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2rx6k252

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Petkov, Georgi
Nikolova, Prolet

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Simple Pointing to Objects may Facilitate Remembering
Georgi Petkov (gpetkov@cogs.nbu.bg), Prolet Nikolova (bonbonisezoni@gmail.com)
Central and East European Center for Cognitive Science,
Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology,
New Bulgarian University, 21 Montevideo Street
Sofia 1618, Bulgaria

Abstract
Two experiments demonstrate the impact of the selfperformed actions during the encoding phase on the amount
of the learned information. People memorized more items if
they had touched the stimuli during learning. The experiments
differ from many of the classical studies testing embodiment
of human memory in two main respects:
First, the performed actions are completely unrelated to the
essence of the learned stimuli, thus the results can not be
explained by pure association-based facilitation. Second, the
actions are performed during the encoding phase only, thus
the results maybe directly linked to the nature of the encoded
representations. The possible mechanisms that may underlie
the observed influence are discussed shortly.
Keywords: embodiment; memory encoding; representations

Introduction – embodied cognition
The classical AI theory of manipulations of abstract
symbols had been reconsidered during the last decades.
Very influential in the field of the so-called embodied view
of cognition are the books of Lakoff and Johnson (Lakoff &
Johnson, 1980, 1999). They argue for a massive crossdomain interrelation of various structures that map each
other. Furthermore, the authors claim that maybe the whole
cognition is ground in the body. The growing theory of
embodied cognition rejects in its extreme version even the
very idea of representations: “What you get underlying our
representations of the world - the kinds of things we
formulate, for instance, in declarative sentences - is not
further representations but rather a certain grasp of the
world that we have as agents in it” (Taylor, 1987, p. 432).
The relation between the sensory-motor and the
conceptual system was widely explored from different
perspectives. O’Regan & Noë, (2001) focus on the dynamic
interrelation of all cognitive systems – the perceptual one,
the action one, and in turn the conceptual one. The
fundamental base for the view that perceptual signals lie at
the core of the conceptual representations is enriched by the
works of Barsalou (1999) and Brooks (1987). According to
the Barsalou’s
perceptual
symbol system, the
representations of all concepts, even the abstract ones, are
based on associations with huge number of perceptual and
motor neural signals. A wonderful theoretical analysis of the
philosophical view of embodiment had been made by
Anderson (2003), as well by Shepard (1984), Glenberg
(1997), and Varela et al. (1991).
At the same time, many empirical studies gave additional
support for the idea of embodiment. Sinai et al. (1998) and

Proffitt et al. (2003) demonstrated how physical difficulties
may change abstract judgments of people. For example,
people judge a certain distance as longer if they stay with a
heavy rucksack on their back. Myung et al. (2006)
performed an experiment to show that recognition of the
action, for example, typing on typewriter, is facilitated by
the context of a piano just because of the common typical
finger movements performed on both objects. In addition,
not only the performed actions influence perceptions, but
also the perceived objects influence directly some motor
commands. Thus, in a series of experiments Tucker and
Ellis (Tucker & Ellis, 1998; Ellis & Tucker, 2000), as well
as Richardson et al. (2001) demonstrated this opposite effect
– the perceived objects automatically and immediately
activate certain action responses.
Evidence supporting the embodiment view on cognition
can be found also in brain imaging researches (Hauk,
Johnsrude & Pulvermüller, 2004, Damasio, 1999). Even the
mirror neurons (Rizzolatti & Craighero, 2004) often are
speculatively related to this view.
Together with the interdependency between perceptions
and actions, the relationship between language and
constraints of the body is explored widely by the scientists.
For example, people prefer to say that a given umbrella is
above the man’s head if the umbrella protects the man from
the rain even if the real position of the umbrella is at 45
degrees according to the head (Coventry et al., 2001). The
claim that language is grounded in our bodies and actions is
supported by a huge number of empirical evidences
(Glenberg & Kaschak, 2002; Pecher et al., 2003; Solomon
& Barsalou, 2001; Spivey et al., 2000; Stanfield& Zwaan,
2001; Zwaan et al.,2002). Catrambone et al. (2006)
demonstrated that an irrelevant touch of the objects may
facilitate relatively abstract analogy-making. Maybe babies
first ground the meaning of verbs that are closely related to
the body parts (Tardif & Wellman, 2000).

Actions – Massively associated with the
representations or essence of the memorized
knowledge
However, most of the empirical studies can not answer
whether there are pure symbolic representations of objects
in our mind that are massively associated with the action
and perceptual representations or indeed the body actions
and perceptions are the very essence of the memory traces.
Many classic theories in the field of memory and learning
assume that learning can be improved if the target

1904

information is processed from different modalities. For
example, The Levels of Processing Theory (Craik &
Lockhart, 1972), which is deeply based on representational
view of memory, is grounded exactly on the interaction
between memory and vision (Craik & Lockhart, 1972),
memory and hearing (Fletcher et al., 1998; Srinivas et al.,
1997), memory and touching (Srinivas et al., 1997), and
memory and smell (Schab, 1991). Dual-coding theory
(Paivio, 1986) also assumes that the visual and auditory
information are processed separately but nevertheless claims
for a deep relation between them (Anderson & Bower,
1973). Thus, many empirical data that support embodied
view on memory are actually arguments for the relationship
between perceptions, actions, and conceptual system but do
not contradict in any way to a possible existence of pure
symbolic representations of the concepts.
In most of the experiments that test embodied effects on
human behavior, the performed actions are closely
associated to the respective test items. For example,
recognition of a typewriter is faster in the context of a piano
(Myung et al., 2006). However, this does not mean that the
concrete movements of fingers are inseparable part of the
representation of the typewriter. Instead, maybe there are
huge number of associative links between the symbolic
representation of the concept ‘typewriter’ and many
concrete situations in which a typewriter has been used.
Furthermore, maybe the representation of these concrete
situations is linked (again associatively) to the
representation of the concrete finger movements.
Thus, we decided to conduct an experiment in which the
manipulated action is not associatively linked to the essence
of the tested items in any way. More concretely, we decided
to test whether simple pointing to a colour sample may
improve actor’s memory of this sample.
In addition, we wanted to ensure that the effect of action
should not be manifested during the test phase. With other
words, we attempted to avoid the possible explanations that
actions and movements may influence the process of
retrieval. Thus, we ask participants to perform or not certain
actions during the phase of memorizing only. Then people
from both acting and not-acting groups were tested in the
same way – by asking them to write on a sheet of paper
what do they remember.

Experiment 1: The role of the own action
Method
Design
One-factorial between-subject design was used. People
from both the control and the experimental group were
asked to memorize the colours of twelve small rectangles,
placed at different positions on the screen. People from the
experimental group were asked to open the rectangles
themselves by touching different parts of the touch-screen.
When any of the rectangles on the screen was touched a
colour appears on its place. Participants from the control

group observed the same procedure of opening the colours
without touching the screen. The dependent variable was the
number of correctly recognized colours on the respective
positions.
Stimuli
Six different colours, each of them used twice, were
randomly placed on a 4x3 table. The exact positions of each
colour, as well the predefined order for their exposure, are
shown on table 1. Initially all colours are “closed”, i.e. the
rectangles were gray.
Table 1: The order of opening and the colour of each
rectangle.
6. red

3. blue

8. green

11. orange

10. yellow

12. black

1. red

7. blue

9. green

4. orange

5. yellow

2. black

Procedure
A 4x3 table with 12 gray rectangles was placed at the
middle of a touch-screen monitor. When a fixation cross
appeared within a certain rectangle, participants from the
experimental group touched it and the rectangle changed its
colour from gray to one of the six target colours (i.e. red,
green. yellow, orange, black and blue). The duration time
for the colour presentation was fixed to 1500ms than the
rectangle became gray again. One second later the fixation
cross appeared on a different location and the procedure was
repeated until all twelve rectangles were seen.
Participants from the control group did not touch the
screen. Two seconds after the fixation cross the rectangle
changed its colour alone for 1500ms and then turned into
gray again. Thus, the control participants were only
permitted to observe the same procedure as participants in
the experimental group but were not actively involved in it.
The order of presentation of the rectangles, as well the
position of the colours, was randomly assigned at the
beginning of the experiment and was the same for all
participants.
The memory test for both groups was performed five
minutes later, at which time the participants looked a short
movie. Each participant received a sheet of paper with a 4x3
empty table graphed on it. Then he/she was asked to fill the
table with the colour labels that he/she can memorized. For
each participant the number of positions filled with correct
colour labels was counted.
Participants
53 students from New Bulgarian University (26 in the
experimental and 25 in the control group) took part as
volunteers in the experiment. The range of their age was
from 19 to 32 years; 24 of them were males and 29 were
females, randomly assigned to both groups.

1905

Results
Nobody had memorized correctly eleven or twelve colours;
everybody had memorized at least one; one person had
memorized correctly only one colour.
The mean number of correctly recognized colours for the
control group was 4.33, st. dev. 1.94. People from the
experimental group had recognized correctly mean 5.96, st.
dev. 2.60 (see figure 1). The difference was significant:
t(51) = -2.59, p = 0.012; the size effect (Cohen's d) was
0.725.
Number of correct responses
(max. 12)
6
4

control
experimental

2

Figure 1. The results from the first experiment - mean
number of positions, filled with correct colours during the
memory test for both groups. The error bars show 95% CI
for the means.
Discussion
The results from the experiment demonstrated that people
memorize better when they use their own hand for touching
the stimuli during learning. These results differ from most
of the empirical data supporting the idea for embodiment of
our memory traces because the memorized items were
completely unrelated to the specific hand action and because
the action was performed during the encoding phase only,
but not during the test phase. Thus, the results are in favor
of the hypothesis that concrete situated actions, performed
by people, are important part and key factor of the
representation of relatively abstract and in some sense
purely symbolic items.
However, two alternative explanations of the experimental
results may arise: First, maybe memories of people from the
experimental group are richer because a representation of a
movement is added to the representation of each colour
position. Thus, because the overall amount of information
for the experimental group is larger, maybe the respective
memory traces are more accessible. Second, it could be that
participants from the control group were less motivated and
less involved in the task.
Thus, a second experiment had been performed. The
amount of the information that maybe encoded was
controlled. In addition, the experiment was performed in an
ecological environment by a trained experimenter who tried
to keep the attention of people from both groups.

Experiment 2: Control of the amount of
information
This experiment differs from the first one in three aspects:
First, a manually made cardboard was used instead of a
computer touch-screen. Second, the experimenter opened
and closed the covers of the coloured rectangles for the
control group. This ensured that for both groups
somebody’s movements can be encoded. Third, the
experimenter was trained on several things: to keep the
motivation and attention of the participants; to know the
exact order of opening the covers; and to keep the time for
exposition of the colours as equal as possible.

Method
Design and stimuli
The design of the second experiment followed exactly the
respective one from the first experiment. However, the
stimuli used differed significantly. A 4x3 cardboard was
manually modeled and each of the twelve rectangles was
differently coloured. The pattern of the colours followed
exactly the respective pattern from the first experiment (see
table 1). Twelve gray covers that could be opened were
stuck in one side of the rectangles.
Procedure
The experimenter touched one of the covers till the
respective participant attended it. Then in the control group
she opened the cover for about one and a half second and
then closed it. Participants from the experimental group
were instructed to open the cover that was pointed from the
experimenter themselves and after one and a half second the
they closed the cover. The order of presentation of the
stimuli was the same as in the first experiment (see table 1).
After the presentation of the twelve stimuli, all
participants watched a five minutes movie on a portable
computer screen. After that all of them received a graphed
sheet of paper and were asked to fill the positions with the
colours they remember. Thus, the overall procedure was the
same as in the first experiment.
Participants
40 persons (20 women and 20 men) took part as
volunteers in the experiment. The range of their age was
from 18 to 35 years. All they were randomly assigned to one
of the two groups.
Results
Everybody had memorized at least one colour position; two
persons had memorized correctly just one; one of the
participants had filled correctly all twelve colours.
The mean number of correctly recognized colours for the
control group was 4.50, st. dev. 2.37. People from the

1906

experimental group had recognized correctly mean 6.45, st.
dev. 2.69 (see figure 2). The difference was significant:
t(38) = -2.43, p = 0.020; the size effect (Cohen's d) was
0.77.
Number of correct responses
(max. 12)
6

control
experimental

4
2

Figure 2. The results from the second experiment - mean
number of positions, filled with correct colours during the
memory test for both groups. The error bars show 95% CI
for the means.
Discussion
During the second experiment the time of colour
exposition was not controlled but the amount of the exposed
information was equalized for the two groups, i.e.
someone’s hand opened and closed the covers. At the same
time, in the first experiment, any possible influences from
the exposure time or from the behavior of the experimenter
were eliminated. Nevertheless, similar pattern of results was
observed in both experiments. Moreover, although during
the ecological experiment people memorized a bit more in
both groups, the size effect was almost the same in the two
experiments. Thus, the effect of the authentic actions on the
amount of the memorized information seems to be stable
enough.

Models that can account to the experimental
results
Often the phenomena of the embodiment cognition are
related to the constructive processes of cognition. Thus, the
models of constructive memory like the CHARM model
(Metcalfe, 1990), the TODAM2 model (Murdock, 1995),
the Trace synthesis model (Nystrom, McClelland, 1992) and
the Complementary Learning Systems (CLS) model
(McClelland, McNaughton, & O’Reilly, 1995) can account
to many of the empirical data that support the embodied
view. All these models are based on massively
interconnected associative networks. Thus, they can explain
the influence of the performed actions to the perceptions
(for example, the contest of a piano may facilitate the
recognition of a typewriter). They can explain as well the
opposite relationship – the perceived objects may
automatically activate motor commands.

However, the results from the two experiments can not be
explained satisfactory from this type of models. The main
reason is that the associative links can be excluded as a
possible reason for the effect, because people did not make
any movements during the recognition phase.
A second possible explanation of the experimental results
can arise from the encoding of the information that comes
from proprioception. As it was mention during the
discussion of the first experiment, maybe people from the
experimental group have richer representations, because
their own pointing is an additional portion of information.
This was one of the reasons for conducting the second
experiment, in which somebody’s hand movement can be
encoded in both groups. However, the information that
comes from the proprioception still is available for the
people from the first group only. Unfortunately, there are
not any memory models that take into account this type of
information.
Ballard and colleagues (Rao, Ballard, 1995, Ballard et al.,
1997) propose their model, based on the idea for deictic
pointers. According to the authors, eye-fixations and the
attention serve for creation and manipulation of pointers to
the objects in the environment. The pointers, instead of the
representation of the objects can be encoded in the memory.
If necessary, it is easy to use these pointers for finding the
objects and to encode from them the necessary information.
From one hand, the deictic codes model proposes a way for
a drastic decreasing of the necessary calculations for
performing tasks in a 3-D environment. From other hand,
they answer to the question why people are limited for the
amount of information that can process simultaneously.
The paradigm of the proposed experiments seems very
close to the deictic codes view. Maybe pointing to the
objects with a hand is an additional source for creating such
deictic pointers. Thus, it seems natural why people from the
experimental group have better memories – they can just
use more deictic pointers.
Unfortunately, the model that Ballard and colleagues
propose is still not enriched with mechanisms for creation,
manipulation, and retrieval of memory traces from the long
term memory. Thus, the relation between the deictic codes
view of the embodiment and the results from the two
experiments seems promising but still speculative.
Finally, maybe pointing to the objects has additional
social value that in turn can influence memory. (Nathan, in
press) proposes various examples how gestures may enrich
the listener’ understanding as well as the speaker’s one
during a conversation. Thus, people from the experimental
group point to the colour samples and they point not only
for themselves but to the experimenter too. Maybe this is
the reason for their better memory.

1907

Conclusion
The theory of embodiment of memory and cognition
opposes in its extreme versions the classical representational
based view. Many empirical data support the close
relationships and interdependencies between our conceptual
system and the sensory-motor inputs and outputs. However,
it is still an open question whether actions and perceptual
signals lie at the very core of the memory traces or it is just
a massive associative interconnection between the separate
conceptual and sensory-motor systems.
The two related experiments, presented here, tried to
highlight more this question. People memorized better
colour samples if they touched them instead of just observed
them. The same effect of the action of touching has been
observed both during the controlled laboratory experiment
and during the more ecological second experiment.
It is demonstrated that the simple touching influences
what people had learned even if the respective touching is
not related in any way to the essence of the information,
required to be learned. Thus, the results are in support of the
hypothesis that the movements that we perform maybe are a
substantial part of the representation of the things we learn
during these movements. This hypothesis is supported
additionally by the fact that the observed effect is caused by
what is actually encoded, not by any influences of the
actions during the recall phase.
The experiments, however, do not highlight any possible
mechanisms that may underlie the observed effect. It is not
clear whether the concrete touching influences the attention,
the way of encoding, both, or something else.
Nevertheless, the observation that simple touching can
influence the rate of memorizing of relatively abstract items
seems promising for further investigations.

Acknowledgments
This material is based on research sponsored by the
ANALOGY project (NEST program, contract 29088)
funded by the EC and the Air Force Research Laboratory,
under proposal number 103061. The U.S. Government is
authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for
Governmental purposes notwithstanding any copyright
notation thereon. The views and conclusions contained
herein are those of the authors and should not be interpreted
as necessarily representing the official policies or
endorsements, either expressed or implied, of the Air Force
Research Laboratory or the U.S. Government or the
European Commission.

References
Anderson, M. (2003). Embodied Cognition: A field guide.
Artificial Intelligence 149, 91–130
Anderson, J. & Bower, G. (1973). Human associative
memory. Washington, DC: Winston.

Ballard, D., Hayhoe, M., Pook, P., Rao, R. (1997). Deictic
codes for the embodinment of cognition. Behavioral &
Brain Sciences 20, 723–767.
Barsalou, L. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems. Behavioral
& Brain Sciences 22, 577–660.
Brooks, R. (1987). Intelligence without representation.
Arti.cial Intelligence 47, 139–159.
Catrambone, R.,Craig, D., & Nersessian, N. (2006). The
role of perceptually represented structure in analogical
problem solving. Memory & Cognition 34 (5), 1126-1132
Coventry, K. R., Prat-Sala, M., & Richards, L. (2001). The
interplay between geometry and function in the
comprehension of ‘over’, ‘under’, ‘above’ and ‘below’.
Journal of Memory and Language, 44, 376-398.
Craik, F., Lockhart, R. (1972). Levels of processing: A
framework for memory research. Journal of Verbal
Learning & Verbal Behavior 11 (6), 671-84.
Damasio, A. (1999). The Feeling of What Happens: Body
and Emotion in the Making of Consciousness. M.D.; New
York, Harcourt Brace & Company.
Ellis, R. & Tucker, M., (2000). Micro-affordance: The
potentiation of components of action by seen objects.
British Journal of Psychology 91(4), 451-471.
Fletcher, P., Shallice, T., Dolan, R. (1998). The functional
roles of prefrontal cortex in episodic memory. I.
Encoding. Brain 121 (7), 1239–1248.
Glenberg, A. & Kaschak, M. (2002). Grounding language in
action. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 9, 558–565.
Glenberg, A. (1997). What memory is for? Behavioral and
Brain Sciences 20, 1–55.
Hauk, O., Johnsrude, I., & Pulvermüller, F. (2004).
Somatotopic representation of action words in the motor
and premotor cortex. Neuron, 41, 301-307.
Jong-yoon Myung, Blumsteinр S., Sedivy, J. (2006).
Playing on the typewriter, typing on the piano:
manipulation knowledge of objects. Cognition 98 (2006).
223–24.
Lakoff, G., Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the Flesh:
The Embodied Mind and Its Challenge to Western
Thought, Basic Books, New York.
Lakoff, G & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
McClelland, J.L., McNaughton, B.L., & O’Reilly, R. C.
(1995). Why there are complementary learning systems in
the hyppocampus and neocortex: Insights from the
successes and failures of connectionists models of
learning and memory. Psychological Review, 102, 419457.
Metcalfe, J. (1990). Composite holographic associative
recall model (CHARM) and blended memories in
eyewitness testimony. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 119, 145-160.
Murdock, B. B. Jr. (1995). Developing TODAM: three
models for serial-order information. Memory &
Cognition, 23, 631-645.
Nathan, M. (in press). An embodied cognition perspective
on symbols, grounding, and instructional gesture. In

1908

DeVega, M., Glenberg, A, M. & Graesser, A. C. (Eds.)
Symbols, Embodiment and Meaning: A Debate (pp. 375396). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Nystrom, L., McClelland, J. (1992). Trace synthesis in cued
recall. Journal of Memory and Language, 31, 591-614.
O’Regan, J., Noë, A. (2001). A sensorimotor account of
vision and visual consciousness, Behavioral Brain Sci. 24
(5).
Paivio, A (1986). Mental representations: a dual coding
approach. Oxford. England: Oxford University Press.
Pecher, D., Zeelenberg, R.,& Barsalou, L. (2003).Verifying
conceptual properties in different modalities produces
switching costs. Psychological Science 14, 119–124.
Proffitt, D., Stefanucci, J.,Banton, T.,Epstein, W. (2003).
The role of effort in perceiving distance. Psychological
Science, Vol. 14, No. 2. (March 2003), pp. 106-112.
Rao, R.P.N., Ballard, D.H. (1995). Object indexing using an
iconic sparse distributed memory. In Proceedings of the
5th International Conference on Computer Vision,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA, p. 24-31.
Richardson, D., Spivey, M., Cheung, J. (2001). Motor
Representations In Memory And Mental Models: The
Embodied Zork. In: Proceedings of the Twenty-third
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society,
(pp.867-872), Erlbaum: Mawhah, NJ
Rizzolatti, G., Craighero, L. (2004). The mirror-neuron
system, Annual Review of Neuroscience 27, 169–192.
Schab, F. (1991). Odor memory: taking stock..
Psychological Bulletin 109 (2), 242–51.
Shepard, R. (1984). Ecological Constraints on Internal
Representation: Resonant Kinematics of Perceiving,
Imagining, Thinking, and Dreaming. Psychological
Review, Vol. 91, 4.
Sinai, M., Ooi, T.,He, Z. (1998). Terrain influences the
accurate judgment of distance. Nature, Vol. 395, 6701.
pp. 497-500.
Solomon, K., & Barsalou, L. (2001). Representing
properties locally. Cognitive Psychology 43, 129–169.
Spivey, M., Tyler, M., Richardson, D., & Young, E. (2000).
Eye movements during comprehension of spoken scene
descriptions. Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 487–492). Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Srinivas, K., Greene, A., Easton, R. (1997). Visual and
tactile memory for 2-D patterns: Effects of changes in
size and lef-right orientation. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review 4 (4), 535–540.
Stanfield, R., & Zwaan, R. (2001). The effect of implied
orientation derived from verbal context on picture
recognition. Psychological Science 12, 153–156.
Tardif, T. & Wellman, H.M. (2000). Acquisition of mental
state language in Mandarin- and Cantonese-speaking
children. Developmental Psychology, 36, 25-43.
Taylor, C. (1987). Overcoming epistemology, in: Baynes, et
al. (Eds.), After Philosophy: End or Transformation? MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA.

Tucker, M., & Ellis, R. (1998) On the relations between
seen objects and components of potential actions. Journal
of Experiemental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 24(3), 830-846.
Varela, F., Thompson, E., Rosh, E. (1991). The Embodied
Mind, MIT Press, Cambridge, NA
Zwaan, R., Stanfield, R., & Yaxley, R. (2002). Language
comprehenders mentally represent the shapes of objects.
Psychological Science 13, 168–171.

1909

