UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Simultaneous Cross-situational Learning of Category and Object Names

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/738979fp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Gangwani, Tarun
Kachergis, George
Yu, Chen

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Simultaneous Cross-situational Learning of Category and Object Names
Tarun Gangwani, George Kachergis, and Chen Yu
{tgangwan, gkacherg, chenyu}@indiana.edu
Department of Psychological and Brain Science, and Cognitive Science Program
1101 East 10th Street Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
Abstract
Previous research shows that people can acquire an
impressive number of word-referent pairs after viewing
a series of ambiguous trials by accumulating cooccurrence statistics (e.g., Yu & Smith, 2007). The
present study extends the cross-situational word
learning paradigm, which has primarily been used to
investigate the acquisition of 1-to-1 word-referent
mappings, and shows that humans can concurrently
acquire both 1-to-1 and 1-to-many mappings (i.e., a
category relation), even when the many referents of a
single word have no unifying perceptual features. Thus,
humans demonstrate an impressive ability to
simultaneously apprehend hierarchical regularities in
their environment.
Keywords: statistical learning; cross-situational
learning; category learning; mutual exclusivity;
language acquisition

Introduction
In order to make sense of their world, human infants must
learn relationships between words and referents in their
environment. Infants simultaneously come into contact with
many diverse, novel objects and equally diverse words that
name them. Thus, there is much potential for acquiring
erroneous word-referent mappings, given only a single
situation. Despite this, both infants and adults have a
remarkable ability to learn many novel word-referent
associations quickly and accurately. Cross-situational word
learning (CSWL) studies give us insight into how people are
capable of learning multiple word-referent associations from
individually ambiguous situations. Previous CSWL studies
have shown that both infants and adults are able to learn
simple 1-word to 1-referent mappings with astonishing
speed (Kachergis, Yu, & Shiffrin, 2009; Smith & Yu, 2008;
Klein, Yu, & Shiffrin 2008; Yu & Smith, 2007). In adult
studies, participants are typically instructed to learn which
words go with which referents, and are then presented with
a few consistently co-occurring objects and spoken
pseudowords on each of a series of training trials. On every
trial, each pseudoword corresponds to a particular on-screen
object, but the intended referent is never indicated. In a
typical cross-situational training block, participants attempt
to learn 18 word-referent pairs from 27 twelve-second trials
consisting of four spoken words and four displayed objects
(i.e. a 4x4 design). On average, participants in this condition

managed to learn half of the 18 pairs by relying on crosssituational statistics (Yu & Smith, 2007). Further studies
have shown that human learning often reflects statistics
manipulated during training such as pair frequency,
contextual diversity (the diversity of other pairs each pair
appears with over time), and within-trial ambiguity (the
number of co-occurring words and referents per trial)
(Kachergis, et al., 2009).
However, simple 1-to-1 mappings are only a subset of the
types of word-referent relations that exist in natural
languages. 1-to-many mappings include referents that have
one common label shared among them, such as a category
or concept label. For example, both an apple and a banana
may be labeled ‘fruit.’ Learners must learn to map both the
superordinate label (‘fruit’) and each basic level name
(‘banana’ ‘apple’) to the appropriate referent. Even in a
learning paradigm like the 4x4 cross-situational learning
condition discussed above, which is simpler than the real
world, it is difficult to imagine that learners consider all 16
possible pairings, as might be necessary to learn higherorder relations. Constraints such as mutual exclusivity (ME)
can drastically reduce the complexity of such ambiguous
situations by limiting the possible pairings to a single word
for each object (and vice-versa). Consider Markman and
Wachtel’s study (1988), in which a child was placed in front
of a learned object (ball) and an unlearned object
(gyroscope) and was prompted to retrieve the ‘toma.’ While
‘toma’ could be another name for the ball, the child moves
to the unlearned object, exhibiting ME. However, despite its
power to speed learning, the strict use of ME as a constraint
in cross-situational learning would also make it impossible
to learn non-1-to-1 mappings.
To determine whether learners use the ME constraint
when learning names for previously unknown objects,
Yurovsky and Yu (2008) presented learners with MEviolating mappings in the CSWL paradigm. An MEviolating mapping is a word (or object) that is consistently
paired with more than one object (or word). Participants
were trained on 12 words and 18 referents, where 6 words
were paired with 12 referents (i.e., 2 referents per word),
known as double words, and the other 6 words were paired
1-to-1 with the remaining 6 referents, known as single
words. Participants had to decide how to manage two names
that co-occur with one referent in the same set of trials. The
results showed that participants had equal performance in
learning both single and double words if each double word’s
two referents were interleaved rather than temporally
separated (i.e. one referent was shown in the first half only

1595

and the other appeared only in the last half). Moreover,
learners acquired more than half of both early and late
pairings; thus, some must have violated ME.
In contrast, Ichinco, Frank, and Saxe (2009) presented
participants with a study to demonstrate ME as a guide to
learning word-to-referent associations. Participants were
shown an additional referent (or word, in a different
experiment) on each trial, alongside four previously-seen
word-referent pairs. Both groups received training on a
standard cross-situational task, which was followed by
further training. In this training, a new stimulus (word or
object, between groups) was added on each trial alongside
four pairs from the early training. Rather than forming a 1to-2 mapping with the additional object (or 2-to-1, for the
extra word) on each trial, participants learned 1-to-2 (or 2to-1) relations on average for only one item and consistently
favored mutually exclusive mappings.
Thus, depending on how ME-violating word-referent
mappings are added to the cross situational paradigm,
learners vary their use of the mutual exclusivity constraint.
In the Yurovsky & Yu study, additional referents are
presented in the absence of old ones: when participants hear
a word and see two referents consistently co-occurring with
it, they may be more likely to violate ME and form a 1-to-2
mapping. In Ichinco, et al.’s study, all 1-to-1 mappings from
the early stage occur simultaneously with the new
mappings. Participants may have failed to learn the new
mappings due to blocking, a known associative learning
effect in which a previously learned pairing interferes with
the acquisition of a new pairing involving old stimuli.
In the present study, in order to eliminate biases that
participants may adopt as a result of training order, we
provide participants with cross-situational training that is
simultaneously consistent with both 1-to-1 (basic-level
name to referent) and 1-to-many (superordinate-level name
to multiple referents) relationships on every training trial.
For example, in Experiment 1, on each 3x2 trial, two words
are basic-level names for the visible referents, and a third
will act as a superordinate-level identifier. These
superordinate level labels hence refer to four referents,
including two that are not on present on a given trial. Thus,
participants are simultaneously faced with two labels for
each referent, and one of these labels also applies to three
other referents. In Experiment 2, we give learners a more
complex learning scenario: 4x2 trials on which two labels
map 1-to-1 to the objects and each of the other two labels
refer to one of the present objects, and three unseen objects.
In both experiments, participants must learn the unique
name for a referent as well as a label it shares with three
other objects, some of which are not present on a given trial.
One block in each experiment is composed of objects that
share some unifying perceptual feature like a hook or arrow
shape, somewhat like objects belonging to natural
categories. We test for generalization using stimuli in which
the objects share each category’s identifying feature from

training, but the objects have different textures and shapes
than those from training.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, participants were merely instructed to
learn which words go with which objects—with no mention
of the potential to form 1-to-many relations—and were then
given a sequence of cross-situational training trials, each
consisting of three words and two referents. Unbeknownst
to learners, two of the words on each trial map 1-to-1 to one
of the visible referents, and the third word refers to both
objects, and also will consistently appear with two other
referents during training. Participants must determine which
words specify a 1-to-1 reference to an object and which
word specifies a 1-to-many reference to both objects on
each trial. If participants assume ME, participants will either
learn 1-to-1 mappings or 1-to-many mappings, but not both.

Figure 1: In Experiment 1, participants are trained on both
1-to-1 (e.g., A-a and B-b) and 1-to-many mappings (e.g., X{a,b,c,d}) in the context of 3 words and 2 referents per trial.
One word is the superordinate-level name that refers to both
referents on each trial (shown in red).
In order to see if 1-to-many associations are facilitated by
stimuli structure, subjects were trained on two different
conditions (in three blocks in fixed order): Block 1 was an
arbitrary category condition, in which the objects had no
obvious shared perceptual features but were consistently
labeled by some other word. Block 2 was a natural category
condition, in which the objects in each category share a
salient feature (e.g., a hook or arrow shape). Block 3 was
another arbitrary category condition (with different stimuli)
to gauge attention shift after learning natural 1-to-many
groupings. Given the salient features present in Block 2,
performance in learning 1-to-many relationships will likely
increase relative to Block 1, as participants’ attention will be
drawn to the 1-to-many relations due to the salient features
acting as learning cues. Their performance on block 3 will
indicate if this attentional shift is carried over from the
natural category block.

Subjects
Participants were 33 undergraduates at Indiana University
who received course credit for participating. None had
participated in other cross-situational experiments.

Stimuli
Each training trial consisted of two objects shown on a
computer screen and three pseudowords played sequentially.
In each of the two arbitrary category conditions, the 12
referents were difficult-to-name, unrelated objects. For the

1596

natural category condition, the 12 objects had one of three
features protruding from the shape. The 45 computergenerated pseudowords are phonotactically-probable in
English (e.g. “stigson”), and were spoken by a monotone,
synthetic voice. 36 words are assigned to each referent,
creating arbitrary word-object pairs which were randomly
assigned to three sets of 12 1-to-1 mappings. One set of
stimuli composed the natural category stimuli for the second
block; the other sets composed of arbitrary strange objects
for the first and third blocks. For the 1-to-many mappings,
the remaining 9 pseudowords are assigned to three sets of
four 1-to-1 mappings. Thus, in each block there are three
groups (i.e., categories).

Procedure
Participants were informed that they would experience a
series of trials in which they would hear some words and see
some objects. They were also told that their knowledge of
which words belong with which objects would be tested at
the end. Training for each condition consisted of 36 trials.
Each training trial began with the appearance of two objects,
which remained visible for the entire trial. After 2 s of initial
silence, each word was heard (randomly ordered; 1 s of
silence between each word) followed by 2 s of silence, for a
total of 9 seconds per trial. After each training block, their
knowledge was assessed using 12-alternative forced choice
(12AFC) and 3AFC testing: on each test trial a single word
was played—a 1-to-1 label or a 1-to-many label—and the
participant was asked to choose the appropriate object from
a display of all 12 objects (for 1-to-1 labels) or from 3
objects (for 1-to-many labels). For 3AFC testing, one
representative from each category was used. The test slides
for generalization were the same as the 1-to-many test slides
except that the only previously-seen parts of the stimuli
were the distinct, protruding shapes (e.g., a hook) that were
seen in training to distinguish the different categories.
Different stimuli were used in each block. Condition order
was fixed.

Results & Discussion
Figure 2: The accumulated stimulus co-occurrence matrix
for each block in Experiment 1. Each word co-occurred with
its intended referent 6 times (A-a, B-b, …) Note that each
referent appeared twice with every other referent in its
category, but never with referents from other categories.
Each 1-to-many label appeared 6 times with each of its
intended referents, and 12 times overall.

Figure 4 shows the results across all three blocks for each
pairing type. Unexpectedly, even in block 1 participants
learned a significant number of 1-to-many mappings (M =
.49, one-sided t(32) = 4.95, p<.001, chance=.33) and learned
a significant proportion of 1-to-1 mappings (M = .52, onesided t(32) = 12.99, p<.001).

In the natural category condition, each of the three 1-tomany labels consistently maps to a salient feature present on
the stimulus. An additional 12 pairs of testing stimuli were
used for a generalization task, using the same category
labels that correspond with the stimuli according to their
feature.

Figure 3: Left: In the natural category condition, objects
with multiple types of textures and three different
protruding shapes were used in training. Right: In the
arbitrary category condition, objects had no apparent
unifying feature.

Figure 3: Mean performance for each experimental block by
pairing type. Block 1 and 3 were arbitrary groupings and
Block 2 was a category grouping; thus, generalization of
category type was tested. Error bars show +/-SE. Blue
dotted line indicates chance for 1-to-1 learning; black dotted
line indicates chance for 1-to-many learning.

1597

After the introduction of a unifying feature, learning of 1to-1 pairings in block 2 decreased relative to block 1 (M =
.35, paired t(32) = 3.07, p<.01). The perceptual similarity of
category members in block 2 may have caused participants
to focus on learning 1-to-many mappings, and thus drew
attention away from 1-to-1 mappings. In addition, their
ability to apply the superordinate name to new referents was
reflected in their significantly above-chance (.33)
performance on a generalization task (M = .53, one-sided
t(32) = 3.78, p<.001).
Presented with a second arbitrary category condition in
block 3, learning of 1-to-1 pairings was significantly lower
compared to block 1 (paired t(32) = 2.96, p<.01), but
performance on 1-to-many testing remained higher (M =
.57, paired t(32) = 6.69, p<.001). That is, following the
natural category condition in block 2, participants continued
to focus on 1-to-many mappings, but still learned 1-to-1
mappings at a proportion over three times chance.
Overall, participants showed evidence of learning both 1to-1 and 1-to-many mappings in every condition—even in
the first condition, when they had no instructions telling
them what type of relations would be present, and the
referents belonging to each 1-to-many relation (i.e., an
arbitrary category) had no unifying perceptual features.
Moreover, we observed a shift in learning from block 1 to
block 3: after the perceptually-similar category referents of
block 2, participants learned more 1-to-many pairings in
block 3 than block 1, and fewer 1-to-1 pairings. In
Experiment 2, we investigate whether learners can still
simultaneously acquire both 1-to-1 and 1-to-many mappings
in a still more complex learning situation.

words are subordinate level names corresponding to one
referent each (see Figure 5).

Experiment 2

During training, two objects were shown on a computer
screen with four spoken words played sequentially upon
presentation of the objects, with time per word equal to that
of Experiment 1. New sets of words and referents were used
for this experiment. Training for each condition consisted of
36 trials, each lasting 12 s. due to the addition of a spoken
category label. Immediately after training for each block,
participants were tested for knowledge of the 1-to-1
relations using 12AFC and 1-to-many relations using 3AFC
as in Experiment 1. Generalization was also tested for the
natural category stimuli. Condition order was fixed.

Experiment 1 showed that humans can simultaneously learn
superordinate and basic level names for referents. On each
trial, there were two basic level names (1-to-1) and one
superordinate level name (1-to-many). Thus, the mutual
exclusivity constraint was relaxed and complex relations
were formed, with two words referring to each object. After
all three conditions in Experiment 1, participants still
performed significantly above chance on 1-to-1 associations
as well as on 1-to-many associations. However, an
alternative learning scenario is an environment in which
objects from different categories are learned simultaneously.
For example, two referents such as an apple and a carrot
could be presented. In this case, each referent has its own
superordinate level name (fruit and vegetable, respectively).
The learner would need to learn both the superordinate label
and basic name label for each object while needing to assign
each term to its appropriate referent. The potential for error
is much greater because the learner is presented with a more
ambiguous learning situation than in Experiment 1, where
the superordinate label refers to both displayed referents.
Experiment 2 thus presents learners with a four word and
two referents (i.e. 4x2) on each trial, where two words are
category labels referring to a single referent each, and two

Figure 5: Participants are given 1-to-1 and 1-to-many
mappings (e.g. A-a, C-c and X-{a,c,d}) in the context of 4
words and 2 referents per trial.
This extension of the cross-situational paradigm provides
additional ambiguity beyond Experiment 1: presented with
two more labels than referents on each trial, participants
must now learn that the more frequent labels are
superordinate, and apply not only to one of the objects on
that trial, but also to three other objects seen on other trials.
However, given the above-chance performance and
particularly exceptional 1-to-many learning, participants
may be able to tune themselves into the ambiguous
superordinate label to referent pairings after the natural
category condition in a manner similar to participants in
Experiment 1.

Subjects
Participants were 24 undergraduates at Indiana University
who received course credit for participating. None had
participated in other cross-situational experiments, including
the previous experiment.

Stimuli & Procedure

Results & Discussion
Figure 6 shows results across all three blocks for each
pairing type. In Block 1 with arbitrary category referents,
participants learned only 1-to-1 names (M = .50; one-sided
t(23) = 7.76, p<.001) while 1-to-many performance was at
chance (M = .39, one-sided t(23) = 1.76, p>.05). Unlike in
Experiment 1, block 2 did not see a performance shift.
While performance was significant in learning 1-to-1 (M =
.46; one-sided t(23) = 6.45, p<.001) associations, 1-to-many
associations were still difficult to acquire, and were not
learned significantly above chance (M = .42; one-sided t(23)
= 1.85, p>.05). Participants may have still not surmised that
there was categorical structure involved due to the

1598

confusion of four words per trial (including two category
labels). Performance on the generalization task was also at
chance, confirming that participants had not yet ascertained
the presence and structure of the 1-to-many mappings.

a 2-to-1 word-referent mapping. Thus, it is possible to
determine whether participants learned mappings that
violate mutual exclusivity. In both experiments, participants
were tested on each referent twice: for the 1-to-1 label
(chance=1/12) and 1-to-many label (chance=1/3). Thus,
learning that respects ME occurred when participants learn
either 1-to-many or 1-to-1 mappings, but not both, and
learning that violates ME occurred when participants learn
both. As shown in Figure 7, across both experiments and in
every block, the average participant learned a significant
number of pairings that violate ME as they learned both 1to-1 and 1-to-many mappings.

Figure 6: Mean performance by pairing type for each block.
Error bars show +/-SE. Dotted lines indicate chance: blue
for 1-to-1 pairings (.08); black for 1-to-many pairings (.33).
However, block 3 performance was significantly above
chance for both 1-to-1 (M = .57; one-sided t(23) = 7.98,
p<.001) and 1-to-many (M = .46, one-sided t(23), p<.001)
associations. Thus, although the higher degree of ambiguity
in Experiment 2 made participants take longer to catch on to
the presence of multiple superordinate labels on each trial,
in the final block they were able to learn these 1-to-many
relationships in addition to the 1-to-1 relationships. In
comparison to block 3 of Experiment 1, 1-to-many learning
in Experiment 2 was significantly lower (Welch’s t(55.0) =
2.08, p<.05), showing that the superordinate label structure
(2 per trial) in Experiment 2 was indeed harder than the
structure (1 superordinate label per trial) in Experiment 1.
However, even when participants were uncertain about
the meaning of the superordinate labels in blocks 1 and 2,
they learned a significant number of 1-to-1 mappings. In
block 3 performance, not only did participants learn a
significant number 1-to-many mappings, they also learned
more 1-to-1 mappings than in the previous two blocks
(block 2: paired t(23) = 2.44, p<.05, block 1: paired t(23) =
2.03, p=.05). The natural category condition once again
provided a clue as to what learning strategy participants
need to utilize. However, the significantly lower
performance for block 1 in Experiment 2 as compared to
Experiment 1 may also indicate interference due to
confusion over the two extra labels.
In both experiments, it is important to note that since both
1-to-1 and 1-to-many word-referent mappings learned
involving the same referents, each referent was thus part of

Figure 7: Comparison of proportion of learned ME violating
vs. respecting pairs by block for each experiment. Chance
(dotted line): Respects=1/3+1/12; Violates=1/3•1/12=.03

General Discussion
While the mutual exclusivity constraint can be a powerful
tool for learning 1-to-1 mappings, the hierarchical structure
of the real world—which is reflected in natural language—
requires people to learn word-referent mappings that are not
mutually exclusive. The present study demonstrates that
learners learn both 1-to-1 and 1-to-many mappings from
situations in which these regularities are simultaneously
present.
By the end (block 3) of both experiments, performance
for both 1-to-1 and 1-to-many testing was significantly
above chance. Experiment 1 shows that participants on

1599

average performed strongly on 1-to-many associations,
particularly after the introduction of within-category
perceptual similarity in block 2. This may be due to the
natural stimuli serving as a primer for learning 1-to-many
mappings in block 3. However, although there appears to be
a trade-off in learning both types of relationships,
participants nevertheless managed to learn both
superordinate and basic level names in the first block of
Experiment 1. Experiment 2 showed participants could not
only learn superordinate and basic level names but can also
handle an additional layer of ambiguity when the two
referents on a trial belonged to two different superordinate
categories. Consistent with Experiment 1, an increase in 1to-many performance was seen after block 2 was observed
in Experiment 2, but 1-to-many performance was overall
lower than in Experiment 1. Correspondingly,
generalization of superordinate labels to novel objects was
also difficult for learners. The more complicated structure
(four labels and two referents per trial, representing two
categories) in Experiment 2 produces many more possible
pairings per trial for a learner to consider. Naturalistic
learning situations are even more complex, with multiple
co-occurring words, events, and objects (Hart & Risley,
1995); Experiment 2 simulates a more natural scenario in
which multiple referents with vague relationships to their
superordinate labels are presented. This suggests that infant
learning of higher order relations could be guided by
creating more unambiguous learning scenarios in order to
reduce the likelihood of attribution error.
Interestingly, participants were equally likely to know the
superordinate level names (e.g., fruit) regardless of their
performance learning basic level names (e.g., apple). Is this
due to the mutual exclusivity constraint? In the 3x2 design
of Experiment 1, participants were more likely to form a 1to-many relationship if they do not know the superordinate
level name than if they know both (P(Know Superordinate
Name | Not Know Basic Name) = .31; P(Know
Superordinate Name | Know Basic Name) = .19). The same
relationship held in the 4x2 design (.25, .18 respectively).
Therefore, participants seemed to form superordinate level
relationships more easily rather than basic level
relationships.
While the ME constraint may be useful in learning 1-to-1
relationships, the present study’s experiments show that
participants will focus on forming 1-to-many relationships
rather than 1-to-1 relationships if the need to learn higher
order relationships becomes apparent, which is often the
case in category learning. The strong performance in 1-tomany learning independent of 1-to-1 performance may
indicate that people are particularly tuned to learning
complex relationships. Every day, we use categories as
functional filters of our world to constrain the amount of
information we must process at lower (basic) levels
(Goldstone & Kersten, 2003). Furthermore, the addition of
an exemplar to a category gives us more information about
other novel candidate members of the category, allowing

learners to generalize as demonstrated in Experiment 1. In
future work, we hope to replicate our findings in infants as
well as focus on what learning strategies are used by both
infants and adults. We also expect that these findings will be
useful in constraining formal models of cross-situational
word learning.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by National Institute of Health
Grant R01HD056029.

References
Goldstone & Kersten (2003). Concepts and Categorization.
In Comprehensive handbook of psychology. New Jersey:
Wiley; pp. 599-621.
Hart, B. & Risley, T. R. (1995). Meaningful differences in
the everyday experience of young American children.
Baltimore, MD: Brookes.
Ichinco, D., Frank, M., & Saxe, R. (2009). Cross-situational
Word Learning Respects Mutual Exclusivity. In N.
Taatgen, H. van Rijn, J. Nerbonne, & L. Schomaker
(Eds.) Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Kachergis, G., Yu, C., & Shiffrin, R. M. (2009). Frequency
and Contextual Diversity Effects in Cross-Situational
Word Learning. In N. Taatgen, H. van Rijn, J. Nerbonne,
& L. Schomaker (Eds.) Proceedings of the 31st Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Klein, K. A., Yu, C., & Shiffrin, R. M. (2008). Prior
knowledge
bootstraps
cross-situational
learning.
Proceedings of the 30th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, 1930-5. Austin, TX: Cognitive
Science Society.
Smith, L. & Yu, C. (2008). Infants rapidly learn wordreferent mappings via cross-situational statistics.
Cognition, 106, 1558-1568.
Yu, C. & Smith, L. B. (2007). Rapid word learning under
uncertainty via cross-situational statistics. Psychological
Science, 18, 414-420.
Yurovsky, D., & Yu, C. (2008). Mutual exclusivity in crosssituational statistical learning. Proceedings of the 30th
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 715–
720. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.

1600

