UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Socially induced motor plasticity affects language comprehension

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0bz3p55v

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Havas, David
Jenvey, Julia
Shilling, Hayley
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Socially Induced Motor Plasticity Affects Language Comprehension
David Havas (dahavas@wisc.edu) & Julia Jenvey (julia.jenvey@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, 1202 W. Johnson Street
Madison, WI 53706 USA

Hayley Shilling (hshilling@wisc.edu)
Department of Counseling Psychology, 244 Rust-Schreiner Halls
Madison, WI 53715 USA

Mitchell Nathan (mnathan@wisc.edu)
Department of Educational Psychology, 1025 W. Johnson Street
Madison, WI 53706 USA
Abstract
Language understanding is a socially coordinated
activity, but the mechanisms of social coordination in
language are poorly understood. Evidence from
embodied cognition has shown that movement-induced
fatigue of actions slows comprehension of language
that refers to those actions. Research on the mirror
neuron system suggests that action systems of the brain
are also involved in social understanding of actions
performed by another, empathy, and possibly language.
Here, we show that simultaneous performance and
observation of kinematically similar actions produced a
fatigue-like effect in sentence judgment times relative
to dissimilar control actions. The results suggest that
the same action systems used in language processing
are influenced by social actions.
Keywords: language comprehension, embodied cognition,
social cognition, joint action, motor plasticity, mirror neuron
system.

Introduction
Language is fundamentally a social activity in which
individuals coordinate their actions (Clark, 1996; Grice,
1975). Conversation involves intricately timed verbal and
non-verbal signals for clarifying, initiating, guiding, and
ending dialog (Clark, & Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986; Garrod &
Anderson, 1987). The mechanisms of language coordination
are of current interest.
According to theories of dialog, conversation is successful
to the extent that there is similarity of mental states between
participants (Garrod & Anderson, 1987). For example,
dialog requires that participants share a common ground, or
similarity in mental states about referents (Clark, 1996;
Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986). Interlocutors tend to show
similarity across linguistic and non-linguistic levels,
including word use (Garrod & Anderson, 1987), syntax
(Branigan et al., 2000), semantics (Clark, & Wilkes-Gibbs,
1986) and movements (Chartrand & Bargh, 1999). It has
been proposed that the same neural systems used for action
imitation are also used in dialog (Garrod & Pickering, 2004;
Pickering & Garrod, 2006b).
Recent evidence from embodied cognition has shown a
close link between action and language. Glenberg and

Kaschak (2002), for example, implicated the action system’s
influence on language comprehension. Participants in this
study responded to a series of sentences depicting transfer,
either away from (“ Close the drawer“) or toward the body
(“ Open the drawer“). After reading each sentence,
participants deemed it sensible or nonsense by pushing
“yes” or “no” buttons and in so doing, were required to
move their hands either toward their bodies or away. The
results demonstrated an action-sentence compatibility effect
(ACE). Sentence judgment times were shorter when the
sentence depicted movement compatible with the movement
required to make a sensible response. The ACE effect has
been demonstrated for sentences describing both concrete
and abstract (or metaphorical) transfer (Glenberg, Sato,
Cattaneo, Riggio, Palumbo, & Buccino, 2008).
More recent evidence has shown that language
comprehension is influenced by prior fatugue of the motor
system. Glenberg, Sato, & Cattaneo (2008) demonstrated
that fatigue of specific actions influences comprehension of
written language depicting those actions. To fatigue the
neural motor systems involved in toward and away
movement, participants were asked to engage in a repetitive
action in a toward or away direction. Participants moved
600 beans individually from a container to a target. They
were then asked to read a series of sentences describing
transfer either toward (“Mark deals you the cards”) or away
from the body (“You deal Mark the cards”), and judge them
as sensible or nonsense by pressing a button. Response
times (the time to read the sentence and push the button)
were longer when the sentence depicted motion congruous
to the movement the participant had previously fatigued.
When the sentence depicted an incongruous movement,
response times were shorter. This finding was taken as
evidence that repeated movement induced plasticity in
motor areas recruited in language processing. In particular,
the repetition of movement induced muscular fatigue,
forcing action-controlling neurons in Broca’s region to
increase their output, but no longer target the specific action
(Glenberg et al., 2008). Thus, participants’ comprehension
of written depictions of the compatible action (toward or
away) was slowed, compromised by shared involvement in
both action and language in Broca’s region (Gallese, 2008).

1804

Although these studies demonstrate a close link between
action and language, they do not address language as a joint
action.
Research on the mirror neuron hypothesis
(Rizzolatti, Craighero, & Fadiga, 2002) suggests that action
systems of the brain, including Broca’s region, are involved
in social understanding of actions, emotions, and possibly
language (Rizzolatti & Arbib, 1998).
Mirror neurons, first discovered in the premotor cortex of
the macaque monkey, fire both during execution and
observation of the same action (di Pellegrino, Fadiga,
Fogassi, Gallese, & Rizzolatti, 1992). A comparable mirror
neuron system (MNS) in humans may contribute to a wide
range of behaviors, including action understanding
(Iacoboni, 2005; Rizzolatti, Fogassi, & Gallese, 2001),
empathy (Blakemore & Decety, 2001; Carr et al, 2003;
Gallese, 2003; Gallese, Keysers, & Rizzolatti, 2004), and
language understanding (Aziz-Zadeh, Wilson, Rizzolatti, &
Iacoboni, 2006; Rizzolatti & Arbib, 1998).
Evidence supports the existence of a mirror-neuron-like
mechanism in humans in which the observed actions of
another are processed using the motor system of the
observer.
In one study, Fadiga, Fogassi, Pavesi, &
Rizzolatti, (1995) used transcranial magnetic stimulation
(TMS) to increase activation of the motor cortex responsible
for grasping an object, while participants observed the same
action, or just the object. The dependent variable was the
motor evoked potentials (MEPs) in the muscle affected by
the stimulated motor cortex. Muscle activation increased
during action observation relative to the control conditions,
showing that observed actions potentiate the execution of
similar actions in the observer.
Other evidence shows that this mirror-like mechanism is
specific to kinematically similar actions. Using fMRI,
Calvo-Merino, Glaser, Grezes, Passingham, & Haggard
(2005) showed that action observation produces the greatest
increase in premotor and other cortical area activation for
actions that the observers had been trained to perform
themselves. And Stefan et al. (2005) used TMS to
demonstrate the formation of a kinematically specific motor
memory through action observations.
The role of the putative MNS in language has begun to be
examined. Using fMRI, Aziz-Zadeh, Wilson, Rizzolatti, &
Iacoboni (2006) asked participants to read sentences and
observe actions involving either the foot, hand or mouth.
They first located brain regions in each subject that were
most active during observation of foot, hand, and mouth
actions. Next, they compared activations in each region
during the reading of sentences involving foot, hand, and
mouth actions.
They found congruence between areas
active during observed actions and the activation levels
during reading of sentences describing those actions. Brain
regions responded most to sentences that involved the body
part for which it was most active during action observation.
If the putative MNS in humans shares neural mechanisms
with the action-based language system, then observing
another agent repeatedly performing an action should elicit

a generalizing response from action controllers similar to
that observed by Glenberg, Sato, and Cattaneo (2008).
To test the influence of social actions in language
comprehension, the present study adds to the beans task of
Glenberg et al. (2008) and manipulates activation of action
controllers through two kinds of simultaneous observed
movements. In the Mirrored condition, the movement of
both participants is kinematically identical; that is, both
participants move beans in the same direction relative to
their own bodies. In the Control condition, particpants’
movements differ in the direction of movement; one
participant moves the beans away from their body, while the
other participant moves beans toward their body.
By definition of the MNS, both observation and execution
of an action activate the same neural systems, and therefore
simultaneous observation and execution of action in the
Mirrored condition should elicit greater net activation of
action controllers than in the Control condition. Based on
the results of the Glenberg, Sato, & Cattaneo (2008) study,
it is expected that greater activation of action controllers in
the Mirrored condition will enhance the fatigue effect in
sentence comprehension, relative to the control condition.
That is, fatiguing movements toward or away from the body
will slow the comprehension of sentences describing
transfer toward or away from the body (respectively), and
this effect will be enhanced in the Mirrored condition.

Participants
Participants
were
80
Introductory
Psychology
undergraduate students at the University of Wisconsin—
Madison (53 females, 27 males). Participants were native
English speakers recruited using the UW psychology
department’s appointment scheduler and were offered
course credit for their participation. They were paired
randomly, irrespective of gender or handedness. All
participants were treated in a manner consistent with the
APA’s “Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code of
Conduct” (American Psychological Association, 2002).

Design
The experiment consisted of a 2 (practice movement
Mirrored or Control) x 2 (practice movement toward or
away) x 2 (sentence movement toward or away) mixed
design with repeated measures on the third independent
variable. The first independent variable consisted of two
levels—Mirrored or Control movement. In the Mirrored
condition, both participants in a pair transferred beans from
one container to another in the same direction, either toward
or away from their bodies, while seated across from one
another at a small table.
In the Control condition,
participants transferred the beans in opposite directions (see
Figure 1 for a schematic illustration of these conditions).
The second independent variable consisted of two levels practice movement toward or away from the body. The third
independent variable consisted of sentences describing
transfer either toward the body (“Tony gives you the cup”),
or away from the body (“Sarah passes the tray to you”).

1805

Table 1: Sample stimuli.
Sentence type
Concrete transfer towards
the body
Abstract transfer towards
the body
Concrete transfer away
from the body
Abstract transfer away
from the body
Figure 1: Schematic diagram of the Mirrored toward and
away conditions (top row) and Control toward and away
condition (bottom row).

Example
Paul throws you the ball.
Meg hands you a paper.
Tony gives you a cup.
Chris gives you advice.
Eric tells you a fact.
Liz tells you a story.
You give Tony the cup.
You throw Paul the ball.
You hand Meg a paper.
You tell Liz a story.
You give Chris advice.
You tell Eric a fact.

Procedure

In the reading task, the dependent variable was sentence
judgment time; that is, the time between a sentence
appearing on the screen and the participant pressing the
“yes” button or “no” button to evaluate the sentence as
nonsensical or sensible.

Materials
Experimenters used a protocol to guide the setup of
materials, to assign participants to a condition, and to
instruct participants in each phase of the experiment. For the
first phase, the setup included four tupperware bowls on a
card table, two for each participant. For each participant,
one bowl contained three hundred beans, and the other bowl
was empty but lidded with a hole in the top to serve as a
target. All four containers were attached to the table by
Velcro tabs.
For the second, reading comprehension phase of the
experiment, short sentences were displayed one at a time on
a computer monitor. Participants indicated that the sentence
made sense or did not make sense using “yes” or “no”
buttons located on the “3” and “8” keys on a keyboard.
For each participant, 280 sentences were shown in total.
Half (140) of all sentences were sensible and half were
nonsense (“You iron Linda the theory”). Of the 140
sensible sentences, 100 described transfer (“You give
Angela a photo”), and the remaining 40 filler sentences did
not (“Angela and you discuss the photo”). Following
Glenberg, et al. (2008), half (50) the sensible sentences
described transfer of a concrete object (“ Tony gives you the
cup”), and half described abstract transfer (“Liz tells you a
story”). Also, half (50) the sensible sentences described
transfer toward the body (“Meg hands you a paper” or “Liz
tells you a story”), and half described transfer away from the
body (“You hand Meg a paper” or “You give Chris
advice”). Sentences were divided equally into two
experiment halves. Example stimuli are provided in Table
1.

Participants were run in pairs. After participants signed
consent forms, the experimenter read from a script, giving
an overview of the experiment. First, the experimenter
instructed each participant to go to one of two computer
booths for practice in the language comprehension task.
Practice consisted of instruction in the reading task, and six
test trials. After finishing with practice, participants came
out of the computer booths and were instructed to move 300
beans one at a time from the full container to the empty one
using their right hands. Participants began the beans task at
the same time. After both participants finished the bean
transfer task, they returned to the reading booths to
complete the first half of the sentence comprehension task.
Participants typically finished the beans task within 1
minute of each other.
The experimenter then reversed the direction of
movement for each participant by reversing the positions of
the two containers. After both participants finished the first
half of the reading task, they were instructed to return to the
table and transfer the beans again, still using the right hand,
to the empty container. When finished, the participants
returned to the computer booths for the second half of the
language task. When finished, participants were debriefed,
thanked, and given course credit.

Results
Due to computer difficulties, experimenter error, or
participant error, 7 participants were excluded from the
analysis. We analyzed the data of the remaining 73
participants (48 females, 25 males; 70 right handed, 3 left
handed). Because participants’ accuracy in responding “yes”
or “no” to the sensibility of each sentence reflects their
reading comprehension, two participants with error rates
higher than 10% were excluded from the analysis. Also
excluded were trials containing erroneous responses or filler
sentences. Only trials with raw sentence judgment times
within two standard deviations of each participant’s mean
judgment time were used in the analysis.

1806

We decided that the within subjects measure, away and
toward movement, could produce carryover effects in the
second half of the experiment. The analysis therefore
includes only the first half of the experiment. A regression
analysis adjusted judgment times to control for sentence
length; these residual judgment times provide clearer data
and the focus of our interpretation, but both raw and residual
data were analyzed.
We predicted that participants in the congruent-toward
practice direction condition would have higher (slower)
judgment times on toward sentences than away and
participants in the congruent-away practice direction
condition would have higher judgment times on away
sentences than toward sentences. Although we did not have
specific predictions for participants in the incongruent
condition, it was expected that less MNS stimulation and,
by extension, less fatigue, would occur than in the congruent
condition.
A three-way ANOVA was conducted separately for raw
and residual judgment times. In the raw judgment times,
there was a main effect of sentence direction on judgment
times, F (1, 69) = 10.33, p = .002, showing longer judgment
times for toward sentence (M=1718, SD=336) than for away
sentences (M=1669, SD=305).
Contrary to the hypothesis, the difference between the
Mirrored and Control conditions in raw judgment times only
approached significance, F (1, 69) = 3.48, p= .066. An
interaction between movement condition (Mirrored vs.
Control) and practice direction (toward vs. away) also
approached significance, F (1, 69) = 3.89, p =.053. None of
these interactions were significant in residual judgment
times.
Critically, the expected three-way interaction of sentence
direction, practice direction, and movement condition was
found in both raw [F (1, 69) = 4.60, p = .035] and residual
judgment times [F (1,69) = 6.01, p = .017]. That is, the
interaction of action and language depended on the
movement condition. Mean residual judgment times for the
three-way ANOVA are listed in Table 2.
Table 2: Mean residual judgment times.
Mirrored condition
Toward sentences
Away sentences
Control condition
Toward sentences
Away sentences

Practice toward

Practice away

41.0
-43.5

10.3
-8.0

-19.8
18.7

31.6
-24.9

To decompose the three-way interaction, we ran a 2-way
ANOVA for Mirrored and Control conditions separately.
The 2-way interaction was not significant for the Mirrored
condition in either raw or residual judgment times, but it
was significant for the Control condition in both raw [F(1,
36)=7.86, p=.008] and residual judgment times
[F(1,36)=6.88, p=.013].

To identify the source of the 2-way interaction in the
Control condition, we conducted dependent-samples t-tests.
There was a significant difference between raw judgment
times for toward and away sentences after away practice
[t(18)=3.420, p=.003], but not after toward practice
[t(18)=.654, p=.522]. Similarly in residual judgment times,
there was a significant difference between toward and away
sentences after away practice [t(18)=2.575, p=.019], but not
after toward practice [t(18)=1.235, p=.233].
We are aware that there are other ways to analyze the data
that can take the nested design into consideration, and these
alternatives are currently being explored.

Discussion
The aim of this study was to test one potential mechanism
of social language coordination. Our results indicate an
interaction between socially observed actions and language
processing and support the hypothesis of Glenberg, Sato,
and Cattaneo (2008) that action controllers in Broca’s
region are involved in comprehension of language
describing concrete or abstract transfer. This study also adds
to this hypothesis, suggesting that action controller output
may increase during observation of others’ similar actions.
This finding implicates a mirror-neuron-like mechanism in
mediating language comprehension and conversation.
As predicted, the pattern of results in the Mirrored
condition indicates the fatigue of action controllers through
simultaneous self-produced action and observation of action
in the MNS. Participants in the Mirrored-toward practice
direction, as expected, read toward sentences more slowly
than away sentences. Participants in the Mirrored-away
practice condition similarly demonstrated the expected
pattern, judging away sentences more slowly than toward
sentences.
In contrast, participants’ judgment times in the control
condition seem to reflect the opposite, or a facilitation
effect. Participants in the Control-toward condition read
toward sentences faster than away sentences and
participants in the Control-away condition read away
sentences faster than toward sentences. This finding is
somewhat consistent with our prediction of a reduced
fatigue effect in the control condition. We may attribute the
discrepancy to an adjustment in procedure. Whereas
participants in the Glenberg, et al. (2008) study transferred
600 beans in each condition, those in our study transferred
only 300. Thus, the Control condition activates action
controllers, although not to the point of fatigue. In this case,
we would expect a pattern similar to an action-sentence
compatibility effect (ACE) in which reading times are
shorter when there is a match between the direction of
motor response and the direction implied by the sentence.
The fatigue effect found in the Mirrored condition would
have resulted from the dual action and observation of
movement, more closely approximating the experience of
moving twice as many, or 600, beans.
The findings are generally consistent with several areas of
research. The results support embodied theories of language

1807

comprehension in which action systems of the brain play a
role in processing of language about actions (Glenberg &
Kaschak, 2002). In particular, we replicate the findings of
Glenberg et al. (2008) in which action induced motor
plasticity affected language processing. Here however, we
extend the source of neural plasticity from action-induced
fatigue of action controllers to socially induced fatigue of
action controllers, in which the MNS is the hypothesized
mechanism.
Our findings differ from those of Glenberg et al. (2008)
by revealing a U-shaped effect of motor practice on the
output of action controllers, with smaller amounts of
practice leading to facilitation, and larger amounts of
practice leading to fatigue.
Second, the findings support the existence of a MNS in
humans in which the observed actions of another are
processed using the motor system of the observer
(Rizzolatti, & Craighero, 2004). Studies of the human MNS
have shown that action observation potentiates the execution
of kinematically similar actions in an observer (Calvo et al.,
2005; Stefan et al., 2005). Similarly, it was recently found
that concurrent observation of a similar action not only
produces a kinematically specific motor memory in the
observer, but also enhances the effect of training, relative to
physical training alone (Stefan, Classen, Celnik, & Cohen,
2008). We found that observation of a kinematically similar
action contributes to a fatigue-like effect associated with
neural plasticity. To our knowledge, this is the first
demonstration that action observation elicits practice-like
effects in language comprehension.
Third, the results are consistent with the view of language
as fundamentally a joint action (Clark, 1996) in which
successful communication of meaning is achieved through
alignment of mental states (Garrod & Pickering, 2004;
Pickering & Garrod, 2006).
The results can also be compared with the literature on SR compatility (e.g., the “Simon Effect”). Whereas that
literature has shown that motor responses can reflect the
“fatigue” of a spatial features of an irrelevant stimulus (e.g.
Proctor & Lu, 1999), we show that such a fatigue effect can
be modified by observation of another person doing a
related movement.
This study suggests a mechanism by which alignment
takes place, namely by the matching of motor states via the
mirror neuron system. Interlocutors converge in terms of
linguistic features, including grammatical structure (Bock;
Branigan, 2000), word use, sematics (Clark & WilkesGibbs, 1986), speech characteristics (Giles, H., Coupland,
N., & Coupland, J., 1992), and phonetics (Pardo, J. S.,
2006). But motor behavior also converges in social
interaction (Chartrand & Bargh, 1999), particularly when
there is a desire to create rapport (Lakin & Chartrand,
2003). Our results may shed light on the recent finding that
physiological concordance correlates with client-therapist
bond (Marci, Ham, Moran, & Orr, 2007). An interesting
question is whether dyads in our study would report a

greater sense of rapport in the Mirrored versus Control
condition.
Recent theory suggests that the function of the MNS is for
interpersonal coordination, rather than imitation of actions
(Newman-Norlund, van Schie, van Zuijlen, & Bekkering,
2007), although the evidence for this view is equivocal
(Kokal, Gazzola, & Keysers, 2009). Because our movement
conditions differed only in terms of the similarity of
movement rather than the coordination required by the task,
our results support the view that the MNS is involved in
imitation.
Nevertheless, understanding how the MNS interacts with
brain mechanisms for interpersonal motor coordination is
likely to shed light on how conversational alignment
supports joint actions in communication.

Acknowledgments
We would like to acknowledge the invaluable research
assistance of Katie Krol, and Arbor Otalora-Fadner, and
Arthur Glenberg for his helpful comments and support.

References
Aziz-Zadeh, L., Wilson, S., Rizzolatti, G., & Iacoboni, M.
(2006). Congruent embodied representations for visually
presented actions and linguistic phrases describing
actions. Current Biology, 16, 1818-1823.
Blakemore, S. J., & Decety, J. (2001). From the perception
of action to the understanding of intention. Nature
Reviews Neuroscience, 2, 561-567.
Branigan, H. P., Pickering, M. J., & Cleland, A. A. (2000).
Syntactic co-ordination in dialogue. Cognition, 75, B1325.
Calvo-Merino, B. Glaser, D. E., Grezes, J., Passingham, R.
E., & Haggard, P. (2005). Action observation and
acquired motor skills: an fMRI study with expert dancers.
Cerebral Cortex, 15, 1243-1249.
Carr, L., Iacoboni, M., Dubeau, M.-C., Mazziotta, J. C., &
Lenzi, G. L. (2003). Neural mechanisms of empathy in
humans: A relay from neural systems for imitation to
limbic areas. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 100, 5497-5502.
Chartrand, T. L., & Bargh, J. A. (1999). The chameleon
effect: The perception-behavior link and social
interaction. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
76, 893-910.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using Language. Cambridge
University Press.
Clark, H. H., & Wilkes-Gibbs, D. (1986). Referring as a
collaborative process. Cognition, 22, 1-39.
Di Pellegrino, G., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., Gallese, V., &
Rizzolatti, G. (1992). Understanding motor events: a
neurophysiological study. Experimental Brain Research,
91, 176-180.
Fadiga L., Fogassi L., Pavesi G., & Rizzolatti G. (1995).
Motor facilitation during action observation: a magnetic
stimulation study. Journal of Neurophysiology, 73, 26082611.

1808

Garrod, S., & Anderson, A. (1987). Saying what you mean
in dialogue: A study in conceptual and semantic coordination. Cognition, 27, 181-218.
Garrod, S., & Pickering, M. J. (2004). Why is conversation
so easy? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 8-11.
Gallese, V. (2003). The roots of empathy: The shared
manifold hypothesis and the neural basis of
intersubjectivity. Psychopathology, 36, 171-180.
Gallese, V. (2008). Mirror neurons and the social nature of
language: The neural exploitation hypothesis. Social
Neuroscience, 3, 317-333.
Gallese, V., Keysers, C., & Rizzolatti, G. (2004). A unifying
view of the basis of social cognition. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 8, 396-403.
Giles, H., Coupland, N., Coupland, J. (1992).
Accommodation theory: communication, context and
consequences. In Contexts of Accommodation (Giles, H.
et al., eds.), Cambridge University Press.
Glenberg, A., & Kaschak, M. (2002). Grounding language
in action. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9, 558-565.
Glenberg, A., Sato, M., Cattaneo, L. (2008). Use-induced
motor plasticity affects the processing of abstract and
concrete language. Current Biology, 18, R1-R2.
Glenberg, A.M., Sato, M., Cattaneo, L., Riggio, L.,
Palumbo, D., Buccino, G. (2008). Processing abstract
language modulates motor system activity. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 61, 905-919.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole and
J. L. Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and semantics, Vol. 3: Speech
acts. New York: Seminar Press.
Iacoboni, M. (2005). Understanding Others: Imitation,
language, and empathy. Perspectives on imitation: From
neuroscience to social science: Vol. 1: Mechanisms of
imitation and imitation in animals. Cambridge, MA US:
MIT Press.
Kokal, I., Gazzola, V., & Keysers, C. (2009). Acting
together in and beyond the mirror neuron system.
NeuroImage, 47, 2046-2056.
Lakin, J. L., & Chartrand, T. L. (2003). Using nonconscious behavioral mimicry to create affiliation and
rapport. Psychological Science, 14, 334-339.
Marci, C., Ham, J., Moran, E., & Orr, S. (2007). Physiologic
Correlates of Perceived Therapist Empathy and SocialEmotional Process During Psychotherapy. Journal of
Nervous and Mental Disease, 195, 103-111.
Newman-Norlund, R. D., van Schie, H. T., van Zuijlen, A.
M., & Bekkering, H. (2007). The mirror neuron system is
more active during complementary compared with
imitative action. Nature Neuroscience, 10, 817-818.
Pardo, J. S. (2006). On phonetic convergence during
conversational interaction. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 119, 2382-2393.
Pickering, M. J., & Garrod, S. (2006). Alignment as the
basis for successful communication. Research on
Language and Computation, 4, 203-228.

Proctor, R. W., & Lu, C. H. (1999). Processing irrelevant
location information: Practice and transfer effects in
choice-reaction tasks. Memory & Cognition, 27, 63-77.
Rizzolatti, G., & Arbib, M. (1998). Language within our
grasp. Trends in Neurosciences, 21, 188-194.
Rizzolatti, G., & Craighero, L. (2004). The mirror-neuron
system. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 27, 169-192.
Rizzolatti, G., Fogassi, L., & Gallese, V. (2001).
Neurophysiological mechanisms underlying the
understanding and imitation of action. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 2, 661-670.
Stefan, K., Cohen, L. G., Duque, J. Mazzocchio, R., Celnik,
P. Sawaki, L., Ungerleider, L., & Classen, J. (2005).
Formation of a motor memory by action observation. The
Journal of Neuroscience, 25, 9339-9346.
Stefan, K., Classen, J. Celnik, P., & Cohen, L. G. (2008).
Concurrent action observation modulates practice-induced
motor memory formation. European Journal of
Neuroscience, 27, 730-738.

1809

