UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Structural Constraints and Real-World Plausibility in Analogical Inference

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1sv3p6ck

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Smith, Linsey
Gentner, Dedre

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Structural Constraints and Real-World Plausibility
in Analogical Inference
Linsey A. Smith (linsey@u.northwestern.edu)
Dedre Gentner (gentner@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Abstract

deep matching systems are preferred over shallow matches
(the systematicity principle), which reflects a preference for
coherence and inductive power in analogical processing
(Clement & Gentner, 1991; Falkenhainer, Forbus &
Gentner, 1989). Candidate inferences are generated by
completing the pattern in the (initially) less-structured
member of the pair, based on the common structure.
Models of analogy have largely converged on a set of
assumptions like those outlined above (Falkenhainer,
Forbus & Gentner, 1989; Gentner, Holyoak & Kokinov,
2001; Holyoak and Thagard, 1989; Hummel & Holyoak,
1997; Kokinov & French, 2003; Larkey & Love, 2003).
Further, there is substantial empirical evidence in support of
the idea that analogical reasoning obeys these constraints. A
variety of studies have provided evidence that analogical
matching is constrained by both structural consistency
(including one-to-one mapping) (e.g., Krawczyk, Holyoak,
& Hummel, 2005; Markman, 1997; Markman & Gentner,
1993; Spellman & Holyoak, 1992) and systematicity (e.g.,
Clement & Gentner, 1991). For example, Clement and
Gentner (1991) showed participants analogous scenarios
and asked them to judge which of two lower-order
assertions shared by the base and target was most important
to the match. Participants chose the assertion that was
connected to matching causal antecedents – their choice was
based not only on the goodness of the local match, but also
on whether it was connected to the larger matching system.
Thus, matching lower-order relations that are interconnected
by higher-order relations were considered more important to
the analogy. In sum, people demonstrate considerable
structural sensitivity in analogical mapping.

Theoretical accounts of analogy have largely agreed that
structural constraints play a substantial role in the mapping
process. Less is known, however, about the robustness of
these constraints in the inference process and the way in
which particular content influences the use of structural
constraints in analogical inference. We conducted two
studies testing whether the plausibility (or implausibility) of
an inference influences adherence to general structural
principles in analogical reasoning. We found substantial
reliance on the predicted structural constraints, but also an
influence of the plausibility of the inference.

Introduction
Our goal in this research is to explore the stability of
analogical inference under different conditions: specifically,
whether analogical inference is a domain-general reasoning
process, governed by structural constraints inherent to the
analogical process, or whether it is a loosely constrained
process whose outcome is strongly influenced by the
plausibility of the potential inferences in particular domains.
This question is important not only for what it can tell us
about basic analogy processes, but also because the use of
analogy in scientific discovery (and even in science
learning) sometimes requires making initially implausible
inferences. We first review research on this issue in the
arena of analogical mapping and alignment, which has been
extensively studied, and then turn to analogical inference.

Structural Constraints on Analogical Mapping
Reasoning by analogy involves identifying a common
system of relations between two domains and generating
further inferences driven by these commonalities (Gentner,
1983; Holyoak & Thagard, 1989; Hummel & Holyoak,
1997; Kokinov & French, 2003). According to structuremapping theory, the comparison process involves aligning a
pair in such as way as to achieve a consistent structural
alignment between two domains (Falkenhainer, Forbus &
Gentner, 1989; Gentner, 1983; Gentner & Markman, 1997).
The structural alignment process is guided by a set of tacit
constraints that lead to structural consistency and inferential
clarity: parallel connectivity, which requires that arguments
of matching predicates must also be placed into
correspondence; and one-to-one correspondence, which
requires that each element of a representation match, at
most, one element of the other representation. Importantly,

Analogical Inference
There is some research on the degree to which structural
constraints hold in analogical inference. In the Clement and
Gentner (1991) research just described, a second study
found evidence for systematicity in inference projection.
People generated inferences that were part of a shared
system, rather than equally applicable inferences that were
not. Markman (1997) also found evidence for systematicity
in inference generation. In addition, he found that people
based their inferences on one-to-one mappings. When given
analogies with two possible sets of correspondences, people
noticed both possibilities, but drew inferences from only
one of them. These findings suggest a role for structural
consistency in inference, as in alignment.

712

However, one question that is largely unexplored is the
degree to which the analogical inference process is
influenced by the factual plausibility of the inference in the
target. That is, are people able to track structural consistency
despite implausibility in making inferences? The studies
described above did not involve wide variations in
plausibility, so they do not answer this question. Work by
Keane (1996) does bear on this issue. He found that people
readily accepted inferences that were both highly plausible
[had high “entity utility”] and easy to place into
correspondence with the target [“entity parallelism’]—that
is, highly adaptable—compared to those inferences that
were less adaptable. These findings suggest that plausibility
in the target is important in analogical inference. However,
the question remains open as to what people will do if
structural consistency directly conflicts with target
plausibility.
Another way to put this question is, are there content
effects in analogical inference? The issue of content effects
has been investigated extensively in the research on
deductive reasoning. Deductive reasoning has traditionally
been considered a relatively rigorous, principle-governed
process, although empirical support for this claim (e.g.,
Marcus & Rips, 1979) is punctuated by many observations
that show that people’s judgments about the logical validity
of deductive arguments is influenced by the 1) specific
content that is being reasoned about (e.g., Cheng &
Holyoak, 1985; Cummins, Lubart, Alksinis, & Rist, 1991;
Rips, 2001; Thompson, 1994), and 2) whether the reasoner
agrees with the premises and conclusions of the argument
(e.g., Markovits, 1995; Newstead, Pollard, Evans, & Allen,
1992). Thus, there is evidence that logical reasoning is
swayed by particular content.

real-world implausibility in making analogical inferences
(which we will refer to as analogical rigor)? Our question
in this paper is what happens when the structural alignment
process leads to inferences that the reasoner considers
implausible. On the one hand, some prior research shows
reliable effects of structural consistency on inference
(Clement & Gentner, 1991; Markman, 1997). On the other
hand, these studies (and Keane’s (1996) study) did not
directly pit structural consistency against plausibility. And
unlike deductive reasoning, analogical reasoning is
generally not explicitly taught. Thus we might expect
people to be less committed to maintaining analogical rigor
than they are to maintaining logical rigor.

The Current Experiments
In this set of studies, we asked participants to evaluate
analogies where the inferences derived from the structuremapping process are at odds with the real-world plausibility
of the inferences. This method allowed us to identify how
much people rely on domain-specific content over general
mapping principles in analogical inference.
For the task, we adapted the deductive reasoning task
from Rips (2001). As discussed above, in that experiment,
participants evaluated the validity of conclusions from
arguments that orthogonally varied in logical validity and
real-world plausibility. His study assessed whether people
would follow deductive logic in drawing conclusions even
when these conclusions conflicted with plausibility. In this
research, we posed the parallel question for analogical
inference, that is, would people respect the structural
constraints of analogy in drawing inferences even when
these inferences conflicted with real-world plausibility. To
put it another way, are people able to maintain analogical
rigor in the face of real-world implausibility? We asked
participants to assess whether a particular inference
followed from an analogy. We created materials whose
inferences varied in structural consistency, that is, we varied
whether the inference was a structurally consistent
completion of the analogy. Table 1 shows an example set.
The inferences in (a) and (b) are structurally consistent and
those in (c) and (d) are structurally inconsistent. The pairs
also varied orthogonally in real-world plausibility, with (a)
and (c) having plausible inferences and (b) and (d) having
implausible inferences. Participants might find analogies (b)
and (d) (both implausible inferences) to be odd or downright
wrong, but this is precisely the point: when an analogical
inference conflicts with reasoners’ knowledge, the question
is whether they can identify inferences that the analogy must
structurally yield, without being swayed by the plausibility
of those inferences.
Of course, the ultimate evaluation of an analogical
inference is not solely contingent on structural consistency,
but also involves checking the factual validity of the
inference (and in a real problem solving situation, the
contextual relevance) (Gentner & Clement, 1988; Holyoak
& Thagard, 1989). To this end, we also asked participants to
provide ratings of the overall goodness of each analogy. We

a. Logically valid, real-world plausible:
If Fred sprinkles water on wood shavings, the shavings
get wet.
Fred sprinkles water on wood shavings.
The shavings get wet.
b. Logically invalid, real-world plausible:
Fred sprinkles water on wood shavings.
The shavings get wet.
For example, Rips (2001) asked participants to evaluate
arguments like (a) and (b) in which the plausible conclusion
was either logically valid or invalid. The question was
whether people could track deductive logic regardless of the
plausibility of the conclusion. A substantial number of
participants (mistakenly) identified invalid arguments as
logically correct when they were plausible. Overall, Rips’s
(2001) findings suggest that people were largely able to
maintain logical rigor under the strain of real-world
implausibility, but that logical rigor was sometimes
compromised by the content of the arguments: people could
not wholly divorce logical form from content in this task.
A parallel question can be asked about analogical inference: can people maintain structural consistency despite

713

Table 1: Sample materials from Experiment 1.

inconsistent and implausible), as in Table 1. For an
individual participant, however, different content instantiated each of these arguments. Thus, for example, no
participant received more than one pair from the Table 1
quartet. The order of the problems in the test booklet was
pseudo-randomized into four orders.

Base (constant)
Mary has built a sandcastle. Her younger brother
comes by and kicks the base of the castle. The
sandcastle crumbles.

Measures Participants rated their agreement with the
statement “The conclusion follows directly from the
analogy.” Responses were measured on a 7-point Likert
scale, ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly
agree). To facilitate analysis, responses were recoded into a
dichotomous variable (with responses > 4 recoded as “Yes,
the conclusion follows” and < 4 recoded as “No, the
conclusion does not follow”). The proportion of “Yes”
responses for each type of stimuli was the measure of
interest, and these were aggregated within conditions to
form a measure of inference acceptance rates, which we’ll
simply refer to as acceptance rates. To the extent that
participants strongly differentiate structurally consistent
from inconsistent inferences, such that structurally
consistent inferences have high acceptance rates and
structurally inconsistent inferences have low acceptance
rates, this measure will approximate analogical rigor.
In addition participants were asked to judge the overall
goodness of each analogy. Participants rated their agreement
with the statement “Overall, this is a good analogy.”
Responses were measured on a 7-point Likert scale, ranging
from 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree).

Target (four versions)
a. Structurally consistent, factually plausible
A wrecking ball knocks into a building’s foundation.
Conclusion: The building comes crashing to the
ground.
b. Structurally consistent, factually implausible
A tennis ball knocks into a building’s foundation.
Conclusion: The building comes crashing to the
ground.
c. Structurally inconsistent, factually plausible
A tennis ball knocks into a building’s foundation.
Conclusion: The building stays standing.
d. Structurally inconsistent, factually implausible
A wrecking ball knocks into a building’s foundation.
Conclusion: The building stays standing.
had two goals with this question. First, for implausible
inferences, this question would give participants a way to
indicate that they considered some analogies to be quite
poor. We hoped that this would leave them more free to
judge structural consistency on its own. Second, a more
direct goal was to discover whether participants would
incorporate both structural consistency and real-world
plausibility into their judgments, as we expected they
would. If so, we would expect only analogies that yield
structurally consistent and plausible inferences to receive
high overall goodness ratings.

Results
Figure 1 presents the inference acceptance rates for each of
the four types of stimuli. The data were analyzed with a
two-way ANOVA, with structural consistency and realworld plausibility as within-subjects factors.

Experiment 1

Structurally
Consistent

Method
Participants 19 Northwestern University undergraduates
took part in the study individually or in small groups of up
to four people. Participants completed the task in 10-15
minutes and for their time they received credit towards a
course requirement or monetary compensation.
Procedure and Materials The experimenter gave one task
booklet to the participant, and upon completion they
returned the booklet to the experimenter. The booklet
contained a page of instructions, followed by eight analogies
(one per page). The analogies came from quartets of items,
as in Table 1, that varied in structural consistency and realworld plausibility. We assigned each participant eight
analogies, two of each type (structurally consistent and realworld plausible, structurally consistent and implausible,
structurally inconsistent and plausible, structurally

Structurally
Inconsistent

Figure 1: Inference acceptance ratings for Experiment 1.
Error bars reflect the standard error.

714

Overall, there was a strong effect of structural consistency
on acceptance rates, F(1,37) = 110.87, p <.001, η2 = .38;
people were far more likely to accept structurally consistent
inferences (M=.63, SD=.49) than structurally inconsistent
inferences (M=.09, SD=.29). There was also a main effect
of real-world plausibility on acceptance ratings, F(1,37) =
8.74 , p <.01, η2 =.05; a greater proportion of plausible
inferences was judged as following from the analogy
(M=.45, SD=.50) than implausible inferences (M=.30,
SD=.46). The effect size for real-world plausibility was
considerably smaller (η2 =.05) than that for structural
consistency (η2 =.38).
There was also a significant interaction between structural
consistency and plausibility, F(1,37) = 27.89, p <.001, η2 =
.10. For structurally consistent analogies, participants were
less likely to judge implausible inferences as following from
the analogy (implausible: M=.50, SD=.51; plausible:
M=.89, SD=.31), t(37) = 4.09, p <.001. No such difference
was obtained for structurally inconsistent analogies.
We reserve the analysis of overall goodness judgments
until after we present Experiment 2.

Method

Discussion

The results showed a strong effect of structural consistency;
structurally consistent inferences had higher acceptance
rates (M=.91, SD=.29) than did structurally inconsistent
inferences (M=.12, SD=.33). Figure 2 shows the inference
acceptance rates for each of the four types of stimuli. For
ease of comparison, the results from Experiment 1 (dotted
lines) have also been included. Analysis entailed a two-way
within-subjects ANOVA, with structural consistency and
real-world plausibility as within-subjects factors.

Participants 19 Northwestern University undergraduates
took part in the study individually or in small groups of up
to four people. Participants completed the task in 10-15
minutes and for their time they received credit towards a
course requirement or monetary compensation.
Materials and Measures The materials for the analogy task
were the same, except that the question used to elicit
inference acceptance ratings was modified from rating
agreement with the statement “The conclusion follows from
the analogy?” to instead read “The conclusion in Situation 2
would necessarily follow if Situations 1 and 2 were truly
analogous, regardless of whether the conclusion could be
true or not.” Participants were then asked to circle “Yes” or
“No.” The proportion of “Yes” responses for each type of
stimuli was the dependent measure, and these were
aggregated within conditions to form a measure of inference
acceptance rates. The overall goodness question remained
the same. The procedure was as in Experiment 1.

Results

Our primary question is whether people can maintain
analogical rigor in the face of real-world implausibility. We
found fairly good support for this possibility. Acceptance
ratings were higher overall for structurally consistent
analogies, indicating that people are able to track the
structural consistency of an inference regardless of the
plausibility of that inference. Additional support for this
claim comes from the observed effect sizes: structural
consistency explains 38% of the overall variance on
inference acceptance rates, whereas real-world plausibility
only accounts for 5% of the variance. However, analogical
rigor is also influenced by particular content. Specifically,
participants were more likely to reject structurally consistent
inferences when they were implausible. If individuals had
been entirely rigorous, we would not have expected to see
this difference between plausible and implausible
conditions. Interestingly, this effect of plausibility did not
appear for structurally inconsistent inferences, which were
uniformly rejected.
In short, the results so far suggest that people are able to
abide by structural constraints when making inferences;
however, conflicting content can influence whether people
maintain these constraints. In the next study, we sought to
identify whether clarifying the instructions would attenuate
these content effects.

Structurally
Consistent

Exp. 1
Exp. 2

Structurally
Inconsistent

Experiment 2
This study tested whether more explicit instructions would
lead participants to more strictly observe analogical
constraints. We used the same basic method as Experiment
1, with one important modification: we re-wrote the
question to clarify that the focus should be on what follows
from the analogy.

Figure 2: Inference acceptance ratings for Exp. 1 (dotted
line) and Exp. 2 (solid), divided into structurally consistent
and inconsistent. Error bars reflect the standard error.

715

Discussion

As in Experiment 1, there was a main effect of structural
consistency, F(1,37) = 311.22, p <.001, η2 =.71. Real-world
plausibility no longer influenced inference acceptance: there
was no main effect of real-world plausibility nor an
interaction between the factors (real-world plausible:
M=.53, SD=.50; implausible: M=.50, SD=.50).

Our primary question in Experiment 2 was whether people
are capable of separating structural consistency from realworld plausibility when explicitly told to do so. The results
indicate that the answer is yes: people were able to ignore
the real-world plausibility of analogical inferences in
making their judgments.

Cross-Experiment Analysis To further test whether more
explicit instructions to focus solely on whether an inference
follows from the analogy bolstered participants’ focus on
structural constraints, we entered Experiments 1 and 2 into a
three-way mixed ANOVA, adding in instruction type (i.e.,
Experiment 1 or 2) as a between-subjects factor. In addition
to the main effects of structural consistency and real-world
plausibility, there was also a main effect of instruction type,
F(1,74) = 6.26, p <.05. These main effects were qualified
by a significant three-way interaction between all three
variables, F(1,74) = 5.31, p <.05. This significant
interaction is due to different patterns of performance on
structurally consistent inferences: in the explicit instructions
condition (Experiment 2), there was no difference in
acceptance rates between plausible and implausible
inferences, but in the implicit instructions condition
(Experiment 1), acceptance rates were higher for plausible
inferences, t(37) = 4.09, p < .001.

General Discussion
Two studies probed the robustness of structural constraints
on analogical inference when challenged by the particular
content of the inferences. In Experiment 1, we investigated
whether people would follow the structural constraints of
analogy in drawing inferences even when they conflicted
with plausibility. Acceptance rates were higher for
structurally consistent inferences than inconsistent
inferences; overall, people can reliably follow structural
consistency in inference. Plausibility did influence inference
acceptance rates, but only for structurally consistent
analogies. Structurally inconsistent inferences were noticed
as such, regardless of their real-world plausibility. However,
when people encountered potentially analogous (i.e.,
structurally consistent) inferences, their judgments were
influenced by target plausibility.
Experiment 2 tested whether more explicit instructions
would lead participants to make a clearer separation
between analogical rigor and plausibility. The results
indicate that this is indeed the case: participants no longer
demonstrated content effects, but instead recognized
inferences that followed from completing the common
system, as predicted by structure-mapping and other current
models of analogy (Falkenhainer, Forbus & Gentner, 1989;
Holyoak and Thagard, 1989; Hummel & Holyoak, 1997;
Kokinov & French, 2003). Understanding the conditions
under which people will put aside their knowledge to work
through an analogy has implications for educational
contexts, where analogies are used extensively to promote
knowledge acquisition and conceptual change (e.g.,
Richland, Holyoak, & Stigler, 2004). Importantly, the
analogies used by instructors may require learners to make
ostensibly implausible inferences (e.g., Clement, 1993).
In both experiments, we elicited judgments of overall
goodness of the analogies. We found, as expected, that
people considered both structural consistency and realworld plausibility in judging the analogies. Ratings for
overall goodness did not vary as a function of instructions.
In both experiments, people reliably indicated that only
those analogies that were both structurally consistent and
real-world plausible were good analogies. This pattern of
judgments is in accord with the general assumption that
while analogy may involve a mapping process guided by
structural constraints, ultimate evaluation of the analogy
involves checking the factual validity of projected inferences.
Although Experiment 1 demonstrates that analogical rigor
is influenced by content, for both experiments, participants
showed a general tendency to identify structurally consistent
inferences as following from the analogy. Furthermore,

Judgments of overall goodness We elicited judgments of
overall goodness for the analogies to identify participants’
overall impression of the analogy, which may not have been
captured in the acceptance rates, especially in the case of
implausible inferences. To identify whether judgments of
overall goodness for the analogies varied by instruction
type, we entered both experiments into a three-way mixed
ANOVA, with overall goodness as the dependent measure.
There was only a marginally nonsignificant effect of
instruction type, F(1,74) = 3.33, p =.07; participants rated
overall goodness similarly across both instruction
conditions. There were main effects of both structural
consistency (F(1,74) = 97.35, p <.001, η2 =.27) and realworld plausibility (F(1,74) = 28.43, p <.001, η2 =.06),
which were qualified by a significant interaction between
the two, F(1,74) = 43.02, p <.001, η2 =.11. Structurally
inconsistent pairs were given low overall ratings that did not
vary by real-world plausibility (max = 7, plausible: M=1.92,
SD=1.16; implausible: M=2.20, SD=1.77); structurally
consistent pairs that were plausible were given higher
ratings than implausible pairs (plausible: M=5.05, SD=1.52;
implausible, M=2.91, SD=1.86), t(75) = 8.25, p <.001. This
pattern of goodness ratings partly mirrors the pattern of
inference acceptance ratings in Experiment 1: there was an
effect of both structural consistency and plausibility, with a
stronger effect of structural consistency; and structurally
consistent analogies were rated lower when their inferences
were implausible. Thus, with the exception of the
Experiment 2 acceptance ratings, the deviation from
analogically rigorous behavior occurs only for structurally
consistent but implausible analogies.

716

effect sizes were moderate for structural consistency,
whereas they were extremely small for plausibility. Perhaps
more tellingly, in judgments of overall goodness, the effect
of structural consistency was much larger (η2 =.27) than that
of plausibility (η2 =.06). Taken together, these observations
suggest that people are relying heavily on structural
principles to guide their evaluations of overall analogical
goodness. The results of these experiments are consistent
with the claim that analogical processing involves a
structure-mapping process of alignment and inference
largely governed by structural constraints.
One concern here is that the materials were too simple to
engage serious content-based reasoning. It will be necessary
to investigate a wider range of material to determine the
whether the effects identified in these studies will generalize
to more natural materials. However, the results so far
suggest that analogical inference is to a large extent guided
by a tacit set of structural constraints that may function
something like the principles that guide deductive
reasoning. In future studies it would be of interest to
contrast these two reasoning tasks to see whether similar
patterns emerge. Another future direction would be to obtain
online measures, such as reading times, to investigate the
time course of content effects in analogy and further
explicate the interaction between mapping processes and
target content in analogical inference.

Gentner, D., Holyoak, K. J., & Kokinov, B. (Eds.). (2001).
The analogical mind: Perspectives from cognitive
science. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gentner, D., & Markman, A. B. (1997). Structure mapping
in analogy and similarity. American Psychologist, 52, 4556.
Gentner, D., & Toupin, C. (1986). Systematicity and surface
similarity in the development of analogy. Cognitive
Science, 10, 277-300.
Holyoak, K. J. & Thagard, P. (1989). Analogical mapping
by constraint satisfaction. Cognitive Science, 13, 295-355.
Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (1997). Distributed
representations of structure: A theory of analogical access
and mapping. Psychological Review, 104, 427-466.
Keane, M.T. (1996). On adaptation in analogy: Tests of
pragmatic importance and adaptability in analogical
problem solving. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 46, 1062-1085.
Kokinov, B., & French, R. M. (2003). Computational
models of analogy making. In L. Nadel (Ed.),
Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science. London: MacMillan.
Krawczyk, D. C., Holyoak, K. J., & Hummel, J. E. (2005).
The one-to-one constraint in analogical mapping and
inference. Cognitive Science, 29, 797 – 806.
Larkey, L. B., & Love, B. C. (2003). CAB: Connectionist
Analogy Builder. Cognitive Science, 27 (5), 781-794.
Marcus, S. L., & Rips, L. J. (1979). Conditional Reasoning.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 18(22),
199-223.
Markman, A. B. (1997). Constraints on analogical
inference. Cognitive Science, 21, 373–418.
Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (1993). Splitting the
differences: A structural alignment view of similarity.
Journal of Memory and Language, 32, 517-535.
Markovits, H. (1995). Conditional reasoning with false
premises: Fantasy and information retrieval. British
Journal of Developmental Psychology, 13, 1-11.
Newstead, S. E., Pollard, P., Evans, J. S., & Allen, J. L.
(1992) The source of belief bias effects in syllogistic
reasoning. Cognition, 46(1), 87-92.
Reeves, L. M., & Weisberg, R. W. (1994). The role of
content and abstract information in analogical transfer.
Psychological Bulletin, 115(3), 381-400.
Richland, L. E., Holyoak, K. J., & Stigler, J. W. (2004). The
role of analogy in teaching middleschool mathematics.
Cognition and Instruction, 22, 37-60.
Rips, L. J. (2001). Two kinds of reasoning. Psychological
Science, 12, 129-134.
Spellman B. A., & Holyoak, K. J. (1992). If Saddam is
Hitler then who is George Bush?:
Analogical
mapping between systems of social roles. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 62(6), 913-933.
Thompson, V. A. (1994). Interpretational factors in
conditional reasoning. Memory and Cognition, 22(6),
742–758.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by ONR Grant N00014-08-10040. We thank Doug Medin, in addition to Julie Colhoun
and the rest of the Cognition and Language Lab, for many
helpful comments and suggestions on this work. We also
thank Katherine James, Ted Bedell, Noel Dwyer, and
Lindsey Zamarripa who helped with recruitment,
scheduling, and data collection.

References
Cheng, P. W., & Holyoak, K. J. (1985). Pragmatic
reasoning schemas. Cognitive Psychology, 17, 391–416.
Clement, J. (1993). Using bridging analogies and anchoring
intuitions to deal with students’ preconceptions in
physics. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 30,
1241-1257.
Clement, C. A., & Gentner, D. (1991). Systematicity as a
selection constraint in analogical mapping. Cognitive
Science, 15, 89-132.
Cummins, D. D., Lubart, T., Alksnis, O., & Rist, R. (1991)
Conditional reasoning and causation. Memory &
Cognition, 19(3), 274-282.
Falkenhainer, B., Forbus, K. D., & Gentner, D. (1989). The
structure-mapping engine: Algorithm and examples.
Artificial Intelligence, 41, 1–63.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155–170.

717

