UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Syntax Drives Phonological Choice - Even Independently of Word Choice

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4vj083f0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Nilsenova, Marie
Van Amelsvoort, Marije

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Syntax drives phonological choice – even independently of word choice
Marie Nilsenová (m.nilsenova@uvt.nl)
Department of Communication and Information Sciences, P.O.Box 90153
5000 LE Tilburg, The Netherlands

Marije van Amelsvoort (m.a.a.vanamelsvoort@uvt.nl)
Department of Communication and Information Sciences, P.O.Box 90153
5000 LE Tilburg, The Netherlands
Abstract

will also align on other forms/structures. In other words,
alignment on one level of representation “boosts” alignment
on other levels. For example, Branigan, Pickering and
Cleland (2000; see also Branigan, Pickering, McLean &
Cleland, 2007) found that in English, adaptation on lexical
level significantly increases the frequency of aligned
syntactic structures. In particular, if the subject is instructed
to use the same verb as the confederate in the sentence she
produced to describe a picture, the subject will be more
likely to also use the syntactic structure the confederate did
rather than an alternative one. In another series of
experiments, Hartsuiker et al. (2008) illustrated the
existence of boosts effects in written and spoken computermediated communication (see also Raffray, Pickering &
Branigan, 2008).

We report the results of three experiments designed to test
priming percolation (‘alignment boost effects’) from one
grammatical level to another. In the first two experiments, we
set off to replicate in Dutch the results of Branigan, Pickering
& Cleland (2000) for lexical boosts of syntactic alignment,
adding a baseline control condition without priming. In the
third experiment, we tested direct syntactic boosts of
phonological alignment, using invented verbs. The direct link
between syntax and phonology (without any interference from
the lexicon) has been postulated in the past, but so far no
empirical evidence has been offered in its favor. Our
experimental results so far largely confirm the predictions of
the Alignment Model (Pickering & Garrod, 2004), including
the relation between syntax and phonology. Speakers, who
were instructed to use the same syntactic structure as their
dialogue partner did, also invented a verb that resembled
more their partner’s invented verb.
Keywords: Priming; alignment; phonology; syntax; boost
effect.

Introduction
Speakers in all age categories adapt their speech to their
linguistic environment. They order coffee with milk as
‘caffè latte’, ‘cappuccino’ or ‘café au lait’, depending on
what they perceive to be the addressee’s choice and they do
so even if their personal preference would be to use a
different expression (Garrod & Anderson, 1987; Metzing &
Brennan, 2003; Branigan et al., in press). Speakers are also
likely to copy the syntactic structure previously used by
their interlocutor (Levelt & Kelter, 1982; Bock, 1986;
Pickering & Branigan, 1999). Even babies only a few
months old have been observed to use a higher pitch when
interacting with their mother and lower pitch when
interacting with their father (Liberman, 1967) and also older
children appear to adopt the intonation patterns (low/high
boundary tone) when naming pictures, depending on the
tone they previously heard from their dialogue partner
(Nilsenová, Swerts, Houtepen & Dittrich, 2008). Other
documented cases of phonetic/phonological alignment
include pronunciation of vowels and consonants, pitch,
accent and speech rate (Natale, 1975; Gregory & Hoyt,
1982; Giles, Coupland & Coupland, 1992; Gregory &
Gallagher, 2002; Pardo, 2006; Delvaux & Soquet, 2007).
Interestingly, it appears that if the experimental
task forces participants to use the same form or structure as
their dialogue partner, it increases the likelihood that they

Figure 1: The Interactive Alignment
Model (Pickering and Garrod, 2004:177).
Pickering and Garrod (2004) used the phenomenon of
alignment boosts to support their (Interactive) Alignment
Model. Although the model has been subjected to a number
of critical remarks (e.g., Krauss & Pardo, 2004; Schiller &
de Ruiter, 2004, and others in the volume), it offers a useful
theoretical background for the testing of relations among

212

various levels of representations. In particular, the vertical
lines that stand for possible percolation effects between
linguistic representations have for the most part not been
tested on empirical data.

monotransitive events (one agent only, e.g., a woman
drawing a picture; 16 drawings in total), or ditransitive
events (including an agent and a recipient, e.g., a woman
handing an apple to a boy; 12 drawings in total), viz. figure
3. All the drawings included either a monotransitive (for
pictures with an agent only) or a ditransitive verb and the
participants were instructed to use the verb in a simple
sentence when describing the event.
In condition B, without lexical alignment, the
participants took part in a confederate-governed task of
describing 28 drawings (12 ditransitive stimuli + 16
monotransitive fillers, same as in the baseline study), while
being primed alternatively with a syntactic structure of the
form ‘ditransitive verb + direct object + prepositional
indirect object’ and a structure of the form ‘ditransitive verb
+ (nonprepositional) indirect object + direct object’. For
their description, they were asked to use the verb given
under the drawing. Each time, the verb differed from the
verb used in the confederate’s prime.
In condition C, with lexical alignment,
participants performed the same task but they were asked to
use the verb indicated to them underneath each drawing,
identical to the immediately preceding confederate prime.
To balance for order effects and verb effects, in both
conditions, there were 4 confederate variants with structures
alternating per verb.
During the experimental session in conditions B
and C, the participant was seated opposite to the confederate
who pretended to be ignorant as to the purpose of the
experiment. The experimental leader was present in the
same room to answer questions and make sure that the
participant followed the experimental instructions. The
experiment was presented as a game of describing and
finding pictures, where both the correctness of the response
(picture found) and the time needed to do so would be
compared across conditions. The participants were explicitly
told that rather than performing the task quickly, they
should attempt to be as precise as possible. The output for
all the three conditions was recorded on paper (by the
participant in condition A and by the confederate in
condition B and C), as well as digitally for the spoken
dialogue. After each experimental session, the transcripts
were compared to the audio recording and corrected if
necessary.
The confederate and the participant were taking
turns in describing the pictures (see figure 3), with the
confederate always initiating the turn (in other words,
priming the participant). The confederate picture set
included full sentence descriptions of the pictures but in
order to maintain the appearance of being a participant as
well, the confederate pretended to be making up the
descriptions on the spot. The participant was not aware of
what was in the confederate set but assumed that it
resembled his/her own.
After the experimental session, the experimental leader
asked both the confederate and the participant if they
noticed anything unusual. Only after that did she disclose

Current project
What is of particular interest to us in our current study is the
postulated direct link between the syntactic representation
and the phonological representation, which in the model
appears to be possible even without the intervention of the
lexicon (see figure 2). To our knowledge, empirical
evidence supporting this relationship is lacking. This is,
perhaps, not surprising, since even the expectation of a
phonological alignment appears to be rather far-fetched. At
least on the level of phonemes, it is unlikely that speakers
should be producing strings with identical phonemes (or
even strings with comparable phonemic properties, e.g.,
with respect to the place or manner of articulation). If we
exclude the lexical representation, we should be able to
observe speakers producing utterances with identical
syntactic structures and phonemic properties, turning a
conversation into a game of anagrams. In our project, we
thus set off to test what appeared to be the ‘weakest link’ of
the Alignment Model, starting with a reproduction of the
already established lexical boosts on syntactic alignment.

Figure 2: The part of Pickering & Garrod’s
Alignment Model predicting a direct boost
effect of syntactic alignment on the phonological
representation (and vice versa).

Experiment I.
In the first experimental study, we sought to extend the
results of Branigan, Pickering & Cleland (2000) for English
by adapting their experimental design for Dutch (for another
contribution, see Hartsuiker et al., 2008). Contrary to
previous studies, apart from two experimental conditions
with a confederate, we also measured the preferred syntactic
choices of Dutch speakers in a baseline condition without
priming.
Methodology Thirty-nine Dutch speakers were randomly
divided into three experimental conditions (A, B, C).
In condition A, the ‘base’ condition, the
participants were describing drawings depicting either

213

the real purpose of the experiment and the role of the
confederate.

(a)

comparison of the experimental conditions with the baseline
seems to suggest that syntactic alignment as such does not
occur: speakers were more likely to use the prepositional
and dative ditransitive constructions spontaneously than
when actually primed with them. One possible explanation
for the result could be the fact that the ditransitive verbs
used in the experiment, such as ‘give’ (geven), ‘hand’
(overhandigen) or ‘send’ (sturen), can be used in
monotransitive constructions in Dutch. Unlike in the
English version of the task, our Dutch participants in the
condition B and C could thus have been influenced by the
monotransitive fillers. In fact, they were interpreting them
as primes, albeit not in the immediately following turn. To
test this hypothesis, we adapted the stimuli from experiment
I. in a second experiment.

(b)

Figure 3: The drawings which the participants
were describing depicted either monotransitive
(a) or ditransitive events (b). The monotransitive
items were used as fillers.

Experiment II.
In the second experiment, we attempted to account for the
outcome of experiment I. (syntactic priming in conditions B
and C resulted in less of the primed constructions being
used than in condition A with no priming) by changing the
structure of the fillers from simple monotransitive clauses of
the form ‘agent – finite verb – direct object’ to clauses
containing an adverbial phrase with a preposition, i.e., of the
form ‘agent – finite verb – direct object – adverbial phrase’
(e.g., “The man is painting a picture on the wall” instead of
“The man is painting a picture”).

Results In the experimental conditions (B and C), there was
a significant effect of lexical alignment on alignment in
syntactic structure (t(21)=3.344, p<.005, eta squared =
.035). The participants in the condition C (with lexical
alignment) aligned their verbal syntax more frequently
(M=9, SD=1.9) than the participants in the condition B
(without lexical alignment; M=6.7, SD=1.4). When
compared to the condition A (baseline without priming), it
turned out that the participants in the condition B and C
used the primed constructions significantly less frequently
(F(1.9, 49.403)=5.146 (sphericity not assumed), p<.05,
partial eta squared = .165), see figure 4.

Methodology The procedure was the same as in experiment
I., only with a different set of fillers as described above.
Twenty-two Dutch speakers were randomly divided into one
of the two experimental conditions either without or with
lexical boost (B and C, respectively).
Results As in experiment I, participants in the condition
without lexical boost (B) aligned less frequently (M=6.6,
SD=.84) with the syntactic prime than participants in the
condition with lexical boost (C; M=9.1, SD=1.38),
t(20)=4.963, p<.001, eta squared = .55. Contrary to
experiment I, this time we observed no uses of
monotransitive constructions in descriptions that involved
ditransitive events. In other words, once we replaced the
monotransitive fillers with fillers involving a prepositional
phrase (e.g., a locative), the participants used no alternative
constructions on the experimental trials to describe the
ditransitive events; they always chose either the
prepositional dative construction or the non-prepositional
dative.

Figure 4: In the experimental conditions
with syntactic priming (B and C),
participants chose the primed structures
less frequently than in the baseline
condition without priming (A).

Discussion On the basis of the results obtained in the
second experiment, we concluded that participants in
experiment I were, in fact, adapting to the monotransitive
fillers used by the confederate in the turn preceding the
ditransitive prime. When the monotransitive fillers were
adapted to longer sentences resembling the experimental
primes, their effect disappeared.

Discussion The comparison of the experimental conditions
extends the results of Branigan, Pickering & Cleland (2000)
for English to Dutch. We observed that syntactic priming
received a lexical boost in the condition in which
participants were using the same verb as the confederate in
his/her prime. However, the puzzling outcome of the

214

Experiment III.

appel aan de non… - “The man who … an apple to the
nun”). Furthermore, we changed the phonological primes so
that the systematic variation in the confederate’s verbs
consisted (1) in the number of syllables (one or two) and the
initial phoneme (a vowel or a consonant), see table 1.

In the third experiment, we explored the effect of a syntactic
boost on phonological alignment. In order to test for the
relationship directly, it was necessary to exclude the effects
of the lexicon that is likely to facilitate phonological
alignment in spontaneous data.
Methodology In the baseline condition, twelve drawings
depicting a ditransitive event were presented to 17 Dutch
speakers who were asked to describe the picture using a
monoclausal sentence and a verb they would invent on the
spot. In the experimental conditions, the participants again
engaged in a confederate-steered task during which they
were describing 24 drawings (same as in experiment I and
II) with an invented verb, following a syntactic prime by the
confederate which also involved an invented but Dutchsounding verb (with correct morphology). The participants
were being primed alternatively by a monotransitive
construction or a structure with a direct object followed by a
prepositional indirect object, or a structure with a nonprepositonal indirect object followed by a direct object. The
phonological primes (i.e., the invented verbs) were
alternatively monosyllabic and disyllabic words with a
systematically varied phonological structure.
In the pilot version of the experiment, twenty-two
participants received no instructions regarding the syntactic
structure they were expected to use to describe the pictures.
One third of the invented verbal primes contained two
plosives (in the onset and the coda for the monosyllabic
primes, or in the onsets of the two syllables of the disyllabic
primes), another third contained two nasals, and yet another
third contained two fricatives. There was no systematic
variation of vowels and liquids which were inserted freely to
make the verb appear Dutch-like.
When we compared the syntactic output of the
participants to the baseline condition, however, we observed
that there was no significant difference in the use of the
three alternative structures to describe the depicted events
(viz. figure 5). In other words, the participants in the
experimental conditions were not aligning syntactically and
hence it was not possible to measure the effect of a syntactic
boost on phonology. Moreover, while the participants
appeared to be taking over some phonological features of
the verbal prime, the manner of articulation of the
consonants did not appear to be a perceptually prominent
feature.
Twenty-three speakers of Dutch took part in the
third experiment. On the basis of the outcome of the pilot
experiment, with respect to syntactic alignment, we adapted
the task in such a way as to force the speakers to use the
same structure as the confederate. In particular, we
instructed them to start describing the picture by a clue that
was given to them as an NP + relative clause underneath the
drawing. In practice, the speakers were filling in an invented
verb into a blank of the form NP – who – IO – DO (e.g., De
man die de non een appel... – “The man who … the nun an
apple.”) or NP – who – DO – PO (e.g., De man die een

Figure 5: In the pilot version of the
experiment, participants in the condition with
phonological priming did not differ from the
participants in the baseline condition (without
priming) in their choice of syntactic structures,
F(2,74)=.825, p=.442.
Table 1: Nonsense verbs used as primes
in experiment III.
Initial phoneme
Vowel

Consonant

Monosyllabic

Bisyllabic

oeft
aapt
oot
iert
eift
eemt

oegert
eivelt
affelt
uitert
iemelt
okkelt

proest
kniert
bort
vlaapt
slinkt
loept

manilt
pippelt
lippert
zachelt
poenkert
niesert

Results The nonsense verbs created by the participants were
transcribed by the experimental leader during the
experimental session, as well as recorded digitally. The
transcriptions were made in such a way as to reflect the
rules of the Dutch spelling system and checked against the
audio recordings first by the experimental leader and

215

subsequently by another linguist. We calculated the
proportion of phonological alignment by (i) comparing the
number of syllables in the prime and the verb created by the
participant, (ii) comparing the initial phoneme of the verb
(vowel or consonant), and (iii) comparing the Levenshtein
distance between the prime and the participant’s verb. The
Levenshtein distance between two strings A and B is the
(uniform) cost for insertion, deletion and substitution of
characters in string B needed to make it identical to string B.
The comparison was used to account for cases where the
participant did not align phonologically on the
systematically manipulated features (number of syllables
and initial phoneme) but still appeared to create a new verb
strongly influenced by the prime (consider, for instance, the
invented verb ‘choeft’, which was independently created by
three experimental participants as a response to the prime
‘achelt’).
When we compared the two experimental
conditions, there was no significant difference between the
group that aligned syntactically and the group that did not
with respect to the initial phoneme of the invented verbs
they created. Regarding the number of syllables, we
observed a trend in the data suggesting some effect of the
syntactic boost (t(21)=1.855, p=.095, eta squared=.14). The
boost effect, however, was clearly present when we
measured the Levenshtein distance between the prime and
the participants’ responses, with verbs created in the
syntactic boost condition resembling the primes more
(M=108.42, SD=12.42) than the verbs created in the
condition without boost (M=126.882, SD=24.31; a lower
mean stands for less operations needed to make the strings
identical), t(14.597)=-2.255, p<.05, equal variances not
assumed, eta squared=.26.

be more likely to use the same syntactic construction as
well, compared to participants who could use a different
verb. The evidence for other kinds of boosts has so far been
lacking, despite the fact that these effects are interesting in
that they offer insights into the architecture of the language
model.
In the current study, we examined the link between
the syntactic and the phonological component, which at first
blush appeared to be rather arbitrarily postulated in the
Alignment Model of Pickering and Garrod (2004). In order
to approach the topic of alignment boosts in Dutch in a
systematic manner, we started with a replication of
Branigan, Pickering and Cleland’s (2000) study concerning
the effect of lexical alignment on syntax, enriched with a
baseline study involving no primes. The results of the first
experiment were more complex than the English findings
due to the difference in selection properties of the Dutch
ditransitive verbs, but both the first and the second
experiment confirmed that alignment on the lexical level
increases the frequency of aligned syntactic structures.
Finally, our data confirmed the prediction of the
Alignment Model regarding a direct boost effect of syntax
on phonological alignment. The role of the lexicon was
excluded in the setup by making use of invented verbs that
the participants had to come up with on the spot.
One open question that needs to be answered in
follow-up studies concerns the relation between the spoken
and the written form of the invented verbs (for example, the
combination of graphemes ‘oe’ is pronounced as /u/ in
Dutch but when calculating the Levenshtein distances, we
based ourselves on the graphic representation rather than the
pronunciation). In general, experimental evidence is needed
for other types of boosts apart from the lexical and the
syntactic one explored in the current study.

Discussion The results of the third experiment indicate that
there is a link between the syntactic and the phonological
component that does not have to be mediated by the lexicon.
In particular, when speakers align on the syntactic level with
their dialogue partner, they are also more likely to align
phonologically. The phonological adaptation, however, is
rather subtle and, at least in this experiment, was not
obvious when we looked at traditional phonological features
like the number of syllables or the word-initial phoneme.
However, the resemblance between the prime and the
response could be detected by calculating the Levenshtein
distance between the two strings.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Annabelle Adams for her
help with collecting the experimental data, to Holy Branigan
for her suggestions regarding the design of the third
experiment, to Erwin Marsi for his permission to use his
script to calculate the Levenshtein distances, to Jan Peter de
Ruiter for a helpful discussion in the initial stages of the
project and to the CogSci 2010 reviewers for their helpful
comments. The results of experiment I and of the pilot
version of experiment III were reported as a poster at the
Architectures and Mechanisms of Language Processing
Conference in Cambridge, UK, 2008.

Conclusion
There is evidence that conversational participants adapt to
each other’s language use at various grammatical levels.
This phenomenon has been well documented in a number of
experiments, as well as studies of corpus data (Gries, 2005).
The focus of our current study was the nature of percolation
effects, which have been documented in priming
experiments with lexical boost where participants who were
forced to use the same verb as the confederate turned out to

References
Bock, K. (1986) Syntactic persistence in language
production. Cognitive Psychology, 18, 355-387.
Branigan, H.P., Pickering, M.J., & Cleland, A.A. (2000)
Syntactic coordination in dialogue. Cognition, 75, B13B25.

216

Branigan, H.P., Pickering, M.J., McLean, J.F., & Cleland,
A.A. (2007) Participant role and syntactic alignment in
dialogue. Cognition, 104, 163-197.
Branigan, H.P., Pickering, M.J., Pearson, J., & McLean, J.F.
(in press) Linguistic alignment between humans and
computers. Journal of Pragmatics.
Delvaux, V., & Soquet, A. (2007) The Influence of Ambient
Speech on Adult Speech Productions through
Unintentional Imitation. Phonetica, 64, 145-173.
Garrod, S., & Anderson, A. (1987) Saying What You Mean
in Dialogue: A Study in Conceptual and Semantic
Coordination. Cognition, 27, 181-218.
Gregory, S.W., & Gallagher, T.J. (2002) Spectral Analysis
of Candidates’ Nonverbal Communication: Predicting
U.S. Presidential Election Outcomes. Social Psychology
Quarterly, 49, 237-246.
Gregory, S.W., & Hoyt, B.R. (1982) Conversation Partner
Mutual Adaptation as Demonstrated by Fourier Series
Analysis. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 11, 3546.
Gries, S.T. (2005) Syntactic priming: A Corpus-based
Approach. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 34, 365399.
Hartsuiker, R.J., Bernolet, S., Schoonbaert, S., Speybroeck,
S., & Vanderelst, D. (2008) Syntactic priming persists
while the lexical boost decays: Evidence from written and
spoken dialogue. Journal of Memory and Language, 58,
214-238.
Krauss, R.M., & Pardo, J.S. (2004) Is alignment always the
result of automatic priming? Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 27, 203-204.
Levelt, W.J.M., & Kelter, S. (1982) Surface forma dn
memory in question answering. Cognitive Psychology, 14,
78-106.
Liberman, P. (1967) Intonation, Perception, and Language.
Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Metzing, C., & Brennan, S.E. (2003) When conceptual
pacts are broken: Partner-specific effects on the
comprehension of referring expressions. Journal of
Memory and Language, 49, 237-246.
Natale, M. (1975) Converge of mean vocal intensity in
dyadic communication as a function of social desirability.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 32, 790804.
Nilsenová, M., Swerts, M.G.J., Houtepen, V., & Dittrich, H.
(2009) Pitch adaptation in different age groups: boundary
tones versus global pitch. Proceedings of Interspeech,
September 6-10, Brighton.
Pickering, M.J., & Branigan, H.P. (1999) Syntactic priming
in language production. Trends in Cognitive Science, 3,
136-141.
Pickering, M., & Garrod, S. (2004) Toward a mechanistic
psychology of dialogue. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
27, 169-226.
Pardo, J.S. (2006) On phonetic convergence during
conversational interaction. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 119, 2382-2393.

Raffray, C.N., Pickering, M.J., & Branigan, H.P. (2008)
Relation priming, the lexical boost, and alignment in
dialogue. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 31, 394-395.
Schiller, N.O., & de Ruiter, J.P. (2004) Some notes on
priming, alignment and self-monitoring. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 27, 208-209.

217

