UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Application of the Less is More Hypothesis in Foreign Language Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/74n259pd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Chin, Simone L
Kersten, Alan W

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Application of the Less is More Hypothesis in Foreign Language Learning
Simone L. Chin (schin2@fau.edu)
Florida Atlantic University, Psychology Department
777 Glades Road, Boca Raton, FL 33431

Alan W. Kersten (akersten@fau.edu)
Florida Atlantic University, Psychology Department
777 Glades Road, Boca Raton, FL 33431
Abstract

1982). Newport’s Less is More theory explains that in the
beginning stages of language learning, limited input helps
children learn language (Newport, 1990). Young children’s
limited processing capacity and working memory only allow
them to take in a small amount of the language heard around
them, and as a result, they attend to limited language input
such as individual words or morphemes. When learning a
language, children must learn to map morphemes to specific
meanings, and then combine those morphemes in original
ways to create new sentences. Initial limited input may
create the opportunity for children to analyze simple
morphemes and create a small number of linguistic form-tomeaning mappings. When children’s cognitive processes
develop (working memory and processing capacity
increase), they are then able to process more complex input,
allowing them to learn the rules for combining morphemes
in grammatical production. These cognitive processes fully
develop around puberty (Newport, 1990).
The Less is More theory also explains why older children
and adults do not learn language as well as young children.
When older children and adults begin to learn language,
they use their fully developed working memories and
processing capacity to attend to complex sentences that
contain multiple morphemes. From processing the complex
input, adults (a) tend not to analyze individual morphemes
but learn “frozen” combinations of multiple morphemes and
(b) create many form-to-meaning mappings that are
susceptible to noise. Out of the many possible morpheme
mappings, only a few are correct, resulting in inconsistent
and often incorrect language production. Therefore, adults
do not learn the same morphological structure of a language
as children.
Newport’s research shows that late learners of ASL were
more inclined to produce variable ungrammatical signs
(Newport, 1990). Her theoretical explanation for these
findings is the late learners immediately processed complex
whole signs as units rather than analyzing the individual
morphemes that make up a sign, encouraging the use of
imitative unanalyzed signs. In contrast, the native and early
learners of ASL used their developing cognitive abilities to
process small parts of signs, enabling them to learn the
individual morphemes and eventually produce original
grammatically correct combinations of the morphemes.
Previous language learning studies found that initial
limited exposure can be beneficial in learning the
morphological structure of the language. Goldowsky &

The goal of this study was to test a foreign language teaching
method inspired by Newport (1990)’s Less is More hypothesis.
Computerized French language lessons were presented to 112
adults over two one-hour sessions. Learning trials were
presented either in full sentences to resemble the adult learning
environment, or in small phrases that incrementally increased in
length to full sentences, resembling the steadily expanding
processing capabilities of children. Trials were also ordered
randomly or blocked such that multiple examples of the same
objects and verbs were presented consecutively, in order to
promote attention to individual words within those sentences.
Language proficiency tests of vocabulary and grammar were
administered after the lessons. The incremental and blocked
conditions outperformed the randomly ordered full sentence
conditions on the grammar measure. This outcome suggests that
a teaching method based on Newport’s Less is More hypothesis
can be advantageous in learning a foreign language.
Keywords: adult language acquisition; constraints; starting
small

Introduction
For many years, second language acquisition researchers
and educators have been trying to sidestep the age effect
problem in foreign language acquisition to help older
children and adults reach a near native level of proficiency.
Findings from this research demonstrate that (a) language is
better learned at an earlier age, (b) despite numerous
methods of explicit language instruction, older children and
adult learners do not reach a native level of language
proficiency, and (c) adults generally learn the word order
and semantic aspects of language more quickly than
children but usually never master the grammatical aspects
(Newport, 1990). The demand for a solution to the age
effect problem is essential to our multicultural society. A
first step to solving this issue may be to investigate why
young children are better language learners.
We suggest that second language educators may benefit
from exploring developmental theories of language
acquisition that (a) explain the robust findings of child-adult
differences in language proficiency and (b) provide insight
for methods of instruction to the second language teaching
community. Developmental psychologists propose that the
mind of a young child is more suitable for certain complex
learning processes like language acquisition than is that of
an older child or adult (Newport, 1990; Turkewitz & Kenny,

150

Newport (1993) show that a computational model that has a
filter restricting the amount of input when exposed to
linguistic form-to-meaning mappings learns the correct
mappings better than one without restrictions. Cochran,
McDonald, & Parault (1999) demonstrate that restricting
adults’ language input by having them attend to an external
working memory task or encouraging them to concentrate
on small parts while being exposed to complex ASL
morphology led to more consistent ASL production than did
attending to the full complexity of the language. Kersten &
Earles (2001) found that adults who were presented with an
artificial language in small phrases that gradually increased
in complexity performed better on vocabulary and
morphology measures than did adults who were
immediately presented with the full complexity of the
language. These studies suggest that starting with limited
input of language can facilitate learning.
Other research demonstrates learning benefits of a
different approach to starting small. In particular, research
on category learning has revealed that manipulating the
order of learning trials, such that multiple examples of the
same category are presented sequentially before exposing
learners to the full range of variability in category
exemplars, results in superior ultimate learning. For
example, Sandhofer & Doumas (2008) show that
manipulating the order of presentation so that children are
presented with multiple examples of the same color
category before introducing a new color led to better
learning than did random presentation.
Additionally, Elio & Anderson (1981) introduced adults
to two categories that differed on multiple attributes. The
exemplars of each category were presented in either random
or blocked order, in which multiple examples of the same
category were presented before moving onto the next
category. They found that learning the attributes of each
category and generalizing new examples to the correct
category were better in the blocked condition than the
random condition.
These results suggest that blocking manipulations may
function similarly to incremental presentation, encouraging
learners to focus on the commonalities among members of
an individual category and to ignore the variability
associated with other, orthogonally-varying categories.
Once learners acquire a basic vocabulary of individual
categories, they may be in a better position to learn the more
complex rules for combining those categories. Thus,
teaching methods that encourage attention to simple
information, and then gradually encouraging attention to
more complex material, may be beneficial in learning the
categories, and ultimately the structure, of language.

French language lessons in which they watched short videos
and heard French descriptions. Two different methods were
used to encourage participants to initially focus on
individual French phrases before attempting to learn the
complex grammar of entire French sentences.
First,
consistent with the method used by Kersten & Earles
(2001), some participants were initially presented with
individual phrases that gradually increased in complexity as
learning progressed, whereas others were immediately
presented with entire sentences. Second, consistent with the
methods of Sandhofer & Doumas (2008) and Elio &
Anderson (1981), some participants were presented with
learning examples in a blocked order that encouraged the
acquisition of individual words within the sentences that
accompanied the videos, whereas others were presented
with learning examples in a random order. Crossing these
two factors led to four between-subjects conditions.
The incremental random (IR) condition presented a set of
French lessons initially in individual phrases that gradually
increased to full-length sentences. First, participants viewed
a set of videos and heard only the direct object that
corresponded to the video in the French language. In the
second phase, participants viewed similar videos but heard
entire phrases (including the verb and direct object). In the
final phase, participants viewed the same videos from the
previous phases but heard the full complex sentences that
consisted of subject, verb and direct object. The trials
within each learning phase were presented in random order.
We predicted that initially presenting the descriptions in
individual phrases would promote the learning of individual
words and their meanings.
As longer phrases were
presented, participants were expected to learn additional
words as well as the rules for combining those words
The incremental blocked (IB) condition presented
participants with the French language in incrementally
larger phrases as in the IR condition, but the order of
presentation within each learning phase was blocked by
similarity of object and verb. Similar to methods used in
category learning, a block consisted of presenting two
examples of the same object or verb sequentially before
presenting a new object or verb. In the first learning phase,
trials were blocked by similarity of object so that
participants were presented with two trials containing the
same object before moving onto a new object. In the second
and third learning phases, in which participants heard verb
phrases and full sentences, respectively, trials were blocked
by similarity of verb meaning. The intention of blocking
trials was to encourage acquisition of individual words
within the speech stream.
We predicted that both
incremental and blocking manipulations would ultimately
produce advantages in grammar acquisition.
The sentence blocked (SB) condition immediately
presented the language in full sentences but in a blocked
order similar to the IB condition. Even though these
participants were not initially exposed to individual phrases,
we expected that the blocked order of presentation would
still encourage attention to individual words within the

Present Research and Predictions
The present research tests the applicability of the Less is
More hypothesis to second language learning by attempting
to teach adults a foreign language using teaching approaches
inspired by the theory.
Adults participated in an
unsupervised experiment consisting of two sessions of

151

speech stream, leading to better learning of those words and
ultimately giving a grammar learning advantage to this
group.
Emulating the adult learning experience, the sentence
random (SR) or control condition was immediately exposed
to the foreign language without restrictions. The SR
condition viewed videos accompanied by full sentences in
random order. Therefore, we did not expect these
participants to focus on learning the individual morphemes
or structure and do as well on the morphology measure as
the other conditions.
Following the lessons were test trials assessing language
acquisition. The measures of acquisition were vocabulary
and grammar (word order and morphology) from the
presented foreign sentences, as well as tests of inductive
grammar, measuring the ability to extract grammatical rules
and apply them to novel sentences. Although word order is
a component of grammar, in this study it was measured
separately from grammatical morphology. Performance on
the vocabulary and word-order measures was predicted to
be similar among all groups, as vocabulary and word order
are generally acquired without difficulty in both adults and
children.
However, a disparity was expected in
performance among conditions on both grammar measures
that test participants’ knowledge of morphology. The three
experimental conditions (IR, IB, and SB) were expected to
outperform the control condition (SR) in the measures of
morphology.

The word order of the French language is similar to English.
Lesson and test trials were in French and only the
instructions and examples of the tasks were in English.
Trials All trials were programmed into Superlab Pro 4.0
and displayed on computers. Each trial consisted of a video
playing on the screen and a corresponding French
description presented audibly through headphones. French
text was not available. Each video consisted of an actor
performing a specific action on him/herself or on an object.
Six different actors performed the same actions in different
contexts. A female native French speaker recited French
descriptions into a recorder and the recordings were linked
to correspond with the videos. Each trial was approximately
3 seconds in length.
Learning Trials Learning trials were designed to teach
participants the semantics and grammatical structure of
sentences using 8 verbs and 16 nouns. Lessons were made
up of three learning phases. Each learning phase consisted
of 32 trials that presented 4 examples of each verb (2 in the
active and 2 in the reflexive form) and 2 examples of each
noun. In the IR condition, phase 1 comprised 32 trials of
videos accompanied by only the direct object description
from the corresponding sentences, phase 2 consisted of 32
trials accompanied by the verb and direct object, and phase
3 comprised 32 trials with full sentence descriptions. The
IB condition presented the same trials from the IR condition
in blocked order. Phase 1 consisted of videos and direct
object descriptions, ordered such that the trials with the
same direct objects were presented one after the other.
Phases 2 and 3 involved the exact trials from the IR
condition, but ordered such that trials involving the same
verb were presented one after the other, first in the active
form then in the reflexive form. The SB condition consisted
of three phases of trials with full sentence descriptions, but
presented in blocked order similar to the IB condition.
Participants in the control condition (SR) were exposed to
trials with full sentence descriptions in random order
identical to the last phase of the IR condition for all learning
phases. See Table 1 for an illustration of the presentation of
two learning trials between the groups.

Method
Participants
One hundred twelve native English speakers from Florida
Atlantic University participated in this experiment. Only
participants who reported in a language background
questionnaire that they did not speak a Romance language
and knew fewer than 30% of the French words on the
vocabulary pre-test were included in the data analysis. The
average age of the participants was 22.2 (SD = 4.6) years.
Each participant was randomly assigned to one of the four
conditions of the experiment.

Stimuli

Test Trials To measure participants’ knowledge of the
French vocabulary, a judgment task of 16 trials of videos
and corresponding French sentences were presented. The
correct trial included the appropriate object and verb
description of the video, whereas the incorrect trial
contained an incorrect noun or verb. The incorrect French
sentences were taken from the learning trials but linked to
an incorrect video from the learning trials entailing a
different object or action.
As one test of participants’ knowledge of French
grammar, a word order forced-choice task for the active and
reflexive sentences was administered. The word order task
consisted of 8 trials. The correct trials resembled the
learning trials, whereas the incorrect trials included videos

French Language The stimuli included sentences of active
and reflexive verb forms made up of high frequency French
words. The French active sentences in the stimuli share
similar structure to the English language. Each active
sentence consists of a subject, action verb, and object.
However, English and French languages have grammatical
distinctions when conveying a reflexive action. In English,
possessive pronouns are used to express a reflexive action,
but in French, reflexive pronouns are used. The pronoun
“se” is added and placed in front of the verb and definite
articles describe the object rather than possessive pronouns.
For example, a man brushing his hair is described as
“L’homme se brosse les cheveux”. If the “se” is omitted
from the sentence, the statement changes the meaning to
“The man brushes the hair,” implying the hair of an object.

152

Table 1: Illustration of two learning trials for each condition.
Learning Phase 1
Experimental
Condition
Video
Audio
Incremental
Random

Incremental
Blocked

Sentence
Blocked

Video for 2 & 3

Learning Phases 2 & 3
Audio Phase 2
Audio Phase 3

woman sprays car

“la voiture”

woman shakes
bottle

“la bouteille”

woman sprays car

“la voiture”

woman sprays car

woman washes car

“la voiture”

woman sprays her
face

woman sprays car
woman washes car

“La femme asperge
la voiture.”
“La femme lave la
voiture.”

Same as phase 1

“asperge la
voiture”
“secoue la
bouteille”
“asperge la
voiture”
“s’asperge le
visage”

“La femme asperge
la voiture.”
“La femme secoue
la bouteille.”
“La femme asperge
la voiture.”
“La femme
s’asperge le visage.”

woman sprays car

Same as Learning phase1

woman sprays her
face

“La femme s’asperge le visage.”

Same as phase 1

Same as Learning phase1

woman brushes her “La femme se brosse
hair
les cheveux.”
woman cuts the
“La femme coupe le
ticket
billet.”
from the learning trials linked to French sentences with
incorrect word order.
The grammar forced-choice task assessed participants’
understanding of the morphological structure underlying the
active and reflexive sentence forms. This task comprised 16
test trials. The goal of this task was to determine if the
participants could correctly identify, discriminate, and link
the active and reflexive sentence forms to the appropriate
video.
In other words, would participants learn to
understand that reflexive actions are linked to reflexive
sentences with the “se” pronoun and that active sentences
(without the reflexive pronoun) are used to express actions
on objects rather than to self? The correct choices consisted
of videos with the correct corresponding French sentences
resembling the learning trials. The incorrect choices
included videos with incorrect grammatical French
sentences of the active or reflexive forms.
The purpose of the inductive task was to assess
participants’ ability to apply the learned French grammatical
rules to new stimuli. First, there was a learning phase of 8
videos and sentences (4 active and 4 reflexive sentences),
each presented twice. The intention of the learning phase
was to introduce participants to new vocabulary. The
testing phase consisted of a forced-choice task of 8 trials (4
reflexive and 4 active). The videos and French descriptions
in the test trials were novel. In particular, a verb presented
only in the active form during learning was presented in the
reflexive form in testing. To succeed in the inductive task,
participants had to use the grammar rules of verb forms
extracted from the lessons to fit the video and description of
the task. Since this was a forced-choice task, participants
did not have to produce the verb; however, they had to
decide which one of the provided sentences contained the
correct verb form.
Sentence
Random

The experiment consisted of two one-hour sessions. The
first session entailed lessons and a vocabulary test. During
the lessons portion, participants were instructed to view
each video and listen to the French description. They were
told to repeat the description after each trial. Participants
viewed learning trials from each phase twice before moving
on to the next phase, totaling 192 trials. Every participant
was issued one-minute breaks after every 32 trials. Once
the learning trials were all presented and another break was
given, participants took the word-meaning test.
Two days later, the participants returned for the second
session. First, participants viewed lessons identical to the
third learning phase in session one, totaling 64 trials. After
a break, participants completed the word meaning, grammar
and word order measures. Following a final break,
participants completed the inductive task, and then a short
questionnaire on prior knowledge of the French language,
concluding the procedure of the experiment.

Results
The results of this experiment are presented in Table 2.
Each measure was scored as the percentage of the total
correct acceptances and rejections out of the total number of
test trials for each task. Analyses of the word meaning
judgment task were split into two separate measures of
verbs and nouns. A 2(noun vs. verb) X 2(1st session vs. 2nd
session) X 2(incremental vs. sentence) X 2(block vs.
random order) repeated measures ANOVA was conducted
to investigate within and between group differences on word
meaning measures. The results revealed a significant
within-group difference between noun and verb learning, F
(1, 107) = 146.765, p < .001, MSE = 3.752. Participants
scored higher on the noun items than verb items of the
vocabulary measures. However, there were no significant
increment, blocking, or interaction effects on vocabulary (all
ps > .05).

Procedure

153

Table 2: Means (Standard Deviations) for Groups
Language
Incremental Random
Incremental Blocked
Sentence Blocked
Sentence Random
Measures
n = 31
n = 25
n = 27
n = 29
Vocabulary
1st session nouns
.742(.21)
.613(19)
.785(.18)
.830(.13)
2nd session nouns
.811(.13)
.825(.16)
.810(.18)
.806(.20)
1sr session verbs
.612(.19)
.567(.18)
.638(.20)
.625(.24)
2nd session verbs
.641(.16)
.610(18)
.690(.18)
.586(.21)
Word order
.879(.14)
.930(.09)
.912(.12)
.897(.12)
Grammar
.621(.14)
.655(.13)
.683(.18)
.586(.13)
(based on trials from lessons)
Inductive grammar
.605(.20)
.640(.18)
.644(.25)
.543(.24)
(based on trials from inductive task
A two way ANOVA was conducted on performance that
with the notion that concrete count nouns are easier to learn
tested participants’ knowledge of word order for the active
than verbs, and with findings that children learn the names
and reflexive French sentences. The results revealed no
of objects more quickly than verbs (Gentner & Boroditsky,
significant main or interaction effects on word order
2001). It can be said that the lessons promoted noun
performance (all ps > .05).
learning because the nouns were concrete, consistent and
Analysis of the grammar measures was conducted using
appeared at the end of each phrase.
three planned orthogonal contrasts. The first contrast
The intent of the word order measure was not to test the
compared the control participants (SR) to the three
effects of incremental presentation or order of the lessons
experimental conditions, examining whether manipulations
but to confirm that the participants comprehended the
that promote attention to low-level sentence elements
lessons. All groups performed at similarly high levels near
promote acquisition of French grammar. The second
ceiling on the word order measure.
contrast compared the IB condition to the IR and SB
The crux of the experiment was the outcome of the
conditions, examining whether receiving both manipulations
grammar measures.
Generally, adults have difficulty
yields better knowledge of French grammar than receiving
mastering the grammar of foreign languages. In this
just one. The third contrast compared the incremental IR
experiment, French language lessons inspired by the Less is
condition to the SB condition, examining whether one
More hypothesis were presented to adults as an attempt to
manipulation promoting attention to low-level sentence
overcome this challenge. The results revealed that learning
elements yielded better knowledge of French grammar than
strategies that encouraged the learning of language in small
the other.
pieces by incremental presentation or blocked order of
The first of these three contrasts was significant,
presentation facilitated learning the rules of grammar, with
indicating that the three experimental conditions scored
the three experimental groups performing better than the
significantly higher on the grammar tasks than did the
control group on these measures. Further analysis revealed
control condition (p = .023).
However, the other two
that groups that used either incremental or blocked
contrasts were not significant (both ps > .05). These results
presentation, performed just as well as the condition that
suggest that the increment or blocking methods produced
received both of these manipulations. These results suggest
better performance than the sentence random method on the
that either incremental presentation or blocking was
grammar tasks, but having both the increment and blocked
sufficient to encourage attention to lower-level sentence
methods did not facilitate performance any better than
elements and thus to ultimately yield better grammatical
having one of the two methods.
acquisition. The results of the study thus support our
predictions that teaching methods inspired by the Less is
Discussion
More hypothesis may be fruitful in facilitating the
acquisition of the grammar of a second language.
The goal of this study was to investigate the usefulness of
language teaching methods that were based on the Less is
Limitations
More hypothesis. The results suggest that presenting the
The results of the experiment are consistent with
language lessons in increments, or in a blocked order does
Newport’s Less is More theory, but there remain several
not lead to better performance on the word meaning and
limitations of the study that must be remedied before fully
word order measures. However, the results of the other
endorsing this theory. First, the grammar task involved only
grammar measures suggest that these teaching methods can
a single, relatively simple grammatical alternation. Despite
be advantageous in grammar acquisition.
this simplicity, the participants in the study still had
The generally high levels of performance on the
difficulty learning the grammatical rule, performing only
vocabulary measures suggest that participants had little
slightly above floor on the grammar measures. This
difficulty learning the meanings of the words. All groups
difficulty likely reflects the limited amount of exposure to
learned more nouns than verbs. This finding is consistent
the language, involving only two one-hour lessons, and the

154

Acknowledgments

high demands of the task. High demands include auditory
rather than visual presentation and a lack of explicit
grammar instruction. Previous studies found that grammar
performance is better in adults when using visual modes of
instruction and testing and when using methods that
encourage explicit rule learning instead of implicit learning
(Conway et al., 2003, Dekeyser & Larson-Hall, 2001). The
acquisition of more complex grammatical rules may require
much longer, more varied training. However, this study
provides a good steppingstone for further experiments.
Second, we designed our method with the assumption that
children with limited cognitive processes preferentially
attend to the ends of sentences, reflecting a recency effect in
working memory. For that reason, the lessons in the
incremental condition were presented in small increments
starting with the last word of each sentence. This design
gave participants simple and consistent lessons. However,
the Less is More hypothesis does not state that children
always attend to the last word or part of a sentence. If
children do not always attend to the last word of a sentence
but rather are equally likely to attend to any part of a
sentence, then the incremental condition is not fully
representative of children’s language learning strategies.
Changing the incremental condition to involve presenting
randomly-chosen pieces of sentences would make the
incremental condition less consistent, and as a result,
language learning would likely be more difficult for adults.
Lastly, one may argue that the lessons resemble infantdirected talk (IDT). Studies suggest that IDT plays a role in
language acquisition and can facilitate adult foreign
vocabulary acquisition (Baldwin & Meyer, 2007; Golinkoff
& Alioto, 1995). Though the Less is More hypothesis and
IDT could potentially coexist in explaining children’s
language learning, further experimentation would be needed
to investigate separate effects of IDT and incremental
presentation on adults.

The authors would like to thank David Bjorklund and Erika
Hoff for their helpful comments on this research.

References
Baldwin, D. & Meyer, M. (2007). How inherently social
is language? In E. Hoff & M. Shatz (Eds.), Blackwell
handbook of language development. Oxford, U.K.:
Blackwell Publishing.
Cochran, B., McDonald, J. & Parault, S. (1999). Too
smart for their own good: The disadvantage of superior
processing capacity for adult language learners, Journal
of Memory and Language, 41, 30-58.
Conway, CM, Ellefson, MR., Christiansen, MH. (2003).
When less is less and when less is more: Starting small
with staged input. Proceedings of the 25th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.270275). Boston, MA: Cognitive Sciency Society.
DeKeyser, R., & Larson-Hall, J. (2005). What does the
critical period really mean? In J. F. Kroll & A. M. D. de
Groot (Eds.), Handbook of bilingualism: psycholinguistic
approaches (pp. 88-108). New York: Oxford University
Press.
Elio, R. & Anderson, J. (1981). The effects of category
generalizations and instance similarity on schema
abstraction, Memory & Cognition, 12, 20-30.
Gentner, D., & Boroditsky, L. (2001). Individuation,
relativity, and early word learning. In M. Bowerman & S.
Levinson, (Eds.), Language acquisition and conceptual
development. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Goldowsky, B. & Newport, E. (1993). Modeling effects
of processing limitations on the acquisition of
morphology: The less is more hypothesis. In E. V. Clark
(Ed.), The proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth Annual
Child Language Research Forum. Stanford, CA: Center
for the Study of Language and Information.
Golinkoff, R. & Alioto, A. (1995). Infant-directed speech
facilitates lexical learning in adults hearing Chinese:
implications for language acquisition, Child Language,
22, 703-726.
Harley, B. (1998). The role of focus-on-form in child
second language acquisition. In C. Doughty & J. Williams
(Eds.), Focus on form in classroom second language
acquisition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kersten, A. & Earles, J. (2001). Less really is more for
adults learning a miniature artificial language, Journal of
Memory and Language, 44, 250-273.
Newport, E. (1990). Maturational constraints on language
learning. Cognitive Science, 14, 11-28.
Sandhofer, C. & Doumas, L. (2008). Order of presentation
effects in learning color categories, Journal of Cognition
and Development, 9(2), 194-221.
Turkewitz, G. & Kenny, P. (1982). Limitations on input
as a basis for neural organization and perceptual
development: A preliminary theoretical statement,
Developmental Psychobiology, 15(4),
357-368.

Implications
To address the challenge of learning foreign language
grammar in adulthood, this study shows that foreign
language educators may profit from incorporating teaching
methods based on developmental theories. Presenting a
foreign language in increments or in blocked order that
promotes the learning of small pieces during the initial
stages of language learning are alternative approaches for
adults to learn the vocabulary and grammatical structure of a
foreign language. Widely-used language teaching methods
such as immersion programs or explicit instruction that
heavily emphasize focus on semantics in the initial stages of
foreign language learning tend to fall short of getting adults
to the native level of proficiency in grammar (Harley, 1998).
Although our proposal counters these established methods
of adult foreign language instruction, it would be
worthwhile for the foreign language community to further
explore the potential of developmental theories such as
Newport’s Less is More hypothesis that can offer insightful
new methods for foreign language learning.

155

