UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Emergence of Referential Gaze and Perspective-taking in Infants

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/47j0473w

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Jao, R. Joanne
Robledo, Marybel
Deak, Gedeon O.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Emergence of Referential Gaze and Perspective-Taking in Infants

*

R. Joanne Jao (rjao@ucsd.edu)*
Marybel Robledo (marobledo@ucsd.edu)*
Gedeon O. Deák (deak@cogsci.ucsd.edu)*
Department of Cognitive Science, 9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0515 USA

Abstract

attribute another person’s direction of gaze to an internal
state—their attention. However, it is difficult to tell what
inferences infants make, or mental states they attribute to
the people whose gaze they follow. Because infants cannot
articulate their inferences, we can only observe their
behavioral responses to other people’s behavior (i.e., gazeshifts). More generally, we do not know whether and how
infants understand “seeing.” Thus, the manner in which
infants come to understand the “mental experience of seeing
something” in others remains controversial (Caron, Butler,
& Brooks, 2002).

To understand the development of infant comprehension of
visual obstructions and perspective-taking, this study tested
the ability of N = 28 infants at 14, 16, and 18 months to adapt
attention-sharing to visual constraints. An experimental task
investigated how infants modify gaze following behaviors
when an adult’s line of sight is obstructed by a barrier. From
14 to 18 months, infants gradually learned to modify their
search behavior when an adult looked toward a referent
hidden behind a barrier from the infant’s perspective. This
suggests development of perspective-taking during this
period. It also reveals age-related changes in infants’
understanding of contextual effects on others’ referential gaze
in visually complex environments. Furthermore, the results
address debates about “rich” versus “lean” theories of shared
attention and intentionality.

“Rich” versus “Lean” Interpretations
One controversy about how children understand another
person’s looking behavior focuses on two distinct
developmental interpretations. At one end, “rich”
interpretations of gaze following assume that the follower
explicitly represents the looker’s intention to look in a
particular region (Baron-Cohen, 1995; Woodward, 2003).
At the other end, “lean” interpretations assert that gaze
following emerges from simpler perceptual and learning
processes, and structured social information (D’Entremont,
2000; Nagai et al., 2003; Triesch et al., 2006). Yet other
positions focus on the transition from lean to rich inferences
about others’ gaze (Butterworth, 1998).
The rich interpretation refers to evidence that infants
understand adults’ gaze following behind visual
obstructions (Brooks & Meltzoff, 2002, 2005). It also
considers evidence that by 2 years, toddlers use adults’
patterns of looking and emotional display to interpret their
intentions (Tomasello, 1999). By contrast, the lean
interpretation refers to evidence that infants’ gaze following
is modulated by factors such as target salience and the
salience of an adult’s head turn (Deák, Flom, & Pick, 2000).
Also, earlier studies showed that infants follow an adult’s
head angle, but not eye direction (Corkum & Moore, 1998;
Triesch, Jasso, & Deák, 2007). This is noteworthy because
if infants do not know that the eyes mediate visual attention,
then they do not grasp the basic mechanics of seeing.
However, this conclusion has been challenged (Brooks &
Meltzoff, 2002, 2005), as we review below. Given the
diversity of evidence, we must consider the task paradigms
used to test infants’ knowledge. Since people eventually
develop rich beliefs about looking and seeing, the
controversy is inherently developmental. The question is at
what age, and by what process, do children make mentalistic
inferences about looking? Such inferences relate to the

Keywords: Perspective-taking; referential gaze following;
visual obstruction; intentionality; cognitive development;
social cognition.

Introduction
Infants learn socio-cultural routines and communicative
patterns by sharing attention with adults. As they move into
early childhood, 1- and 2-year-old infants gradually learn
how another’s attention can differ from their own; that is,
they learn to take other people’s visual perspectives in a
shared environment. A critical component of this ability is
attention-following, whereby infants follow the direction of
attention of a more experienced person (e.g., a parent) to
shift focus to interesting features of the environment. The
clearest manifestation of this is referential gaze following, a
type of triadic interaction which involves at least two people
and a common referent. Referential gaze following is a twopart process: 1) one person directs her own attention toward
a referent by orienting her eyes and usually her head, and 2)
another person sees this behavior and consequently shifts
attention in the direction of that referent (Butterworth &
Jarrett, 1991; Scaife & Bruner, 1975). It is well established
that referential gaze following plays a critical role in social
learning, communication, and mental-state inferences
(Argyle & Cook, 1976; Deák et al., 2008; Kleinke, 1986).
A question that has generated interest is how attentionfollowing in general, and gaze following in particular,
supports our inferences and predictions about the mental
states of others. When one person subjugates her current
interest to follow another person’s attention, it may be
assumed that the former is taking the latter’s visual
perspective. This implies that the follower imputes a mental
or physiological state to the “looker.” Indeed, adults

284

origins of perspective-taking (Flavell, 1977). We now
consider research evidence for age-related changes in
infants’ responses to looking and visual perspective-taking.

However, Dunphy-Lelii and Wellman (2004), who also
used transparent and opaque barriers, found no change from
14 to 18 months. Infants by 14 months followed the
experimenter’s gaze more often when the barrier was
transparent than when it was opaque.
In addressing this divergence of results, Moll and
Tomasello (2004) charged that the task was too unnatural.
They therefore used a different paradigm in which the target
was placed behind a barrier from the infant’s perspective. If
the infant followed the experimenter’s gaze, she would only
see a boring opaque barrier. However, if the infant
understood that the adult was looking at something, she
would move around to peer behind the barrier. Results
suggested that this behavior starts to emerge in some 12month-old infants, and is more robust in 18-month-olds.
This goes beyond Butler et al.’s (2000) results to suggest
that 12-month-olds do basic referential gaze following.

Age of Emergence
Recent studies have debated the age at which referential
gaze following and perspective-taking emerge. Between 6
and 12 months of age, infants begin following an adult’s
direction of gaze (Adamson & Bakeman, 1991; Butterworth
& Cochran, 1980; Butterworth & Jarrett, 1991; Corkum &
Moore, 1998; D’Entremont, Hains, & Muir, 1997;
Morissette, Ricard, & Décarie, 1995).
However, the age at which infants develop referential
gaze following (i.e., knowing that someone’s gaze is
directed toward a percept, by virtue of seeing) is disputed.
Brooks and Meltzoff (2005) reported that infants as young
as 10 months start to realize that others are “‘visually
connected’ to the external world.” However, this is the only
study showing such early ability, and the data are equivocal.
There is more convergent evidence that referential gaze
following emerges sometime between 12 and 18 months
(Brooks & Meltzoff, 2002; Butler, Caron, & Brooks, 2000;
Caron et al., 2002; Dunphy-Lelii & Wellman, 2004; Moll &
Tomasello, 2004). For example, Deák et al. (2000) found
that under optimal conditions, 12-month-olds follow gaze to
targets located behind them. This is evidence of referential
gaze following since it entails the representation that the
looker is behaving in a way “toward” something, which the
infants cannot detect. However, computer simulations show
that this ability can be learned without high-level mental
representations (Triesch et al., 2007).
By 18 to 24 months, there is substantial evidence for
robust referential gaze following, particularly to targets that
are visually occluded. That is, infants infer the existence of
unseen objects and make inferences about others’ visual
perspectives. Notably, this is the same age that they begin to
make inferences about other’s mental states (Dunham &
Dunham, 1995; Tomasello, 1999; Wellman, 1993).
The most active debate, then, centers on 12 to 18 months:
if infants show referential gaze following by 12 or 14
months, it will suggest that gaze following is perhaps the
earliest form of inferring others’ mental states. If, however,
referential gaze following does not emerge until 18 months,
it will suggest that multiple forms of mentalistic inference
emerge around the same time.

Goals of the Current Study
We sought to resolve uncertainties about the development of
referential gaze following in the second year. Since no study
has examined the process of emergence, we tested infants at
14, 16, and 18 months, as a part of a longitudinal study. By
testing at 3 bi-monthly ages, we might resolve conflicting
results from previous studies of widely differing age groups.
We can also test the stability and predictability of individual
differences in development, which has not yet been studied.
Similar to Moll and Tomasello (2004), we used opaque
barriers in a distal barrier paradigm, but added some
improved controls. With a barrier on each side, one barrier
occluded a target from the infant while the other displayed a
target to both infant and adult. By making one target visible,
we assessed each infant’s baseline gaze following. We
compared this to each infant’s tendency to move and peer
around the blank barrier when the adult looked toward it.
This verified that the infant could visually orient to the
experimenter’s head and eye direction, thus making
interpretable the “more demanding response” (Moll &
Tomasello, 2004) of peering around when the adult’s
looking behavior was ambiguous. That is, in actively
leaning forward or moving to look around a barrier to an
occluded object, the infant’s behavior signals her awareness
of the implications of the adult’s looking behavior.
In sum, the current investigation seeks to: 1) establish
age-related trends in infants’ acquisition of referential gaze
following when the physical environment suggests that
another person has a different visual perspective; and 2)
relate the results to prior, simpler gaze following skills.
Therefore, the goal of this study is to establish the validity
of referential gaze following tasks and examine their
implications for perspective-taking.

Problematic Occlusions
Many studies of referential gaze following in infants use
large, distal occlusions (e.g., screen-like barriers) to obstruct
either the infant’s or adult’s direct line of sight to a referent
(Dunphy-Lelii & Wellman, 2004; Moll & Tomasello, 2004).
Butler et al. (2000) compared infants’ responses to
transparent versus opaque barriers that were placed between
a target referent and the experimenter. They found that 18month-olds responded to the presence of an opaque barrier,
whereas 14-month-olds did not reliably infer whether or not
the adult could see the target through the barrier.

Method
Participants
Twenty-eight infants (17 males, 11 females) participated at
14 months (mean age = 427 days, SD = 7), 16 months (M =

285

491 days, SD = 13), and 18 months (M = 550 days, SD = 8).
All infants were walking independently by 12.3 months (SD
= 1.4). Infants were primarily of middle-class households
from the San Diego area.

sessions the barrier sides were counterbalanced. Across
trials, condition (control, experimental), direction (left,
right), and target (circle, duck) were also counterbalanced.

Materials
Two featureless, rigid brown barriers (92 cm x 58 cm) were
placed side-by-side 1.2 m apart. Two 2D foam shapes (10.2
cm x 10.2 cm) were used as target stimuli. The control
target was a red circle and the experimental target was a red
duck. A researcher (“cue-giver” or CG) interacted directly
with the infant in a quiet, controlled testing room (4.0 m by
3.6 m). A second researcher (“observer” or OB) monitored
and recorded the infant’s behavioral responses from an
adjacent room. Target cues and locations were given by the
OB to CG using a two-way radio and earpiece. A
metronome was used to accurately time cue-length and
inter-trial intervals. To control the visual scene, the CG
wore a gray sweatshirt and tied her hair in a ponytail. Both
the CG and parent were seated on the floor on cushions.

Figure 1: One configuration of the experimental setup.
Each session was recorded at 30 fps with four video
cameras placed in the corners of the room at infant eyelevel. The cameras recorded onto on-board hard drives, and
simultaneously pushed video to be time-stamped and
captured on a Level 5 RAID. In addition, a video camera
with a fisheye lens was mounted above the infant’s head,
and was time-stamped and captured in the same manner.

Procedure and Design
All infants participated in three sessions at 14, 16, and 18
months of age. Before each session, informed consent was
obtained from the parent. Each session consisted of eight
10-second test trials.
Before the session, the barriers were placed on either side
of the CG and the infant, who sat facing one another
approximately 61 cm apart. Targets were attached to the
middle of each barrier 46 cm above the floor. The control
target was placed on the front of one barrier and the
experimental target on the back of the other, relative to the
infant. Barriers were angled so that both targets were visible
to the CG, but only the control target was visible to the
infant (Figure 1). The parent sat with the infant in her lap
such that the infant could freely rise to walk around at will.
The parent was instructed to provide no cues, and the infant
remained seated between trials. The CG sat with her hands
in her lap and displayed an open friendly expression.
To orient the infant to the target locations, the CG first
held the control target at eye-level and said “[infant’s
name], look!” As she placed the target on the front of one
barrier, she said “I’m going to put it there.” The CG then
held up the experimental target, saying “[infant’s name],
look!” She then placed the target on the back of the second
barrier, saying “I’m going to put it here.”
In each trial, OB gave the CG the onset cue, and the CG
began the trial with an open-mouth smile. She called the
infant’s name until eye contact was made, and after two
seconds said, “[infant’s name], look!” The CG immediately
turned to look directly at the target for four seconds. Then,
CG looked back to the infant, establishing eye contact if
possible, and said “Can you get it for me?” while executing
another gaze cue to the target for four seconds.
After four trials (2 experimental, 2 control) in one leftright configuration, the barriers were switched between
sides and the last four test trials were given. Between

Coding
Videos of infant behaviors were examined frame-byframe. The infant’s first look after each cue by the CG were
coded (i.e., anticipatory looks were not examined).
Furthermore, trials were coded only if the infant saw the
CG’s cue. Possible visual directions included looks to the
correct target, incorrect target, front of the barrier that hid
the target in experimental trials, CG, and "other" (i.e.,
anything else in the room). Success in referential gaze
following was defined as the infant looking to the correct
target location (i.e., specified by the CG's cue versus
looking to the other target location or not looking at all). In
a control trial, this meant looking toward the visible target
after the CG’s cue. In an experimental trial, this meant
leaning or moving forward to peer around the back of the
appropriate barrier.
An incorrect look was coded if the infant looked at the
wrong target or to the front of the appropriate barrier in the
experimental condition. A non-look was coded if the infant
did not look to any target, but instead looked at the CG or at
an irrelevant feature of the room.

Results
Proportions of correct looks were submitted to a 3 (age: 14,
16, 18 months) x 2 (condition: experimental vs. control)
analysis of variance (ANOVA) within subjects. There was a
significant main effect of age F(2, 25) = 2.56, p < .09; 18month-olds looked proportionately more (M = 0.55, SD =
0.39) to the correct targets than 14- (M = 0.41, SD = 0.44) or

286

16-month olds (M = 0.48, SD = 0.40). There was also a
significant effect of condition F(1, 25) = 147.70, p < .001.
Infants looked more to the correct targets when they were
visible in the control condition (M = 0.75, SD = 0.31) than
when they were hidden behind barriers in the experimental
condition (M = 0.20, SD = 0.29). However, there was no
significant effect for the age x condition interaction, F(2,
25) = 0.46. Separate Student’s t-tests were used to compare
the factors of age and condition in looking behaviors (see
Table 1). As expected, there was a significant difference
between the control and experimental conditions for correct
looks and non-looks (p < .001) at each age.

displays these mean proportions at 14 months as a function
of condition and looking behavior to illustrate the general
pattern. While the general trends remained the same from 14
to 18 months, there was a decrease in the proportion of
incorrect looks in the experimental condition from 0.52 (SD
= 0.31) to 0.42 (SD = 0.32). Within the incorrect looks,
looks to the front of the appropriate barrier in the
experimental condition decreased from 0.39 (SD = 0.25) to
0.30 (SD = 0.29), and looks to the wrong target decreased
slightly from 0.13 (SD = 0.18) to 0.12 (SD = 0.16).

Table 1: t-tests comparing conditions across age.

Longitudinally, 71% of the infants performed steadily
well in the control condition, while 4% of infants performed
similarly well in the experimental condition. Comparatively,
14% of infants in the control condition and 21% of infants
in the experimental condition improved in their performance
from 14 to 18 months. Across all 3 age groups, 11% of
infants in the control condition and 25% of infants in the
experimental condition showed mixed abilities.
In addition to significant effects of age and condition, as
well as longitudinal performance, there were subtler
developmental changes that occurred between 14 and 18
months. Generally, infants at 14, 16, and 18 months looked
to the correct target in the control condition; this showed a
trend of increasing consistency, with mean proportions of
0.69 (SD = 0.40), 0.77 (SD = 0.27), and 0.80 (SD = 0.25) at
the three ages, respectively. In the experimental condition,
the mean proportions of looks to the correct target also
increased from 0.14 (SD = 0.27), to 0.18 (SD = 0.26), and
0.29 (SD = 0.34), respectively (Figure 2).

Figure 3: 14 month mean proportions of looking behavior.
However, one concern about these parametric data is that
nothing compels infants to rise and peer around the
barrier—especially after having done so once, since they
may not be motivated to continue looking at such simple
targets. To address this, we considered a less demanding
measure of infants’ understanding that the experimenter
might be looking at something they could not see. The “1
Trial Pass” criterion defined an infant as “passing” if she
looked to at least one correct target by moving or leaning
forward to look behind a barrier. Since the active movement
of searching for an unseen target indicates intentionality,
this seems to show some basic level of understanding of
visual obstructions and referential gaze. (In support of this,
infants virtually never got up to look around the barrier in
control trials.) Results showed a steady increase with age in
the proportion of infants who looked to the correct target. In
the control condition, 82% of the infants at 14 months, and
96% of the infants at 16 and 18 months, passed at least one
trial (i.e., followed gaze to the visible target). In the
experimental condition, 25%, 43%, and 54% of the infants,
respectively, passed at least one trial. Thus, twice as many
infants at 18 months followed blocked gaze successfully
than at 14 months.

Discussion
The results show that some infants at 14 months are starting
to develop an understanding of visual barriers and
perspective-taking in referential gaze. This development
goes beyond the ability to merely follow gaze, since infants
were clearly able to do so by 14 months, as shown by the
results in control trials. In the experimental trials, however,

Figure 2: Mean proportions of success in looking behavior
(with SE) in experimental and control conditions across age.
To understand these trends more fully, we examined the
looking behaviors in each trial, distinguishing between
correct looks, non-looks, and incorrect looks. Figure 3

287

infants must determine that the adult is looking at a referent
that the infants cannot see. At 14 months, some infants
looked behind the barrier to the correct target, but did so
much less than they looked to the front of the barrier. Yet at
18 months, infants peered behind the barrier to the correct
target just as often as they looked to the front of the barrier.
In addition, the “1 Trial Pass” analysis suggests that by 18
months, more than half of infants develop some Level 1
visual perspective-taking (Flavell, 1977), inferring an
unseen target on at least one trial.
A longitudinal analysis suggests that a sizeable minority
of infants improved in the experimental condition. Thus,
there is some sort of learning from 14 to 18 months.
However, there was also some within-infant variability
between sessions, suggesting sources of unidentified
situation-specific variability.
These results support Butler et al.’s (2000); 18-month-old
infants respond significantly more than 14-month-olds to an
adult looking behind barriers at hidden targets. Yet, possibly
due to our more “natural” experimental design with multiple
barriers and targets (inspired by Moll & Tomasello, 2004),
our results showed a stronger effect than Butler et al.
(2000). In their experiment, only 33% of 18-month-olds and
no 14-month-olds leaned forward to look behind a barrier
that obstructed a target. Thus, they concluded that infants at
18 months understand referential gaze and visual
obstructions, whereas infants at 14 months do not. In the
current investigation, 54% of the infants at 18 months and
25% of the infants at 14 months leaned forward to look
behind the barrier. This demonstrates that visual
perspective-taking develops considerably, and is clearly
established, by 18 months, but it remains unclear whether
14-month-old infants have any functional capacity for visual
perspective-taking. The current results suggest that some
14-month-olds are starting to develop an incipient
understanding, as suggested by Dunphy-Lelii and Wellman
(2004). However, we cannot say whether, for example,
providing 14-month-old infants with additional training or
reinforcement would increase their rate of responsiveness to
an adult looking behind a barrier.
In order to better understand the developmental trajectory
of referential gaze following, and to establish more precisely
the age at which this understanding emerges, we considered
results from a prior session in the longitudinal study. A
subset of the infants (N = 18) who had performed simpler
gaze following tasks at 12 months was compared to their
performance at 14 months in the current task. Overall, the
infants at 12 months occasionally followed gaze to visible
targets (M = 0.43, SD = 0.19), but seldom followed gaze to
targets located behind them (M = 0.11, SD = 0.27). This can
be considered a “first step” towards referential gaze
following. Furthermore, when subjected to the “1 Trial
Pass” criterion, only 16% of the infants successfully looked
to at least one target out of their direct view. By comparison,
the same infants at 14 months made a similar proportion of
successful looks to targets behind barriers (M = 0.14, SD =
0.25), but a higher proportion of them met the “1 Trial Pass”

criterion (28%) in the experimental condition. Generally,
infants at 12 months seldom followed gaze to unseen targets
located behind them, therefore failing to show referential
gaze following ability. Somewhat more infants showed at
least minimal referential gaze perspective-taking at 14
months. Thus, our results do not support claims that infants
even younger than 12 months have a concept of intentional
behavior (Brooks & Meltzoff, 2002). Rather, our data
suggest a shift from a leaner interpretation of gaze following
in most 12-month-old infants, to a richer interpretation in
most 18-month-old infants. Given this shift, we favor a
learning-based account (in which gaze following begins
perceptually, and then becomes referential as well as
intentional), over accounts that assume strictly either a
maturational onset of perceptual processes or an inherent
understanding of the referential nature of gaze following.
Between their first and second birthdays, most infants
develop the understanding that there may exist some object
of interest at which an adult is looking, and that adult visual
perspectives, in general, offer useful information. From 14
to 18 months, infants learn that acting on that information,
via referential gaze following, can be rewarding. Even if
that information consists of a referent that is visually
occluded, infants will deliberately move to a proper viewing
perspective to search for the inferred referent. Notably, the
gradual differentiation of performance in the experimental
and control conditions of the current investigation offers
some insights into infants’ growing capacity for detecting
cues of others’ perceptual states. This capacity is based in,
and demonstrated by, their active search patterns, which for
unseen targets might serve as an interim “trial and error”
strategy that allows infants to test or verify the objective
underlying adult looking behavior. However, this strategy is
minimal at 14 months of age.
It is worth noting that the behavioral measures used in our
study assess infants’ performance and emerging ability,
rather than level of competence. Indeed, all of the infants
were capable of walking independently or crawling to look
behind the barrier. This demonstrates that any possible
differences in motor capabilities were not the primary
source of divergence in the data between 14 and 18 months.
As an additional factor, the manipulation of infants’
motivational states highly influences competence, and may
impede performance.
Finally, little is known about how infant gaze following
skills relate to other spatial representational skills. However,
referential gaze following provides a unique arena for
studying how infants develop skills for simultaneously
processing social and spatial information, and using these
processing skills to support inferences about non-obvious
events and ecological relations. Referential gaze following
offers a new ability to synthesize information about other
people’s embodied actions in a shared environment to infer
unperceivable states. This ability may be critical for
impending changes in social and communicative
knowledge.
The current study confirms developmental trends in

288

referential gaze following from 14 to 18 months of age.
Together with previous studies, this contributes to our
understanding of infants’ referential gaze following,
perspective-taking, vision comprehension, and ultimately,
theory of mind.

D’Entremont, B. (2000). A perceptual-attentional
explanation of gaze following in 3- and 6-month-olds.
Developmental Science, 3, 302-311.
D’Entremont, B., Hains, S. M. J., & Muir, D. W. (1997). A
Demonstration of Gaze following in 3- to 6-Month-Olds.
Infant Behavior and Development, 20(4), 569-572.
Deák, G. O., Flom, R. A., & Pick, A. D. (2000). Effects of
gesture and target on 12- and 18-month-olds’ joint visual
attention to objects in front of or behind them.
Developmental Psychology, 36(4), 511-523.
Deák, G. O., Walden, T. A., Kaiser, M. Y., & Lewis, A.
(2008). Drive from distraction: How infants respond to
parents’ attempts to elicit and re-direct their attention.
Infant Behavior and Development, 31, 34-50.
Dunham, P. J., & Dunham, F. (1995). Optimal social
structure and adaptive infant development. In C. Moore
and P. J. Dunham (Eds.), Joint attention: Its origins and
role in development. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Dunphy-Lelii, S., & Wellman, H. M. (2004). Infants'
understanding of occlusion of others' line-of-sight:
Implications for an emerging theory of mind. European
Journal of Development Psychology ,1(1), 49-66.
Flavell, J.H. (1977). The development of knowledge about
visual perception. Nebraska Symposium on Motivation:
Vol. 25 (pp. 43–76). Lincoln, NE: Univ. of Nebraska
Press.
Kleinke, C. L. (1986). Gaze and eye contact: A research
review. Psychological Bulletin, 100, 417-425.
Moll, H., & Tomasello, M. (2004). 12- and 18-month-old
infants follow gaze to space behind barriers.
Developmental Science, 7(1), F1-F9.
Morissette, P., Ricard, M., & Décarie, T. G. (1995). Joint
visual attention and pointing in infancy: A longitudinal
study
of
comprehension.
British
Journal
of
Developmental Psychology, 13, 163-175.
Nagai, Y., Hosoda, K., Morita, A., & Asada, M. (2003). A
constructive model for the development of joint attention.
Connection Science, 15, 211–229.
Scaife, M., & Bruner, J. S. (1975). The capacity for joint
visual attention in the infant. Nature, 253, 265-266.
Tomasello, M. (1999). The cultural origins of human
cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Triesch, J., Jasso, H., & Deák, G.O. (2007). Emergence of
mirror neurons in a model of gaze following. Adaptive
Behavior, 15, 149-165.
Triesch, J., Teuscher, C., Deák, G., & Carlson, E. (2006).
Gaze following: Why (not) learn it? Developmental
Science, 9, 125-147.
Wellman, H. M. (1993). Early understanding of mind: The
normal case. In S. Baron-Cohen, H. Tager-Flusberg, and
D. Cohen (Eds.), Understanding other minds:
Perspectives from Autism. London, England: Oxford
University Press.
Woodward, A. L. (2003). Infants’ developing understanding
of the link between looker and object. Developmental
Science, 6(3), 297-311.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank the mothers and infants who participated
in the study. We also thank Ana Ramundo, Corrine Zavala,
Katy Brecht, and members of the Cognitive Development
Laboratory for assistance with data collection and coding.
This project was supported by NSF award HSD 0527756 to
G. Deák.

References
Adamson, L., & Bakeman, R. (1991). The development of
shared attention during infancy. Annals of Child
Development, 8, 1-41.
Argyle, M., & Cook, M. (1976). Gaze and mutual gaze.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Baron-Cohen, S. (1995). The eye direction detector (EDD)
and the shared attention mechanism (SAM): Two cases
for evolutionary psychology. In C. Moore and P. Dunham
(Eds.), Joint attention: Its origins and role in
development. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Brooks, R., & Meltzoff, A. N. (2002). The Importance of
Eyes: How Infants Interpret Adult Looking Behavior.
Developmental Psychology, 38(6), 958-966.
Brooks, R., & Meltzoff, A. N. (2005). The development of
gaze following and its relation to language.
Developmental Science, 8 (6), 535-543.
Butler, S. C., Caron, A. J., & Brooks, R. (2000). Infant
Understanding of the Referential Nature of Looking.
Journal of Cognition and Development, 1(4), 359-377.
Butterworth, G. E. (1998). Origins of joint visual attention
in infancy: commentary on Carpenter et al. Monographs
of the Society for Research in Child Development, 63(4),
144-166.
Butterworth, G. E., & Cochran, E. (1980). Towards a
mechanism of joint visual attention in human infancy.
International Journal of Behavioral Development, 3, 253272.
Butterworth, G. E., & Jarrett, N. (1991). What minds have
in common is space: Spatial mechanisms serving joint
visual attention in infancy. British Journal of
Developmental Psychology, 9, 55-72.
Caron, A. J., Butler, S., & Brooks, R. (2002). Gaze
following at 12 and 14 months: Do the eyes matter?
British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 20, 225239.
Caron, A. J., Kiel, E. J., Dayton, M., & Butler, S. C. (2002).
Comprehension of the referential intent of looking and
pointing between 12 and 15 months. Journal of Cognition
and Development, 3(4), 445-464.
Corkum, V., & Moore, C. (1998). The origins of joint
attention in infancy. Developmental Psychology, 34, 2838.

289

