UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Disproportionate Face Inversion Effect in Recognition Memory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8d86v7tb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Prince, Melissa
Heathcote, Andrew

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Disproportionate Face Inversion Effect in Recognition Memory
Melissa Prince (Melissa.Prince@newcastle.edu.au)
Andrew Heathcote (Andrew.Heathcote@newcastle.edu.au)
School of Psychology, The University of Newcastle
University Drive, Callaghan, 2308, NSW Australia
from traditional analyses that revealed a weak DFIE, statetrace results indicated that unfamiliar faces were not special
relative to other mono-oriented stimuli when inversion was
only manipulated during the encoding stage of a recognition
memory task. Loftus et al. therefore suggested that the DFIE
only occurs during memory retrieval. Although Prince and
Heathcote (2009) replicated this state-trace result, as well as
ruling out several potential caveats on Loftus et al.'s
methodology and state-trace analyses, they questioned the
memory retrieval interpretation. Here we examine an
alternate explanation for these results, namely Prince and
Heathcote's Strategic Hypothesis.

Abstract
The Disproportionate Face Inversion Effect (DFIE), the
finding that inversion disproportionately affects face
recognition, provides a primary piece of evidence to suggest
that faces are processed in a qualitatively different way to
other visual stimuli (i.e., along configural as well as featural
dimensions). However, when Loftus, Oberg and Dillon (2004;
also Prince and Heathcote, 2009) examined the DFIE using
state-trace analysis (Bamber, 1979) they found evidence for a
one-dimensional encoding of unfamiliar faces when inversion
only occurred during the study phase of a recognition memory
task. We further examine this one dimensional result with
more precise individual measurement and more specifically,
Prince and Heathcote’s suggestion that the use of configural
encoding may not be automatic in recognition memory.
Keywords: Disproportionate Face Inversion
Recognition Memory; State-trace analysis.

The Disproportionate Face Inversion Effect

Effect;

Over the course of a human lifetime, thousands of faces can
become so familiar that they can be recognized after only a
glance, when seen in an unfamiliar context and even after
undergoing significant physical changes (Maurer, LeGrand
& Mondloch, 2002). Indeed, the common experience of
recognizing a familiar face in a crowd or involuntarily
imagining a face in scenic features seems to indicate that
humans possess an innate aptitude for face processing.
However, this expertise is less evident when the faces are
unfamiliar (Hancock, Bruce & Burton, 2000), and even
more so when they are viewed upside-down.
It is widely found that perception and memory
performance for all mono-oriented stimuli (i.e., objects
usually viewed in a specific "upright" orientation) are
strongly disadvantaged by inversion; called the Inversion
Effect. However, in his seminal paper, Yin (1969) observed
that this inversion effect was disproportionately stronger for
faces compared to mono-oriented control stimuli (e.g.,
houses) that were matched as closely as possible to faces in
terms of familiarity, complexity and difficulty in applying a
verbal label; known as the Disproportionate Face Inversion
Effect (DFIE). Although the inversion effect is taken to
indicate there is a general factor affecting the processing of
all mono-oriented stimuli, the DFIE suggests there is an
additional face specific factor. Hence the DFIE has become
one of the primary pieces of evidence to suggest that face
processing is "special".
In this paper, we aim to explore the evidence for the DFIE
in recognition memory accuracy for unfamiliar faces. In
particular, we will focus on an alternate statistical method
for testing the effect of inversion called State-Trace
Analysis (Bamber, 1979). Using this technique, Loftus,
Oberg and Dillon (2004) found that, in contrast to results

Since Yin's (1969) initial demonstration, the DFIE in
recognition memory has been replicated numerous times
and with various procedural variations. Although many
studies have followed Yin's original design where items
were studied upright or inverted and tested in the same
"matched" orientation, a DFIE has also been found when
images were tested using a different viewpoint from study
(Valentine & Bruce, 1986) as well as when all images were
studied upright but tested upright or inverted (Yarmey,
1971). Consequently, the DFIE has been taken to indicate
that face processing is qualitatively different from the
processing of other visual stimuli.
It has been suggested that the two factors (or dimensions)
underlying the DFIE might be two types of information that
can be extracted from the images. The first, featural
information, is common to all mono-oriented stimuli and
refers to the isolated features of an object that can be
specified without reference to its other parts. In contrast, the
second type, configural information, is mostly or only
available to faces and enables good discrimination despite
the highly similar structure and features that all faces share
(McKone & Yovel, 2009). At least three types of configural
information have been proposed: (a) holistic information,
which captures the overall look of a face; (b) first order
relational information, which refers to the arrangements of
features that define a face; and (c) second order relational
information, which refers to distances between internal
features. However, the differences between these sub-types
are not of critical importance here. Rather, what is important
is the general finding that inversion differentially affects
two broad classes of largely independent information.
Although both featural and configural information are
affected by inversion, it is typically found that the extraction
of configural information is particularly disrupted. Hence, it
is often believed that upright faces are processed using both

2248

featural and configural information, whereas only featural
information is available for inverted faces. Recent evidence,
however, suggests a more graded relationship, such that
inversion decreases the rate at which both featural and
configural information can be extracted from a face, but to a
greater degree for configural information (Valentine &
Bruce, 1986).

Identifying Dimensions of the DFIE
Evidence for the DFIE, and hence for the existence of two
underlying dimensions for face processing, is traditionally
provided by a dissociation quantified by an interaction test
comparing the size of the inversion effect for faces (the face
inversion effect; FIE) to that for a mono-oriented control
stimulus, such as houses (the house inversion effect; HIE).
However, it has been argued that such dissociation logic at
best makes the rejection of a one-dimensional account more
plausible or parsimonious. Moreover, where response
measures are bounded (e.g., accuracy data), interactions
may be scale dependent (e.g., influenced by floor and
ceiling effects; Loftus, 1978). An alternate method proposed
to overcome the caveats on dissociation logic is State-trace
analysis (e.g., Newell & Dunn, 2008). State-trace analysis
provides a rigorous method for determining whether a single
dimension (i.e., a single latent variable) is able to explain
the joint effect of two or more experimental factors, and
assumes only that the mapping between the latent variable
and response is monotonic (i.e., that the response and latent
variable consistently change in the same direction).
The results from state-trace analysis are assessed using a
state-trace plot, which is essentially a scatterplot showing
the covariation of two factors, namely the state and
dimension factors. As shown in Figure 1, the state factor
defines the axes of this plot, while each level of the
dimension factor typically defines a set of points within the
plot. In particular, the dimension factor is manipulated with
the aim of differentially influencing the latent variables. In
applications examining the DFIE, the state factor is defined
by recognition accuracy for face and house images and the
dimension factor manipulated to differentially influence the
latent configural dimension is the image orientation.

The crucial diagnostic feature of this plot concerns
whether or not the data fall on a single monotonic function;
that is, whether the ordering of the x-axis values is the same
as the ordering of the y-axis values. At least three data
points are required to potentially violate monotonicity, and
thus a third factor, called the trace factor, is introduced to
sweep out a set of points (i.e., a “data trace”) within each
level of the dimension factor. Importantly, the trace factor
must itself have a monotonic effect if we are to
unambiguously attribute dimensionality evidence to the
interaction between the state and dimension factors (i.e.,
that A<B and a<b in Figure 1). Loftus et al. (2004), for
example, manipulated the study presentation time, which
can reasonably be assumed to have a monotonic effect on
accuracy; shorter study durations always lead to poor
recognition in all conditions (within measurement limits).
If the two levels of the state factor depend on the same
underlying dimension, the points on a state-trace plot will
fall on a single monotonic function (e.g., in Figure 1a the xand y-axis order is a,A,b,B). If, however, performance for
each state is determined by more than one dimension (e.g.,
along featural and configural dimensions), the resulting
state-trace plot will be non-monotonic (see Figure 1b). It is
important to note that although a non-monotonic plot cannot
have been produced by a one-dimensional model, the
converse does not necessarily hold. Monotonic evidence is
only diagnostic of dimensionality when there is overlap of
the data traces on at least one axis. Where data-trace overlap
fails (such as in Figure 1c), a state-trace plot can be
monotonic even if two separate dimensions exist.
Despite the simplicity of state-trace analysis graphically,
the best statistical method for testing departures from
monotonicity remains an open question (e.g., Newell &
Dunn, 2008). Recently Heathcote, Brown and Prince
(submitted) proposed a method for assessing dimensionality
in state-trace designs based on a Bayes Factor method of
selecting amongst models defined by ordinal constraints:
namely, (a) a non-trace (NT) model, which assumes the
trace factor does not have a monotonic effect on
performance: that is that the trace model is violated; (b) a no
overlap (NO) model, which given the trace model holds,
assumes the data traces do not overlap and hence cannot be

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Example state-trace plots for a design where the state, dimension and trace factors each have two levels. The thin
dotted lines show the underlying dimension or processes revealed in the plot, with examples of (a) a one-dimensional plot,
(b) a two-dimensional plot and (c) a non-diagnostic state-trace plot (i.e., due to the data traces having no overlap)

2249

considered diagnostic of dimensionality; (c) a unidimensional (UD) model, which assumes the state-trace plot
is monotonic, given that both trace monotonicity and data
trace overlap hold; and (d) a multi-dimensional (MD)
model, which assumes the state-trace plot is non-monotonic,
again given that both trace monotonicity and data trace
overlap hold. Together these four models account for all
possible orders. The aim is then to find the model with the
highest posterior probability; that is, the model with the
highest probability of being the data generating model.

A Memory Retrieval Phenomenon?
Using state-trace analysis, Loftus et al. (2004) reported an
apparent exception to the otherwise robust DFIE result;
evidence for a single dimension in accuracy averaged over
participants in recognition memory for unfamiliar faces
(Experiment 1). In contrast, when the faces were famous
(i.e., familiar; Experiment 2), they found evidence for more
than one dimension. In both experiments, images were
studied upright or inverted and all tested upright. This
design was utilized to examine Valentine’s (1988) assertion
that “the orientation of the inspection [study] series does not
appear to be critical” (p.474) to produce a DFIE. Loftus et
al. concluded that a DFIE would only emerge when
inversion was present at the time of memory retrieval,
because familiar faces cause memory retrieval at study (and
so produce a DFIE when inversion occurs during study), but
unfamiliar faces do not (so inversion occurring at study
cannot cause a DFIE).
Although, Prince and Heathcote (2009) replicated the
one-dimensional state-trace result with unfamiliar faces, the
conclusion that a DFIE only occurs at memory retrieval
goes against the general opinion in the literature which
would suggest the DFIE “is really a perceptual phenomenon
rather than a memory phenomenon” (Freire, Lee & Symons,
2000; p.160). Consequently, Prince and Heathcote proposed
an alternate explanation more compatible with this
perceptual view, whereby participants may be able to
strategically use configural information, but only when they
know it will improve performance for all items. That is, that
the use of configural information may not be automatic in
recognition memory.
Here we aim to further examine the one-dimensional
state-trace result for unfamiliar faces, as well as Prince and
Heathcote’s (2009) strategic hypothesis. To do so we ran
new experiments that greatly increased the number of
observations obtained from each participant (78
observations per design cell), by increasing the number of
trials and reducing the number of study durations. Our first
condition partly replicated Prince and Heathcote’s Test
Upright design, with both upright and inverted study trials
mixed in each study list and all items tested upright.
However, it used a two-alternative forced choice (2AFC)
recognition memory test, rather than the single-item testing
used in the original study (i.e. on each test trial participants
chose between a studied and unstudied face, or between a
studied and unstudied house). This condition was run to

check if Prince and Heathcote’s result was replicable with a
different testing procedure and with a slightly different, and
more powerful, design. We denote this condition TUM2
(Test Upright, Mixed study lists, 2AFC).
In TUM2 (thus also Prince and Heathcote’s, 2009, Test
Upright design), an old item can either be studied and tested
upright or studied inverted and tested upright. The former
case has a matched (configural) encoding available at study
and retrieval. However, when an image is studied inverted it
only (or at least mostly) can be encoded using featural
information, yet configural information is available from the
upright test presentation. As suggested by the encoding
specificity effect (i.e., the improvement in memory when
study and test conditions match; Tulving & Thomson,
1973), if only featural information was available at study,
performance would benefit from a matched (featural) test
encoding and be hurt by a mismatched (configural)
encoding. Hence it may be detrimental for participants to
use configural information when an item had been studied
inverted.
In these upright test conditions, upright and inverted items
were mixed together at study. Therefore, when all items are
presented upright at test, participants have no way of
knowing for which test items the use of configural
information may be detrimental (i.e., those studied
inverted). As these experiments used multiple study-test
cycles participants would quickly become aware that all test
items were upright. Hence it is possible that they decided to
rely purely on featural information, either by not encoding
upright study items along a configural dimension, or
choosing not to use the configural information available at
test. In either case, both faces and houses would only be
encoded along a single (featural) dimension, producing the
one-dimensional state-trace plots observed by Loftus et al.
(2004) and Prince and Heathcote (2009).
To test this possibility, in our second condition,
participants viewed two types of study-test lists where: (a)
all items were studied and tested upright or (b) all items
were studied inverted and tested upright. By blocking study
orientation in this manner we hoped that participants would
become aware of when configural encoding was
advantageous (in type ‘a’ lists) and hence make use of it. If
this occurred, we should observe a multi-dimensional statetrace plot, and hence evidence against Loftus et al.’s (2004)
memory retrieval hypothesis. We denote this condition
TUB2 (Test Upright, Blocked study lists, 2AFC).

Method
Participants
The 38 participants were recruited from members of the
wider community, who had normal or corrected-to-normal
vision. They received cash reimbursement for their time
(total AUD$30.00). Two subjects in TUM2 were excluded
due to their raw percentage correct falling below 55%,
leaving 18 subjects in TUM2 and TUB2.

2250

Stimuli
Stimuli were black and white bitmap images (120 x 105
pixels) displayed at twice their original size. A total of 936
face stimuli were sourced from the FERET database
(Phillips, Wechsler, Huang & Rauss, 1998), excluding
images with averted gaze, distinctive facial expressions or
blemishes (either natural or the result of photographic
process). These face stimuli were divided into homogenous
blocks based on race, gender and any other distinctive
feature (i.e., glasses or facial hair). An additional 36
Caucasian males without facial hair or glasses were
included for the practice phase.
A total of 936 house stimuli (with an additional 36 for
practice) were sourced using real estate websites and
internet search engines. Houses were excluded if located in
New South Wales in order to reduce potential familiarity
effects given that participants were largely drawn from this
region. Following Prince and Heathcote (2009), house
stimuli were also divided into homogenous blocks based on
their most distinctive feature (e.g., fence, two-storey).

Apparatus
Testing was completed either at individual computer
terminals equipped with 17inch LCD monitors or at an
external location using laptop computers. All stimuli and
text were presented on a black background with white font.
Prospective and retrospective confidence judgments were
made using the computer keyboard with the keys “z”, “x”,
“.”, “/” labeled “1”, “2” “3” and “4” respectively.

“definitely yes”. The purpose of this prospective confidence
judgment was to encourage participants to attend to the
stimulus and this data will not be considered further.
The test list (again comprised of 18 trials) was marked by
a 300ms blank screen, followed by the warning “Prepare
for test … of … Place your fingers on the keys” displayed
for 2000ms. Each test trial was preceded by a blank screen
following which the test item and retrospective confidence
response scale were presented for a maximum of 5000ms.
For our 2AFC design, a pair of test images (one old and one
new, with the old item appearing equally often on the left
and right) were presented above the question “Which image
was previously studied and how confident are you that you
have seen this image earlier?” Again participants responded
using a four-point scale from “definitely left” to “definitely
right”. For the entire length of the study and test lists, the
words “STUDY” and “TEST” were respectively displayed
in the top left corner of the screen.
Following the practice study-test lists, participants
received feedback on the number of times they used each of
the confidence levels. The purpose of this feedback was to
encourage participants to use the full range of the
confidence scale.
Participants were required to attend three one hour
sessions, preferably on consecutive days. Participants
completed 12 study-test lists in their first session and 20
study-test lists in the later two. At the end of each list
participants were able to take a self paced break (minimum
of 30s), while three longer breaks (minimum of 5min)
occurred within each one hour session.

Procedure
It was emphasized during the instructions for the task, that
the orientation of a stimulus was irrelevant to a recognition
decision; that is, participants should identify an image as
being “old” even if the test item had been studied in a
different orientation. In TUB2, participants were further
informed that study lists would be comprised of either all
upright or all inverted images and a warning was displayed
prior to each study list indicating the study orientation to be
used. Before commencing the main experiment, participants
completed two full length practice blocks; one for faces and
one for houses, with order counterbalanced over
participants.
A study list (comprised of 18 trials) was initiated by
pressing the space bar, following which the warning
“Prepare for study … of … Place your fingers on the keys”
was displayed for 2000ms. For each study trial a centrally
placed fixation cross was displayed for 1000ms, followed
by a 300ms blank screen. The target stimulus was then
presented for its designated duration (upright: 33, 100,
267ms; inverted: 267, 800, 2048ms), with durations selected
to maximize data trace overlap and each duration level used
equally often in every study list. After each study
presentation, participants had a maximum of 2500ms to rate
their prospective confidence by responding to the question
“How confident are you that you will remember this image
later on?” using a four-point scale from “definitely no” to

Results
The retrospective confidence rating was used to determine a
participant’s probability correct (i.e., the number of trials
correct divided by total number of trials). Accuracy was
then quantified by the inverse cumulative normal
probability (z) transformation of the probability correct.
We first report a preliminary analysis to ensure the
present study was able to replicate previous findings that
accuracy is linear as a function of the logarithm of study
duration. One-way repeated measures ANOVAs were
performed on the effect of the logarithm of study duration
for upright and inverted houses and faces in each condition
with polynomial trend analyses. Linear trends were all
statistically reliable (p<.05) and accounted for almost all
(minimum 88%) of the variance in accuracy as a function of
study duration. The only quadratic trends to approach
significance were for TUM2’s upright faces (p=.045) and
upright houses (p=.075).
Evidence for the DFIE was first assessed by the
traditional test of an interaction between orientation and
stimulus type. As the 267ms duration level was the only
study duration common to both upright and inverted stimuli,
the DFIE was tested by a two-way (orientation by stimulus
type) ANOVA using only the 267ms data. Table 1 also
shows estimates of the inversion effect (i.e., the difference
between upright and inverted) for faces (FIE) and houses

2251

(HIE), the corresponding DFIE estimates (DFIE=FIE-HIE)
and the results of associated t-tests.

(a)

Table 1: Estimates of the FIE, HIE, and DFIE and results
associated t-tests, for the 267ms data.

TUM2
TUB2

FIE
HIE
DFIE
0.281**
0.270***
0.011
0.274***
0.215***
0.059
Note: ***p < .001, **p < .01, *p <.05

For TUM2 there was no reliable difference in accuracy
between houses (M=0.479) and faces (M=0.411), p=.152.
However, accuracy was reliably higher for upright items
(M=0.582) than inverted items (M=0.307), F(1,17)=30.50,
p<.001. Although a slightly greater inversion effect was
observed for faces than houses (DFIE=0.01), this effect was
not statistically reliable, p=.91. Similarly for TUB2,
accuracy was higher for houses (M=0.421) than faces
(M=0.409), but not reliably so, p=.83. Upright items were
again reliably more accurate (M=0.537) than inverted items
(M=0.293), F(1,17)=41.93, p<.001. However, there was no
reliable DFIE (DFIE=0.059; p=.42).
State-trace plots for each condition are shown in Figure 2.
Results for upright study are joined, as are the points for
inverted study. These lines are clearly monotonically
increasing, and consistent with the requirement that the trace
factor has a monotonic effect, both conditions’ posterior
model probabilities favored the trace model being true,
p(NT)<.001. The plots also show excellent data trace; for
both TUM2 and TUB2 p(NO)<.001. In assessing the overall
dimensionality, TUM2 showed positive evidence for a
multi-dimensional model, p(MD)=0.910, however, TUB2
showed equivocal evidence suggestive of a one-dimensional
account, p(UD)=0.733.

(b)

Discussion

Figure 2: State-trace plots showing the 50% credible regions
for the (a) TUM2 and (b) TUB2 conditions. The numbers
1…3 indicate shorter to longer study durations.

We replicated Loftus et al.’s (2004) and Prince and
Heathcote’s (2009) finding of a linear increase in accuracy
consistent with the suggestion that there was no abrupt
change in strategy (i.e., no switch from featural to
configural processing) associated with longer study
durations. Additionally, we replicated the lack of evidence
for a DFIE using the traditional interaction measure
(although the DFIE estimates were of the same magnitude
as Loftus et al., and Prince & Heathcote). Our state-trace
findings, however, were mixed.
We found clear multi-dimensional evidence consistent
with the use of both featural and configural information for
TUM2, where inversion was only manipulated during initial
encoding and upright and inverted items were mixed
together at study. However, for TUB2, where study lists
were blocked by orientation, we observed evidence
suggestive of a single underlying dimension (although at an
equivocal level). In this blocked condition, participants were
informed of an item’s study orientation if it was old and
therefore, according to Prince and Heathcote’s

(2009) strategic hypothesis, may have been able to reinstate
the use of configural information. The observed onedimensional result, however, does not offer support for this
proposal. This is not to say that our results are consistent
with Loftus et al.’s (2004) memory retrieval hypothesis.
Indeed the strong multi-dimensional result for TUM2 cannot
be explained by a memory retrieval interpretation, as
orientation was only manipulated during initial encoding.
It is important to note that the posterior model
probabilities on which we are basing our interpretations, are
not simply the average result over participants. Rather they
examine, for example, the probability that all individual
state-trace results are one-dimensional versus all being
multi-dimensional. Hence these probabilities can sometimes
be influenced by outlying subjects. To ensure our results
were not influenced in this way, we re-examined the
dimensionality results, excluding participants with poor
evidence (p>.5) for trace monotonicity and data trace
overlap (four participants from TUM2 and seven from TUB2

2252

were excluded using this criteria). However, both conditions
revealed the same pattern of results; that is, multidimensional evidence for TUM2 and equivocal evidence for
TUB2. Although TUB2 showed a decrease in the probability
supporting a one-dimensional model, p(UD)=0.691.
One possible explanation for observing multi-dimensional
evidence, even though inversion was only manipulated
during the initial stimulus encoding, is that our more precise
individual measurement also produced higher accuracy
performance overall and consequently an improved effect
size. Although state-trace analysis is not affected by floor
and ceiling effects to the same degree as traditional
dissociation analyses, if accuracy is not high enough to
reveal the decrement caused by inversion then it will also
not be able to reveal the underlying dimensionality.
Consistent with this suggestion, we can observe from the
TUM2 state-trace plot that the data traces do not depart from
monotonicity (indicating multi-dimensional evidence) until
the longer study duration levels (where accuracy is also
higher). This same pattern can also be seen to a lesser
degree in TUB2.
Although not reported here, we also ran these same mixed
and blocked conditions using a yes/no testing procedure
(i.e., participants were shown a single test item and asked to
indicate if that item had or had not been studied), and in
contrast to our 2AFC results, observed equivocal onedimensional evidence. Interestingly, it has been found that
memory performance is advantaged by a 2AFC procedure
over a yes/no procedure (Deffenbacher, Leu & Brown,
1981), which could explain why our 2AFC conditions
tended toward multi-dimensional evidence. It should also be
noted that recognition memory studies in general tend to
show a smaller inversion effect than perceptually based
studies (e.g., TUM2 showed a 9.97% drop in accuracy, but
perceptual tasks can show a drop double this magnitude; see
McKone & Yovel, 2009). Hence evidence for more than one
dimension underlying face processing may only emerge
when performance is high enough to reveal the decrement
caused by stimulus inversion.
We will pursue two avenues in future research. First, as
our results did not offer strong insight into Loftus et al.’s
(2004) memory retrieval hypothesis we will examine statetrace evidence for the DFIE in recognition memory using a
paradigm in which unfamiliar faces are all studied upright
and tested either upright or inverted. In this paradigm,
Loftus et al.’s (2004) memory hypothesis predicts that
evidence for multiple dimensions should emerge, because
inversion occurs at test where memory retrieval is required.
Second, we will extend the use of state-trace analysis to a
perceptual paradigm, such as a sequential same-different
task, in order to investigate whether evidence for more than
one dimension emerges with larger inversion effects.

Acknowledgments

References
Bamber, D. (1979). State-trace analysis: A method of testing
simple theories of causation. Journal of Mathematical
Psychology, 19, 137-181.
Deffenbacher, K.A., Leu, J.R., & Brown, E.L. (1981).
Memory for faces: Testing method, encoding strategy, &
confidence. American Journal of Psychology, 94, 13-26.
Freire, A., Lee, K., & Symons, L.A. (2000). The face
inversion effect as a deficit in the encoding of configural
information: Direct evidence. Perception, 29, 159-170.
Hancock, P.J.B., Bruce, V., & Burton, A.M. (2000).
Recognition of unfamiliar faces. Trends in Cognitive
Science, 4, 330-337.
Heathcote, A., Brown, S. & Prince, M. (submitted). The
design and analysis of state-trace experiments.
Loftus, G.R. (1978). On interpretation of interactions.
Memory & Cognition, 6, 312-356.
Loftus, G.R., Oberg, M.A., & Dillon, A.M. (2004). Linear
theory, dimensional theory, and the face-inversion effect.
Psychological Review, 111, 835-863.
Maurer, D., Le Grand, R., & Mondloch, C.J. (2002). The
many faces of configural processing. Trends in Cognitive
Science, 6, 255-260.
McKone, E., & Yovel, G. (2009). Why does picture-plane
inversion sometimes dissociate perception of features and
spacing in faces, and sometimes not? Toward a new
theory of holistic processing. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 16, 778-797.
Newell, B.R., & Dunn, J.C. (2008). Dimensions in data:
Testing psychological models using state-trace analysis.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 12, 285-290.
Phillips, P.J., Wechsler, H., Huang, J., & Rauss, P.J. (1998).
The FERET database and evaluation procedure for face
recognition algorithms. Image and Vision Computing, 16,
295-306.
Prince, M., & Heathcote, A. (2009). State-trace analysis of
the face-inversion effect. In N.A. Taagen & H. van Rijn
(Eds.). Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Tulving, E., & Thomson, D.M. (1973). Encoding specificity
and retrieval processes in episodic memory.
Psychological Review, 80, 352-373.
Valentine, T. (1988). Upside-down faces: A review of the
effect of inversion upon face recognition. Acta
Psychologica, 79, 471-491.
Valentine, T., & Bruce, V. (1986). The effect of race,
inversion and encoding activity upon face recognition.
Acta Psychologica, 61, 259-273.
Yarmey, A.D. (1971). Recognition memory for familiar
"public" faces: Effects of orientation and delay.
Psychonomic Science, 24, 286-288.
Yin, R.K. (1969). Looking at upside-down faces. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 81, 141-145.

Thanks to students enrolled in Psyc4815/Psyc6781 at the
University of Newcastle, 2009 for assistance with stimulus
preparation and running of participants.

2253

