UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of Vagueness in the Numerical Translation of Verbal Probabilities: A Fuzzy
Approach

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5xd0d6g6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Bocklisch, Franziska
Bocklisch, Steffen F.
Baumann, Martin R.K.
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of Vagueness in the Numerical Translation of Verbal Probabilities:
A Fuzzy Approach
Franziska Bocklisch1 (franziska.bocklisch@psychologie.tu-chemnitz.de)
Steffen F. Bocklisch1 (steffen.bocklisch@etit.tu-chemnitz.de)
Martin R. K. Baumann2 (martin.baumann@dlr.de)
Agnes Scholz1 (agnes.scholz@psychologie.tu-chemnitz.de)
Josef F. Krems1 (josef.krems@psychologie.tu-chemnitz.de)
1

Wilhelm-Raabe-Str. 43, Chemnitz University of Technology, Germany
Lilienthalplatz 7, German Aerospace Center Braunschweig, Germany

2

Abstract
The paper describes a general two-step procedure for the
numerical translation of linguistic terms using parametric
fuzzy potential membership functions. In an empirical study
121 participants estimated numerical values that correspond to
13 verbal probability expressions. Among the estimates are
the most typical numerical equivalent and the minimal and
maximal values that just correspond to the given linguistic
terms. These values serve as foundation for the proposed
fuzzy approach. Positions and shapes of the resulting
membership functions suggest that the verbal probability
expressions are not distributed equidistantly along the
probability scale and vary considerably in symmetry,
vagueness and overlap. The role of vagueness for further
investigations in reasoning and decision making is discussed
and relations to knowledge representation and working
memory are highlighted.
Keywords: verbal probability expressions; vagueness; fuzzy
potential membership functions; knowledge representation;
diagnostic reasoning; working memory

Introduction
Since the 1960s up to the present time researchers of
different scientific areas have sustained an interest in
studying the relationship between verbal and numerical
probability expressions (Lichtenstein & Newman, 1967;
Teigen & Brun, 2003; Smits & Hoorens, 2005). Among
these are cognitive psychologists that inquire about the
influence of uncertainty expressions on basic cognitive
processes such as reasoning and decision making
(Windschitl & Wells, 1996) as well as engineers, computer
scientists and others that focus on the characterization
(Zadeh, 1978, 2002) or on the treatment of uncertainty in
applications such as medical decision support systems
(Boegl, Adlassnig, Hayashi, Rothenfluh & Leitich, 2004).
This broad interdisciplinary interest may be motivated by
the essential role language plays in our daily life. Verbal
probability terms, such as probably or thinkable are very
widely used to express uncertainty about the occurrence of
future events or about the degree of belief in hypotheses.
For example, a typical statement that illustrates the use of
linguistic terms in the conversation of stock market traders
could be: “It is very unlikely that there will be a significant
increase in the price of oil in the next month vice future.”.

Several studies consistently show that people prefer words
over numbers to express uncertainty (e.g. Wallsten,
Budescu, Zwick & Kemp, 1993). This preference may be
explained by the possibility of saying something about two
different kinds of subjective uncertainty by using only one
word. First, the stochastic uncertainty about the occurrence
of an event (e.g. the probability of an increase of the oil
price) and second, the vagueness of the event (e.g. what is
meant by “a significant increase”).
The understanding of these two kinds of uncertainty, their
relations to each other and the way in which they influence
human reasoning and decision making is crucial for any
application that aims to support decision makers for
example in medicine, business, risk management, marketing
or politics. In our view, in order to contribute to the
understanding of uncertainty, it is essential to first uncover
the underlying relationship between word meaning and
mathematical concepts such as subjective probability or
fuzzy membership. Therefore, we propose a general twostep procedure for the numerical translation of verbal
probability expressions based on (1) empirical estimates
modelled by (2) fuzzy membership functions (Zadeh, 1965,
Bocklisch & Bitterlich, 1994).
The paper is structured as follows: first, we compare
verbal and numerical probability expressions and discuss
existing translation approaches. Second, we present our
proposal that goes beyond other methodical issues and the
results of an empirical investigation. Thereafter, the results
are discussed and conclusions (e.g. for the construction of
verbal probability scales for questionnaires) are highlighted.
Further, potentialities of the fuzzy pattern classification
method for reasoning and decision processes are pointed
out.

Verbal and Numerical Probabilities
There is broad agreement concerning the different features
of verbal and numerical expressions (see Teigen & Brun,
2003 for an overview). Numerical probabilities are
commonly described as precise, unambiguous and
especially useful for calculations. Additionally, the quality
of numerical expressions can be evaluated and compared to
predictions of normative models such as Bayes nets.
Currently many researchers in the area of cognitive

1974

psychology utilize subjective probabilities for the modelling
of human reasoning (e.g. Bayes nets in inductive learning
and reasoning (Tenenbaum, Griffiths & Kemp, 2006)). This
approach is very fruitful and the obtained results contribute
highly to the understanding of psychological processes but,
at the same time, it focuses only on the probability
dimension of uncertainty. Generally, vagueness is another
facet of people’s subjective uncertainty and should not be
neglected. The effects of vagueness, such as exemplarily
described by Kuhn and Budescu (1996) for hazard risk
decisions, have received much less research attention in
psychology. Although it is investigated more in engineering
and other domains, where the practical significance is
clearly observable from its prevalence in real-world
decisions, vagueness is also crucial for psychological
approaches. Zadeh (1965) proposed the fuzzy framework
for the handling of vagueness and pointed out that
probability theory and fuzzy approaches are complementary
rather than competitive (Zadeh, 1995). Hence, it is possible
to combine probability and fuzzy accounts and the
advantages of bridging the gaps have been discussed
recently (Singpurwalla & Booker, 2004).
In contrast to numerical probabilities, probability words
are vague, with ambiguous meaning. They cannot be easily
used for calculations and their meaning is often only
clarified by means of a context (such as domain, speakers’
prior knowledge and experience, reference point or prior
probabilities and base rates of events). Nevertheless, most
people in most everyday situations use words rather than
numbers when describing their own uncertainty. Words are
perceived as more natural, easier to understand and
communicate and they are useful in situations when
uncertainty can not at all be verbalized exactly.
Numerical and verbal expressions are closely associated and
refer to the underlying concept of probability and there is
evidence that people can use numbers and words
interchangeably (Jaffe-Katz, Budescu & Wallsten, 1989).
But, at the same time, words and numbers do not mean
exactly the same thing.
Furthermore, it can be assumed from various experiments
that the use of numbers versus words affects human
reasoning processes under certain circumstances. Windschitl
and Wells (1996) show that numeric measures of
uncertainty tend to sway people toward rule-based,
deliberate thinking, whereas verbal expressions tend to elicit
more associative and intuitive reasoning. These findings are
of particular importance for reasoning situations that create
conflicts between logical reasoning and intuitive beliefs
(e.g. the belief-bias effect (Evans, 2003)).
In belief updating processes, such as customers product
evaluation, there is evidence for the influence of information
format (verbal vs. numerical) on order effects. Shen and
Hue (2007) report that numerical information lead to order
effects whereas verbal expressions do not. It can be assumed
that the utilization of numerical vs. verbal expression
formats result in different cognitive processes that in turn
have different consequences for decisions.

Translating Words Into Numbers
In order to investigate the impact of verbal versus numerical
probability expressions on order effects, decision making
and the communication of uncertainty methods have to be
developed for the “translation” of verbal into numerical
expressions. There are already a number of translation
studies that utilized different estimation and translation
procedures. Among these are empirical approaches using
direct estimation techniques for instance on a scale from 0
to 100 (Beyth-Marom, 1982) or pair comparison methods
(Wallsten, Budescu, Rapoport, Zwick & Forsyth, 1986) as
well as expert consultations for example to create
knowledge bases for decision support systems (Boegl et al.,
2004). A summary and discussion of different estimation
approaches, that map verbal probabilities onto a numerical
probability scale, is provided by Teigen and Brun (2003).
Recurrent findings in the studies using empirical
estimations are that the mean estimates of the verbal
probability expressions are reasonably similar supporting
the idea that words are translatable. At the same time, there
is a large variability between individuals indicating
inconsistency in word understanding which may lead to
communication problems. Although there are different
views on whether verbal probability expressions are
quantifiable or not (Teigen & Brun, 2003), we agree with
Budescu et al. (2003). They propose to treat probability
words as fuzzy sets and use fuzzy membership functions
(MFs) over the probability scale to represent their vague
meanings. They elicited judgments of membership by using
a multiple stimuli estimation method in which probability
values (0, 0.1, …, 0.9, 1) are presented simultaneously with
a verbal probability expression. Their results show, that the
peak value and skew of the MF describing a probability
expression depends on the words meaning. Therefore, they
conclude that properties of the MF can predict for example
the directionality (positive vs. negative verbal expressions,
such as probable vs. improbable) of probability words.

Objective of the Paper
This paper has the goal to present a general two-step
procedure for the numerical translation of linguistic terms. It
is composed of (1) a direct empirical estimation method that
yields numerical data participants assigned to presented
words and (2) a fuzzy approach for the analysis of the data
resulting in parametric membership functions (MFs) of the
potential type (Bocklisch & Bitterlich, 1994). We outline
this method for verbal probability expressions (e.g.
possible) but the proposed procedure can also be applied for
other linguistic terms such as expressions of frequency (e.g.
occasionally), strength (e.g. strong) or others and is
therefore of potential interest for many research areas and
applications. Furthermore, our method goes beyond existing
approaches for two reasons: first, the presented direct
estimation method is frugal, efficient and easy to use to
yield data from human decision makers. Therefore, it is
suitable for research purposes and especially for
applications where expert knowledge is crucial but also rare

1975

or expensive. Second, the proposed parametric MFs of the
potential type bring along advantages compared to other
MFs (Zadeh, 1965; Budescu et al., 2003). For instance, they
are able to account for asymmetric probability terms and are
defined continuously over the numerical probability scale.
Hence, linguistic terms can be modelled very realistically.
In addition, the MFs can be implemented directly in
applications (e.g. in fuzzy decision support systems) and the
fuzzy pattern classification approach has potentials for
psychological research (see Future Prospects at the end of
this paper).
In contrast to Boegl et al. (2004) we do not expect that the
MFs of the probability words are distributed equidistantly
along the numerical probability scale and just like Budescu
et al. (2003) we predict the functions to be asymmetric in
shape.

Two-Step Translation Procedure
In this section we present the details of the two-step
translation procedure for the numerical translation of verbal
probability expressions. At first, the estimation technique
and the method we used in the empirical study is outlined.
Thereafter, the fuzzy analysis and the MFs are specified.

(e.g. that the numerical probability value 0.25 belongs to the
word doubtful). For the analysis of the empirical data
provided by the 121 participants a parametric membership
function of the potential type (Bocklisch & Bitterlich, 1994;
Hempel & Bocklisch, 2009) was used.
This function (see Figure 1) is based on a set of eight
parameters: r marks the position of the mean value, a is
representing the maximum value of the membership
function. Regarding a class structure, a expresses the
“weight” of the class in the given structure (we use a fixed
a=1 in this investigation). The parameters bl and br assign
left and right-sided membership values at the borders of the
function. Hence, they represent the border memberships
whereas cl and cr characterize the left and right-sided
expansions of the class and therefore mark the range of the
class (in a crisp sense). The parameters dl and dr specify the
continuous decline of the membership function starting
from the class centre, being denoted as representative of a
class. They determine the shape of the function and hence
the fuzziness of the class.

Empirical Investigation
Participants. 121 participants (19 males) took part in the
study mainly for exchange of credits. The majority were
undergraduate students of the Universities of Chemnitz,
Göttingen and Zurich with an average age of 23 years
(SD=4.6).
Materials and Procedure. Participants read a short
contextual story from the area of medical decision making
and were requested to take over the perspective of a
physician. Then they assigned three numerical values to
each of 13 exemplars of probability words (see translated
words in Table 1, the original material was presented in
German language) that were chosen from previous studies
(e.g. Budescu et al., 2003). Among the three numerical
values that had to be estimated were: (1) the one that
represents the given probability word best and the (2)
minimal and (3) maximal values that just correspond. The
estimations can be interpreted according to the semantic
meaning of the words: the first value characterizes the most
typical numerical equivalent for the word, whereas the other
values indicate the lower and upper border of the verbal
probability expression. Participants were instructed to give
their estimates in the frequency format (e.g. “In how many
of 100 cases a certain diagnosis is correct if it is for instance
improbable?”). This frequency format of estimation was
proved to be better than for instance the estimation of
percentages (Gigerenzer & Hoffrage, 1998). Participants
used a PDF online questionnaire to provide their estimates.

Figure 1: Parameters of the membership function (for r=0)
A continuous range of membership functions, varying
from a high degree of fuzziness to crisp, is available. This
function type allows considering asymmetry in fuzzy
classes by individual parameters for the left and right hand
branches of the function. As we expect the MFs for the
probability expressions to be asymmetric, this feature is
especially important for the present study.

Results
In this paragraph we present the results of the statistical and
fuzzy analysis of the present study. The descriptive statistics
were calculated with the help of SPSS software. For the
fuzzy analysis and the modelling of the MFs a software
package (Fuzzy Toolbox, 2008) was used.

Fuzzy Analysis
Fuzzy Membership Functions. Membership functions are
truth value functions. The membership value (µ) represents
the value of truth that an object belongs to a specific class

Descriptive Statistics
Table 1 shows the descriptive statistics for the empirical
estimates of the most typical values that correspond to the

1976

presented words. The minimal and maximal estimates, that
indicate the borders of the semantic meaning of the
linguistic terms, were necessary for modelling the MFs.
Results show that the probability words are distributed all
over the numerical probability scale with varying distances.
The standard deviation and kurtosis show a systematic
pattern: probability words near to the borders of the
numerical probability scale (e.g. impossible and certain)
have small standard deviations but high values of kurtosis.
And probability words in the middle (e.g. thinkable and
possible) offer a larger spread but smaller kurtosis values.
Also systematic differences exist for the skew indicating
that probability expressions with means smaller than P=0.5
are skewed to the right whereas words with means higher
than P=0.5 are asymmetric to the left. These findings are
consistent with the results reported by Budescu et al. (2003).
Table 1. Descriptive statistics for the estimates (most
typical values)
probability words
Impossible
very improbable
quite improbable
Improbable
hardly probable
sparsely probable
Doubtful
Thinkable
Possible
Probable
quite probable
very probable
Certain

Mean
1.44
5.53
9.99
11.68
17.01
18.57
21.34
49.33
51.49
67.68
75.07
83.95
96.28

SD
3.01
5.48
7.94
9.03
11.05
12.19
13.61
20.24
21.6
12.49
12.89
9.08
6.45

Skew
3.25
1.71
1.42
1.43
1.15
1.12
.72
.35
.54
-.01
-1.01
-1.02
-2.87

Kurtosis
13.39
2.72
2.2
1.82
1.02
.89
.32
.1
.53
-.85
1.02
1.2
9.99

Figure 2: Membership functions of the 13 verbal
probability expressions
The second column of the table presents percentages of
the corresponding estimation data that was reclassified
correctly. According to these results, some of the probability
words are unambiguous and the reclassification was very
successful (e.g. certain; 93.5% reclassified correctly).
Others are inconclusive and almost no estimation data point
that was used to describe the MF was reclassified correctly
(e.g. improbable; 2.5 % classified correctly). Instead, the
data was classified as belonging to the neighboring
functions.
Table 2. Percentages correct reclassification
probability words
impossible
very improbable
quite improbable
improbable
hardly probable
sparsely probable
doubtful
thinkable
possible
probable
quite probable
very probable
certain

Fuzzy Analysis
Figure 2 shows the MFs for the 13 verbal probability
expressions. The representative values (r) indicating the
highest memberships are identical to the reported means in
Table 1.
Obviously, the functions differ considerably in shape,
symmetry, overlap and vagueness. Functions at the borders
(e.g. impossible) are narrower than those in the middle (e.g.
thinkable) which is consistent with the observed standard
deviations and kurtosis values. Most functions are
asymmetric and are not distributed equidistantly along the
probability scale. From the functions’ positions, three
clusters arise, that may be described by (1) low (MFs 1-7),
(2) medium (MFs 8 and 9) and (3) high (MFs 10 - 13)
probability ranges. The 13 MFs overlap in large parts and
especially when they belong to the same cluster.
To test whether the probability expressions are distinct or
not, participants’ estimates were reclassified. Table 2 shows
the results of the reclassification.

Scale (13)
80.0
33.1
24.8
2.5
15.1
2.5
42.4
41.2
6.6
44.2
33.9
18.4
93.5

Scale (5)
95.0

77.1
61.3
72.5

93.5

For a verbal probability scale that could be employed in
psychological research or application, a scale with 13
probability words would not be useful because the words
are too indifferent according to their meanings. But if a few
words with small overlaps are selected, it is possible to
create a scale that differentiates very well (see
reclassification rate computed by the Fuzzy Toolbox
Software in column three of Table 2). Figure 3 shows an
example scale with five probability words described by their
MFs.

1977

context in which they are used and therefore will become
less vague which can be observed in the MFs.

Future Prospects

Figure 3: Membership functions of 5 selected verbal
probability expressions

Discussion
This paper aims to present a two-step procedure for the
numerical translation of linguistic terms that goes beyond
existing approaches. First of all, the estimation of three
numerical values for each linguistic term (the most typical,
minimal and maximal corresponding values) is very frugal
and data can be gained very efficiently, whereas most
alternative procedures are more costly (Budescu et al.,
2003). The resulting estimation data can be analyzed using
the proposed parametric MFs of the potential type. Results
show, that the functions are able to model the data in a very
efficient way, creating averaged membership functions that
describe the linguistic terms continuously over the
numerical probability scale. Because of the eight
parameters, the functions take into account asymmetry,
which was indeed found in the empirical data. Parametric
MFs with fewer parameters would model the data without
considering asymmetry and would therefore be less accurate
and suitable for the reported data. Another advantage of the
proposed function type is that the parameters can be
interpreted in terms of content on a semantic meta level and
illustrate the vague meaning of probability words very
realistically.
Large overlaps of the functions (see Figure 2) indicate
that the words are very similar in their meanings. Despite
the imprecision of natural language, the MFs allow
identifying words that are more distinct in their meaning
than others. Just as Dhami and Wallsten (2005) we also
found five probability expressions (see Figure 3) that are
sufficiently distinct. This is especially useful for the creation
of verbal probability scales for purposes of research and
application that should include unambiguous words when
possible.
Finally, the presented translation procedure serves as
foundation for future investigations concerning the
influence of contexts on word understanding. This influence
can then be quantified by changes in the parameters defining
the MFs. As these parameters can be semantically
interpreted the influence of context on the interpretation of
the expressions can be investigated in detailed way. As
Wallsten and Budescu (1990) claimed, it is a promising
instrument to uncover the various communication roles that
probability phrases serve. For instance, it is likely that some
of the ambiguous probability words are clarified by the

Finally, we will present a short outlook that highlights the
potentials of the fuzzy approach for further psychological
research in the area of diagnostic reasoning and decision
making.
An advantage of the proposed MFs and the underlying
fuzzy pattern classification method (Bocklisch & Bitterlich,
1994) is that the functions serve for the representation and
combination of various kinds of vague knowledge (e.g.
fuzzy degrees of symptom intensity such as “high fever” or
“low blood pressure”) in a multidimensional way. For
example, a physician considering the likelihood that a
patient has a certain disease presumably takes into account
the intensity of two (or more) present symptoms in
combination prior to stating the diagnosis. Figure 4
exemplifies the content of a possible mental model in a
simplified manner: three fuzzy classes (diseases A, B and C)
resulting out of the multivariate combination of two features
(intensities of the symptoms 1 and 2) that are described by
fuzzy potential membership functions.
Furthermore, it is possible to integrate both vague and
crisp information (such as precise predictions of
probabilistic models) in this framework.

Figure 4: Representation of medical knowledge using fuzzy
pattern classification method
The distance of the classes as well as their overlap can be
interpreted in terms of similarity (disease classes A and B
are near to each other and therefore cause similar symptom
intensities, whereas disease C is apart and less similar to the
other diseases). Furthermore, shapes and positions of the
classes provide information about the discriminability of
items in working memory which in turn affects reasoning
performance. According to Oberauer, Süß, Wilhelm and
Wittman (2003), the coordination function of working
memory (WM) allows the integration of information (such
as symptoms in a diagnostic reasoning process). Therefore,

1978

WM provides simultaneous access to independently varying
elements (such as symptoms and diseases) by placing them
in a common coordinate system. The coordinate system has
limited capacity to hold information and keep them
separated from each other. Hence, it is likely that the
precision or vagueness of the information elements (as it is
described by the MFs) is an important variable influencing
diagnostic reasoning processes and decision making
performance. Moreover, it seems possible to predict to
which extent relevant and irrelevant diagnostic hypotheses
will interfere during the reasoning process (Dougherty &
Sprenger, 2006) from the fuzzy knowledge representation.
For example, it is plausible to assume that irrelevant
diagnostic hypotheses that show a strong overlap with the
relevant ones interfere more than irrelevant hypotheses that
show less overlap. And the overlap can be quantified with
this fuzzy approach. This is currently the object of further
investigation.

References
Beyth-Marom, R. (1982). How Probable is Probable? A
Numerical Translation of Verbal Probability Expressions.
Journal of Forecasting, 1, 257-269.
Bocklisch, S.F. (2008). Handbook Fuzzy Toolbox. GWTTUDmbH, Department of Electrical Engineering, Systems
Theory, Chemnitz University of Technology, Germany
Bocklisch, S.F. & Bitterlich, N. (1994). Fuzzy pattern
classification – methodology and application. In Kruse,
R., Gebhardt, J., & Palm, R. (Eds.) Fuzzy Systems in
Computer Science. Vieweg.
Boegl, K., Adlassnig, K.-P., Hayashi, Y., Rothenfluh, T.E.,
& Leitich, H. (2004). Knowledge acquisition in the fuzzy
knowledge representation framework of a medical
consultation system. Artificial Intelligence in Medicine,
30, 1-26.
Budescu, D.V., Karelitz, T.M., & Wallsten, T.S. (2003).
Predicting the Directionality of Probability Words from
Their Membership Functions. Journal of Behavioral
Decision Making, 16, 159-180.
Dhami, M.K. & Wallsten, T.S. (2005). Interpersonal
comparison of subjective probabilities: Towards
translating linguistic probabilities. Memory & cognition,
33(6), 1057-1068.
Dougherty, M.R. & Sprenger, A. (2006). The Influence of
Improper Sets of Information on Judgment: How
Irrelevant Information Can Bias Judged Probability.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 135(2),
262-281.
Evans, J.S.B.T. (2003). In two minds: dual-process accounts
of reasoning. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7 (10), 454459.
Gigerenzer, G. & Hoffrage, U. (1998). Using Natural
Frequencies to Improve Diagnostic Inferences. Academic
Medicine, 73(5), 538-540.
Hempel, A.-J. & Bocklisch, S.F. (2009). Parametric Fuzzy
Modelling for Complex Data-Inherent Structures. In
Proceedings of the Joint 2009 International Fuzzy

Systems Association World Congress and 2009 European
Society of Fuzzy Logic and Technology Conference
(IFSA-EUSFLAT 2009), 885-890.
Jaffe-Katz, A., Budescu, D.V., & Wallsten, T.S. (1989).
Timed magnitude comparisons of numerical and
nonnumerical expressions of uncertainty. Memory &
Cognition, 17, 249-264.
Kuhn, K.M. & Budescu, D.V. (1996). The Relative
Importance of Probabilities, Outcomes, and Vagueness in
Hazard Risk Decisions. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 68(3), 301-317.
Lichtenstein, S. & Newman, J.R. (1967). Empirical scaling
of common verbal phrases associated with numerical
probabilities. Psychonomic Science, 9, 563-564.
Oberauer, K., Süß, H.-M., Wilhelm, O., & Wittman, W.W.
(2003). The multiple faces of working memory: Storage,
processing, supervision, and coordination. Intelligence 31,
167-193.
Shen, Y.-C. & Hue, C.-W. (2007). The role of information
presentation formats in belief-updating. International
Journal of Psychology, 42(3), 189-199.
Singpurwalla, N.D., & Booker, J.M. (2004). Membership
Functions and Probability Measures of Fuzzy Sets.
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 99 (467),
867-877.
Smits, T. & Hoorens, V. (2005). How Probable is Probably?
It Depends on Whom You’re Talking About. Journal of
Behavioral Decision Making, 18, 83-96.
Teigen, K.H. & Brun, W. (2003). Verbal Expressions of
Uncertainty and Probability. In D. Hardman (Edt.):
Thinking: Psychological Perspectives on Reasoning,
Judgment and Decision Making. Chapter 7, Wiley and
Sons.
Tenenbaum, J.B., Griffiths, T.L., & Kemp, C. (2006).
Theory-based Bayesian models of inductive learning and
reasoning. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10 (7), 309-318.
Wallsten, T.S., Budescu, D.V. (1990). Comment. Statistical
Science 5(1), 23-26.
Wallsten, T.S., Budescu, D.V., Rapoport, A., Zwick, R., &
Forsyth, B. (1986). Measuring the Vague Meanings of
Probability Terms. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 115, 348-365.
Wallsten, T.S., Budescu, D.V., Zwick, R., & Kemp, S.M.
(1993). Preferences and reasons for communicating
probabilistic information in numerical or verbal terms.
Bullet of the Psychonomic Society, 31, 135-138.
Windschitl, P.D., & Wells, G.L. (1996). Measuring
psychological uncertainty: Verbal versus numeric
methods. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied,
2, 343-364.
Zadeh, L.A. (1978). Fuzzy Sets as a basis for a theory of
possibility. Fuzzy Sets and Systems, 1, 3-28.
Zadeh, L. A. (1965). Fuzzy sets. Information and Control 8,
338-353.
Zadeh, L.A. (1995). Discussion: Probability Theory and
Fuzzy Logic Are Complementary Rather Than
Competitive. Technometrics, 37, 271-276.

1979

