UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Cultural Transmission of Explanations: Evidence that Teleological Explanations are
Preferentially Remembered

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2d08996p

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Gwynne, Nicholas
Lombrozo, Tania

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Cultural Transmission of Explanations: Evidence that Teleological
Explanations are Preferentially Remembered
Nicholas Z. Gwynne (nzg@berkeley.edu)
Tania Lombrozo (lombrozo@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, 3101 Tolman Hall
Berkeley, CA 94703 USA
Abstract
Teleological explanations – explanations in terms of functions,
purposes, or goals – are pervasive in religion and feature
prominently in intuitive theories about the world, such as theory
of mind and folk biology. Previous findings suggest that such
explanations reflect a deep, explanatory preference. Here we
explore the mechanisms underlying the prevalence and
persistence of such explanations, following a method developed
by Boyer and Ramble (2001) to examine which religious
concepts are likely to survive processes of cultural transmission.
Specifically, we test the prediction that novel teleological
explanations are remembered better than mechanistic
explanations, even when effects of an explanation’s quality are
taken into account. Two experiments support this prediction for
artifact and biological trait explanations, but find the opposite
pattern for explanations of non-living natural entities.
Keywords: explanation; teleological explanation; functional
explanation; religion; memory; cultural transmission

Introduction
Why‐questions are ubiquitous, ranging from those a
child might ask to those of existential importance. While
different questions solicit different answers, there seem
to be systematic patterns in the properties of folk
explanations (Lombrozo, 2006). Consider the difference
between mechanistic explanations, which appeal to
causal mechanisms, and teleological explanations, which
appeal to functions and goals. The origin of human life
can be explained mechanistically by appeal to evolution,
but is often explained teleologically by appeal to some
greater purpose.
In this paper we consider why folk explanations are so
often teleological, and suggest that part of the answer
lies in their mnemonic properties: teleological
explanations are more likely to be remembered than
mechanistic alternatives, and hence to survive processes
of cultural transmission.

Teleology in folk explanations
Teleological explanations pervade intuitive theories.
Folk psychological explanations, for example, often
appeal to an agent’s goals (e.g. Gopnik & Wellman, 1992;
Wellman, 1992), while those in folk biology prominently
feature biological functions (e.g. Atran, 1994).
Teleological explanations even figure in early physics, as
in Aristotle’s appeals to teleological causation (Aristotle,
Physics II).

Teleological explanations are particularly prominent
in religion. Consider, for example, explanations for the
origin of the universe. In the familiar Judeo‐Christian
creation story, the Old Testament God forms trees and
animals for man to use (KJV, Genesis, 2:9, 2:18). Appeals
to functions and goals likewise infuse the explanations
for more mundane goods: we have wine because it
“makes glad the heart of man,” and bread because it
“strengthens man's heart” (KJV, Psalm 104:14, 15).
What accounts for the prevalence of teleology in folk
explanations? One possibility is that teleological
explanations are common because they correspond to
the structure of the world. This possibility is at best
incomplete given that so many teleological folk
explanations extend beyond those sanctioned by
contemporary science (e.g. Kelemen & Rosset, 2009).
A second possibility is that teleological explanations
are common because they are psychologically privileged,
meaning that they are found more satisfying and
generally preferred over alternatives. Evidence for this
possibility comes from a growing literature on
‘promiscuous teleology’ demonstrating that young
children prefer teleological explanations (e.g. “clouds are
for raining”), and that this preference may persist into
adulthood (Lombrozo, Kelemen, & Zaitchik, 2007;
Kelemen and Rosset, 2009). Moreover, teleological and
mechanistic explanations have unique consequences for
categorization (Lombrozo, 2009). While some have
suggested that teleological explanations are privileged in
only some domains, such as folk biology (Atran, 1994,
Keil, 1994), others suggest the preference is more
widespread (Kelemen, 1999).
A third possibility is that teleological explanations are
common because they are likely to survive processes of
cultural transmission. Specifically, if teleological
explanations are more likely to be reliably recalled, one
should expect culturally transmitted beliefs such as
religion to over‐represent such explanations.
The possibility that mnemonic properties play a role
in explaining the properties of religious explanations is
particularly attractive in light of past research on
cultural transmission. Within the domain of religion,
Boyer and colleagues have successfully explored the role
of memory and transmission in explaining the properties
of religious concepts, such as demons and deities (e.g.
Boyer, 2003). In these studies, participants read about

1301

religious entities and were later asked to recall as many
as possible. Boyer argued that if religious concepts have
the properties they do because of cultural transmission,
the concepts surviving this process should reflect the
characteristics of concepts in the world’s religions.
Although the details have been disputed (e.g. Gonce et

al. 2006; Norenzayan, Atran, Faulkner & Schaller,
2006; Tweney et al. 2006), Boyer’s findings are
broadly consistent with this proposal.
Beyond the domain of religion, research on iterated
learning suggests that small biases in transmission can
have large consequences over time (Kirby, 2001; Kalish,
Griffiths, & Lewandowsky 2007). In the case of
teleological explanations, a small bias in memory could
have large consequences for the nature of folk
explanations after several generations of transmission.
Our aim in this paper is to explore this third
possibility: that teleology pervades folk explanations in
part because teleological explanations are more likely to
be remembered than mechanistic alternatives. We also
explore the relationship between this hypothesis and the
idea that teleological explanations are psychologically
privileged – and hence deemed more satisfying – in all
domains or in some domains.
How might memorability and satisfaction interact? It
could be that teleological explanations are better
remembered than mechanistic alternatives, and that this
is because teleological explanations are judged more
satisfying. Alternatively, memorability may influence
satisfaction. Specifically, explanations that are more
reliably encoded or recalled may lead to a greater sense
of understanding, and hence be found more satisfying. A
final possibility, and the one we favor, is that
memorability and satisfaction have a common cause. If
teleological and mechanistic explanations are supported
by different kinds of representations or have a unique
relationship to prior knowledge, both greater
satisfaction and enhanced memory could result. By
examining whether satisfaction mediates effects of
explanation type on memorability we can begin to
distinguish these alternatives.
In two experiments, participants read novel
explanations that were either teleological or mechanistic
and about biological traits, artifact properties, or (in
Experiment 2) nonliving natural entities. Memory was
then tested with recall and recognition tasks to examine
the relationships between explanation type, explanation
satisfaction, and memory.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 examines whether teleological or
mechanistic explanations are more reliably recalled and
recognized. Additionally, it examines the relationship
between explanations’ memorability and their rated
satisfaction, plausibility, detail, and unfamiliarity.

Explanation satisfaction and plausibility ratings were
included to examine whether these factors mediate
memorability. Ratings for detail and unfamiliarity were
added because previous research suggests that
explanations of moderate detail (Frazier et al, under
review) and moderate unfamiliarity (Boyer & Ramble,
2001) are better remembered. By soliciting detail and
unfamiliarity ratings we can examine whether memory
differences, if found, result from differences in the detail
or familiarity of the novel teleological and mechanistic
explanations generated for the experiment. Having
participants rate explanations along these four
dimensions additionally provided a task to ensure that
explanations were encoded prior to the memory tests.

Participants
One‐hundred University of California students and
community members (68% female, mean age = 22)
participated in exchange for course credit or monetary
compensation.

Materials and Procedure
The experiment involved twenty why‐questions: ten
regarding artifact properties and ten regarding
biological traits. Each why‐question had four possible
answers of approximately equal length, two teleological
and two mechanistic, for a total of 40 explanations of
each type. Tables 1 and 2 provide sample why‐questions
and answers for each domain.
Table 1: Sample artifact trait explanations.
An istup is a kind of shovel with a compressible handle.
Why do istups have compressible handles?
Teleological A: Because that way they can be used by
aliens of various heights.
Teleological B: Because that way they can fit inside a
regular toolbox.
Mechanistic A: Because the handle is made of distinct,
interlocking segments.
Mechanistic B: Because the handle has hinges that
allow it to fold.
These explanations were divided into four stimulus
sets. In each set, half the questions were mechanistic and
half teleological, with equal numbers across domains.
Data were collected via a computerized survey in a
laboratory setting. Participants were instructed that
they would “learn about the properties of plants,
animals, and objects from alien planets and civilizations”
and “receive explanations for those properties.” Each
participant was presented with explanations from a
single stimulus set, and was asked to rate each
explanation along four dimensions: satisfaction,
plausibility, detail, and unfamiliarity. These scales

1302

ranged from 1 (not at all satisfying, plausible, detailed, or
unfamiliar) to 7 (very satisfying, very plausible, etc.).
Table 2: Sample biological trait explanations.
Bligs are a kind of animal with fur that is blue. Why do
bligs have blue fur?
Teleological A: Because that way they can hide from
predators in their environment, which contains blue
rocks.
Teleological B: Because that way they can attract others
of their species, who are drawn to blue.
Mechanistic A: Because of their mineral‐rich diet, which
contains compounds that are blue.
Mechanistic B: Because the surface of their planet
contains fine, blue dust that sticks to their fur.
Following this encoding task, participants completed
24 distractor questions involving “Alien Math” which
took 3 minutes to complete. Participants then completed
a cued recall task and a recognition task. The cued recall
task involved prompts such as the following:
You previously saw the following: “Bligs are a kind of
animal with fur that is blue. Why do bligs have blue
fur?” What was the answer provided for this question?
Please reproduce the answer you received as
accurately as you can.
This prompt was repeated for each why question.
In the recognition task, the 20 why‐questions were
again repeated along with four candidate answers. The
four answers included the one previously seen by that
participant, as well as three additional answers for that
why‐question drawn from the three unpresented
stimulus sets.
Participants were randomly assigned to a stimulus set.
The question orders for encoding, recall, and recognition
were randomized, as were the multiple‐choice answers
in the recognition task.

Recognition errors were analyzed as the dependent
measure in an equivalent ANOVA, revealing a main effect
of explanation type, F(1,99)=5.05,p<.05. Participants
made an average of .83 errors (of 10) for teleological
explanations, and 1.06 errors for mechanistic
explanations.
These results suggest differential memory for
teleological and mechanistic explanations, with
teleological explanations remembered more reliably. To
examine whether these effects stem from differences in
the rated satisfaction, plausibility, detail, or unfamiliarity
of teleological versus mechanistic explanations, the two
analyses above were repeated as Linear Mixed Model
analyses with satisfaction, plausibility, detail, and
unfamiliarity as covariates. The main effect of
explanation type on recall remained statistically
significant, F(1,396)=10.05, p<.01; the effects of domain
on recall and of explanation type on recognition did not.
Notably, however, the explanations did differ in
satisfaction, with higher ratings for the teleological
explanations, t(99)=5.71, p<.01 (see Table 3).
Table 3: Mean satisfaction ratings in Experiment 1.
Biological
Mechanistic
4.32

Artifact
Mechanistic
3.90

Artifact
Teleological
4.16

While these findings are consistent with several
hypotheses, they suggest that differential recall is not a
product
of
differential
satisfaction.
Instead,
memorability and satisfaction may have a common
cause, potentially stemming from the way teleological
explanations relate to prior knowledge.

5
4
3

Mechanistic
Explanations

2

Results and Discussion
To analyze recall data, two independent coders
categorized participant responses to cued recall
questions as correct or incorrect/absent based on
whether the explanation captured the gist of the
mechanism or function. Coder agreement was 93%.
Recall accuracy was analyzed as a dependent measure
in an ANOVA with explanation type and domain as
within‐subjects factors. This analysis revealed significant
main effects of explanation type, F(1,99)=25.5, p<.01,
and domain, F(1,99)=7.90, p<.01, with teleological
explanation recalled more reliably than mechanistic
explanations, and explanations for artifacts recalled
more reliably than explanations for biological traits (see
Fig. 1).

Biological
Teleological
4.86

1

Teleological
Explanations

0
Biological Artifacts
Traits

Figure 1: Recall accuracy in Experiment 1.

Experiment 2
Experiment 1 finds that teleological explanations are
better remembered in two domains for which teleology
is warranted. Are the mnemonic benefits of teleological
explanation restricted to these domains, or do they
extend more broadly? One aim of Experiment 2 is to

1303

examine this question by extending the task to include
nonliving natural entities (NNEs), such as lakes and
mountains, which do not typically support teleological
explanations.
Experiment 2 additionally aims to examine the nature
of memory errors. To increase errors, Experiment 2
involves a larger number of explanations: 10 why‐
questions for each domain (artifacts, biological traits,
NNEs), with one teleological and one mechanistic
explanation for each why‐question. Of particular interest
are errors in explanation type, such as a mechanistic
explanation that is “misremembered” as a teleological
explanation, as systematic trends in error type could
have implications for the cultural transmission of
explanations. We target this issue in the recognition task
by including two between‐subjects conditions: one
examining within‐explanation type errors (e.g.
teleological to teleological), and the other between‐
explanation‐type errors (e.g. mechanistic to teleological).

The distraction and recall tasks were identical to
Experiment 1. Note that the recall prompt asked
participants to report the answer to the question that
they had previously seen; they were not explicitly
prompted to provide two explanations.
There were two versions of the recognition task. In
each version, participants received all 30 why‐questions
with two candidate responses: either one teleological
and one mechanistic (between‐type condition) or two of
the same type (within‐type condition), with the unseen
explanations drawn from the unseen stimulus set.
Participants were randomly assigned to stimulus set
and to recognition condition (between‐type or within‐
type). Questions were presented randomly, but
separated into two blocks, with order counterbalanced
across participants, such that participants would see one
answer for each why‐question before seeing a second
answer to any question. Answers for the recognition test
were presented in random order.

Participants

Results and Discussion

Sixty University of California students and community
members (72% female, mean age = 19 have participated
for course credit or monetary compensation.

Coding for the recall portion of the experiment was
completed as in Experiment 1, with 88% agreement.

10

Materials and Procedure
The stimuli from Experiment 1 were augmented with 10
new why‐questions involving the properties of Nonliving
Natural Entities (NNEs), such as lightning and lakes.
Four explanations for each question were generated as
in Experiment 1 (see Table 4).

8
6
4

Table 4: Sample nonliving natural entity explanations.
A wernuct is a type of geyser that shoots very high into
the air. Why do wernucts shoot high into the air?
Teleological A: Because that way giant reptiles can
bathe under them.
Teleological B: Because that way the surrounding
foliage can remain lush.
Mechanistic A: Because pressure builds up under
ground and shoots water through cracks in the planet
surface.
Mechanistic B: Because hot temperatures
underground cause steam in the water, increasing its
reach.
Explanations were subdivided into two stimulus sets,
with each set containing a single teleological and
mechanistic explanation for each why question.
The procedure mirrored Experiment 1, with the
following modifications. In the explanation encoding
task, participants saw each why‐question twice: once
presented with a teleological explanation, and once with
a mechanistic explanation.

Mechanistic Explanations
Teleological Explanations

2
0
Biological
Traits

Artifacts

NNEs

Figure 2: Recall accuracy in Experiment 2.
Recall accuracy was analyzed as a dependent measure
in an ANOVA with explanation type and domain as
within‐subjects factors (see Fig. 2). This analysis
revealed a significant effect of domain, F(2,58)=13.4,
p<.01, as well as an interaction between explanation
type and domain, F(2,58)=70.5,p<.01. Paired samples t‐
tests comparing recall for teleological and mechanistic
explanations within each domain revealed significant
differences, but in different directions. Teleological
explanations were recalled more reliably than
mechanistic explanations for biological traits, t(59)=‐
3.91, p<.01, and for artifacts, t(59)=‐4.39,p<.01,
replicating Experiment 1. In contrast, mechanistic
explanations were recalled more reliably than
teleological explanations for NNEs, t(59)=8.94, p<.01.

1304

To determine whether these differences were driven
by the satisfaction, plausibility, detail, or unfamiliarity of
stimulus items, recall accuracy was analyzed separately
for each domain in a Linear Mixed Model with
explanation ratings as covariates. This analysis
confirmed that teleological explanations were more
reliably recalled than mechanistic explanations for
biological traits, F(1,118)=12.1, p<.01, and artifacts,
F(1,118)=13.6, p<.01, with the reverse pattern for NNEs,
F(1,118)=82.9, p<.01. We did not replicate the
satisfaction difference between mechanistic and
teleological explanations found in Experiment 1.
Recognition errors were analyzed as the dependent
measure in an ANOVA with explanation type and domain
as within‐subjects factors. This revealed a main effect of
explanation type, F(1,59)=63.9,p<.01, with better
recognition
for
teleological
than
mechanistic
explanations (26.4 versus 22.4 of 30). There was also a
main effect of domain, F(2,58)=78.9, p < .01, with better
recognition for NNE (17.8/20) and artifact (17.7)
explanations than for biological trait (13.3) explanations.
Finally, there was an interaction between explanation
type and domain, F(2,58)=37.7, p<.01, with teleological
explanations recognized more reliably than mechanistic
explanations for biological traits and for artifacts, but a
non‐significant trend in the reverse direction for NNEs
(9.1 versus 8.8). These patterns of significance remained
identical in a Linear Mixed Model with explanation
ratings (satisfaction, etc) as covariates.
To examine the nature of memory errors, recognition
accuracy was analyzed as the dependent measure in an
ANOVA with recognition test (within‐type versus
between‐type) as a between‐subjects factor and
explanation type as a within‐subjects factor. This
analysis confirmed the main effect of explanation type
on recognition accuracy, F(1,58)=75.3, p<.01, with
teleological explanations recognized more reliably than
mechanistic explanations, and also revealed an
interaction between explanation type and recognition
test, F(1,58)=11.5, p<.01. Teleological explanations were
correctly distinguished from teleological lures about as
often as they were correctly distinguished from
mechanistic lures (26.9 versus 25.8). In contrast,
mechanistic explanations were more likely to be
correctly distinguished from teleological lures than from
mechanistic lures (23.4 versus 21.4). This suggests that
mechanistic explanations were more “interchangeable”
than teleological explanations.
It is worth noting that despite the sizeable advantage
for mechanistic explanations of NNEs in recall,
recognition performance was comparable for both
teleological and mechanistic explanations. This suggests
that recall performance may have reflected a preference
to report warranted explanations in addition to or
instead of differential effects of memory.

General Discussion
Experiments 1 and 2 suggest that when it comes to
explaining the properties of biological traits or artifacts,
teleological explanations are recalled more reliably than
mechanistic alternatives. However, when it comes to
explaining the properties of nonliving natural entities,
mechanistic explanations are recalled more reliably than
teleological alternatives. These effects persist when
explanations’ satisfaction, plausibility, detail, and
unfamiliarity are taken into account.
Data for recognition were more variable, but yielded
two suggestive results. First, mechanistic explanations
were more likely to be “misrecognized” as other
mechanistic explanations, suggesting that mechanistic
explanations generated less distinctive memories.
Second, despite the overwhelming advantage for
mechanistic explanations of non‐living natural entities in
recall, recognition performance was comparable for
teleological and mechanistic explanations, suggesting
that even unwarranted teleological explanations were
remembered remarkably well.
The current findings suggest that memory for
teleological explanations is privileged in domains for
which such explanations are typically warranted –
namely biological traits and artifacts – but do not rule
out the possibility that memory benefits extend more
broadly. In follow‐up work, we plan to explicitly prompt
participants to report all provided explanations in recall,
thereby helping to identify whether the benefit for
mechanistic explanations of NNEs resulted from a
genuine difference in memory or a preference to report
explanations that are believed to be warranted.
While the memory differences we find are small –
especially for recognition – models of cultural
transmission suggest that small biases can quickly
magnify over time (Kirby, 2001; Kalish, Griffiths, &
Lewandowsky 2007). Thus a modest tendency to recall
or report teleological explanations could result in a
disproportionate representation of such explanations
after only a few generations. When it comes to religious
explanations, which are arguably less responsive to data
than explanations in scientific or folk theories, biases in
transmission may be responsible for systematic trends
across the world’s religions (see also Boyer, 2003).
We conclude by considering three important
questions for future research. First, to what extent are
differential effects of teleological and mechanistic
explanations driven by the close relationship between
teleology and intentional agency? Could it be that it is
intentional explanations, not teleological explanations,
that are preferentially remembered? While our effects
extended to biological traits, it could be that participants
construed the biological organism or natural selection as
an intentional agent. Research suggests a close
correspondence between teleology and intentional
agency (e.g. Kelemen & DiYanni, 2005), but there is also

1305

evidence that teleological explanations are reliably
distinguished from intentional explanations (Lombrozo
& Carey, 2006).
Second, to what extent are there individual
differences in memory and transmission biases when it
comes to explanations? In particular, what is the
relationship between an individual’s religious
commitments and differential memory for explanation
types? There is already some evidence that scientific
training decreases teleological tendencies (Casler &
Kelemen, 2008), while science training is inversely
related with belief in god (Larson & Witham, 1997),
particularly for top scientists (Larson & Witham, 1998).
Finally, and most critically, future research will need
to explore the basis for differential memory for
teleological and mechanistic explanations. Examining
the contributions of explanation satisfaction, plausibility,
detail, and unfamiliarity is a first step, as is considering a
range of domains. But what is it about some
explanations that make them more memorable, and
hence more likely to survive processes of cultural
transmission?
We
speculate
that
teleological
explanations may be encoded differently from beliefs
about causal mechanisms, and may have a more
integrated relationship to prior knowledge. Of course,
these speculations require further elaboration and
empirical examination.

review). Adults(UnderPreschool Childrenw)
Preferences for Explanatory Detail.
Genesis. (n.d.). In The Bible (KJV) (pp. 2:9, 19).
Gonce, L. O., Upal, M. ,Afzal, D., Slone, J. & Tweney, R. D.
(2006). Role of Context in the Recall of
Counterintuitive Concepts. Journal of Cognition &
Culture, 6, 521‐47.
Gopnik, A., & Wellman, H. M. (1992). Why the child
childConcepts.uitive Coive CoounterinMind and
Language, 7, 145and L
Kalish, M. L., Griffiths, T. L., & Lewandowsky, S. (2007).
Iterated learning: Intergenerational knowledge
transmission reveals inductive biases. Psychonomic
Bulletin and Review, 14, 288.
Keil, F. C. (1994). The birth and nurturance of concepts
by domains: The origins of concepts of living things.
Mapping the mind: Domain specificity in cognition and
culture (p. 234. ng).
Kelemen, D. (1999). The scope of teleological thinking
in preschool children. Cognition, 70, 241tion
Kelemen, D., & DiYanni, C. (2005). Intuitions about
origins: Purpose and intelligent design in children's
reasoning about nature. Journal of Cognition and
Development, 6, 3rnal
Kelemen, D., & Rosset, E. (2009). The human function
compunction: Teleological explanation in adults.
Cognition, 111, 138tion9
Kirby, S. (2001). Spontaneous evolution of linguistic
structure‐an iterated learning model of the emergence
of regularity and irregularity. IEEE Transactions on
Evolutionary Computation, 5, 102Trans
Larson, E. J., & Witham, L. (1997). Scientists are still
keeping the faith. Nature, 386, 435‐436.
doi:10.1038/386435a0 0.Larson, E. J., & Witham, L.
(1998). Leading scientists still reject God. Nature, 394,
313.
Lombrozo, T. (2006). The structure and function of
explanations. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10, 464‐470.
Lombrozo, T. (2009). Explanation and categorization:
How "why?" informs "what?" Cognition, 110, 248‐253.
Lombrozo, T. & Carey, S. (2006). Functional explanation
and the function of explanation. Cognition, 99, 167‐
204.
Lombrozo, T., Kelemen, D., & Zaitchik, D. (2007).
Inferring Design. Psychological Science, 18, 8,chologi
Norenzayan, A, Atran, S., Faulkner, J. & Schaller, M.
(2006). Memory and Mystery: The Cultural Selection
of Minimally Counterintuitive Narratives. Cognitive
Science 30, 531‐53.
Psalms. (n.d.). In The Bible (KJV) (pp. 104: 14, 15).
Tweney, Ryan D., M. Afzal Upal, Lauren O. Gonce, D.
Jason Slone & Katie Edwards (2006). The creative
structuring of counterintuitive worlds. Journal of
Cognition & Culture, 6, 483‐98.
Wellman, H. M. (1992). The child's theory of mind. MIT
Press Cambridge, MA.

Acknowledgments
We thank the Concepts & Cognition Lab for feedback and
help with data collection, and Kevin Uttich and Anna
Rafferty for comments on earlier drafts. This research
was supported by an Oxford Cognition, Religion, and
Theology Grant awarded to the second author.

References
Aristotle, Physics (Vols. 1‐8, Vol. 2).
Atran, S. (1994). Core domains versus scientific
theories: Evidence from systematics and Itza‐Maya
folkbiology. Mapping the mind: Domain specificity in
cognition and culture, 316ng th
Atran, S. (1998). Folk biology and the anthropology of
science: Cognitive universals and cultural particulars.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 21(04), 547l and
Boyer, P. (2003). Religious thought and behaviour as
by‐products of brain function. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 7(3), 119n Cog
Boyer, P., & Ramble, C. (2001). Cognitive templates for
religious concepts: cross‐cultural evidence for recall of
counter‐intuitive representations. Cognitive Science,
25(4), 535e Sci
Casler, K., & Kelemen, D. (2008). Developmental
Continuity in Teleo‐Functional Explanation: Reasoning
about Nature among Romanian Romani Adults. Journal
of Cognition and Development, 9(3), 23.
Frazier, B.N, Wellman, H.M & Gelman, S.A. (Under

1306

