UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The resolution of ambiguity during conversation: More than mere mimicry?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8vj189hc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Roche, Jennifer
Dale, Rick
Kreuz, Roger J.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The resolution of ambiguity during conversation: More than mere mimicry?
Jennifer Roche (jroche@memphis.edu)

Rick Dale (radale@memphis.edu)

Roger J. Kreuz (rkreuz@memphis.edu)
Department of Psychology, 202 Psychology Building
Memphis, TN 38152 USA
Abstract

end. Recent research suggests that this strategy of
responding is relatively egocentric. This often occurs
because cognitive load is initially reduced at the onset of the
conversation, especially when common knowledge has not
been fully established (Bard, Anderson, Chen, Nicholson,
Harvard, & Dazel-Job, 2007; Rayner, Carlson, & Frayser,
1983; Schober, 1993). Taking an egocentric perspective
may eventually become quite cumbersome if the speaker
must continually adjust his/her own previous statements
when the message is unclear (Levelt, 1989; Miller &
Johnson-Laird, 1976). In order to resolve the confusion,
interlocutors must perceive the existing ambiguity early on
in the conversation. If the existing ambiguity is realized,
then there will be no need to restate the message because it
will not be misunderstood. Therefore, it is important to
investigate how individuals recover during these instances
of miscommunication.
Haywood, Pickering and Branigan (2004) have
demonstrated an effective method in which conversation
partners may resolve instances of ambiguity. These authors
suggest that syntactic priming is an effective and automatic
strategy interlocutors use to communicate effectively with
each other (Garrod & Pickering, 2004). They maintain that
under certain situations (e.g., giving instructions)
conversation partners will initially respond ambiguously
unless they are primed to disambiguate. This type of
syntactic strategy shows the listener how to correctly clarify
his/her statements. Haywood, Pickering, and Branigan have
also shown that syntactic priming has a quite substantial
effect on future utterances. This is beneficial to the speakers,
because s/he realizes how to disambiguate his/her own
statements without explicitly being instructed to do so.
Priming clearly has a dominant influence in dialogue, but
interlocutors rarely implement this strategy on their own
(Haywood, Pickering, & Branigan, 2004). It should be
considered that the effect of the prime might merely
represent the automaticity of aligning at the syntactic level
(Garrod & Pickering, 2004; Pickering & Garrod, 2004).
This level of alignment could represent conversational
mimicry, rather than the understanding of why the speaker
is required to disambiguate. Other strategies are possible
and it is imperative to evaluate other cues speakers may
retroactively use to elucidate confusing situations (Horton &
Keysar, 1996). The studies reported here will evaluate the
contribution of linguistic and/or non-linguistic behavioral
cues to the breakdown in communication. If priming truly
represents the mechanism behind disambiguation, then there

Interlocutors often omit important words during conversation,
which can lead to miscommunication during ambiguous scenarios
(Rayner, Carlson, & Frasyer, 1983). Haywood, Pickering and
Branigan (2004) show that under ambiguous situations, listeners
are highly sensitive to syntactic primes. The studies reported here
evaluated the effects of linguistic and nonlinguistic cues to
ambiguity. Experiment 1 implemented a syntactic prime and a
visual mistake from a pseudo-confederate to promote
disambiguation. Participants were successfully primed to
disambiguate their statements during the pseudo-conversation but
the visual mistake had no effect. Experiment 2 evaluated the effect
of the visual mistake in the absence of a prime during an
ambiguous pseudo-conversation. There was a significant effect of
visual mistake for participants who believed they were speaking
with a real person. Overall, participants did not merely mimic their
pseudo-conversation partner’s syntactic prime, but perceived other
cues to the breakdown in communication to better clarify their own
statements.
Keywords: Priming; conversation; language; linguistics;
nonverbal communication

Introduction
Verbal and nonverbal communication requires individuals
to correctly decode meaning behind an intended message.
However, there is a great deal of ambiguity that naturally
occurs during conversation. This may occur because
individuals are presented with a multitude of information
during communication scenarios (i.e., foreground and
background information, with an influence from visual,
auditory, and motor events). Yet interlocutors have the
ability to interpret the intended message with relatively little
difficulty (Garrod & Pickering, 2004; Pickering & Garrod,
2004). In fact, miscommunication often occurs (e.g., leaving
out a seemingly useless bit of information because it’s
utility is not recognized; Guhe & Bard, 2008). Individuals
often leave out a single word that could help clarify the
intended meaning behind a statement (e.g., “that” to group
two objects as one, Haywood, Pickering, & Branigan,
2004). Some researchers have suggested that choices in the
use of syntax are influenced by ease of production (Bock,
1986; Branigan, Pickering & Cleland, 2000).
This ease in production may help explain why
interlocutors often omit information during conversations.
Individuals may leave out words because it is initially easier
to exclude information when s/he is unsure of what his/her
communicative partner already knows (Lee, 2001; Levelt,
1989; Horton & Keysar, 1996). This strategy may save the
speaker time in the beginning, but it will be costly in the

206

should be no differences between the use of a prime and the
inclusion of a non-linguistic cue.

there were two instances in which the participant could
disambiguate his/her instructions. Finally, visual stimuli
included 48 pre-recorded pseudo-confederate video
responses to the participant statements. Each condition
contained a total of 48 videos, which differed by the type of
pseudo-confederate video response the participant received
(mistake or correct).
The unambiguous condition included 7 videos that
contained a mistake in which the pseudo-confederate moved
the wrong container or object. The ambiguous condition
included 7 pseudo-confederate videos comprised of a
container and object that was initially moved, but then the
correct container + object was moved. Finally, the incorrect
conditions included 7 pseudo-confederate videos comprised
of cases in which the corresponding separate container and
object were moved, but the correct grouped (C+O) object
was never moved (see Figure 1b, for an example of video
presentation). It should be noted that the video files that
contained mistakes all occurred in the beginning (first 24
trials) of the experiment and were pseudo-randomly
assigned to each condition.

Experiment 1
The original Haywood, Branigan and Pickering (2004)
study used a live confederate to prime participants to
disambiguate during a two-referent instructional task. They
found that participants were more likely to disambiguate on
future trials if they were exposed to a syntactic prime (e.g.,
the complementizer “that”) that resolved existing ambiguity.
This study was successfully replicated using a pseudoconfederate (pre-recorded confederate statements; Roche,
Caucci, Dale, & Kreuz, 2009; Roche, Dale, & Caucci,
2009). The next logical step to understanding how
interlocutors resolve ambiguity during conversation was to
evaluate other possible strategies they might use to
disambiguate. The current study evaluated the contribution
of a prime (“that”) and a non-linguistic behavior cue (a
visual mistake) to disambiguating ambiguous scenarios. If
participants recognize the non-linguistic cue as a salient
indication of their own ambiguity, they should then increase
the number of times they disambiguate during the entirety
of the conversation.

Method
Participants. Participants included 23 University of
Memphis undergraduate students (mean age = 19.84 years
years; 13 females). All participants were native speakers of
American English with normal to corrected vision and no
reports of hearing/speech impairments.
Materials. The experiment took place in a private
laboratory room. Participants were seated at a comfortable
distance from a 20-inch iMac computer screen. A headset
with microphone was used to present and record acoustic
data.
MATLAB PsychToolbox-3 programs (Brainard,
1997) controlled stimulus presentation and recorded
participant responses for the conversation.

Figure 1. a) The 5x5 grid of objects to be moved by the
participant; b) Represents the screen participants see after
they have finished giving their instruction to the pseudoconfederate (the small box in the right corner was the video
presented to the participant).

Stimuli. There were 3 conditions (ambiguous,
unambiguous, and incorrect), 12 rounds and 8 instructions
per round (4 participant and 4 pseudo-confederate
instructions per round). Experimental object stimuli
included twenty-five images placed in a 5x5 grid. These
grids contained four types of images (13 containers and/or
objects, 4 containers + objects and 8 geometric shapes; see
Figure 1a for an example of object placement; with 8 empty
cells by the end of the round). Auditory stimuli included 48
pre-recorded pseudo-confederate statements (44.1kHz, 16
bit sampling rate, with equated RMS amplitude to adjust for
comfortable listening level and to prevent unwanted
acoustic cuing) that described 4 types of instruction
statements about the object to be moved [e.g., container,
object, “that” prime (container + object), no prime
(container + object), see Table 1 for example statements]. It
should be noted that there was only one prime from the
pseudo-confederate per round (12 primes total). However,

Table 1. Examples of pseudo-confederate instructions (C:
Container, O: Object, C+O: Container + Object.
Object
C

Prime
No

Statement
“Put the bucket on the circle.”

O

No

“Put the paperclip on the stop sign.”

No

“Put the pencil in the flowerpot on the
rectangle.”

Yes

“Put the potato that’s in the bucket on the
diamond.”

C+O

Procedure. To begin, the participant was seated next to a
Caucasian female confederate while completing the
informed consent, but separated during the experimental
sessions. This is an important to control, because much of

207

Results

perceived talker variability is related to race and gender
(Ryalls, Zipprer, & Bauldauff, 1997; Walton & Orlikoff,
1994). Therefore, it was important to match the confederate
to the pseudo-confederate’s race and gender, to conceal the
deception of the task. Participants were then told that their
conversation partner (the confederate) would receive
instructions first, in a separate room. Once the participant
and confederate were separated, the participant was told that
they were separated from his/her conversation partner in
order to obtain uncontaminated auditory recordings, because
individuals often speak over each other during
conversations.
Participants were assigned to 1 of 3 conditions that
differed based on the pseudo-confederate’s video responses
(i.e., ambiguous, unambiguous or incorrect). The participant
and pseudo-confederate took turns giving instructions about
moving objects around the screen (8 instructions per round:
4 participant and 4 pseudo-confederate). It should be noted
that each pseudo-confederate statement and video file had a
2s delay before its presentation to imply she was thinking
about giving and receiving the instruction.
Participants were informed that the pseudo-confederate
would initiate the conversation because she had been
viewing the first screen longer. After each pseudoconfederate response, the participant was asked to follow
the instructions provided by his/her conversation partner.
Once the participant finished moving his/her object, s/he
would click a button to transition to another screen to
provide instruction to his/her partner (e.g., the object to be
moved had a yellow background, and its location had a
yellow highlight around it). Once the participant finished
giving his/her partner instructions, a smaller window would
pop-up on the screen showing the participant if his/her
partner made a correct or an incorrect response.
To ensure participants understood the task, they were
presented with a brief video prior to the experimental
session. This video included 3 mock trials, with 2 male
talkers providing each other with instructions and moving
the objects around the screen. Once the video was finished,
the researcher then asked the participants to rephrase the
instructions for the task in their own words. When the
researcher felt the participant understood the task, the
participant was then asked to make a mental note of how
many mistakes were made by his/her conversation partner
during the experiment (this helped the researchers determine
if they were paying attention to the mistakes). All
participants recognized the existence of the mistakes, but on
average reported viewing 3-5 out of 12 mistakes (this was
not surprising, since the experiment lasted about an hour).
Upon completion of the experimental session, the
confederate returned and participants were asked, “Would
you be surprised if I told you that you were not actually
speaking with the person sitting next to you?” The resulting
percentage of deceived participants was 92.3%.

A 3 (Condition: ambiguous, unambiguous, & incorrect) x
3 (Block: rounds 1-4, 5-8, & 9-12) mixed fixed effects,
repeated measures model with a compound symmetry
variance-covariance structure was used to assess the
proportion of disambiguated responses from participants
during the pseudo-conversation. This model provided nonsignificant results between the three conditions (see Table 2
for means and standard errors). However, it should be noted
that the results from the current experiment did in fact
replicate Haywood, Pickering and Branigan’s (2004) study,
suggesting that participants were significantly affected by
the prime (no prime: 25% said “that”, 15% disambiguated;
prime: 53% said “that”, 60% disambiguated).
Table 2. Means and standard errors for the proportion of
disambiguation for each condition.
Condition
ambiguous

Mean
0.55

SE
0.15

unambiguous

0.63

0.09

incorrect

0.49

0.14

Discussion. The results from Experiment 1 replicated
Haywood, Pickering and Branigan’s (2004) study
suggesting that participants used the syntactic prime “that”
reliably to disambiguate their statements. This suggests that
the use of a syntactic prime is effective for disambiguation.
Unfortunately, including a visual mistake with a syntactic
prime did not seem to significantly influence interlocutors.
The interpretation of this non-significant effect may be that
the results are an indication of the strength of the prime
“that”. The prime may have been a highly effective cue
participants used to disambiguate. However, the prime alone
may have created a ceiling effect in which participants were
unable to find a more creative strategy of responding, thus
leaving the effect of the behavioral cue hidden. An
egocentric perspective may prevent participants from using
a syntactic prime, such as “that”. Under more natural
situations, interlocutors must find other methods to help
them disambiguate confusing scenarios.

Experiment 2
Experiment 1 replicated Haywood, Pickering, and
Branigan’s (2004) study, but failed to show an effect of the
visual mistake. Regardless of the null effect, it is still
important to evaluate the influence of non-linguistic
behavioral cues to communication breakdown. Haywood,
Pickering and Branigan suggest that interlocutors often do
not automatically use complementizers on their own to
disambiguate. They suggest that a listener should be primed
to do so, but this is not to say syntactic priming of this
nature never occurs naturally. Interlocutors must find other
methods to demonstrate the ambiguity perceived, if the
syntactic strategy is not naturally elicited. This is especially

208

important when it is too costly to explicitly describe the
ambiguity (e.g., under time constraint).
Therefore, evaluating the use of other strategies
interlocutors may enlist during perceived ambiguity is
crucial. Again, a syntactic prime is an extremely effective
and powerful strategy interlocutors may use to disambiguate
ambiguous scenarios. The prevailing nature of the syntactic
priming effect might have dampened the effects of the nonlinguistic behavioral cue to communication breakdown in
Experiment 1. The purpose of Experiment 2 was to evaluate
the effects of non-linguistic behavioral cues to
miscommunication in the absence of a syntactic prime. If
this is an effective cue to disambiguation, then priming that
may never occur naturally may be unnecessary under certain
communicative scenarios.

participants was 67%. Since some participants were not
deceived by the experimental design, the statistical analysis
for this experiment will include Deception as a factor.
A 2 (Condition: correct & mistakes) x 2 (Deception:
deceived & not deceived) x 3 (Block: rounds 1-4, 5-8, & 912) mixed repeated fixed effects model with a first-order
auto-regressive (AR1) variance-covariance structure, was
used to evaluate the probability that individuals
disambiguate their statements during an ambiguous
instruction task. Upon initial analysis of the variancecovariance structure, the AR1 variance-covariance structure
was used because it seemed to have the best fit for the data.
The results from this model suggests there was a significant
main effect of deception [F(1, 14.139) = 10.593, p <.01);
see Figure 2] and block [F(2, 24.933) = 5.087, p < .05) see
Figure 3]. The model also revealed a significant Condition x
Deception interaction [F(1, 14.139) = 12.682, p < .005); see
Figure 4].
The main effect of deception revealed that deceived
individuals disambiguated their statements 36.9% more than
participants who were not deceived (see Figure 2).

Method
Participants. Participants included 16 University of
Memphis undergraduate students (mean age = 19.64 years;
12 females). All participants were native speakers of
American English with normal to corrected vision and no
reports of hearing/speech impairments.
Materials. All the materials were identical to those in
Experiment 1.
Stimuli. There were 2 conditions (correct or mistake), 12
rounds with 8 instructions per round (4 participant and 4
pseudo-confederate instructions per round). The object
stimuli for this experiment were identical to Experiment 1.
The auditory stimuli were identical to Experiment 1, except
the prime “that” was removed. The vocally produced word
“that” was clipped at the zero crossing at the onset and
offset of the production from the original sound files using
Audacity. The video stimuli consisted of either a correct
response or a mistake provided by the pseudo-confederate.
There were a total of 12 mistakes pseudo-randomly assigned
throughout the mistake condition. The construction of the
mistake was identical to the mistakes created for the
“incorrect” condition in Experiment 1 (the incorrect objects
were moved).

Figure 2. Means and standard errors for the proportion of
disambiguated statements for deceived and not deceived
participants.
Post-hoc adjusted Bonferroni pair-wise comparisons for
the main effect of block revealed that there were
significantly fewer instances of disambiguation in block 1,
relative to block 2 (19.7%, p < .05) and marginally different
than block 3 (18.5%, p = .08; see Figure 3 for means and
standard errors).

Procedure. The setup and instructions to the participants
were identical to Experiment 1. It should be noted that the
pseudo-confederate video presented to participants was
moved to the middle of the computer screen to increase the
likelihood that the participants would see the mistake. All
participants noticed the mistakes and were able to reliably
describe the mistakes when asked, but reported seeing on
average 2-3 mistakes out of 12. This is not surprising since
the experiment lasted about an hour.

Figure 3. Means and standard errors for the probability of
disambiguating during the 1st four rounds, 2nd four rounds
and last four rounds.

Results
Upon the completion of the experimental session,
participants were asked, “Would you be surprised if I told
you that you were not actually speaking with the person
sitting next to you?” The resulting percentage of deceived

Post-hoc adjusted Bonferroni pair-wise comparisons for
the Condition x Deception interaction revealed that deceived
participants who viewed the pseudo-confederate mistakes

209

General Discussion

disambiguated 52.2% more than participants who did not
view mistakes (p < .001). However, there were no
significant differences between the participants who were
not deceived and the condition they were in (p = .206).

Under conditions in which an interlocutor aligns with a
pseudo-conversation partner, priming has been shown to be
highly effective (Haywood, Pickering & Branigan, 2004).
When ambiguity exists and no prime is naturally produced,
participants must find another method to help them
disambiguate. The results from these studies do in fact
support the notion that priming interlocutors is highly
effective under ambiguous scenarios. This finding is
supported by Garrod and Pickering’s (2004) theory of
interactive alignment, which suggests interlocutors
automatically align at many levels (syntactic being one of
them; Pickering & Garrod, 2004). The use of a syntactic
prime may be a successful conversation strategy if at least
one of the interlocutors is aware of the ambiguity in the
beginning of the conversation. However, if neither
participant realizes the magnitude of the ambiguity that
exists, both partners might be less likely to adopt a syntactic
strategy.
The efficiency of a syntactic prime is apparent, but the
nature of participant responses may represent mere mimicry.
The possibility that participants are mimicking the syntactic
prime may lead to disambiguation. Within this artificial,
confederate/pseudo-confederate design, it is quite possible
that participants may never become aware of the ambiguity.
This disregard of ambiguity may create a situation in which
s/he may never realize why s/he needed to disambiguate
his/her own statements. This strategy may never be elicited,
if conversation partners do not naturally prime each other
syntactically, because the ambiguity of the situation is not
apparent. This seems to be evident in Experiment 2, when
deceived participants in the correct condition disambiguate
significantly less than participants who received the nonlinguistic behavioral cue. The problem of ambiguity still
exists, in which interlocutors never use disambiguating
strategies if they do not realize there was a failure in
comprehension.
Thus, providing a visual mistake or some other type of
behavioral cue should be an alternative and effective
strategy interlocutors have available for use during natural
conversation scenarios. This notion was supported by
Experiment 2, in which the non-linguistic disambiguating
cue did in fact help the participants recognize the ambiguity.
Recognizing the vagueness in their productions was
retroactively beneficial, which allowed them revise their
statements to accommodate their listener (Horton & Keysar,
1996). This type of cue to communication breakdown
allowed participants to respond effectively and creatively
when resolving the confusion.
Unfortunately, the pseudo-confederate paradigm was less
effective because some of the participants recognized the
artificial nature of the conversation in Experiment 2. This
created a situation in which participants may have felt that it
was unnecessary to disambiguate their own statements
because there was no cost/benefit in doing so. This supports
the concept that there may have been a perceived social
exchange or reciprocal altruism necessary for the

Figure 4. Means and standard errors for the probability of
disambiguating when a behavioral cue was provided (a
mistake) or not provided (correct).
Discussion
Upon initial evaluation, only 67% of the participants were
deceived. However, when participants were asked why they
felt the deception failed, many of the participants said that
they were aware of the deception that usually occurs during
psychological experiments. Many of these participants who
were not deceived reported being upper division psychology
students or had experience participating in other psychology
experiments. This resulted in differential responding
between deceived and not deceived participants in
Experiment 2. This may have been due to the fact that some
participants were more invested (deceived participants) in
helping their conversation partner because they may have
felt they were truly influencing another person’s behavior.
The individuals who were not deceived may have felt it was
unnecessary to disambiguate, because there was nothing to
lose or gain by instructing ambiguously.
Overall, all of the participants disambiguated their
statements more as their interaction progressed. This
suggests that participants may begin instructing their
partners in an egocentric manner because they are initially
unsure about the task at hand, but as time progressed they
were able to take the other person’s perspective into
account. Also, the Deception x Condition interaction
suggests that when the conversation scenario seemed
relatively natural, providing a nonverbal behavioral cue to
miscommunication was highly effective. The non-linguistic
behavioral cue may have been successful above and beyond
the use of a prime to communicate during ambiguous
situations [Experiment 1 incorrect condition = 49%
disambiguation; Experiment 2 mistake condition = 80%
disambiguation; F(2,18.386) = 50.928, p <.001].
This suggests that a nonverbal cue to miscommunication
may be a more effective cue to use during conversations that
are ambiguous. Therefore, addressing such a concern will
allow for the evaluation of a non-linguistic behavioral cue
such as this under conditions that require interlocutors to
quickly and accurately provide information to their
conversation partner.

210

conversation to work properly (Cosmides & Tooby, 1992).
When the participants perceived no benefit in
disambiguating, they expended less effort and disregarded
the constraints of the conversation.
Another assumption in previous literatures has suggested
that humans are generally egocentric in regards to their
conversation strategies. This suggests that interlocutors
rarely take the other person’s perspective into account.
However, when participants were deceived by the paradigm,
they were highly affected by the mistake. This suggests that
when interlocutors interact with each other, if there is
something to gain or lose during a conversational situation,
they are more likely to take the other person’s perspective
into account. Therefore, the presentation of a behavioral cue
may help interlocutors assess the degree to which they
invest their energies into the conversation.
It should also be noted, that upon evaluation of the types
of syntactic structures the deceived participants chose, they
not only used the word “that”, when not primed to do so;
they also used other syntactic strategies to group the
“container+object” images. This supports the view that once
speakers become aware of the ambiguity, they are better
able to implement a syntactic strategy in the future and a
prime may be unnecessary. A non-linguistic mistake has a
dominant influence on the strategies interlocutors use to
disambiguate scenarios. Therefore, if participants
understand that they are communicating ambiguously and
there are direct perceived consequences, then they will more
quickly try to recover from their mistakes by any means
available to them.
Though the pseudo-confederate paradigm was not as
effective during the implementation of the nonverbal cue, it
was still relatively successful. Future studies should
evaluate other scenarios in which the use of a nonverbal
behavioral cue to the breakdown of communication might
be useful. For example, future studies should evaluate
nonverbal behavioral cues under time-constrained tasks.
These non-linguistic behavioral cues should also be assessed
in more natural conversation scenarios. Future evaluation of
such issues will help clarify whether or not a non-linguistic
behavioral cue to miscommunication helps interlocutors
resolve ambiguity within their own statements quickly and
naturally. Understanding the role of such behavioral cues
should provide valuable insight into how individuals are
able to communicate within their own environment.

cognitive burdens of dialogue. Journal of Memory and
Language, 57(4), 616-641.
Bock, J. (1986). Meaning, sound, and syntax: Lexical
priming in sentence production. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 12, 575586.
Brainard, D. (1997). The psychophysical toolbox. Spatial
Vision, 10, 433-436.
Branigan, H., Pickering, M. & Cleland, A. (2000). Syntactic
coordination in dialogue. Cognition, 75, B13-B25.
Cosmides, L. & Tooby, J. (1992). Cognitive adaptations for
social exchange. In J. Barkow, L. Cosmides, & J. Tooby
(Eds.), The adapted mind (pp. 162-228). New York:
Oxford University Press.
Garrod, S. & Pickering, M. (2004). Why is conversation so
easy? Trends in Cognitive Science, 8(1), 8-11.
Guhe, M. & Bard, E. (2008). Adaping referring expressions
to the task environment. Proceedings of the 30th Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society. Austin, Tx:
Cognitive Science Society.
Haywood, S., Pickering, G., & Branigan, H. (2004). Do
speakers avoid ambiguities during dialogue?
Psychological Science,16(5), 362-366.
Horton, W. & Keysar, B. (1996). When do speakers take
into account common ground? Cognition, 59, 91-117.
Lee, B. (2001). Mutual knowledge, background knowledge,
and shared beliefs: their roles in establishing common
ground. Journal of Pragmatics, 33, 21-44.
Levelt, W. (1989). Speaking: From intention to articulation.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Miller, G. & Johnson-Laird, P. (1976). Language and
perception. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Pickering, M. & Garrod, S. (2004). Toward a mechanistic
psychology of dialogue. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
27, 169-226.
Rayner, K., Carlson, M., & Frayser, L. (1983). The
interaction of syntax and semantics during sentence
processing. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 22, 358-374.
Roche, J., Dale, R., & Caucci, G. (2009). Pragmatic
alignment: The coordination of ironic statements during
pseudo-interaction. Proceedings of the 31st Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, Amsterdam,
NL.
Roche, J., Caucci, G., Dale, R., & Kreuz, R. (2009).
Conversational puppetry: Priming via pseudoconfederate. Poster presentation at the 50th annual
meeting of the Psychonomic Society. Boston, MA.
Ryalls, J., Zipprer, A., & Baldauff, P. (1997). A preliminary
investigation of the effects of gender and race on voice
onset time. Journal of Speech, Language and Hearing
Research, 40, 642-645.
Schober, M. (1993). Spatial perspective taking in
conversation. Cognition, 43, 1-24.
Walton, J. & Orlikoff, R. (1994). Speaker race identification
from acoustic cues to the vocal signal. Journal of Speech
and Hearing Research, 37, 738-745.

Acknowledgments
We thank undergraduates Ryan Morehead, Caitlin Mills,
Amy Roche-Purdy, Rachel McKelroy, and graduate
researchers Gina Caucci, Kristy Tapp, and Monica Riordan.
Preparation of the manuscript was supported by a grant from
the National Science Foundation to Rick Dale (NSF HSD0826825).

References
Bard, E., Anderson, A., Chen, Y., Nicholson, H., Harvard,
C., & Dazel-Job, S. (2007). Let’s you do that: Sharing the

211

