UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Effects of Work Shift and Strategy on an Orientation Task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/72m0j0zx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Halverson, Tim
Gunzelmann, Glenn
Moore Jr., L. Richard
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Effects of Work Shift and Strategy on an Orientation Task
Tim Halverson (thalverson@gmail.com)
Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education
Air Force Research Laboratory
Mesa, AZ 85212 USA

Glenn Gunzelmann (glenn.gunzelmann@mesa.afmc.af.mil)
Air Force Research Laboratory
Mesa, AZ 85212 USA
L. Richard Moore Jr. (larry.moore@mesa.afmc.af.mil)
Lockheed Martin
Air Force Research Laboratory
Mesa, AZ 85212 USA

Hans P.A. Van Dongen (hvd@wsu.edu)
Sleep and Performance Research Center, Washington State University
Spokane, WA 99210 USA
Abstract
Cognitive alertness decreases at night due to circadian
rhythms with adverse effects on performance across domains
and tasks, including real-world tasks like driving and flying.
Additionally, the strategy used on a task may have a
substantial effect on performance. However, little is known
about whether and how circadian rhythms and strategy
interact to affect performance. The current study investigates
participants’ performance on an orientation task performed
over a period of two weeks. Participants were assigned to
simulated day or night shift conditions, and were trained to
use one of two strategies for the orientation task. The results
indicated that shift condition had little impact on a more
declarative strategy for the task, but had a significant impact
on a more spatial strategy. The results illustrate how different
aspects of cognitive functioning may be affected differently
by circadian rhythms, and point to some important
implications for training and task performance in real-world
contexts.
Keywords: spatial; sleep; circadian rhythm; fatigue; learning;
shift work

Introduction
Critical, safety-sensitive activities, such as driving and air
traffic control, are performed at all times of the day and
night. Yet, it is not well understood how nighttime
operations affect task performance in contexts such as these.
Most research on night and shift work has focused on how
shift differences affect sleep and frequency of accidents
(e.g., Åkerstedt, 1988). Little work has focused on how shift
work and task differences affect different cognitive
processes alone or in interaction.
Variations in alertness due to circadian rhythms and sleep
loss have been shown to affect various components of
cognitive functioning (Jackson & Van Dongen, in press).
For example, vigilant attention (Lim & Dinges, 2008),
perceptual learning (Mednick, Nakayama & Stickgold,

2003), and motor learning (Walker, Brakefield, Morgan,
Hobson & Stickgold, 2003) are all affected by fluctuations
in alertness associated with time awake and circadian
rhythms.
For shift work, circadian rhythms are particularly
important. Circadian rhythms are driven by a biological
clock in the suprachiasmatic nuclei of the hypothalamus,
which imposes cyclical changes in alertness throughout the
day, leading to increased pressure for sleep at night. This
leads to nocturnal degradations in cognitive performance
(Van Dongen & Dinges, 2005), as demonstrated in a variety
of tasks and domains (e.g. Caldwell, 2003; Dinges, 1995).
The present research investigates how strategies recruiting
different
cognitive-perceptual
processes
may
be
differentially affected by fluctuations in alertness resulting
from circadian rhythms in laboratory-simulated shift work.
This is accomplished within the context of a spatial
direction task, where distinct alternative cognitive strategies
have been identified (Gunzelmann, Anderson & Douglass,
2004). In this task, participants are presented with two views
of a set of objects (Figure 1). One of the views (the left side
in Figure 1) is an overhead, ego-oriented perspective, based
on a viewpoint at the bottom of the screen. Within the egooriented view, one of the objects (small circles) in each trial
is filled in to identify it as a target. The other view (the right
side in Figure 1) shows a map-like perspective with the
viewpoint indicated by the arrow, which may be misaligned
relative to the ego-oriented view on the left. The task
requires participants to identify the location of the target in
the map-like perspective.
In the study described here, participants were taught to
use one of two strategies for the spatial direction task: one
based on counting and the other on mental rotation, as in
Gunzelmann et al. (2004). The strategies are described in
more detail below. The key feature is that the strategies
emphasize different cognitive functions, declarative and

2134

spatial, and lead to reliably different performance in
participants trained to use them.
The alternative strategies for the spatial direction task
offer an opportunity to explore how different cognitive
capabilities may vary in their susceptibility to fluctuations in
alertness. Such variations can be important in naturalistic
contexts, where a variety of strategies may be available. To
address this issue in the context of a common situation, we
compare performance on the spatial direction task between
individuals placed on a simulated night shift schedule for
two weeks versus individuals sleeping according to a
simulated day shift schedule.

Method
This experiment was conducted as part of a larger study to
understand how circadian rhythms and sleep disruption
affect performance in a variety of domains.

Participants
Twenty-six individuals, 14 female and 12 male, ranging in
age from 22 to 39 years old (mean = 27), from the general
community of Spokane, Washington participated in the
experiment. The participants were screened to be healthy
and without sleep disorders, with no evidence of brain
damage or learning disabilities, and free of drugs of abuse.
Participants gave written informed consent, and were paid
for their participation.

Stimuli
Participants completed the task shown in Figure 1. There are
8 possible target locations and 8 possible misalignments (45
degree intervals). However, performance is roughly
equivalent for right-left mirrored stimuli (see Gunzelmann
et al., 2004). For instance, response times for targets located
in the lower-left and lower-right positions are similar for a
given misalignment. Likewise, response times are similar
for misalignments that differ only in the rotation direction,
such as assumed perspectives at positions 4 versus 6 on the
map. Because of this correspondence, participants were
presented with only one of these trials in each session. There
were therefore 25 trials per session — 5 target locations
(bottom, near, middle, far, and top) crossed with 5
misalignments (0, 45, 90, 135, and 180 degrees) — which
were presented in random order.
Participants responded using the numeric keypad portion
of a computer keyboard, which was spatially mapped to the
possible response locations on the map view. So, if the
correct response was the bottom position on the map (as it is
in the sample trial shown in Figure 1), participants
responded by pressing the “2” on the numeric keypad.

Procedure

Participants were in the laboratory for fourteen consecutive
days. The first day was a baseline day with 10 hours in bed
for sleep (22:00–08:00). Subsequently, some of the
participants (n = 12) changed to a simulated night shift.
Night shift participants were given five hours in bed (15:00–
20:00) on the second baseline day, before starting five
consecutive work days with
10 hours in bed during the
daytime (10:00–20:00) on
each day. On the seventh
and eighth day, night shift
participants had a simulated
weekend during which they
had 5 hours in bed (10:00–
15:00), 7 hours awake, 10
hours in bed during the
night (22:00–08:00), 7
hours awake, and then 5
hours in bed (15:00–20:00)
before resuming their night
shift schedule for the next 5
days.
This
schedule
represented a stereotypical
schedule for individuals
working a night shift, who
frequently shift back to a
nighttime sleep schedule
during weekends. After the
last night shift day, night
Figure 1: An example trial. The target on the overhead ego-oriented view (left side), indicated shift participants received 5
by the filled circle, is at middle distance to the right of center. The perspective on the map view hours in bed (10:00–15:00),
(right side), indicated by the arrow, is misaligned by 90° clockwise. The correct response in
7 hours awake, and then, on
this example trial is “2.”
the final day of the study,

2135

were given 10 hours in bed (22:00–08:00) for recovery.
Participants on the day shift (n = 14) maintained the same
sleep schedule throughout the study, with 10 hours in bed
(22:00–08:00) each night. Note that participants on the day
shift and night shift schedules were given the same amount
of time in bed over the course of the experiment, although it
was distributed differently.
Participants completed fifty-one test sessions of the
spatial direction task over the fourteen consecutive days,
with 2 to 4 sessions per day. On the first baseline day,
participants completed three sessions; on the second
baseline day, they completed two sessions. On each of the
remaining days of the study, participants completed four
sessions up until the last day when they completed two
sessions.
Before the first session, participants were presented with
instructions for the task, including training for either the
rotation (n = 13) or counting (n = 13) strategy for which
they completed four practice sessions. Training on the
rotation strategy encouraged the participants to mentally
rotate the relative positions of the viewpoint and the target
on the overhead view (left side) to align them with the
viewpoint indicated on the map view (right side).
Specifically, they were taught to imagine an angle that
connects the viewpoint (indicated by the “You” arrow) to
the target on the overhead view, with the vertex at the center
of the field (a 90 degree angle in Figure 1). They were then
told to mentally shift to the map view, and to rotate the
angle so that the arrow in the overhead view was aligned
with the arrow in the map view (a rotation of 90 degrees
clockwise in the trial shown in Figure 1). At this point, the
answer could be determined by finding the target end of the
angle.
Training on the counting strategy taught the participants
to count the number of objects from the arrow at the bottom
of the ego-oriented view to the target position (the count is 2
in Figure 1) and note the direction in which the target was
located (counterclockwise in Figure 1). They were then told
to count the same number of steps around the map view in
the appropriate direction from the location indicated by the
smaller arrow.

Results
The analyses focused on how the study condition (night
shift versus day shift) interacted with the trained task
strategy to affect performance. Previous research using this
task has shown that some people use special-case strategies
when the target is at the top (“across from where I am”) or
bottom (“where I am”) of the ego-oriented view
(Gunzelmann et al., 2004). In order to ensure that the
analysis truly reflected differences in the use of the counting
and rotation strategies, these special cases were removed
from the analysis. Additionally, we only included data in the
analysis for sessions when the sleep schedules were
different for the two groups (i.e., when the night shift group
was up at night), that is, days 3 to 7 and days 9 to 13.

Linear mixed-effect models were used for the analysis,
using the R environment (R Development Core Team,
2009) with the nlme package (Pinheiro, Bates, DebRoy,
Sarkar & the R Core Team, 2009). The skewed distribution
of the response time data was corrected using an inverse
square root. An alpha level of .05 was used for all statistical
tests.
The analysis concentrated on the effects of the strategy
that the participant was taught (rotation or count), the work
shift of the participant (day or night), the day of
participation, the location of the target (near, mid, and far),
and misalignment between camera and target view (0°, 45°,
90°, 135°, and 180°). These were all included in the nlme
analysis as multi-level factors, except for day, which was
continuous. Participant was used as a repeated-measure
grouping factor, and intercept, target and misalignment were
included as random factors.
Table 1 shows the mean response times by strategy and
shift. Neither the strategy, F(1, 22) = 0.05, p = .83, nor the
shift, F(1, 22) = 0.47, p = .50, displayed a simple main
effect on response time. As seen in Figure 2, participants
performed better in later days, F(1, 15458) = 2,300, p <
.001, reflecting a learning curve. As seen in Figure 3, targets
located further away required more time, F(2, 15458) = 81,
p < .001, and larger misalignments also required more time,
F(4, 15458) = 150, p < .001. Additionally, misalignment
had a larger effect when targets were further away, F(8,
15458) = 26, p < .001.
Performance improved more as time progressed for
participants using the rotation strategy than for participants
using the count strategy, F(1, 15458) = 11, p < .001.
Performance of participants on the day shift improved faster
than that of participants on the night shift, F(1, 15458) = 21,
p < .001. Figure 2 shows the interaction of strategy, shift,
and day, which was significant, F(1, 15458) = 15, p = .008.
Up until day six, participants using the rotation strategy
were performing worse, no matter which shift they worked,
than those using the counting strategy. Later, participants
using the rotation strategy on the night shift eventually
reached the performance level of those using the count
strategy, and participants using the rotation strategy on the
day shift outperformed the other groups.
Observed error rates were low (M = 4%, SD = 3%). The
error rates tended to correlate with the response time (r2 =
0.58), suggesting that the between-group differences did not
stem from a speed-accuracy trade-off.
An analysis of the baseline data alone was conducted to
explore the possible influence of differences among the
groups at the start on the observed effects. Importantly,
neither the strategy, F(1, 22) < 0.01, p = .99, the shift, F(1,
Table 1: Mean (SD) response times (ms) by strategy and shift.
Shift
Day
Night

2136

Strategy

Counting

2016 (802)

2113 (945)

Rotation

2015 (1033)

2210 (1041)

//
Figure 2. Reaction time as a function of strategy trained, work shift, and day in study. Data from days 1 and 2 (baseline) prior
to work shift and day 14 (last day) after work shift are shown for reference, but were not included in the primary analysis. The
sleep schedule was interrupted by a simulated weekend on day eight (dotted line), which was not included in the analysis or
shown here. Error bars indicate ±1 standard error.

Figure 3. Response time as a function of misalignment and
target location. Error bars are too small to be visible.
22) = 0.12, p = .73, nor their interaction, F(1, 22) = 0.04, p =
.85, were significant, indicating that the groups were
roughly equivalent in their performance at the start.

Discussion
All of the participants gained extensive expertise in the task
by performing the task multiple times per day over a twoweek period. Still, the strategy the participants trained on

and the work shift to which they were assigned had a
significant impact on performance.
During the first two days of the experiment (i.e., baseline
days), performance was not significantly different across
work shift conditions, which supports the conclusion that
differences seen in the subsequent weeks were real and not a
result of selection bias. Differences seen in the baseline
condition with respect to strategy are consistent with
previous research using this task (Gunzelmann et al., 2004).
As seen in Figure 2, participants trained to use the counting
strategy initially performed slightly better (but not
significantly better) than participants trained to use the
rotation strategy, and, as shown in Figure 3, misalignment
angle and target location interacted, both of which are in
line with those previous results.
Participants on the night shift tended to perform worse
than those on the day shift. Previous research has shown
that performance on a variety of tasks tends to be worse at
night (e.g., Van Dongen & Dinges, 2005) and a number of
commercial and industrial disasters have been attributed to
degraded cognitive functioning associated with such shift
work (Caldwell, 2003; Dinges, 1995). Further, within each
shift condition, participants using the rotation strategy
tended to perform worse than those using the counting
strategy. As with the baseline data, this was expected, as it
is consistent with previous research (Gunzelmann et al.,

2137

2004). However, the results also suggest that, although
initially more difficult, the rotation strategy may be a more
efficient approach to the task by the end of the experiment
(at least in the day shift condition).
Asymptotic performance appears to have been reached
earlier when the counting strategy was used. Further,
asymptotic performance appears to have been the same for
day and night shift when the counting strategy was used.
When the rotation strategy was used, the rate of
performance improvement was reduced. However, on the
night shift, performance using the rotation strategy was
eventually equivalent to performance using the counting
strategy. Moreover, on the day shift, performance with the
rotation strategy continued to improve through the end of
the protocol, and was eventually better than the performance
in all other conditions. These results suggest that (a)
learning occurs faster for the counting strategy than for the
rotation strategy, (b) the task is learned equally well when
the counting strategy is used whether performed during the
day or night, (c) the task is not learned as well at night when
the rotation strategy is used, and (d) the rotation strategy
may ultimately display the greatest amount of learning,
when performed during the day.
So what could cause this interaction of strategy and shift?
One possibility is the familiarity of the knowledge and
transformations needed for the two strategies. The counting
strategy relies heavily on well-known facts: the order of
integers. That familiarity may have limited the impact of
lower alertness and allowed participants on the night shift to
arrive at a level of performance comparable to those on the
day shift by the second half of the experiment.
In contrast, the rotation strategy may rely on knowledge
that is less well practiced, thus requiring more cognitive or
perceptual learning. Mental rotation is often associated with
the visual perceptual system (e.g., Kosslyn, Thompson, &
Ganis, 2006). While mental rotation is a well-practiced
process, it may be stimulus or task specific. For instance,
research has shown that the rate of rotation varies with
stimulus complexity (Bethell-Fox & Shepard, 1988). While
the stimuli in this task are relatively simple, the angle to be
rotated by the participants is defined only by the end points,
which may have added to the difficulty in maintaining an
accurate visualization. Results of this imaginal visualization
may be more difficult to learn or recall with a lower level of
alertness, thus resulting in slower performance for
participants on the night shift.
With practice, specific angles and rotations may be
consolidated and stored in declarative memory. Within a
session, the same combination of target and misalignment
angle was never repeated. However, trials were repeated
across sessions. This may have allowed participants to learn
the results of mental rotations over days.
In addition, the rotation strategy may allow for more
optimization of the procedural knowledge than does the
counting strategy. Perhaps because mental rotations require
more effort than counting, there was more pressure for
additional optimization in the rotation strategy. Initially, the

task takes longer to execute using the rotation strategy. This
extra time may work as additional pressure to optimize
(either explicitly or implicitly) the procedural knowledge
brought to bear on the task. Further, variations in alertness
may affect the pressure to optimize or the results of the
optimization.
If the rotation strategy involves more learning throughout
the task, either through declarative or procedural knowledge
processes, then this may explain why participants using that
strategy on the night shift performed more poorly. It is
possible that one effect of decreased alertness is to decrease
the effectiveness of learning. Specifically, fluctuations in
alertness may affect the encoding, consolidation, or retrieval
of declarative knowledge gained through effortful processes,
like mental rotations, or interfere with the optimization of
procedural knowledge (Jackson & Van Dongen, in press).
Importantly, performance on the last day of the
experiment, when all participants performed the task during
the day, does not support the argument that memory
retrieval was the cause of slowed performance at night.
Performance continued to improve only for participants
using the rotation strategy on the day shift, but remained
fairly consistent with the previous three days for all other
participants. If retrieval processes, rather than learning or
encoding, were causally involved, we would expect
performance for night shift participants using the rotation
strategy to improve noticeably on the last day. Additional
research is required to determine if declarative knowledge,
procedural knowledge, or both are affected by decreased
alertness when performing orientation tasks at night.

Conclusion
Performance differences based on strategy and sleep
patterns have both real-world and theoretical importance.
The results have implications for task training and
performance in real-world contexts, and also illustrate how
different cognitive processes may be affected differently by
circadian rhythms.
This study shows that training must be evaluated in
context. The time of day in which the task will be performed
and the time allowed for training need to be considered,
among other things. If the choice of strategy were based
upon the best day shift performance alone, the preferred
strategy in this task may be rotation. However, shift alone is
only part of the story. The rotation strategy resulted in
performance improvements over the counting strategy only
near the end of the two-week experiment. If the training
period were short or if consistent performance across shifts
were an important criterion, a strategy that uses familiar
knowledge, as the count strategy does, may be more
beneficial.
Choosing the correct strategy for the task environment
can help reduce the effects of night shift decrements in
alertness. Even small differences in performance can have
drastic effects on some tasks. Orientation tasks are
commonly performed in parallel with many time-critical
tasks, such as driving or flying. Distractions from the

2138

primary tasks of even a couple hundreds of milliseconds can
have unwanted consequences, especially when magnified in
more complex tasks and environments. This is true in many
situations, in addition to orientation tasks, where delays and
errors can have severe consequences.
This research also reveals ways in which different
components of cognitive functioning, utilized by different
strategies, are differentially affected by circadian rhythms.
The performance of individuals using the counting strategy
did not vary significantly between those on a day shift
schedule and those on a night shift schedule. This
robustness was likely the result of using familiar knowledge
in the strategy, leading to similar learning trends regardless
of shift assignment.
In contrast, there was a significant impact of shift on
performance for those using the rotation strategy, suggesting
that the cognitive processes involved may be less robust to
degradations in alertness at night. This vulnerability may be
due to a greater reliance on the learning of visual perceptual
information (i.e., angles and rotations), which appeared to
be hindered by lower alertness.
In conclusion, the findings presented here speak to both
the need for considering the strategy set used in a task and
the potential for decrements in learning caused by decreased
alertness. In other words, when evaluating the effects of
cognitive moderators, such as alertness, it is critical to
consider the strategy people use to complete tasks.

Acknowledgments
The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors
and do not reflect the official policy or position of the
Department of Defense or the U.S. Government. The
research was supported in part by the Air Force Research
Laboratory’s Warfighter Readiness Research Division and
grants 07HE01COR, 09RH06COR, 10RH04COR and
FA9550-09-1-0136 from the Air Force Office of Scientific
Research (AFOSR). The first author was supported by an
appointment to the Postgraduate Research Participation
Program at the U.S. Air Force Research Laboratory
administered by the Oak Ridge Institute for Science and
Education through an interagency agreement between the
U.S. Department of Energy and the Air Force Research
Laboratory. The experimental research was supported by
FMCSA grant DMC75-07-D-0006.

Dinges, D. F. (1995). An overview of sleepiness and
accidents. Journal of Sleep Research, 4(2), 4-14.
Gross, J. B., Gunzelmann, G., Gluck, K. A., Van Dongen,
H. P. A., & Dinges, D. F. (2006). Computational
modeling of the combined effects of circadian rhythm and
sleep deprivation. Proceedings of the 28th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, Vancouver,
B.C., Canada, 297-302.
Gunzelmann, G., Anderson, J. R., & Douglass, S. (2004).
Orientation tasks with multiple views of space: Strategies
and performance. Spatial Cognition and Computation,
4(3), 207-253.
Jackson, M. L. & Van Dongen, H. P. A. (in press).
Cognitive effects of sleepiness. In Thorpy, M. & Billiard,
M. (editors), Sleepiness, Cambridge University Press.
Kosslyn, S. M., Thompson, W. L., & Ganis, G. (2006). The
Case for Mental Imagery. New York: Oxford.
Lim, J. & Dinges, D. F. (2008). Sleep deprivation and
vigilant attention. Annals of the New York Academy of
Science, 1129, 305-322.
Mednick, S., Nakayama, K., & Stickgold, R. (2003). Sleepdependent learning: A nap is as good as a night. Nature
Neuroscience, 6(7), 697-698.
Pinheiro, J., Bates, D., DebRoy, S., Sarkar, D., & the R
Core Team (2009). nlme: Linear and nonlinear mixed
effects models (R package version 3.1-96) [Computer
Software].
R Development Core Team (2009). R: A language and
environment for statistical computing [Computer
Software]. Vienna, Austria.
Van Dongen, H. P. A. & Dinges, D. F. (2005). Sleep,
circadian rhythms, and psychomotor vigilance. Clinics in
Sports Medicine, 24(2), 237-249.
Walker, M. P., Brakefield, T., Morgan, A., Hobson, J. A., &
Stickgold, R. (2003). Practice with sleep makes perfect:
Sleep-dependent motor skill learning. Neuron, 35(1), 205211.

References
Åkerstedt, T. (1988). Sleepiness as a consequence of shift
work. Sleep, 11(1), 17-34.
Anderson, J. R., Bothell, D., Byrne, M. D., Douglass, S.,
Lebiere, C., & Qin, Y. (2004). An integrated theory of the
mind. Psychological Review, 111(4), 1036-1060.
Bethell-Fox, C. E. & Shepard, R. N. (1988). Mental
rotation: Effects of stimulus complexity and familiarity.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
& Performance, 14(1), 12-23.
Caldwell, J. A. (2003, Fall). Wake up to the importance of
sleep for air safety. Flightline, 30-33.

2139

