UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The role of action in perceiving and comparing functional relations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/35f878r5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Vankov, Ivan
Kokinov, Boicho

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The role of action in perceiving and comparing functional relations
Ivan Vankov (i.i.vankov@cogs.nbu.bg)
Central and East European Center for Cognitive Science
New Bulgarian University, 21 Montevideo Street, Sofia 1618, Bulgaria

Boicho Kokinov (kokinov@nbu.bg)
Central and East European Center for Cognitive Science
New Bulgarian University, 21 Montevideo Street, Sofia 1618, Bulgaria

Abstract
There is growing evidence that even the most abstract
capacities of human cognition are not entirely amodal and
disembodied. The present study presents two empirical
studies which aim to demonstrate that relational reasoning is
grounded in our sensory-motor experience. Experiment 1
shows that the affordances of tool-like objects have an effect
on comparing functional relations. Experiment 2 makes sure
that this finding can not be explained by an automatic
activation of motor systems. The results are interpreted as
evidence that at least certain functional relations are perceived
by simulating interactions with the environment. It is also
asserted that the process of comparing such relations is
constrained by the properties of the human body such as
hand-dominance.
Keywords: relations, situated cognition, embodiment, action,
simulation, analogy

Introduction
Imagine you are asked to compare the relation between an
axe and a wooden log with the relation between a meat
chopper and a piece of meat. One way to solve this problem
is to find out what relation holds in the first pair of objects,
turn it into propositional form (e.g. ‘is used to cut(axe,
wood)’), do the same for the second pair of objects and than
compare the two symbolic structures. This is what many
models of relational reasoning do (Gentner, 1983;
Falkenhainer, Forbus, & Gentner, 1989). Some models can
also establish a correspondence between distinct relational
symbols by measuring their semantic similarity (Holyoak &
Thagard, 1989; Kokinov, 1994; Hummel & Holyoak, 1997,
2003). However all these models do not address the problem
of where the relational meaning comes from (how the
propositions are encoded) and they all assume that the
process of comparing relations is amodal and disembodied
in nature.
On the other hand, there is plenty of evidence that human
cognition is inherently modal and constrained by the
characteristics of the human body (Glenberg, 1997;
Barsalou, 1999; 2008; Lakoff, 1999; Fisher & Zwaan,
2008). For example, it has been shown that the perception of
a graspable object immediately activates a potential motor
interaction with this object, even when it is task-irrelevant
(Tucker & Ellis, 1998, 2004; Beauchamp, Lee, Haxby &
Martin, 2002; Beauchamp & Martin, 2007; Buccino, Sato,
Cattaneo, Rodà & Riggio, 2009). Proponents of the

embodiment theory claim that this phenomenon is not a
mere side effect of spreading activation, but that motor
programs are part of the representation of objects. These
motor programs are used to simulate potential interactions
with an object and determine its function.
Similarly, the perception of a functional relation between
two objects should require a mental simulation of the
relevant interactions with the objects. For example, in order
to comprehend the functional relation between an axe and a
piece of wood, you would simulate grasping the axe and
chopping the wood with it. And in order to compare two
instances of functional relations you have to be able to
compare the motor dynamics resulting from simulating the
actions involved in each of the relations. Such an approach
is justified by the study of Klatzky, Pellegrino, McClosky &
Lederman (1993), which found that there is remarkable
consistency in people's knowledge about the movements
underlying functional interactions with objects. There is also
evidence that sometimes people consciously try to detect the
perceptual motor similarities of different situations in order
to evaluate how analogous they are (Clement, 2009).

Figure 1: An example of the stimuli used by V&K.
Participants had to compare the relation between the objects
in the left part with the relation in the right part of the
screen. The affordances of the objects were manipulated by
making them easier to be grasped with the left or with the
right hand. In this example, both affordances are right.
Recently, Vankov & Kokinov (2009) (henceforth V&K)
proposed a model of grounding relational meaning in
simulated interactions with the environment. According to
the model, the motor dynamics resulting from these
interactions is used not only to comprehend relations, but
also to solve the role-filler binding problem (Hummel,
1999). The model makes two major predictions. First, it

2081

predicts relation-specific motor effects when relations are
perceived, even if the task does not involve any motor
activity. The second prediction is that relations are
compared most efficiently when it is possible to simulate
the underlying interactions simultaneously or in close
temporal proximity.
V&K reported an experiment which managed to provide
support for both hypotheses. Participants were asked to
compare the functional relations in two pairs of objects
(Figure 1) by giving a verbal response – pronouncing ‘yes’
or ‘no’. An effect of the affordances of the objects was
found. Right-handed participants’ response times were
faster when the objects in the relation on the left were
displayed in such a way, that it was easier to manipulate
them with the left hand. The effect of the affordance of the
object on the right was reversed in direction and much
smaller in size. The very fact that an affordance effect was
found is in support of the hypothesis that perceiving
relations involves simulating actions. The bigger size of the
effect of the affordance which was closer to the subjects’
non-dominant hand implied that subjects tried to
simultaneously simulate the actions involved in the two
relations. A control study ruled out the possibility that this
result was due to the mere perception of objects with
varying affordances. However it is still possible the effect
was due to presenting the two relations at once. Another
valid point is that the overall reaction time could have been
affected mostly by the affordance of the relation displayed
near the subjects’ non-dominant hand because it was harder
to be simulated. Also the design of the experiment did not
allow to control the sequence in which the subjects look at
the two relations. Therefore it is possible that the effect of
the relation which had been attended last was different
(bigger or lesser) from the other one. A new experiment was
designed and conducted in order to overcome these
problems.

comparison. If any affordance effect was found for the first
relation, it would seriously question any disembodied view
on relational comparison which assumes that relations are
first encoded as symbols and then compared.
However, according to embodied view on relational
reasoning, there must be an effect of both affordances
because the sensory-motor dynamics of both relations is
needed at the time of comparison. Moreover, the embodied
view predicts that relations will be compared more
efficiently when the underlying interactions with
environment could be simulated in close temporal
proximity. Therefore it is predicted that subjects will be
faster when the affordances differ and they can employ both
their hands in the simulations.

Method
Participants 36 right-handed participants (20 females) took
part in the experiment for course credit or as volunteers.
Their average age was 24.06 years (age range from 18 to 53,
SD = 5.91).

Figure 2a: A left and a right affordance of a pair of
objects which make a functional relation.

Experiment 1
The experiment used the same stimuli as V&K, but the
relations were displayed one by one in the center of the
screen in order to control the order in which they were
perceived and isolate the effect of the presentation location.
The elimination of the factor of the presentation location
served to set apart the effect of the affordances of the stimuli
from any spatial compatibility effects. It is well known that
people respond faster to stimuli which location is
compatible to the response action (Simon & Rudell, 1967).
Although the response action in V&K was verbal, it is
possible that subjects’ reaction times had been affected by
the congruence of the presentation location and the
affordances of the stimuli. For example, an interaction
between objects with a left affordance could be easier to be
simulated with the right hand if they are displayed in the
right part of the screen.
The new design also allowed testing the effect of a
stimulus – the relation which was presented first – which
had to be retrieved from memory at the time of the

Figure 2b: Examples of the stimuli used in ‘same’ and
’different’ trials.
Stimuli The stimulus set was the same one that was used in
V&K. It consisted of 144 photos of various household
objects. Each stimulus consisted of two pairs of objects. The
objects in each pair participated in a certain functional
relation, such as ‘hammer’ – ‘nail’, ‘key’ – ‘lock’, ‘fork’ –
‘spaghetti’, etc. In all pairs, it was possible to manipulate the
affordance so that the interaction between the objects could
be performed easier either with the left or the right hand

2082

(Figure 2a). The relations in the two pairs were the same in
half of the stimuli (‘same’ trials) and different in the others
(‘different’ trials). A pre-test study was used to organize the
objects pairs in such a way that there was maximal
agreement among people whether the relations were same or
different (Figure 2b). All images were resized to 400x400
pixels. In all pairs there was one tool-like, graspable object
(axe, hammer, ironer, fork, etc) and it was always located at
the bottom position.
Design The experiment had a 2x2 within subject design.
The two independent variables were:
First affordance – left or right, depending on the
affordance of the first pair of objects.
Second affordance – left or right, depending on the
affordance of the second pair of objects.
The dependent variable was the reaction time of
participants’ verbal responses (‘yes’/’no’).

resolution of 1280x1024 pixels. Before the actual
experiment all participants went through a microphone
training session in order to make sure that they would
articulate their responses clearly enough. The experimental
session started with 8 practice trials, none of which
appeared in the experimental part. Each trial began with a
centrally location fixation cross (750ms), followed by the
onset of the first pair of objects. The objects were displayed
one below the other in the centre of the screen. Subjects
were instructed to perceive the relation between the objects
without making any response. The first pair of objects was
presented for 3500 ms and when it disappeared the screen
stayed blank for 1000 ms. After that a second pair of objects
was presented at the same position as the first one. The
stimuli stayed on the screen for 5000ms or until a response
was generated. Participants were instructed to respond by
saying ‘yes’ if the relation between the objects in the second
pair was the same as in the first pair and say ‘no’ otherwise.
The subject’s response time (RT) was measured since the
onset of the second pair of objects till the moment a verbal
response was detected. Stimulus presentation and response
recordings were controlled by E-prime software (Schneider,
Eschman, & Zuccolotto, 2002). The inter-trial interval was
2500 ms. The experiment took about 10 minutes. The total
number of test trials for each subject was 36, including 18
‘same’ and 18 ‘different’ trials.

Results

Figure 3: Experimental procedure. Reaction time was
measured from the onset of the second relation until a verbal
response was given.
Procedure Each stimulus was presented once to each
subject. Affordance conditions and the order of presentation
of the relations (first or second) were counterbalanced
across subjects and it was made sure that the same
combination of the affordance factors would not repeat
more than 3 times in a row. Same/different trials were
pseudo-randomized, so that a given correct response would
not repeat more than 3 times. The trial sequence was fixed
for all subjects, i.e. they saw the stimuli in the same order.
Participants were tested in a sound-proof booth. The
stimuli were presented on 19” computer monitor with a

Trials in which subjects failed to respond or the response
was incorrect were excluded from the analysis. An incorrect
response was counted when a subject said ‘yes’ in a
‘different’ trial or ‘no’ in a ‘same’ trial. RT lying more than
±2.0 standard deviations from the mean ‘same’ and
‘different’ RT times were also removed. Thus a total of
82.10% of the originally collected RT data were included in
the analysis.
Same and different trials were analysed separately. A
2x2 repeated measures ANOVA was performed on subject
RT means in ‘same’ trials (Figure 4) and revealed a
significant main effect of the affordance of the first relation
(F(1, 35) = 7.12, p < .05, η2 = .17). There was no effect of
the affordance of the second relation (F(1, 35) = 2.02, p =
.16, η2 = .06). The interaction between the two affordance
factors was not significant (F(1, 35) = .20, p = .66, η2 = .01).
An analysis of mean item response times also found a
main effect of the first affordance of ‘same’ items (F(1, 17)
= 9.05, p < .01, η2 = .35). The effect of the second
affordance (F(1, 17) = 2.69, p = .12, η2 = .14) and the
interaction (F(1, 17) = 2.15, p = .16, η2 = .11) were not
significant .
Analyses of ‘different’ trials and items revealed similar
patterns of results, but none of the effects reached
significance.

2083

RT (ms)

Experiment 2
1350
1300
1250
1200
1150
1100
1050
1000

Several researchers have shown that mere looking at
manipulable objects activates regions of the brain related to
action (Beauchamp et al., 2002; Beauchamp & Martin,
2007; Buccino et al., 2009). The goal of this experiment was
to make sure that the main findings of Experiment 1 are not
due to such kind of automatic motor activation. In particular
we wanted to check whether if two objects with varying
affordances are presented sequentially and the task is to
compare them for some reason, the reaction times will be
shorter when the affordance of first object is congruent with
the non-dominant hand of the subjects.

Left
Right

First
Affordance

Second
Affordance

Figure 4: Experiment 1 results for same trials. Subjects’
responses were significantly faster when the affordance of
the first relation was left although all subjects were righthanded. The tendency for the affordance of the second
relation was reversed. Error bars represent standard errors.

Discussion
The results replicated the findings of V&K (2009) as long as
an effect of left/right affordances on comparing functional
relations was found. Also, the shortest reaction times were
in the condition when one of the affordances was left and
the other one was right. Another similarity was that the
effect size of the first affordance effect was bigger than the
effect size of the second affordance.
The major result of Experiment 1 was that the subjects, all
of which were right-handed, were faster to respond when
the first affordance was left. This result can not be explained
by presentation location as all stimuli were presented in the
center of the screen. At first glance, there is no reasonable
explanation why participants would be faster when one of
the stimuli is easier to process by their non-dominant hand.
However the results start to seem logical if we assume that
subjects tried to run the two simulations of functional
interactions simultaneously in order to compare the
resulting motor dynamics. It is reasonable to assume that
subjects always engaged their dominant right hand in
simulating the functional interactions of the visually
available second relation, event when the affordance of the
objects was congruent to their left hand. Thus, when they
had to compare the two relations by running two
simulations at once they could use only their non-dominant
hand for recalling and simulating the first relation.
The pattern of results of Experiment 1 is inconsistent with
any classical encode-and-compare account. If relations are
first turned into propositions and then compared, then there
would not be any effect of the first affordance. The first
relation would have already been encoded by the time the
second relation is presented and the response is given. If the
effect is due just to the activation of the visual image of the
first relation then the direction of affordance effect should
be the same for both relations. Yet, we conducted a control
study to make sure that main results of Experiment 1 are
specific to the relation comparison task.

Method
Participants 24 right-handed participants (17 females) took
part in the experiment for course credit or as volunteers.
Their average age was 22.79 years (age range from 17 to 32,
SD = 3.13).
Stimuli The target stimuli set consisted of the manipulable
tool-like objects which used in the ‘same’ trials of
Experiment 1. Each target stimulus consisted of two such
objects (Figure 5). Objects were paired in the same way as
they were in the previous experiment. There were 18 target
trials. An equal number of fillers were compiled using 18
photos of man-made objects, none of which was used in the
target trials, and 18 photos of natural objects (fruits, plants,
rocks, etc).

Figure 5a: An example of a target stimulus used in
Experiment 2. Both objects are artifacts, so the subjects
should respond by saying ‘Yes’.

Figure 5b: An example of a filler. The correct response is
‘No’ as one of the objects is of natural origin. Either of the
objects could be a natural one.
Design The design was identical to Experiment 1. The
affordances of the objects were described by two
independent variables – ‘first affordance’ and ‘second
affordance’.
Procedure The setting of the experiment was similar to
Experiment 1 except for the task. Each trial began by a
fixation cross (750 ms), followed by the presentation of the

2084

first object (2000ms). After that, the screen stayed blank for
1000 ms and the second object was presented. Subjects were
instructed to say ‘yes’ if none of the objects was of natural
origin and say ‘no’ otherwise. Response time was recorded
since the onset of the second object. All objects were
displayed in the center of the screen. The order of
presentation of the objects and the affordance conditions
were counter-balanced across subjects.

Results
Fillers and trials with invalid or incorrect responses were
excluded from the analysis. Response times lying more than
±2.0 standard deviations from the mean RT time were
removed. Thus a total of 92.40% of the originally collected
non-filler RT data were included in further analysis.
A 2x2 repeated measures ANOVA was performed on
subject means. It revealed main effects of the first (F(1, 23)
= 5.18, p < .05, η2 = .18) and the second object affordance
(F(1, 23) = 5.36, p < .05, η2 = .19). The interaction was not
significant (F(1, 23) = 0.22, p = .64, η2 = .01). Response
times were faster when the affordances of both objects were
right (Figure 6).

850
RT (ms)

800
750

Left

700

Right

650
600
First
Affordance

Second
Affordance

Figure 6: Results for trials with objects which were part of
‘same’ items in Experiment 1. Subjects were significantly
faster when both objects were presented in such a way, that
they were easier to be grasped with the right hand. Error
bars represent standard errors.

Discussion
Experiment 2 showed that the main findings of Experiment
1 can not be explained by the automatic activation of motor
programs by object affordances. Response times were
shorter when the affordances of both objects were congruent
to the subjects’ dominant hand. Also, there was no
difference between the sizes of the effects of the first and
the second affordance. These results are different from what
was found in the previous experiment and they show that
the results of Experiment 1 are specific to the relation
comparison process.

General Discussion
The presented experiments provide further evidence in
support of the hypothesis that the meaning of functional
relations is grounded in the sensory-motor dynamics

resulting from simulated interactions with the environment.
The pattern of results is also consistent with the idea that
comparing functional relations involves running two or
more such simulations simultaneously or in close temporal
proximity. The outcome of Experiment 2 rules out the
possibility that the results were due to the object affordances
per se.
The experiments were designed not to rely on the
stimulus-response compatibility paradigm, unlike most
other behavior studies of affordances (for instance Tucker &
Ellis 1997, 2004; Spivey, Richardson & Cheung, 2001). In
this way it was made sure that the results could not be
attributed to accidental spreading of activation from
conceptual to motor areas of the brain (Mahon &
Caramazza, 2009). If the activation of motor areas was just
a side effect it would not have had any effect on verbal
responses as the motor areas dedicated to hand
manipulations and language production are unlikely to be
systematically connected. Informal debriefing after the
experiments showed that subjects were completely unaware
that the task had anything to do with their hands and
simulations of actions.
The outcomes of the experiments are clearly in support of
an embodied view on cognition. However one may attempt
to interpret the results of Experiment 1 without adopting the
specific idea of embodying relational representations and
relational reasoning by referring to the theory of event
coding (Hommel, Müsseler, Aschersleben & Prinz, 2001).
According to this theory, elements of perception and action
are encoded in a common medium. When the stimulus
features related to perception and action are active for a long
time period they become bound into an event file. Once
bound, these features are less available for planning of other
actions. Hence it is possible that a right affordance of the
first pair of objects would bind the features representing the
right hand of the subject to the stimulus features of the first
relation. When the second relation is presented, the right
hand of the subject would be less available for simulating
the use of the presented objects and the response would be
delayed. A result of this kind has been reported by Spivey,
Richardson & Cheung (2001). Such an explanation reduces
the role of simulated action to the process of object
recognition.
However, the theory of event coding contradicts the
results of the control study, unless it is assumed that the
presentations times were too short for the event filing to
happen. Such an assumption is highly unlikely to be true, as
in the control study the first object was presented for a fixed
period of 2000ms, followed by a 1000 ms inter-stimulus
interval before the second object was displayed. This period
is much longer than the time which was required for
suppression of future actions in the studies of Spivey,
Richardson & Cheing (2001) and Stoet & Hommel (1999).
Also, there is no evidence so far that such a phenomenon
could occur outside the stimulus-response compatibility
paradigm and have an effect on verbal reaction time. Hence,

2085

the event filing explanation can not adequately account for
the results presented in this paper.
The results of the present study are broadly consistent
with the ‘body-specificity hypothesis’ (Casasanto, 2009),
according to which ‘people who interact with their physical
environments in systematically different ways should form
correspondingly different mental representations’. We
demonstrated that an asymmetry of our bodies, such as hand
dominance, constrains performance in a task which is
traditionally thought to be highly symbolic and abstract in
nature. It remains however an open question to what extent
abstract concepts and reasoning abilities are dependent on
our bodies and whether such constraints are the only source
of meaning.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Armina Janyan and the ANALOGY
team for useful discussions and Simona Dobrinova for
collecting most of the data.
This work was supported by the Project ANALOGY:
Humans–the Analogy-Making Species, financed by the FP6
NEST Programme of the European Commission. (Contr. No
029088).

References
Barsalou L. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems. Behavioral
and brain sciences, 22, 4.
Barsalou, L.W. (2008). Grounded cognition. Annual Review
of Psychology, 59, 617-645.
Beauchamp, M., Lee, K., Haxby, J.,& Martin, A. (2002).
Parallel visual motion processing streams for manipulable
objects and human movements. Neuron, 34-1, 149-159.
Beauchamp, M., Martin, A. (2007) Grounding object
concepts in perception and action: evidence from fMRI
studies of tools, Cortex, 43, 461-468.
Buccino, G., Sato, M., Cattaneo, L., Rodà, F.,& Riggio, L.
(2009). Broken affordances, broken objects: A TMS
study. Neuropsychologia, 47-14, 3074 - 3078.
Casasanto, D. (2009). Embodiment of abstract concepts:
Good and bad in right and left-handers. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 138-3, 351-367.
Clement, J. (2009). Analogical reasoning via imagery: the
role of transformations and simulations. In B. Kokinov,
K. Holyoak & D. Gentner (Eds.), New Frontiers in
Analogy Research (pp. 463 - 472). Sofia, Bulgaria: NBU
Series in Cognitive Science.
Falkenhainer, B., Forbus, K., Gentner, D. (1989) The
Structure-Mapping Engine: Algorithm and Examples.
Artificial Intelligence, 41(1), 1-63.
Fisher, M., Zwaan, R. (2008). Embodied language: a review
of the role of the motor system in language
comprehension. Quarterly journal of experimental
psychology, 61, 6, 825-850.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Glenberg, A. (1997). What memory is for. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 20, 1-19.

Holyoak, K., & Thagard, P. (1989). Analogical mapping by
constraint satisfaction. Cognitive Science, 13, 295-355.
Hommel, B., Müsseler J, Aschersleben G, & Prinz W.
(2001) The theory of event coding (TEC): A framework
for perception and action planning. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 24, 849-878.
Hummel, J. (1999). Binding problem. In R.A. Wilson and
F.C. Keil (Eds.), The MIT Encyclopedia of the Cognitive
Sciences, MIT Press.
Hummel, J., Holyoak, K. (1997). Distributed representations
of structure: A theory of analogical access and mapping.
Psychological Review, 104, 427-466.
Hummel, J. Holyoak, K. (2003). A symbolic-connectionist
theory of relational inference and generalization.
Psychological Review, 110, 220-264.
Klatzky, R., Pellegrino, J., McClosky, B., & Lederman, S.
(1993). Cognitive representations of functional
interactions with objects. Memory and Cognition, 21,
294-303.
Kokinov, B. (1994). A hybrid model of reasoning by
analogy. In K. Holyoak & J. Barnden (Eds.), Advances in
connectionist and neural computation theory: Analogical
connections. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Mahon, B. Z. & Caramazza, A. (2009). A critical look at the
embodied cognition hypothesis and a new proposal for
grounding conceptual content. Journal of Physiology –
Paris, 102, 59-70.
Schneider, W., Eschman, A., & Zuccolotto, A. (2002). EPrime user’s guide. Pittsburgh: Psychology Software
Tools Inc.
Simon, J., & Rudell, A. (1967). Auditory S–R compatibility:
The effect of an irrelevant cue on information processing.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 51, 300-304.
Spivey, M., Richardson, D., & Cheung, J. (2001). Motor
representations in memory and mental models: The
embodied zork. Proceedings of the 23rd Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 867872), Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Stoet, G. & Hommel, B. (1999). Action planning and the
temporal binding of response codes.. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 25, 1625- 1640.
Tucker, M., & Ellis, R. (1998). On the relations between
seen objects and components of potential actions. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 24(3), 830-846.
Tucker M., & Ellis R. (2004). Action priming by briefly
presented objects, Acta Psychologica, 116, 185-203.
Vankov, I., & Kokinov, B. (2009). Grounding relations in
action. In B. Kokinov, K. Holyoak & D. Gentner (Eds.),
New Frontiers in Analogy Research (pp. 463 - 472).
Sofia, Bulgaria: NBU Series in Cognitive Science.

2086

