UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Bodily Movements of Liars

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/80t6h9x5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Eapen, Natasha
Baron, Sam
Street, Chris
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Bodily Movements of Liars
Natasha M. Eapen (nme@eyethink.org)
Sam Baron (sambaron@ eyethink.org)
Chris N.H. Street (chris@eyethink.org)
Daniel C. Richardson (dcr@eyethink.org)

Cognitive, Perceptual & Brain sciences, University College London
Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK
Abstract
We measured the continuous bodily motion of participants as
they lied to experimenters. These lies were spontaneous rather
than elicited, and occurred for different motivations. In one
situation, participants were given the opportunity to lie about
their performance on a maths test in order to win money. In
another, they witnessed one experimenter accidentally break a
laptop. When asked what had happened, participants were
motivated to lie and deny any knowledge. Across these
situations, participants lied 61% of the time, allowing us to
contrast the body movements of liars with truth tellers as they
answered neutral and critical questions. Those who lied had
significantly reduced bodily motion. In one case this motion
appeared before the experimenter had even asked the critical
question. We conclude that a person’s bodily dynamics can be
indicative of their cognitive and effective states, even when
they would rather conceal them.
Keywords: deception; social cognition; action; body motion

Introduction
While running in between parallel sessions at the next
Cognitive Science conference, you catch the eye of a
colleague from your university. They smile and ask what
you thought of the talk they gave that morning, the one you
promised to attend. Since you know that the sessions were
both crowded and dimly lit, you take a chance, smile, and
say, ‘Of course I was there. It was fantastic, as always.” Will
they believe your deliberate falsehood? What in your choice
of words, gestures and behaviour will make you sound
either convincing or conniving?
The good news for you is that it is very unlikely your
colleague will be able to tell that you are lying. Regardless
of their training or self belief, people are able to detect
deception in others at only a fraction above chance levels
(Bond & DePaulo, 2006, 2008; DePaulo, Stone, & Lassiter,
1985; Kӧhnken, 1987; Vrij 1993, 2000). The bad news for
your colleague, professionals who need to know if people
are lying, and those studying deception is that many
researchers have found no unique and reliable behavioural
signature for deception (Vrij, 2008; Ekman, 1992; Buller &
Burgoon, 1996; DePaulo et al., 1985, 2003).
One reason is that deception is a daily activity and a
diverse phenomenon (DePaulo et al., 1996). Sometimes a lie
means making up a story, sometimes it means a simple
denial. Lying can be done out of kindness or out of self
interest. It can have different consequences and place
different emotional and cognitive demands on the liar (Vrij
& Mann, 2004).
It may not be surprising, then, that a clear link between
deceit and bodily activity has proven elusive (DePaulo et al.,

2003). Whilst some researchers have demonstrated
increased movements of the fingers, arms, hands, legs and
feet whilst deceiving (McClintock & Hunt, 1975), even if
only anecdotally (Porter & ten Brinke, 2009), others report
decreased limb movements (Vrij, 2008).
Set against this long tradition of deception research are
more recent findings in cognitive science regarding the
relationship between motor control and cognitive
processing. Thinking about the past versus the future shifts
the direction that your body tilts (Miles, Nind, & Macrae,
2010) moving marbles upwards rather than downwards
changes the emotional content of the memories you recall
(Casasanto & Dijkstra, in press), swaying in time with
another person and mimicking their actions they make
causes you to like each other (Chartrand & Van Baaren
2009), and how you move your mouse cursor when asked
‘Do you like Black people?’ reveals the influence of
negative stereotypes (Wojnowicz et al., 2009). Many of
these recent findings rely on fine grained, continuous
measures or manipulations of motor activity, rather than
discrete, categorical behaviours such as button presses (see
Spivey, 2007 for a motivation). Is it possible to use these
continuous methods to detect a behavioural signal to
deception?
Recently, Duran, Dale & McNamara (in press) adapted a
standard paradigm in deception research, and asked people
to respond yes or no to certain questions about themselves.
They were instructed to give false answers in some cases
and truthful answers in others. In this experiment, they
signalled their responses using a Wiimote-controller that
translated their hand movements into movements of a
cursor. They found that deceitful answers had a
characteristic movement trajectory, with increased
complexity and competition from other responses. This
exciting evidence suffers from only one flaw - it is rare that
people ask us to lie to them. Regardless, Duran et al’s
findings suggest that perhaps there is more in motor
behaviour than has typically been measured by deception
researchers.
In deception research, bodily behaviour is usually
videotaped and coded by experimenters. However, this is a
laborious, costly and inaccurate method as reliability
between coders must be established, extensive training can
be necessary and only bodily movements discernible to the
human eye can be analysed. Furthermore, because it is
necessary to be selective in such a coding method, it
requires an understanding of what bodily movements are
potentially interesting to examine before it is possible to
begin coding. As we have noted, the consensus is that there
is no reliable behavioural profile for deceit. An ideal, for

2548

Figure 1. A participant wearing the motion tracking shirt and hat (right) and the
3D position of the markers reconstructed by the motion tracking system (left)
both practical and theoretical goals, is an automated system
which will record accurate bodily changes and provide an
objective approach to the study of deception (Burgoon et al.,
2005; Vrij & Mann, 2004). Such a method, we believe, must
be able to maintain the complexity of continuous variables.
Our goal in this experiment was to use continuous,
objective measures of the bodily activity of participants
who were engaged in spontaneous deceptive behaviour.
Participants were told they were in a study about posture
and mental arithmetic. This gave us an excuse to measure
their body position at 24 locations 200 times a second. It
also provided the opportunity for them to lie. We offered
them £5 for improving their score in a second round of the
maths test. Although the task became much harder, so that
score was most likely to decrease, only the participants
could know how well they had performed. Therefore,
participants were given the opportunity to tell a lie for a
monetary reward, without the risk of being caught out.
During the experiment, the participants witnessed the
junior experimenter accidentally knock a laptop off of a
table. The laptop belonged to a senior experimenter who
was absent at the time. Later, when he was unable to turn on
his laptop, he asked the participants if they had seen
anything happen to it. The junior experimenter was very
friendly and the senior experimenter quite unpleasant, and
we assumed that this would provided a second motivation to
deceive. We hoped that the participants would be motivated
to cover up for her, and falsely deny knowledge of the
incident. During these moments, when participants thought
that the real experiment had finished, and when they could
freely chose to tell the truth or lie, we captured their bodily
motion.

Methods
Participants
32 participants took part in two experiments, run in a single
session. They were UCL students or members of UCL’s
subject pool, and received course credit or a payment for
their participation. There were 20 females and 12 males,
with a mean age of 22.5 years old.

Apparatus
The experiment took place in UCL’s Multimodal Lab. Six
high speed infrared cameras were mounted on a rail around
the perimeter of a 5m square area. Participants wore a tight,
stretchable shirt and a cap which had 20 plastic markers
arrayed over them (see Figure 1). The markers were
approximately 2cm in diameter and are highly reflective in
infrared light. Additional markers were attached to the
hands, tips of the index fingers and the face. Image data
from the cameras was passed to the Vicon Nexus motion
tracking system at a rate of 200 Hz. The 3D position of each
marker was reconstructed with an accuracy of 0.1mm. A
digital camera recorded a view of the participants’ actions,
and a ladybug 2, 360º panoramic camera recorded all events
in the lab. A ceiling mounted omnidirectional mic provided
a sound recording. Participants carried out the experiment
sat 50cm or stood 200cm away from a Mac laptop.

Procedure
Three experimenters ran the study. One operated the motion
tracking systems and did not interact with the participant.
The other two experimenters dealt with the participants
according to a well rehearsed script. The senior, male
experimenter acted in a cold and unpleasant manner

2549

throughout. The junior female experimenter, who was an
undergraduate like the participants, was friendly and
engaging. The experimental procedure was designed to put
participants in two situations in which they might chose to
lie spontaneously to the experimenters. For clarity, we will
describe those two situations separately, even though the
events they describe partially overlapped with each other. In
each, motion is captured in two periods: as the participants
reply to a neutral question, and as they reply to a question
that has a motivation for deception. Participants were
unaware that each of these periods were the critical portions
of the experiment and that their behaviour was being
recorded.
Participants were told the study was investigating the
relationship between body sway and mathematical ability.
After donning the motion capture clothes, they stood in a Tpose with arms outstretched for a brief calibration recording.
The participants then took part in a simple maths test. After
the experiment they were debriefed to the true aim of the
study, and gave additional retrospective consent with the
option to withdraw their data, which none chose to do.

Participants who answered ‘yes’ to the critical question
received their £5 reward and were categorised as liars. Even
though it is possible that the participants scored higher on
the second test, the increased difficulty made this unlikely.
Therefore overall, we assumed that people who said yes
were more likely to be deceptive than those who said no.

The Maths Test Following calibration, participants were
seated at a table and given a maths test on a laptop. There
were 30 multiplication questions with three multiple
choices. Participants had a limited time to respond and were
given feedback on their answer. A pilot test showed that
people scored around 75% on the test.
After completing the test, participants were shown their
score. The junior experimenter told them that they were now
required to repeat the test, but this time standing up while
the motion tracking system measured their balance. She
explained that our hypothesis was that standing would
improve maths performance. She said that was what we had
found so far, and hoped to prove conclusively. In violation
of good experimental practice, she deliberately increased the
demand characteristic of the ‘experiment’ by telling
participants how they should perform. In addition, she
explained that participants would receive a £5 reward if
their results followed the hypothesised pattern and they
scored better while standing.
The participants were told that since they were standing
out of reach of the keyboard, they couldn’t enter their
answer. They were instructed not to voice their answers
aloud but keep count of how many they had calculated
correctly. The time given for participants to respond in the
standing phase gradually reduced. Norming tests confirmed
that this made the test considerably harder, but since they
were not inputting their answers, only the participants
themselves could ever know their score on the standing
phase.
Once they had completed the study, the junior
experimenter asked two questions, with the order
counterbalanced between participants. The neutral question
was “Did you feel the second stage took more or less time to
complete?” The critical question was “Did your
performance improve on the second test?”. Participants’
body motion was captured from the time she began asking
the question to the end of their reply.

The Accident At the start of the experiment, while the
participant was signing the consent form, the senior
researcher precariously placed a laptop down on a table
saying, “I’ve got that report of yours on my laptop. Remind
me about it at the end”. After the first stage of the maths
test, the senior experimenter left the lab and the junior
experimenter prepared them for the standing phase. While
walking backwards, the junior experimenter knocked into
the laptop that had been left on the table edge, and sent it
crashing to the floor. She exclaimed loudly, made eye
contact with the participant and said, “Thank God the
cameras were off”. Therefore, only the participant witnessed
this ‘accident’.
After the second maths test, the senior experimenter came
back to the lab and told the participant that he needed to
take a backup copy of the data. While the junior
experimenter was stood in a corner of the lab preparing
herself to leave, he asked the participant the neutral
question, “Did the maths experiment run okay?” He then
opened his laptop and attempted to turn it on without
success. He then turned to the participant and asked the
critical question, “Did you see anything happen?” During
both questions and the participant’s replies, their body
motion was recorded. Participants were categorised as liars
if they denied knowledge about the incident, and as truth
tellers if they made any reference to the accident or the
junior participant.
Debriefing Following the experiment, participants were
fully debriefed about the true nature of the experiment and
asked if they suspected that deception was being
investigated. We framed all their behaviour in a positive
light. For example, if they chose to deceive the senior
experimenter about the accident, we referred to this as their
choice to ‘protect’ the junior researcher. Contact details of
psychological services were provided in the event that they
felt concerned about deceiving or being deceived.

Data Analysis
Marker positions were reconstructed offline using the Vicon
Nexus software. Standard procedures were used for
identifying markers and excluding noise. For each marker
we calculated the distance it moved in 5msec. We summed
those values for series of 20 frames to get the total number
of millimeters travelled in each 100ms period. Finally,
across every marker and across every 100ms period during
the data capture, we averaged those values. Our measure of
general body motion is operationalized as the average
distance in millimeters that a marker traveled every 100ms.

2550

30!
25!
20!

Truth teller!

15!

Liar!

A. The Maths Test

10!

30!

30!

5!

25!

25!

0!

20!

20!

15!

Neutral!

Critical!

15!

10!

10!

5!

5!

0!

0!
Neutral!

B. The Accident

Truth teller!

Truth telle

Liar!

Liar!

Neutral!

Critical!

Critical!

Question
Figure 1. Total upper body motion during neutral and critical questions in the maths test and accident situations

Results
Participants data was discarded if they guessed our real
hypothesis, in cases of experimenter error or deviations
from the script. The complexity of the equipment and the
spontaneous nature of the behaviour meant that data loss
was a risk in this experiment. In the event, 34 (out of 128)
trials produced unusable data. Since a full analysis of the
data would require that we have data for all four periods for
all subjects, we carried out planned comparisons on the
maths deception and the accident data separately, giving us
18 and 23 subjects respectively. However, the same pattern
of means and significance was still found when we analysed
the smaller set of 16 subjects who had a full set of data for
each cell.
This study is a quasi experiment, as participants placed
themselves in the truth or lie conditions rather than being
assigned. Overall, they chose to lie 61% of the time,
allowing a between subjects comparison of the body motion
of truth tellers and liars. Their (dis)honesty was consistent:
73% of participants either lied or told the truth on both
occasions. Body motion data were analysed in a 2
(deception: truth teller/liar) x 2 (question type: neutral/
critical) ANOVA.

The Maths Test
Participants moved less if they attempted to deceive the
experimenter and lie about their maths score. They moved
more when asked the critical question than when asked the

neutral question, though the difference between truth tellers
and liars was greater in response to the critical question.
This pattern of results is shown in panel A of Figure 2, and
supported by a main effect of deception (F(1,21)=7.97, p=.
01), a main effect of question (F(1,21)=9.04, p=.007) and a
significant interaction (F(1,21)=6.24, p=.021). Post hocs
show that the participants did not significantly differ in their
motion in response to the neutral question, but moved
significantly more when telling the truth in response to the
critical question.

The Accident
Participants moved less if they attempted to deceive the
experimenter and deny knowledge of the accident. They
also moved less overall in response to the critical question.
This pattern of results is shown in panel B of Figure 2, and
supported by a main effect of deception (F(1,21)=7.97, p=.
01) and a main effect of question (F(1,21)=9.04, p=.007).
The interaction was not significant (F(1,21)=1.11).

General Discussion
When people spontaneously lied to us, they reduced their
bodily motion. Behind this simple finding, robustly
supported by our data, lie two more nuanced stories. One
concerns the directionality of the relationship between body
motion and deceptive behaviour. The other concerns the
difference between the two situations and the two types of
lie.

2551

In the maths test, there was no obvious negative
consequence to the participants’ lie. The junior experimenter
gave clear signs that she would prefer a particular answer,
and participants were given a monetary reward for
providing it. It was clear from the situation that there was no
way in which participants could be found out if they lied,
since they could be the only people who knew the truth.
Therefore, participants had everything to gain and nothing
to lose by lying. In this situation, participants’ body motion
was not different in response to the neutral question, but
those who chose to lie for the reward showed less motion
when answering the critical question.
This result aligns with other findings (Vrij, 2000) that
during cases of deception, bodily motion can decrease. One
explanation is that even though there is no logical way that
another person can know that we are telling a lie, we suffer
from an ‘illusion of transparency’ (Gilovich, Medvec &
Savitsky, 1998). We are prone to thinking that since our own
internal mental states are highly salient to us, they must be
at least partially visible to others. Therefore, when we think
about something that we don’t want others to know, we try
to suppress our overt actions in an attempt to suppress the
(nonexistent) cues to our mental states. As often happens, it
is not the lie that causes people to be caught, but the coverup.
In the accident situation, the motivation and the
consequences for lying are quite different. By lying,
participants are acting in the interest of another person, the
junior experimenter. Our intention was that the participants
would feel some affiliation with her, due to her overt
friendliness to the participants and their similarity in age and
position. In sharp contrast, the senior experimenter asserted
his authority over everyone else in the lab, and was curt and
unpleasant when speaking to the participant. By lying to
him, the participants are aligning their interests with their
in-group, which is a strong motivation for social behaviour.
However, unlike the maths test situation, there could
conceivably be negative consequences to this lie. Something
did indeed happen to the laptop, and it’s possible that the
senior experimenter could find out what happened in the
future - perhaps the junior experimenter would confess. In
this case, the participants would be discovered to have lied
to someone in authority.
Both the motivation (DePaulo et al., 2003) and the
possible consequences of the social lie are related to
affective outcomes. In contrast to the maths lie, where
material reward is at stake, in the accident situation,
participants lie to foster an affiliation between themselves
and the junior experimenter, but risk the aversive
consequences of lying to an authority figure. We
hypothesise that these differences produced an unusual
feature of our data.
For the accident situation, the difference between liars and
truth tellers emerged in responses to both the neutral and the
critical questions. The neutral question was always asked
before the critical question in the accident situation, as pilot
studies showed that it seemed very unnatural for the
experimenter to interrogate the participant about his broken
laptop, and then switch to innocuous questions.

So why is it that participants who are going to lie to the
experimenter in the near future already show a distinctive
pattern of body motion when answering his neutral
question? In looking back over the situation we constructed
for participants, it seems that they may have already been
thinking about the laptop and the incident they witnessed
during the neutral question. While asking the neutral
question, “Did the maths experiment run okay?” the senior
experimenter was walking towards the table where the
broken laptop was sat. This, coupled with the fact that he
mentioned he was taking a backup of the data, makes it
plausible to suggest that the participants realised he was
about to use his laptop. At that point, perhaps they were
considering the affective consequences of him discovering
the accident, accusing the junior researcher, and asking them
for information. In other words, even during the neutral
question, participants’ body motion was revealing their
relation to the whole scenario of the accident and the two
different researchers, and their own potential involvement.
This claim brings us to the second issue raised by these
findings. Is it the case that there are some individuals, or
some individuals’ moods, that correlate with higher levels of
bodily motion and higher levels of honesty? Or does the act
of forming a lie or preparing to tell the truth produce a
particular pattern of bodily motion? In the context of the
accident situation, for example, it could be that during the
neutral question some individuals are feeling heightened
anxiety (because of what they witnessed), and that anxiety
produces more bodily motion and higher rates of telling the
truth. Alternatively, it could be that during the neutral
question, some participants are already acting to suppress
their overt behaviour as they prepare to tell a lie to the
experimenter, or at least, distance themselves from the
awkward situation.
In short, does body motion reveal differences between
people who tell the truth and people who lie, or does it
reveal differences in the process of lying and truth telling?
There is some evidence for the latter proposal in our maths
test situation. If it were true that some people simply move
more and are more disposed to honesty, then we would
expect to see truth tellers moving more in response to the
neutral maths question as well as the critical question.
Furthermore, supporting evidence for a direct link between
motion and deception comes from experiments which
instruct participants to lie or tell the truth, and thereby cause
differences in bodily movements (Duran et al., in press). At
present though, our data are equivocal on this point, and
calls for further investigation.

Conclusion
People who spontaneously lie, or are about to lie, showed
reduced body motion in our experiment. Though this pattern
was found across two different types of situation, we are not
rushing to make any claims to have found a unique bodily
signature for deceptive behaviour. Differences in the two
types of situation produced distinct patterns in degree of
bodily motion and the conditions under which it emerged.
We have speculated that these bodily differences are related
to differences in the underlying motivations and
consequences of deception in the two situations. We take

2552

this work as establishing that motion capture systems are a
new telescope that we can point at deception, and
reaffirming the complexity of cognitive and affective states
that underlie spontaneous deceptive behaviour.
It remains the case that almost no-one is much better than
a coin toss at detecting deception in others (Bond &
DePaulo, 2006). A notable exception are the FBI
interrogators trained and tested by Ekman and O’Sullivan
(1991). In their article, ‘Who can catch a liar?’ they reported
a deception detection rate of 64%. Recently Bond (2008)
came across a passage in Ekman’s (1992) book giving
further details of that experiment. As it is described, the
study has a striking similarity to our own maths test
situation that was designed to evoke spontaneous lies:
“Immediately after taking the test I would give the
correct answers. Then I asked them to raise their
hands if they got all ten correct, nine correct, and so
forth. I tallied the results on a blackboard so that
they could evaluate their own performance against
that of their group. . . . In September 1991, our
findings on these professional lie catchers were
published”
(Ekman, 1992; pp. 282–285)
As Bond (2008) concluded, “Who can catch a liar? It
would appear to be Secret Service agents who get to score
their own tests.” It is an intriguing thought that these FBI
agents, might themselves have displayed signature patterns
of bodily movement that betrayed the fact that they were
actually lying about their ability to detect liars.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Geoff Bird, Rick Dale, Natasha
Kirkham and Michael Spivey for many insightful
discussions. This research was carried out as part of NME
and SB’s undergraduate dissertations, and authorship is
equal.

References
Bond, C.F. (2008). A few can catch a liar, sometimes:
Comments on Ekman and O’Sullivan (1991), as well as
Ekman, O’Sullivan, and Frank, (1999). Applied
Cognitive Psychology, 22, 1298-1300.
Bond, C.F., & DePaulo, B.M. (2006). Accuracy of deception
judgments. Personality and Social Psychology Review,
10(3), 214-234.
Bond, C.F., & DePaulo, B.M. (2008). Individual differences
in judging deception: Accuracy and bias. Psychological
Bulletin, 134(4), 477-492
Buller, D. B., & Burgoon, J. K. (1996). Interpersonal
deception the- ory. Communication Theory, 6, 203–242.
Burgoon, J., Jensen, M.L., Meservy, T., Kruse, J., &
Nunamaker, J.F. (2005). Augmenting human
identification of emotional states in video. Proceedings

of the International Conference on Intelligent Data
Analysis.
Casasanto, D., & Dijkstra, K. (in press). Motor action and
emotional memory. Cognition.
Chartrand, T.L., & Van Baaren, R. (2009). Mimcry. In M.P.
Zanna (Ed.), Advances in Experimental Social
Psychology, Volume 41. Ocford, UK: Academic Press.
DePaulo, B. M., Kashy, D. A., Kirkendol, S. E., Wyer, M.
M., & Ep- stein, J. A. (1996). Lying in everyday life.
Journal of Personal- ity and Social Psychology, 70,
979–995.
DePaulo, B. M., Lindsay, J. J., Malone, B. E., Muhlenbruck,
L., Charlton, K., & Cooper, H. (2003). Cues to
deception. Psycho- logical Bulletin, 129, 74–118.
DePaulo, B. M., Stone, J. L., & Lassiter, G. D. (1985).
Deceiving and detecting deceit. In B. R. Schenkler (Ed.),
The self and social life (pp. 323-370). New York, NJ:
McGraw-Hill.
Duran, N. D., Dale, R., & McNamara, D. S. (accepted). The
action dynamics of overcoming the truth. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review.
Ekman, P. (1992). Telling lies: Clues to deceit in the
marketplace, politics and marriage. New York: Norton.
Ekman, P. & O’Sullivan, M. (1992). Who Can Catch a Liar?
American Psychologist, 46(9), 913-920
Gilovich, T., Savitsky, K., & Medvec, Victoria H. (1998).
The illusion of transparency: Biased assessments of
others’ ability to read one’s emotional states. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 75(2), 332-346.
Kohnken, G. (1987). Training police officers to detect
deceptive eye-witness statements:Does it work? Social
Behaviour, 2 , 1-17.
McClintock, C. C., & Hunt, R. G. (1975). Nonverbal
indicators of affect and deception in an interview setting.
Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 5, 54-67.
Miles, L.K., Nind, L.K. & Macrae, N.C.(2010). Moving
Through Time. Psychological Science, published online
January 8, 2010
Porter, S., & ten Brink, L. (2009). The truth about lies: What
works in detecting high-stakes deception. Legal and
Criminological Psychology, 00, 1-21.
Spivey, M.J. (2007). The Continuity of Mind. Oxford: OUP.
Vrij, A. (1993). Credibility judgements of detectives: The
impact of nonverbal behavior, social skills, and physical
characteristics on impression formation. Journal of
Social Psychology, 133(5), 601-610.
Vrij, A. (2000). Detecting Lies and Deceit: The Psychology
of Lying and Implications for Professional Practice.
Chichester: John Wiley & Sons.
Vrij, A. (2008). Detecting Lies and Deceit: Pitfalls and
Opportunities. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons.
Vrij, A., & Mann, S. (2004). Detecting deception: The
benefit of looking at a combination of behavioral,
auditory and speech content related cues in a systematic
manner. Group Decision and Negotiation, 13(1), 61-79.
Wojnowicz, M.T., Ferguson, M.J., Dale, R., & Spivey, M.J.
(2009). The self-organization of explicit attitudes.
Psychological Science, 20(11), 1428-1435.

2553

