UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of "Explaining Away" in Human Abstract Rule Induction

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1ww8t01c

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Dawson, Colin Reimer
Gerken, LouAnn

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of “Explaining Away” in Human Abstract Rule Induction
Colin Reimer Dawson, M.A. (CDawson@Email.Arizona.Edu)
Department of Psychology, 1503 E. University Blvd.
Tucson, AZ 85721 USA

LouAnn Gerken, Ph.D. (Gerken@Email.Arizona.Edu)
Department of Psychology, 1503 E. University Blvd.
Tucson, AZ 85721 USA
Abstract

attribute it to biology. This conclusion would be premature
without further examination, however.
Indeed, previous research suggests that infants reorganize
their domain knowledge within the first year of life, and
even within the laboratory. In language, infants reorganize
their phonetic categories (Werker & Tees, 1984; Bosch and
Sebastian-Galles, 2003; Maye, Werker, & Gerken, 2002)
and even exhibit shifts in what features a stress rule can
reference (Gerken and Bollt, 2008). In music, attention
shifts from absolute pitches to relative intervals (Saffran and
Griepentrog, 2001; Saffran, 2003), and infants’ tonal and
rhythmic categories change as a function of cultural context
(Hannon and Trehub, 2005; Lynch and Eilers, 1992).
Marcus, et al. (1999) and Marcus, Fernandes and Johnson
(2007) found that 7-month-old infants can learn an AAB or
ABB pattern in three-element sequences, provided the
elements are syllables. Infants at the same age failed at the
same task when the elements were non-linguistic events
such as musical tones or animal noises. It was suggested
that the child’s initial endowment may tell her that speech
can be structured by abstract, relational properties, but other
auditory stimuli cannot.
While this is possible, subsequent research has revealed
AAB-style learning in infants with other stimuli, such as
pictures of dogs (Saffran, et al., 2007), and simple shapes
(Johnson, et al., in press). Murphy, Mondragon and Murphy
(2008) found that even rats can learn such generalizations
from both speech and tones. These results cast doubt on the
notion that language is privileged for abstract patternlearning.

Of great interest to cognitive science is how human learning
is constrained to avoid spurious generalizations. While many
constraints must be relatively experience-independent, past
experience provides a rich source of guidance for subsequent
learning. If a learner discovers some structure in part of the
environment, this can inform her future hypotheses about that
domain. If a general structure parsimoniously accounts for
particular sub-patterns, a rational learner should not stipulate
separate explanations for each detail without additional
evidence, as the general structure has “explained away” the
original evidence. In a grammar-learning experiment using
tone sequences, manipulating learners’ prior exposure to a
tone environment affects their sensitivity to the grammardefining feature, in this case consecutive repeated tones.
Grammar-learning performance is worse if context melodies
are “smooth”, that is, if small intervals occur more often than
large ones, as this smoothness is a general property that
accounts for a high rate of repetition.
Keywords: statistical learning; artificial grammar; Bayesian
inference; language acquisition; music cognition

Introduction
In traditional theories of learning, the relationship
between knowledge1 and learning is fairly static. Some
initial knowledge is provided by experience-invariant
biology to constrain learning. Within these a priori
constraints, learning builds one’s body of knowledge. An
area that has been explored relatively little is the dynamic
interplay between learning and knowledge: namely, (how)
can the results of learning actually change how subsequent
learning proceeds? If this feedback loop is ignored,
observed constraints on learning may be incorrectly
attributed to initial biologically provided knowledge instead
of to learning that has already taken place.
Untangling the relative contributions of experienceindependent biology and prior learning has been particularly
important in the study of infant cognition, not least infant
language acquisition. If an adult can learn one pattern and
not another in the absence of a priori differences in
difficulty, there are often ready explanations in terms of her
years of experience in the world. In contrast, if a young
infant exhibits the same discrepancy, it is tempting to

“Explaining Away” Details With Generalities
Dawson and Gerken (2009) found that while 7-montholds fail at learning AAB and ABA patterns with tones, 4month-olds succeed given the same input. They suggested
that 7-month-olds’ failure may be due to their having
learned certain general properties about music.
In
particular, if they have learned that (a) melodies tend to
move in small intervals from pitch to pitch, and (b)
individual melodies tend to use only a restricted set of
pitches (Temperley, 2008), the presence of a large number
of repetitions would become much less surprising, and
hence less informative about the abstract structure in the
AAB-style task. This change in informativeness is an
example of a phenomenon known as “explaining away”,
central to several cognitive models in a variety of areas

1

Here, “knowledge” is meant in a broad sense – roughly,
“information about the environment”. This can be anything that
affects behavior, or, critically, the interpretation of experiences.

79

including visual inference (Kersten, Mamassian and Yuille,
2004), linguistic processing (Ciaramita and Johnson. 2000),
and infant causal reasoning (Xu and Garcia, 2008; Gergely
and Csibra, 2003).
The basic idea is as follows. When an observed pattern
could arise from multiple hidden causes, the causes
“compete” with each other over the evidence contained in
the data, even when the underlying hypotheses do not
conflict with each other a priori. For example, suppose
during a card game you peek at the dealer’s hand, and you
notice that on one hand, she has three aces, and on the next
she has the nine through king of hearts. If you assume the
game is poker, this unusually lucky sequence might raise
suspicion that the dealer has stacked the deck to give herself
a favorable hand. However, if you later learn that the
players are engaged in a friendly pinochle match, in which
only the cards nine through Ace are used, the dealer’s hands
are less surprising given a fair deal. Although the dealer
may still be stacking the deck, the evidence for this
hypothesis must be discounted, or “explained away”.
In a musical context, repetition is an ambiguous event.
On the one hand, it constitutes a “sameness” relation
between two tones. At the same time, it is also an interval
of magnitude zero between successive pitches. If one
assumes that melodies are random, and that any tone is
equally likely at any point (i.e., the tone distribution is
uniform), hearing every melody begin with two repeated
notes would be quite surprising, and evidence for a
“sameness” interpretation would be strong. If, however, one
knows that tones nearby in time also tend to be nearby in
pitch (i.e., melodies are usually “smooth”), repetition
becomes a more common event (qua interval of distance
zero), and it should take more evidence to conclude that
repetition is special. Similarly, as the set of tones shrinks,
the probability of chance repetitions increases (as with the
three aces in the Pinochle hand), and the evidentiary bar for
learning a repetition grammar should be raised.
The present experiment provides a test of the first of these
two predictions with human adults. Participants are first
placed in one of three melodic environments: one where
every tone is equally likely at any point (the Uniform
condition); one in which small intervals are more common
than large intervals (the Smooth condition); and one in
which repetition alone is more frequent than other intervals
(the Repetition condition).
Following this exposure,
participants are given a grammar-induction task where the
“grammatical” melodies have either an AABCD or DCBAA
structure. If learners model the interval distribution in the
larger environment, the Smooth context should lead them to
represent repetition as the result of a general constraint on
melodies, and not as a specific grammatical feature. Hence,
learners should exhibit decreased sensitivity to positional
repetition, as well as decreased grammar-learning
performance.
In contrast, in the Repetition environment, the only way
to explain the high rate of repeated tones is to represent it
explicitly. This unexplained repetition may even increase

learners’ attention to that feature, improving
performance relative to the Uniform group.

their

Methods
Participants
One hundred and twenty University of Arizona
undergraduates participated in the study for course credit.
An additional eighteen participated but were excluded from
analysis due to their failure to score above chance on a
melodic-discrimination screening task.

Materials and Procedures
The experiment consists of a “context” phase and a
grammar-learning phase. The latter contains four blocks,
each with a training component and a test component. All
“sentences” consist of five tones generated using the FM
Synthesizer in the MIDI Toolbox for MATLAB (Eerola &
Toiviainen, 2004), which produces a horn-like sound. The
first four notes are 250 msec each, with 50 msec gaps after
each one. The last note is 500 msec. In music terms, the
melodies contain four eighth notes followed by a quarter
note, played at 200 beats per minute.
Procedures: Context Phase The context phase consists of
two blocks of 100 sentences, in random order. Ten are
“probe” sentences, after which either the same sentence is
repeated or one of the other ten probe sentences is played.
On the probe trials, participants have 3 seconds to press the
“1” or “0” key on the keyboard to register “same” or
“different” sentence pairs. The absence of a response is
coded as incorrect. Each block lasts about five minutes.
Data from participants who did not perform above chance
on this discrimination task (15 or more out of 20 correct)
was discarded, as these participants presumably either could
not distinguish differences among melodies, or were not
attempting to succeed.
During context exposure, all participants see a group of
eight cartoon “aliens” (Folstein, Van Petten and Rose,
2007). Half are “star-chested” and half are “brick-chested”.
Materials: Context Phase Participants are assigned to one
of three context conditions: Uniform (n = 24), Smooth (n =
48) or Repetition (n = 48). The Smooth and Repetition
conditions are further divided into High Variance (HV) and
Low Variance (LV) sub-conditions. In all cases, context
melodies are drawn from a “vocabulary” of six tones: A3,
A#3, C#4, E4, G4 and G#4 (MIDI values 57, 58, 61, 64, 67
and 68).
In the Uniform condition, each tone is equally likely and
independent of the last. As such, the probability of a
repetition at any given point is 1/6 (in the 200 generated
melodies, the empirical rate was 18.1%). The resulting
distribution of intervals is shown in Fig. 1a.
In the Smooth condition, melodies are generated as
follows.
The first tone is chosen from a uniform
distribution over the six tones. For each subsequent tone, a

80

sample is generated from a normal distribution, truncated
between 0.5 and 6.5. The mean of the distribution is an
integer corresponding to the previous tone (the lowest tone
is 1; the highest tone 6). The standard deviation is 2 in the
HV condition and 1.2 in the LV condition. The sampled
value is rounded to the nearest integer to generate the tone.
The resulting distribution reflects the bias toward small
intervals in typical folk music (Dawson, 2007). The rate of
repetition across the 200 melodies is 39.3% of all intervals
in the LV condition (Fig. 1b), and 26.3% in the HV
condition (Fig. 1c).
The Repetition conditions control for the actual rate of
repetition, while removing the overall “smoothness”
constraint. Here, the HV and LV conditions (Fig. 1d-e) are
matched to their Smooth counterparts for the number of
repetitions, but unlike in the Smooth cases, the remaining
notes are equiprobable. Here, the high rate of repetition
cannot be explained by a general bias for small intervals;
instead, a learner modeling the tone distribution must
encode repetitions separately to achieve a good fit.

clicks left or right of center, and a continuous
“discrimination score” calculated by subtracting from 100
the percentage of the line lying between the response and
the correct pole. Participants experience four training-test
cycles on the same grammar.

Figure 2: Test Prompt
Materials: Grammar-Learning Phase The “Qixian” and
“spy” sentences are again five tones in length. Each
participant is trained using one of two five-tone
vocabularies. The first (V1) contains the tones A3, C4,
D#4, F#4 and G4 (MIDI 57, 60, 63, 66 and 67); the second
(V2) contains the tones A#3, B3, D4, F4 and G#4 (MIDI 58,
59, 62, 65 and 68). Each set shares two tones with the
context vocabulary.
For half of participants, the “grammatical” sentences
follow an AABCD pattern (with a repetition at the
beginning and nowhere else), while the “ungrammatical”
sentences have a DCBAA pattern. For the other half of
participants, the labels are reversed.
Of the 120 sentences possible in each grammar, 60 are
used as training items, and 24 as test items. The chosen
items were balanced for pitch contour: ¼ in each section had
a rising segment followed by a falling segment (in addition
to the repetition), ¼ had the reverse; ¼ had a rise-fall-rise
pattern and ¼ a fall-rise-fall pattern.
Thirty training sentences are used in the first two learning
blocks; the other thirty in the last two blocks. On oddnumbered test blocks, participants are tested with items
from the training vocabulary; on even blocks they hear
items from the opposite vocabulary. Both vocabularies
were used to test whether the context manipulation has an
effect on the level of abstraction at which participants learn
the grammar. The training vocabulary always comes first,
as the vocabulary switch could provide a clue to the nature
of the grammar (i.e., that it was vocabulary-independent),
and if the new vocabulary came first, participants could not
demonstrate mastery independent of this “hint”.

Figure 1(a-e): Interval Counts in the Context Phase2
Procedures: Grammar-Learning Phase After the context
phase, participants move on to the grammar-learning phase.
They are asked to detect “spies” attempting to infiltrate the
“Qixian” colony, and are told that they can distinguish
Qixians from spies by the grammaticality or
ungrammaticality of their speech.
In each training block, participants hear thirty
“grammatical” sentences in random order while an image of
four star-chested aliens is displayed.
After each training block, participants hear twenty-four
test sentences, half grammatical. After each sentence,
participants make a continuous grammaticality judgment by
clicking on a line (Fig. 2), where the left pole represents
“definitely grammatical”, the right pole represents
“definitely ungrammatical”, and every gradient response in
between is possible. There is no time limit. The computer
records a binary response, based on whether the participant

Results
Of primary interest is whether prior exposure to the Smooth
distribution will impair participants’ detection of the
repetition pattern. If so, this will suggest that learners are
establishing a higher baseline for repetition, which
(partially) explains away the training pattern. The key
comparison is between the Smooth and Repetition
conditions, as these are matched for number of repetitions,

2
Here, 0 is a repetition, +1 is a step to the next-highest note, etc.
The distributions are combined across all pitches. The truncation
of the pitch range results in more small intervals across all
conditions.
If the interval distributions were separated by
preceding pitch, those for the Uniform and Repetition conditions
would each be flat, except for the peak at 0 in the Repetition case.

81

differing only in the presence or absence of a larger-scale
regularity that accounts for that frequency.
A secondary question is whether the presence of an
inexplicably high rate of repetitions will encourage learners
to encode discrete “same” and “different” relations at the
expense of the continuous relations among frequencies,
thereby increasing the proportion of attention allocated to
repetition and hence increasing performance in grammarlearning. If so, the Repetition group should outperform the
Uniform group.
Pilot data revealed that many participants performed near
ceiling at discriminating grammatical and ungrammatical
sentences, while another large set performed at chance
overall. For many of these, presumably only a fairly strong
manipulation would observably shift performance. As such,
the particular values of the scores received by these
participants are mostly uninformative, and contribute noise
that could obscure effects of the manipulations.
To address this issue, participants were separated into
quartiles within each context condition based on their
combined number of correct responses throughout the four
test blocks, and two sets of analyses were conducted. The
first used all of the data; the second discarded the highestand lowest-performing quartiles in each condition, thereby
greatly reducing the proportion of participants performing
either at floor or ceiling. When “floor” is defined as
producing fewer than 57 correct binary responses out of 96
(the one-tailed p < 0.05 cutoff under coin-flip guessing), and
“ceiling” is defined as 88 or more correct (i.e., the same
distance from 100% as floor is from 50%), then of the 60
participants in the trimmed sample, only 9 were still at floor,
and 7 at ceiling. Of the 30 participants excluded for low
performance, all but 2 were at floor, and of the 30 excluded
for high performance, all but 4 were at ceiling.

Figure 3: Mean Discrimination Scores by Context
Condition and Block, Full Sample
The main effect of Block was significant (F(3, 345) =
30.59, p < 10-15) but the Block X Context interaction was
nonsignificant (F(12, 345) = 0.55, n.s.). Of the contrasts
among context conditions, only the contrast between the
Repetition and Smooth groups reached significance (F(1,
115) = 5.63, p < 0.02). The contrast between the Repetition
group and the Uniform group was nonsignificant (F(1, 115)
= 0.03, n.s.), as were the contrast between the High and Low
Variance groups (F(1, 115) = 1.08, n.s.) and the Distribution
X Variance interaction (F(1, 115) = 0.12, n.s.). Means and
standard errors for each block and each group (collapsing
the High and Low Variance groups) are displayed in Fig. 3.

Trimmed-Sample Analysis
The above analysis was repeated using only those
participants in the second and third quartiles within each
context group, as determined by total number correct
collapsed across blocks. The effect of Block was significant
(F(3, 165) = 26.89, p < 10-13), but the Block X Context
interaction was not (F(12, 165) = 1.12, n.s.). Of the
contrasts among context conditions, only the contrast
between the Repetition group and the Smooth group reached
significance (F(1, 55) = 16.16, p < 0.001). The contrast
between the Repetition group and the Uniform group was
nonsignificant (F(1, 55) = 0.41, n.s.), as were the contrast
between the High and Low Variance groups (F(1, 55) =
1.58, n.s.) and the Distribution X Variance interaction (F(1,
55) = 0.004, n.s.). Means and standard errors for this
trimmed sample are displayed in Fig. 4.

Full Sample Analysis
Both the binary and continuous responses were analyzed,
yielding qualitatively similar results. In the interest of
concision, we report only the latter here. Mean scores were
computed for each participant at each block and entered into
an ANOVA with between-subjects factor Context Condition
(five levels: Uniform, Smooth (High Variance), Smooth
(Low Variance), Repetition (High Variance) and Repetition
(Low Variance)), and within-subjects factor Block (1
through 4). Four planned contrasts were used for the
Context factor: the first three concerned the Repetition and
Smooth groups, corresponding to main effects of (1)
distribution type and (2) variance, and (3) the interaction
between distribution and variance; the last comparison
contrasted the two Repetition groups with the Uniform
group.

82

At first glance, the presence of differences in participants’
use of information resembles situations in which learners
come to focus on features that are predictive of a relevant
task outcome, filtering out redundant information (Haider
and French, 1996; Pellegrino, Doane, Fischer and Alderton,
1991; Doane, Sohn and Schrieber, 1999). Although many
of the same mechanisms may be involved here, the nature of
the learning is somewhat different.
Whereas in the
preceding experiments participants were engaged in a
specific task all along, in the present experiment the key
manipulation occurs before participants become aware of
what it is they will be asked to learn. As such, it is not
simply a matter of repetition being predictive of a particular
response (or even of other stimulus features); rather this
result suggests that learners in this experiment are creating
an explanatory model of the alien environment, and forming
hypotheses about how their input is being generated.
Although ultimately the value of explanation may be
connected to the future ability to make predictions, the
absence of explicit behavioral demands frees learners to
pursue a general goal of understanding the underlying
nature of the environment.
Here, in the Smooth
environment repetitions do not appear to be an essential
component of the environment at all, whereas in the
Repetition environment it is necessary to represent them in
order to understand the distribution of intervals. This
concept of the learning process as rational hypothesis testing
fits nicely into the wealth of recent literature using Bayesian
models to capture aspects of cognitive functioning (see, e.g.,
Tenenbaum, Griffiths and Kemp (2006), for a review).
The present set of findings is of great relevance to the
rule-learning literature initiated by Marcus, et al. (1999),
and is particularly supportive of the conjecture by Dawson
and Gerken (2009) that 7.5-month-olds may have “learned
to fail” at learning AAB rules due to the acquisition of
knowledge about tonality and the smoothness of natural
melodies. We are currently carrying out a version of the
present experiment adapted to infants to determine whether
the explaining away process observed here in adults comes
into play in infancy as well. If so, it will add a new
explanatory tool to be applied to the puzzle of why formally
analogous rules are easier to learn in some contexts than
others. More generally, the sort of “metalearning” observed
here may play an important role in the formation of
apparently domain-specific biases and constraints. In
general, when a potential role for differential experience
exists, caution should be exercised before proposing innate
biases.
Finally, in order to explain away, learners must be
explaining in the first place. The present findings add to a
growing body of evidence (Gopnik, 1998; Schulz and
Bonawitz, 2007; Xu and Garcia, 2008; Gerken, 2010) that
learning is a lot like science: in addition to making specific
predictions, an important role of cognition is to build
explanatory models of the environment, and to construct and
test hypotheses about why the world works the way it does.

Figure 4: Mean Discrimination Scores, 2nd and 3rd
Quartiles Only

Discussion
The present experiment set out to investigate the
contribution of rational, generative “explaining away” to
induction of an abstract repetition rule over a set of tone
sequences. In the context of sequences of musical tones,
repetition has a dual nature, first as an identity relation
between two consecutive events, and second as an interval
of magnitude zero between two tones on a continuum.
Hence when a repetition occurs, it is ambiguous which of
these two descriptions should be attached to it. The central
finding was that adult humans appear to take into account a
global “smoothness constraint” on melodies, which have a
statistical tendency to move in small intervals, to set a
baseline expectation for the rate of repetitions. This reduces
the informational value of a repeated tone as a cue to an
abstract rule.
The secondary prediction was that participants in the
Repetition condition (in which repetitions are uniquely
frequent and cannot be explained except by representing
them explicitly) would be inclined to downplay the ordinal
relations among tones in their representation of the
environment, focusing instead on abstract, “discrete”
relations like “same” and “different”. Since these are
precisely the relations needed to learn the repetition
grammar, participants in this group were expected to learn
the rule more easily than those in the Uniform group.
Support for this prediction is tenuous at best: although
scores in the Repetition group were numerically higher than
those in the Uniform group, this difference failed to reach
significance.
Exploratory analyses suggested that an
advantage for the Repetition group may be present in the
early blocks, disappearing later, but the difference was only
marginally significant, and in any case the analysis was post
hoc. It may be that a larger sample is needed to detect a
difference if one indeed exists.

83

Haider, H., & Frensch, P. A. (1996). The role of information
reduction in skill acquisition. Cognitive Psychology,
30(3), 304-337.
Johnson, S. P., Fernandes, K. J., Frank, M. C., Kirkham, N.
Z., Marcus, G. F., Rabagliati, H., & Slemmer, J. A. (in
press). Abstract rule learning for visual sequences in 8and 11-month-olds. Infancy.
Kersten, D., Mamassian, P., & Yuille, A. (2004). Object
perception as Bayesian inference. Annual Review
Psychology, 55, 271-304.
Lynch, M. P., & Eilers, R. E. (1992). A study of perceptual
development for musical tuning. Perception and
Psychophysics, 52(6), 599-608.
Marcus, G., Fernandes, K., & Johnson, S. (2007). Infant
Rule-Learning Facilitated by Speech. Psychological
Science, 18, 387-391.
Marcus, G. F., Vijayan, S., Rao, S. B., & Vishton, P. M.
(1999). Rule learning by seven-month-old infants.
Science, 283, 77–80.
Maye, J., Werker, J., & Gerken, L. A. (2002). Infant
sensitivity to distributional information can affect
phonetic discrimination. Cognition, 82, 101-111.
Murphy, R. A., Mondragon, E., & Murphy, V. A. (2008).
Rule learning by rats. Science, 319, 1849-1851.
Pellegrino, J. W., Doane, S. M., Fischer, S. C., & Alderton,
D. (1991). Stimulus complexity effects in visual
comparisons: The effects of practice and learning context.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 17(3), 781-791.
Saffran, J. (2003). Statistical language learning:
Mechanisms and constraints. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 12, 110-114.
Saffran, J. R., & Griepentrog, G. J. (2001). Absolute pitch in
infant auditory learning: Evidence for developmental
reorganization. Developmental Psychology, 37, 74-85.
Saffran, J. R., Pollack, S. D., Seibel, R. L., & Shkolnik, A.
(2007). Dog is a dog is a dog: Infant rule learning is not
specific to language. Cognition, 105, 669-680.
Schulz, L., & Bonawitz, E.B. (2007) Serious fun:
Preschoolers play more when evidence is confounded.
Developmental Psychology, 43(4), 145-150.
Temperley, D. (2008). A probabilistic model of melody
perception. Cognitive Science: A Multidisciplinary
Journal, 32(2), 418–444.
Tenenbaum, J. B., Griffiths, T. L., & Kemp, C. (2006).
Theory-based Bayesian models of inductive learning and
reasoning. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10(7), 309-318.
Werker, J. F., & Tees, R. C. (1984). Cross-language speech
perception: evidence for perceptual reorganization during
the first year of life. Infant Behavior and Development, 7,
49–63.
Xu, F., & Garcia, V. (2008). Intuitive statistics by 8-monthold infants. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, 105(13), 50125015.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by an NSF Graduate Research
Fellowship to Colin Dawson, as well as NIH grant R01
HD042170 to LouAnn Gerken. The authors also wish to
thank Brianna McMillan and Kailey Tucker of the Tweety
Language Development Laboratory at the University of
Arizona for their assistance with data collection.

References
Agresti, A. (2002). Categorical Data Analysis. Hoboken,
NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Bosch, L., & Sebastián-Gallés, N. (2003). Simultaneous
bilingualism and the perception of a language-specific
vowel contrast in the first year of life. Language and
Speech, 46, 217-243.
Ciaramita, M., & Johnson, M. (2000). Explaining away
ambiguity: Learning verb selectional preference with
Bayesian networks. In Proceedings of the 18th
International Conference on Computational Linguistics,
187-193, Saarbrucken, Germany.
Dawson, C. (2007). Infants Learn to Attend to Different
Relations When Forming Generalizations in Different
Domains. Unpublished Master’s thesis.
Dawson, C., & Gerken, L. (2009). From domain-generality
to domain-sensitivity: 4-Month-olds learn an abstract
repetition rule in music that 7-month-olds do not.
Cognition, 111(3), 378-382.
Doane, S., Sohn, Y. W., & Schrieber, B. (1999). The role of
processing strategies in the acquisition and transfer of a
cognitive skill. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 25(5), 1390-1410.
Eerola, T. & Toiviainen, P. (2004). MIDI Toolbox:
MATLAB Tools for Music Research. University of
Jyväskylä: Kopijyvä, Jyväskylä, Finland.
Folstein, J. R., Van Petten, C., Rose, S. A. (2007) Novelty
and conflict in the Categorization of complex stimuli.
Psychophysiology, 45, 467-479.
Gergely, G., & Csibra, G. (2003). Teleological reasoning in
infancy: the naïve theory of rational action. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 7, 287-292.
Gerken, L. A. (2010). Infants use rational decision criteria
for choosing among models of their input. Cognition,
115(2), 362-6.
Gerken, L., & Bollt, A. (2008). Three exemplars allow at
least some linguistic generalizations: Implications for
generalization mechanisms. Language Learning and
Development, 4(3), 228-248.
Gopnik, A. (1998) Explanation as orgasm. Minds and
Machines, 8(1), 101-118.
Hannon, E. E., & Trehub, S. E. (2005). Tuning into musical
rhythms: Infants learn more readily than adults.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
102(35), 12639-12643.

84

