UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The induction of hidden causes: Causal mediation and violations of independent causal
influence

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5kz4f12g

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Carroll, Christopher
Cheng, Patricia

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Induction of Hidden Causes:
Causal Mediation and Violations of Independent Causal Influence
Christopher D. Carroll (cdcarroll@ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology, UCLA
Los Angeles, CA 90095 USA

Patricia W. Cheng (cheng@lifesci.ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology, UCLA
Los Angeles, CA 90095 USA
with its context (Liljeholm & Cheng, 2007; Rottman &
Ahn, 2009).
In this paper, we focus on the assumption of independent
causal influence (Cheng, 1997; Novick & Cheng, 2004).
Independent causal influence requires that the power of one
cause to produce or prevent the effect is constant: it does not
change with context or with the occurrence or nonoccurrence of other causes. According to independent causal
influence, if aspirin prevents headaches caused by colds,
then it will also prevent headaches caused by dehydration,
stress, and so on. We investigate a specific violation of
independent causal influence that arises in prevention.
Preventive scope is the range of circumstances across
which a preventer works (Carroll & Cheng, 2009). A broad
preventer stops the effect no matter what the cause, but a
narrow preventer only stops the effect when the effect is
produced by a certain targeted cause. Aspirin and nasal
spray illustrate the difference between broad and narrow
prevention. As a broad preventer, aspirin prevents
headaches of all kinds (e.g., headaches caused by colds and
headaches caused by stress). As a narrow preventer, sinus
spray only prevents headaches caused by colds; it would not
prevent a headache caused by stress.
Narrow prevention violates the assumption of
independent causal influence because the power of the
preventer depends on which cause is producing the effect e:
a narrow preventer prevents e when it is brought about by
the targeted cause c, but it does not prevent e otherwise.
However, it is possible to reconcile narrow prevention and
the assumption of independent causal influence by positing
a certain type of hidden cause: a hidden mediator. Suppose
that c produces e indirectly through a mediator and that the
narrow preventer prevents the mediator rather than
preventing e directly (see Figure 1). Once the mediator is
included in the explanation, none of the causal relationships
violate independent causal influence: c and the preventer
independently influence the mediator, and the mediator and
other causes independently influence e. As long as other
causes of e produce e via mechanisms other than the
mediator, the preventer will only stop e when it is being
produced by c. Thus, narrow prevention would only appear
to violate the assumption of independent causal influence
because there is an unobserved mediator.

Abstract
In order to explain the apparent violation of a causal
assumption, people often posit hidden causes. The assumption
of independent causal influence states that the power of a
cause to produce or prevent an effect is independent of other
causes. Some preventers violate independent causal influence;
we conducted an experiment to test whether people posit a
hidden mediating cause to explain these preventers. The
results indicated that participants are more likely to posit a
hidden mediator when the preventer violates independent
causal influence.
Keywords: causal reasoning; causal inference; prevention;
hidden causes; unobserved causes

Introduction
Although people often reason about simple cause and effect,
they typically assume that such causal relationships are
embedded in complex causal structures with hidden causes.
So while people know that aspirin prevents headaches, they
also believe that this relationship is mediated by some
complex biological mechanism involving hidden causes. In
many circumstances, the hidden causes are inconsequential.
Knowing how aspirin prevents headaches is less important
than knowing that it does so. Indeed, people often reason
appropriately with only shallow causal knowledge (e.g.,
Keil, 2003). However, hidden causes may be important in
other circumstances.
In particular, hidden causes may be important when the
observed causes violate causal assumptions such as the
Markov assumption in causal Bayesian network models
(Pearl, 2000; Spirtes, Glymour, & Scheines, 1993/2000) or
the assumptions for inferring causal power (Cheng, 1997;
Novick & Cheng, 2004). Inferences about hidden causes
have been demonstrated in a number of studies where some
causal assumption is violated. Children appeal to hidden
causes in order to explain probabilistic causation, and this
may reflect an assumption that causation is deterministic
(Schulz & Sommerville, 2006; see also Lu, Yuille,
Liljeholm, Cheng, & Holyoak, 2008). Similarly, both adults
(Gopnik, Glymour, Sobel, Schulz, Kushnir, & Danks, 2004;
Hagmayer & Waldmann, 2007; Luhmann & Ahn, 2007) and
infants (Saxe, Tenenbaum, & Carey, 2005) posit hidden
causes when there is an unexplained effect, presumably
reflecting the assumption that every effect has a cause
(Kant, 1781/1965). Finally, people infer a hidden contextual
cause when the causal power of the observed cause interacts

913

participants were given a series of statements and were
asked to endorse or reject each statement. One of these
statements presented the mediation explanation.

Participants
Forty undergraduates at the University of California, Los
Angeles (UCLA) participated to obtain course credit in a
psychology course. Participants were assigned to the narrow
(n = 20) or broad (n = 20) prevention condition.

Materials
The data presented in the narrow and broad prevention
conditions are shown in Table 1. The critical difference
between the conditions can be seen by comparing the effect
of asmine juice on headaches attributed to the background
cause. In the broad prevention condition, drinking asmine
juice reduced the number of headaches even when pane fruit
was not consumed. This can be seen by comparing the
number of headaches when people neither ate pane fruit nor
drank asmine juice to the number of headaches when people
drank asmine juice but did not eat pane fruit (see the top
half of Table 1). In the narrow prevention condition, it did
not do so.

Figure 1: Mediation as an explanation of narrow prevention.
Generative and preventive causation are denoted by arrows
and modified arrows terminating in a circle, respectively.
Previous research (Carroll & Cheng, 2009) demonstrated
that people distinguish between narrow and broad
prevention, but the relationship between preventive scope
and the inference of hidden mediation is less clear.
Although participants in the previous research identified the
mediation shown in Figure 1 as an explanation for narrow
prevention, they only did so in a two-alternative forcedchoice procedure. This shows that participants preferred the
explanation in Figure 1 to the available alternative (an
explanation where the preventer directly stopped the effect),
but it is impossible to tell whether participants would have
endorsed this explanation outside of this particular forcedchoice question. Participants may have endorsed causal
mediation as the better – but potentially unappealing –
explanation of the two available choices. Furthermore, the
experiment previewed the choices before showing the
participants any data, and this may have biased participants
towards interpreting the data with one of the provided
explanations. Whether causal mediation is a favored
explanation for narrow prevention more generally remains
to be seen. Moreover, previous research did not clarify the
relationship between preventive scope and the assumption
of independent causal influence.
To assess whether the causal mediation explanation of
narrow prevention is appealing more generally, we tested
whether people endorse causal mediation after encountering
a narrow preventer.

Table 1: The frequency of headaches (the effect) as a
function of pane fruit (cause), asmine juice (preventer), and
prevention condition. F = pane fruit, J = asmine juice.
Observed
Causes

Broad prevention

Narrow prevention

none

10 out of 50

10 out of 50

J

5 out of 50

10 out of 50

F

40 out of 50

40 out of 50

J, F

20 out of 50

20 out of 50

As shown in Figure 2, the data were presented in displays
containing cartoon faces. Each cartoon face represented a
person in the clinical trial, and the type of cartoon face
(happy face or sad face) indicated whether the person had a
headache.

Procedure
Participants were randomly assigned to the broad or narrow
prevention conditions and then given the following cover
story:

Method
Participants were asked to imagine themselves as
researchers at a medical research company. They were
directed to investigate how two fruit products from the rain
forest - pane fruit and asmine juice - influence whether
someone will have a headache. In all conditions,
participants were shown some clinical trials where pane
fruit caused headaches and asmine juice prevented
headaches. We manipulated whether asmine juice was a
narrow or broad preventer. After viewing the data,
participants reported whether they expected asmine juice to
prevent headaches under various circumstances. Finally, the

Imagine that you work for a drug company that
develops headache medications. You have heard rumors
about a certain area in a rainforest where many of the
fruits influence whether someone has a headache (either
by causing a headache or preventing it).
The drug company has asked you to investigate these
claims.
You decided to run clinical trials to assess the
influence of pane fruit and asmine juice. You recruited

914

volunteers and randomly divided them into groups. Each
group was assigned a specific treatment (e.g., eating
pane fruit but not drinking asmine juice).
The results of each trial are summarized by tables of
cartoon faces, and you can tell whether someone had a
headache by looking at the cartoon face.

eating pane fruit: they have stopped drinking coffee and are
experiencing caffeine withdrawal.
Finally, participants were shown a series of statements
about pane fruit and asmine juice. The statements were
shown one at a time, and participants were asked to endorse
whichever statements they agreed with. Table 2 lists these
statements in the order that they were presented.
Endorsement of the mediation statement provided the
critical measure of whether participants inferred a hidden
mediator. It should be noted that the mediation statement is
compatible with broad prevention as well as narrow
prevention: a broad preventer might destroy the substance in
addition to directly preventing the effect when it is produced
by other mechanisms.

Participants were shown data in a display similar to
Figure 2, and were given a print-out of the data to reference
while answering subsequent questions. The instructions
emphasized that the results had been replicated in much
larger studies so that any differences in the frequency of the
effect were reliable.

Table 2: Participants were asked to indicate whether they
agreed or disagreed with the following statements

Figure 2: The data shown in the narrow prevention
condition. Shaded frowning faces indicate people with
headaches, and the lighter smiling faces indicate people
without headaches.
Then, participants answered a series of counterfactual
questions designed to measure beliefs about how pane fruit
and asmine juice influence headaches. Each question asked
the participants to imagine a group of people with certain
characteristics and to predict whether consuming one of the
food products would lead to more, fewer, or the same
number of headaches in that group. For example, the fruit
counterfactual - designed to assess the influence of pane
fruit among a group of people who have not drunk asmine
juice – asked following question:

Type

Statement

prevents

Asmine juice can sometimes prevent or
relieve headaches.

develop drug

Your company may be able to turn
asmine juice into a drug like aspirin,
selling it widely as a headache treatment.

mediation

Pane fruit produces a RARE substance
that causes headaches, and asmine juice
destroys THAT substance.

combination

There is something special about the
combination of asmine juice and pane
fruit that prevents headaches.

Results
For the counterfactual questions, participants indicated
whether there would be more, fewer, or the same number of
headaches after consuming one of the food products. To
analyze these responses, we coded responses of “more” as 1,
“fewer” as -1, and “same number” as 0.
As expected, most participants predicted that pane fruit
causes headaches. For the pane fruit counterfactual, the
mean response was .90 (SD = 0.45) in the broad prevention
condition and .95 (SD = 0.22) in the narrow prevention
condition. The difference between these experimental
conditions was not significant, t(38) = 0.45, p = .66.
On the other hand, the predicted influence of asmine juice
depended on the experimental condition and the specific
counterfactual (see Figure 3). Participants in both conditions
believed that asmine juice would prevent headaches among
groups of people that had eaten pane fruit (juice|fruit
counterfactual). However, there were noticable differences
between the conditions for the other counterfactuals. When
participants were shown broad prevention, they believed
that asmine juice would prevent headaches in every
counterfactual. In contrast, when participants were shown
narrow prevention, they were much less likely to believe

Imagine that you go to a small town in the United States.
If you brought PANE FRUIT to the town and everyone
ate it, do you think that MORE people would have
headaches, FEWER people would have headaches, or
the SAME NUMBER of people would have headaches?
The other questions assessed when participants believed
that asmine juice would prevent headaches. The juice|fruit
question asked participants to predict the effect of asmine
juice among people who live in a town near the rainforest
and frequently consume pane fruit. The juice|no fruit
question measured the influence of asmine juice among
people living in a small town in America (who presumably
have not eaten pane fruit). The juice|withdrawal question
measured the influence of asmine juice among a group of
people who have headaches for a specific reason other than

915

that asmine juice would prevent headaches when the
headaches were produced by either an unknown (juice|no
fruit) or a known non-targeted (juice|withdrawal) cause. 1
-1.2

causal rating

-1
-0.8

headaches, and the difference between the conditions was
not statistically significant, p = .41 by Fisher's exact test.
Table 3: Percentages of participants in each condition who
agreed with the statements.

juice|fruit
juice|no fruit
juice|withdrawal

Question

Broad prevention

Narrow prevention

prevents

100%

75%

-0.6

develop drug

95%

25%

-0.4

mediation

35%

70%

-0.2

combination

10%

25%

0
broad
narrow
preventive scope condition

Discussion
This experiment demonstrates that people will endorse
causal mediation in order to explain narrow prevention. The
results also confirm that people distinguish between narrow
and broad prevention, using preventive scope to guide
generalization. Broad prevention was generalized
irrespective of context, but narrow prevention was only
generalized when the effect was produced by the targeted
cause. A narrow preventer was not expected to stop the
effect when the effect was produced by an unknown cause
or a cause other than the targeted cause.
These findings contribute to a growing body of evidence
showing that causal assumptions play a central role in the
induction of hidden causes. Models of causal inference that
make minimalistic assumptions (e.g., Pearl, 2000; Spirtes,
Glymour, & Scheines, 1993/2000) may fail to explain these
findings (see Griffiths & Tenenbaum, 2009 for other
situations where minimalistic assumptions prove
inadequate). In fact, since broad and narrow prevention
imply the same conditional independencies among the
observable variables,2 Pearl’s (2000) causal Bayesian
network model represents them with the same causal graphs,
treating a causal graph with mediation and a causal graph
without mediation as equivalent.
Why is independent causal influence so important that its
preservation warrants positing a hidden cause? The power
PC theory (Cheng, 1997; Novick & Cheng, 2004) uses the
assumption of independent causal influence as a defeasible
default assumption to justify the inference of causal power.
Without this assumption, the causal power of a candidate
cause with respect to an effect is indeterminate even if the
usual prerequisites for causal inference (e.g., “no

Figure 3: Prevention ratings for the counterfactual questions
involving asmine juice. Error bars show the standard errors.
To confirm these patterns, we conducted an ANOVA with
prevention condition (broad or narrow prevention) and
prevention counterfactual (juice|fruit, juice|no fruit, or
juice|withdrawal) as the independent variables. The
ANOVA found a main effect of prevention condition,
F(1,38) = 17.08, p < .001, and an interaction between
prevention condition and prevention counterfactual, F(2, 76)
= 6.28, p < .01. To investigate the source of the interaction,
we conducted a separate ANOVA in each prevention
condition. These ANOVAs confirmed that there was a nonsignificant effect of counterfactual question under broad
prevention, F(2, 38) = 1.85, p = .17, and a significant effect
of counterfactual question under narrow prevention, F(2,
38) = 6.34, p < .01.
The percentages of participants endorsing the statements
are shown in Table 3. Participants in both conditions were
very likely to report that asmine juice sometimes prevents
headaches, but participants in the broad prevention
condition were more likely to do so, p < .05 by Fisher's
exact test. This difference might reflect the failure of some
participants in the narrow prevention condition to notice that
the preventer prevents the effect. Participants in the broad
prevention condition were much more likely to believe that
asmine juice could be developed into a headache drug and
widely marketed, χ2(1, N = 40) = 20.42, p < .001.
Participants in the narrow prevention condition were much
more likely to believe that pane fruit and asmine juice might
produce and prevent headaches via a rare shared mediator,
χ2(1, N = 40) = 4.91, p < .05. Neither of the experimental
conditions led many participants to suggest that the
combination of pane fruit and asmine juice prevented

2

Although the preventer is independent of the effect conditional
on the cause being absent in narrow prevention but not broad
prevention, causal Bayesian network models do not recognize this
distinction. Causal Bayesian network models consider the
conditional independencies of variables, not the conditional
independencies at certain levels of variables. Since the preventer
and effect are dependent for some values of the cause in both broad
and narrow prevention, conditionalizing on the cause does not
render them independent in the sense that causal Bayes nets
consider when constructing a causal graph.

1

Average causal ratings that are close to zero might be
produced by (1) a roughly even mixture of “fewer” and “more”
responses, or (2) many “same number” responses. Few participants
reported that asmine juice causes headaches (n = 2); the answers
close to zero were driven primarily by “same number” responses.

916

confounding”) are satisfied. A difference in the probability
of the effect in the presence of the cause and in its absence,
for example, could be entirely due to the interaction
between the cause and the context. If so, then there would
be no reason to expect the cause to produce the effect in a
different context. Indeed, without independent causal
influence, causal power is bound to specific contexts, and
causes will combine in unpredictable ways from one context
to the next. This would render generalization unjustified.
The assumption of independent causal influence jumpstarts
the inference of causal power and supports generalization to
transfer contexts via a context-independent causal power.3
Although people view causal mediation as a viable
explanation for narrow prevention, the reason for this
inference is less clear. There are at least two possibilities.
First, people may posit causal mediation liberally, but only
endorse causal mediation of a certain form. If so,
participants in the broad prevention condition might be
equally comfortable with causal mediation except that they
prefer explanations where the mediator is common rather
than rare. If this is the case, then people use the assumption
of independent causal influence to infer the form of causal
mediation. That is, the violation or non-violation of
independent causal influence would determine whether
people expect the mediator to be shared between different
causes of the effect.
Alternately, people may posit mediation only when causal
assumptions are violated. Since causal relationships can be
decomposed almost indefinitely, this represents a reasonable
strategy to minimize the complexity of causal explanations
while maintaining useful assumptions. Broad prevention,
which does not violate independent causal influence, can be
explained and predicted without causal mediation.
Therefore, positing causal mediation provides little practical
benefit. For narrow prevention, however, the representation
of mediation provides more tangible benefits: it allows
people to generalize more accurately. If people can identify
the mediator, they can infer whether the preventer will stop
other causes from producing the effect. Thus, the violation
of the assumption of independent causal influence serves as
a criterion for revising one’s causal explanation to achieve
more accurate predictions.
In summary, narrow and broad prevention differ in
whether they respect the assumption of independent causal
influence. In narrow prevention, which violates independent
causal influence, people view causal mediation as a
plausible explanation. By positing causal mediation, people
preserve the assumption of independent causal influence.

Acknowledgments
The preparation of this article was supported by AFOSR
FA 9550-08-1-0489. The authors wish to thank Hannah Har
for her assistance with data collection.

References
Carroll, C. D., & Cheng, P. W. (2009). Preventive scope in
causation. In N.A. Taatgen & H. van Rijn (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 31th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 833-838). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Cheng, P. W. (1997). From covariation to causation: A
causal power theory. Psychological Review, 104, 367405.
Cheng, P.W. (2000). Causality in the mind: Estimating
contextual and conjunctive causal power. In F. Keil & R.
Wilson (Eds.), Explanation and cognition (pp. 227253). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gopnik, A, Glymour, C., Sobel, D. M., Schulz, L. E.,
Kushnir, T. & Danks, D. (2004). A theory of causal
learning in children: Causal maps and Bayes nets.
Psychological Review, 111 (1), 1-31.
Griffiths, T. L., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2005). Structure and
strength in causal induction, Cognitive Psychology, 51,
334-384.
Griffiths, T. L., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2009). Theory-based
causal induction. Psychological Review, 116 (4), 661-716
Hagmayer, Y., & Waldmann, M. R. (2007). Inferences
about unobserved causes in human contingency learning.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 60 (3),
330-355.
Kant, I. (1965). Critique of pure reason. London:
Macmillian. (Original work published 1781).
Keil, F. C. (2003). Folkscience: coarse interpretations of a
complex reality. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7 (8), 368373.
Liljeholm, M., & Cheng, P. W. (2007). When is a cause the
“same”? Psychological Science, 18 (11), 1014-1021.
Lu, H., Yuille, A. L., Liljeholm, M., Cheng, P. W., &
Holyoak, K. J. (2008). Bayesian generic priors for causal
learning. Psychological Review, 115 (4) , 955-984.
Luhmann, C. & Ahn, W. (2007). BUCKLE: A model of
unobserved cause learning. Psychological Review, 92 (3),
657-677.
Novick, L. R., & Cheng, P. W. (2004). Assessing interactive
causal influence. Psychological Review, 111, 455-485.
Pearl, J. (2000). Causality: Models, reasoning, and
inference. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
Press.
Rottman, B. M. & Ahn, W. (2009). Causal inference when
observed and unobserved causes interact. In N.A. Taatgen
& H. van Rijn (Eds.), Proceedings of the 31th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 14771482). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Saxe, R., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Carey, S. (2005). Secret
agents: inferences about hidden causes by 10- and 12-

3

The assumption of independent causal influence can be
replaced, without changing the predictions regarding
generalization, by the assumption that the causal factors in the
background that interact with the targeted cause occur with the
same probability across contexts (Cheng, 2000). Since our
dependent measures do not allow differentiation between these
assumptions, we treat them as equivalent for our purposes.

917

month-old infants. Psychological Science, 16 (12), 9951001.
Schulz, L. E., & Sommerville, J. (2006). God does not play
dice: Causal determinism and children's inferences about
unobserved causes. Child Development, 77 (8), 427-442.
Spirtes, P., Glymour, C., & Scheines, R. (2000). Causation,
prediction and search (2nd ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press. (Original work published 1993).

918

