UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The perception of number from long-term memory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4fp8d00n

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Zhao, Jiayang
Turk-Browne, Nicholas

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The perception of number from long-term memory
Jiaying Zhao (jiayingz@princeton.edu)
Department of Psychology, Green Hall,
Princeton University, NJ 08540 USA

Nicholas B. Turk-Browne (ntb@princeton.edu)
Department of Psychology, Green Hall,
Princeton University, NJ 08540 USA
Abstract
The perception of numerosity is supported by two systems: an
exact system for small quantities, and an approximate system
for large quantities. Two properties arise from the combination
of these two systems: the accuracy of numerosity judgments
changes qualitatively above the capacity limit for exact representations, and the ability to discriminate two quantities depends on the numerical distance between the quantities and the
relationship of this distance to the absolute magnitudes. These
well-characterized aspects of number cognition have typically
been studied in judgments of numerosity based on visual arrays. Across four experiments we demonstrate remarkably
similar effects in numerosity judgments based on incidental
long-term memory. These results suggest that similar mechanisms and constraints may operate when estimating numerosity from representations of external sensory input and internal
representations derived from long-term memory.
Keywords: Numerosity judgments; perception; memory

Introduction
Perception is typically considered a set of processes for analyzing incoming sensory input. Some researchers have argued that the same perceptual and attentional mechanisms
can be directed inward during prospection, memory retrieval,
and memory search. To what extent are the mechanisms that
underlie judgments on the basis of immediate perception similar or constrained in the same way as the mechanisms that
underlie judgments derived from internal representations?
One way to answer this question is to examine the relation between numerical judgments on the basis of immediate
external visual input and the numerical judgments based on
internal representations from long-term memory. In the former case, several features of immediate numerical perception
have been discovered. People are very accurate and fast at
enumerating small quantities (6 or fewer), a process termed
subitizing (Kaufman, Lord, Reese, & Volkman, 1949), while
they are subject to capacity limitations with large quantities,
a process termed approximation (Mandler & Shebo, 1982;
Trick & Pylyshyn, 1994; Feigenson, Dehaene, & Spelke,
2004). Moreover, when discriminating between numerosities, error rates and response times are inversely related to
the numerical distance between numbers (Moyer & Landauer,
1967; Dehaene, Dupoux, & Mehler, 1990). When distance
is held constant, error rates and response times increase as
the absolute sizes or magnitudes of the two numbers increase
(Whalen, Gallistel, & Gelman, 1999; Barth, Kanwisher, &
Spelke, 2003). Developmental research has also suggested
core systems for representations of exact and approximate

quantities (Feigenson et al., 2004; Wood & Spelke, 2005;
Opfer & Siegler, 2007).
Numerical judgments from long-term memory have previously been examined in the context of event frequency
(Hasher & Zacks, 1979; Hintzman & Block, 1971; Howell,
1973). For instance, according to the strength hypothesis proposed by Hintzman (1969), frequency judgments of an event
are determined by the strength or the repetition of the memory
trace representing the event. Another view is that frequency
judgment is a direct readout of the number of stored traces of
an event based on its time lag rather than the strength of a single trace (Hintzman & Block, 1971). More recently, Brown
(1995, 1997, 2002) argues that judgments of event frequency
depend on context memory in that people rely on enumeration when different contexts produce distinct memory traces.
Here we relate the two areas using tools from studies of immediate numerical perception to focus on how people make
numerosity judgments from long-term memory. We investigate the extent to which properties and constraints of numerosity judgments on the basis of long-term memory mirror
those of judgments based on immediate perception.

Experiment 1
The purpose of this experiment is to test whether unexpected
numerosity judgments from long-term memory are accurate,
and whether capacity limitations in subitizing and short-term
memory for external visual input also apply for judgments
based on retrieved internal representations.

Participants
Twenty students from Princeton University participated in exchange for partial course credit (13 female, mean age 19.2
yrs, SD = 1.1).

Materials
Stimuli were chosen from an image set containing 60 distinct object categories. To manipulate numerosity, 50 of these
categories were pseudo-randomly assigned to a number between 1 and 10 such that each numerosity level was represented by 5 categories. One exemplar image was chosen
from each of these categories, and was presented the corresponding number of times over the course of the first phase
of the experiment. For example, if at numerosity level ‘3’ the
categories of dog, bear, car, flower, and horse were chosen,
then one exemplar from each category would be presented 3

1240

times throughout the first phase intermixed with images from
other numerosity levels. The order of image presentation was
randomized for each participant with the constraint that categories could not repeat back-to-back. In addition to the 275
images of interest ([10 + 9 + 8 + 2 + 1] × 5), 20 additional
images were selected randomly from the remaining 10 categories with half presented at the beginning and half at the end
to control for primacy and recency effects.

Procedure
In the first phase of the experiment, the participant viewed
each image and determined whether it corresponded to a natural or artificial category by pressing one of two keys. This
cover task prevents an explicit strategy such as counting, and
is orthogonal to the primary manipulation. On each trial, an
image appeared on the screen for 2 seconds, followed by an
interstimulus interval of one second. The full trial sequence
of 295 images lasted about 20 minutes. The participant then
completed an unrelated distractor task for 15 minutes.
In the second phase of the experiment, the participant again
viewed single images of objects on the screen, and estimated
how many times between 1 and 10 they had seen that image
in the first part of the experiment by pressing a number key
on the keyboard. The 50 exemplar images of interest were
presented in a random order. The accuracy and response time
for each image were recorded. Filler images were not presented. It is worth noting that participants often expressed
surprise when receiving these instructions, and that in postexperiment debriefing no subject reported being aware that
their memory for number would be tested in the second part.
These responses suggest that any effects we observe reflect
incidental encoding of number in long-term memory.

Results
We compared estimated numerosity from the second phase
against the objective numerosity from the first phase. At every numerosity level we averaged across the five categories at
that level for each participant, and then averaged these mean
estimates across participants. These estimates were compared
against the objective numerosity by computing differences
within participant and averaging these differences across participants. Results are shown in Figure 1.
To quantify performance, estimated numerosities were
modeled as a function of objective numerosities using linear regression. Since estimated and objective numerosities
were bounded (from 1 to 10), perfect performance would
result in a slope of 1 and an intercept of 0. In contrast,
chance performance (i.e. guessing) would lead participants
to randomly distribute their responses and would result in
a slope of 0. If they randomly distributed their estimates
across all response options, the expected intercept would be
5.5 ([10+1]/2). Thus, we can judge accuracy in estimating
numerosity from incidental encoding on a continuum from
perfect performance (slope = 1, intercept = 0) to chance performance (slope = 0, intercept = 5.5). The linear regression
analysis was performed within each participant. The mean

Figure 1: (A) Mean estimated numerosity plotted against the
number of times each image was presented during the first
phase (objective numerosity). (B) Mean slope of a linear
model applied to the data in Figure 1A over windows of three
numerosity levels (e.g. ‘1’ reflects window from 1 to 3 on the
x-axis of Figure 1A). (C) Mean intercept of a linear model
applied over the same windows. Error bars reflect std. error.

slope across participants was 0.64 (SD = 0.12, median = 0.64)
and the mean intercept was 1.59 (SD = 0.71, median = 1.53).
Prior research has indicated a capacity limitation in highly
accurate numerosity judgments of about 4 objects (Mandler
& Shebo, 1982; Trick & Pylyshyn, 1994). Thus, despite overall high performance, accuracy may be non-stationary across
objective numerosity. In particular, the slope of linear regressions over smaller windows of objective numerosity may approach 0 (with a corresponding increase in intercept). Such a
finding would support the existence of capacity limitation in
numerosity judgments from long-term memory.
We thus ran a linear regression across all possible windows
of 3 contiguous numerosity levels for each participant. That
is, separate linear regressions were run on windows [1,3],
[2,4]...[8,10]. For each window, the slope and the intercept
values were averaged across participants (see Figure 1B). To
quantify our results, one way repeated-measures ANOVAs
were performed for slopes and intercepts. There were reliable
main effects of numerosity on both measures (slope F[7,145]
= 9.4, p < .01; intercept F[7, 145] = 3.9, p < .01). Post-hoc
Tukey HSD tests revealed that the slope values for window
[1,3] (M = 1.08, SD = 0.28) were reliably higher than the rest
of the slope values, while the intercept values for the same
window (M = 0.50, SD = 0.65) were reliably lower than the
rest of the intercept values.
These results suggest that performance starts off near perfect, and declines steadily as a function of objective numerosity. From inspection of Figure 1B, there appears to be a
marked drop in slope and increase in intercept after window
[3,5], suggesting a capacity limitation around 4-5 repetitions.
To quantify these intuitions, we imposed a mixture of perfect
and chance performance on the data in Figure 1A. In particular, we tested a mixed linear model to identify at what point
along the objective numerosity line at which participants’ performance started to level off and to decline. In this mixed
model, at a given point n on the numerosity line, y = 1×x+0
for x in [0, n], and y = 0×x+5.5 for x in [n + 1, 10]. In other

1241

words, we fit the perfect performance linear model to data up
to numerosity n and a chance performance model to data from
numerosity n + 1 to 10. It should be noted that at numerosity 0 the mixed model becomes a complete chance model and
at numerosity 10 it becomes a complete perfect performance
model. The average model fits across participants are shown
in Figure 2A. SSerror was minimized at n from 4 to 8.

drawn from each category and presented only once. For example, if the category dog was assigned to the numerosity
level ‘3’, then images of three different dog breeds would
each be presented once. This increased the novelty and variance within each category, possibly allowing for more accurate estimates about large numerosity levels.

Procedure
The procedure was identical to Exp. 1 except for one aspect
of the second phase: category names (e.g., “dog”) were used
to elicit estimates of how many images of that category had
been presented in the first phase. Names were used rather
than images because there were several possible images to
choose from for many of the categories. Thus, 50 category
names were presented in a random order.

Results
Figure 2: Estimated numerosities in (A) Exp. 1, (B) Exp. 2a,
(C) Exp. 2b, tested against the following model: at a given
point n on the x-axis, y = 1 × x + 0 for x in [0, n], and y = 0 × x
+ 5.5 for x in [n + 1, 10]. Error bars reflect std. error.

Data were analyzed in the same manner as Exp. 1. Results
are shown in Figure 3. To quantify performance, we modeled
estimated numerosities as a function of objective numerosities using linear regression (as in Exp. 1). Surprisingly, the
mean slope across participants was 0.33 (SD = 0.16, median =
0.34), reliably lower than the mean slope (M = 0.64) in Exp. 1
(t[38] = 6.9, p < .01). The mean intercept across participants
was 2.72 (SD = 1.18, median = 2.58), reliably larger than the
mean intercept (M = 1.59) in Exp. 1 (t[38] = 3.7, p < .01).
Contrary to our predictions, these results suggest that performance was worse in Exp.t 2a vs. Exp. 1, i.e. farther from
perfect performance, and closer to a chance uniform distribution.

Discussion
The results in Exp. 1 demonstrate that participants can make
remarkably accurate numerosity judgments from long-term
memory. Moreover, participants were unaware that their
memory for number would be tested, and therefore this accuracy reflects incidental/automatic encoding of number in
memory. Despite overall high accuracy, estimates of numerosity became less accurate when an image has been presented more than 5 times. To our knowledge, this provides
the first demonstration of capacity limitations in judgments
operating over internal representations, extending and replicating robust findings of similar limits in short-term memory
for external visual input (Xu & Chun, 2006).

Experiment 2a
This putative capacity limit observed in Exp. 1 could reflect
the fact that we repeated identical images many times. Such
repetition could lead to habituation or reduced attention that
would impair further encoding. To test this explanation, here
we replicate Exp. 1, but present multiple exemplars of the
same category once, rather than the same exemplar multiple times. This increased novelty may improve encoding and
may facilitate retrieval.

Figure 3: (A) Mean estimated numerosity plotted against the
number of exemplars of each category from the first phase.
(B) Mean slope of a linear model applied to the data in Figure 3A over windows of three numerosity levels. (C) Mean
intercept of a linear model applied over the same windows.
Error bars reflect std. error.

Participants
Twenty students from Princeton University participated in exchange for partial course credit (14 female, mean age 19.7
yrs, SD = 1.5). None had served in the previous experiment.

Materials
The materials were identical to Exp. 1 with one important exception: instead of presenting the same exemplar image from
each category n times, n distinct exemplars were randomly

We again explored the presence of a capacity limit by computing the slopes and intercepts of linear functions over windows of objective numerosity. Despite the relatively poorer
performance in this experiment, visual inspection of Figures
3B and 3C revealed a qualitative difference between windows
[3,5] and [4,6]. One way repeated-measures ANOVAs revealed a main effect of numerosity on intercept values (F[7,
145] = 5.6, p < .01). The main effect of numerosity on slope
values did not reach significance (F[7, 145] = 1.5, p > .05).

1242

2.9, p < .01). Thus, after matching retrieval cues, numerosity judgments from multiple repetitions of the same exemplar
remain more accurate than those from multiple exemplars of
the same category.

To further characterize a change in accuracy as a function of
numerosity we also tested the same mixed linear models on
the data in Figure 3A. The model fits are shown in Figure 2B.
Again, across numerosities the data were best represented by
a model in which performance was perfect up to 5 exemplars
and plateaued for larger numbers.

Discussion
Contrary to our predictions, providing multiple exemplars for
number estimation did not improve accuracy. In fact, performance was worse than in Exp. 1, where judgments were
based on the number of repetitions of a single stimulus. This
suggests that performance in Exp. 1 did not asymptote around
5 presentations because of habituation or diminished attention. The worse performance here could reflect poor encoding
of images presented only once, or source confusion during retrieval in response to a category label. For example, “dog”
may retrieve more than 3 exemplars, with reduced performance reflecting an inability to distinguish exemplars intruding from prior experience. Regardless, despite overall worse
performance, participants nevertheless showed consistent capacity limitations to Exp. 1 of approximately 5 memories.

Figure 4: (A) Mean estimated numerosity plotted against the
number of exemplars of each category from the first phase.
(B) Mean slope of a linear model applied to the data in Figure 4A over windows of three numerosity levels. (D) Mean
intercept of a linear model applied over the same windows.
Error bars reflect std. error.

The stimuli used here were the exactly same as those in Exp.
1. The exemplar image from each category was repeatedly
presented depending on the numerosity value.

To explore possible capacity limitations, we computed
slopes and intercepts for linear models over windows of
three contiguous numerosities. One way repeated-measures
ANOVAs revealed main effects of numerosity on both measures (slope F[7, 145] = 3.2, p < .01; intercept F[7, 145] =
4.6, p < .01). Post-hoc Tukey HSD tests revealed that the
slope value for window [1,3] (M = 0.90, SD = 0.61) were
reliably higher than the rest of the slope values, while the
intercept for the same window (M = 1.26, SD = 1.20) were
reliably lower than the rest of the intercepts.
Moreover, from Fig. 1, 3, and 4 the slope and intercept
values for Exp. 2b appear to resemble those in Exp. 1 more
than those in Exp. 2a. Collapsing across participants, the
mean slope values were highly correlated with those in Exp.
1 (r = 0.84, p < .01), but not with those in Exp. 2a (r =
0.51, p > .05). Capacity limitations were examined for each
numerosity level where performance plateaued (see Fig. 2C).
As in previous experiments, the mixed model fit best at 5.

Procedure

Discussion

The procedure was identical to Exp. 2a. Participants were
cued by a category name (e.g. “dog”) and estimated how
many times they had seen an image from that category.

This experiment reveals that judgments of numerosity are
more accurate for multiple repetitions of the same exemplar
than for single presentations of multiple exemplars of the
same category. The category label did somewhat impair performance, but critically, cannot entirely explain the poor performance in Exp.2a. Across three experiments we observed
evidence that unexpected judgments of numerosity from past
experience are accurate and subject to capacity limitations.

Experiment 2b
While the worse performance in Exp. 2a vs. Exp. 1 can be
due to weaker encoding of number, it remains possible that
potentially more accurate judgments were hampered by a less
informative retrieval cue. To examine this possibility, here we
replicate Exp. 1 with category labels during retrieval.

Participants
Twenty students from Princeton University participated in exchange for partial course credit (12 female, mean age 19.1
yrs, SD = 1.3). None had served in previous experiments.

Materials

Results
Results are shown in Figure 4. We modeled estimated numerosities as a function of objective numerosities using linear regression. The mean slope across participants was 0.46
(SD = 0.15, median = 0.48), reliably higher than the mean
slope in Exp. 2a (M = 0.33; t[38] = 2.6, p < .01) but reliably
lower than that in Exp. 1 (M = 0.64; t[38] = 4.2, p < .01).
The mean intercept across participants was 2.31 (SD = 0.82,
median = 2.06), which was not statistically smaller than the
mean intercept in Exp. 2a (M = 2.72; t[38] = 1.3, p > .05)
but was reliably larger than that in Exp. 1 (M = 1.59; t[38] =

Experiment 3
Capacity limitations are a signature property of perceptual
number processing. To further build our case for a similarity between external and internal number estimation, we
consider two additional classic effects in the numerosity literature: the distance effect and the magnitude effect. These

1243

psychophysical effects are evident when two quantities must
be discriminated. The distance effect refers to the relative
ease with which participants can discriminate two quantities
that are farther apart in number space (e.g., 2 vs. 3 compared
to 2 vs. 4). The magnitude effect refers to the fact that a
given numerical distance can become harder to discriminate
at higher magnitudes (e.g., 2 vs. 3 compared to 8 vs. 9). We
explore whether these psychophysical effects also occur when
discriminating numerosities defined by long-term memory.

Participants
Twenty students from Princeton University participated in exchange for partial course credit (11 female, mean age 19.6
yrs, SD = 1.6). None had served in previous experiments.

Materials

Figure 5: (A) Mean accuracy as a function of distance. (B)
Mean response time as a function of distance. (C) Mean accuracy as a function of the smaller number in a pair and also the
distance (e.g. D1 = distance of 1). (D) Mean response time as
a function of the smaller number and also the distance. Error
bars reflect std. error.

The stimuli in Exp. 1 were used. The exemplar image of
a category was repeatedly presented depending on the numerosity value.

Procedure
The first phase was identical to Exp. 1, such that all number
encoding was incidental. In the second phase, participants
judged which of two images they had seen more times during
the first phase. Based on numerosity levels, we paired images
so as to fully cover the space of possible distances and proportional distances (for the magnitude effect). At distance of
1 we paired an image that was presented n number of times
with the one that was presented n + 1 number of times. Since
numerosity levels range from 1 to 10, there were 9 pairs at the
distance of 1 (e.g., 1 vs. 2, 2 vs. 3, etc.). The same pairing
method was applied to the distances of 2, 3, 4, and 5, which
resulted in 8, 7, 6, and 5 pairs, respectively. Thus, a total
of 35 pairs were generated. For each pair, two images were
presented side by side on the screen and participants judged
which image appeared more times by pressing one of two buttons for left or right. The order of pairs was randomized for
each participant and the position on the screen of the image
with the larger numerosity was randomized on each trial.

Results
To assess distance effects, we pooled all of the pairs of each
distance within participant and computed mean accuracy and
RT. To assess magnitude effects, we conditioned every distance on the smaller number of the pair (e.g., 1 vs. 3: distance
= 2/base = 1). Mean accuracy and RT were again computed
within participant for each bin. Results are shown in Fig. 5.
As visible in Fig. 5A and 5B, accuracy increased while response time decreased as a function of distance (the opposite
of a speed/accuracy tradeoff). Collapsing across participants,
there was a strong correlation between accuracy and distance
(r = 0.98, p < .01) but a weaker correlation between response
time and distance (r = -0.61, p > .05). To test the reliability
of these relationships, we correlated accuracy and response
time with distance within each participant, transformed the
resulting correlation coefficients to Z scores using Fisher’s

transform, and then compared these values against the null
relationship of 0 using a one-sample t-test. Accuracy was
positively correlated with distance (mean z = 0.21, t(19) =
5.72, p < .01), and response time was negatively correlated
with distance (mean z = -0.08, t(19) = 2.15, p < .05). Thus,
participants were able to discriminate between two numerosities in long-term memory, and performed better as a function
of the absolute number difference.
To assess the magnitude effect, we performed repeatedmeasures ANOVAs on accuracy and response time as a function of the base and the distance of each pair. We could
not include both the base and distance factors in a two-factor
ANOVA because the design was not factorial (e.g., there were
no distance = 5/base = 9 trials), and thus used separate oneway ANOVAs. There were main effects of base and distance on accuracy (base F[8, 683] = 18.5, p < .01; distance
F[4, 691] = 50.1, p < .01). There were also main effects of
base and distance on response time (base F[8, 683] = 16.4,
p < .01; distance F[4, 691] = 13.9, p < .01). The robust effect of base demonstrates a magnitude effect in numerosity
judgments from memory.

Discussion
When judging which exemplar appeared more times, participants were more accurate and faster when the distance was
larger. Holding the distance constant, participants were also
more accurate and faster when the base number of presentations was relatively small.

General Discussion
We have found that unexpected numerosity judgments based
on long-term memory can be highly accurate, and that this
accuracy is maintained for up to a small quantity of retrieved

1244

memories. These findings are largely in agreement with studies of numerical judgments based on immediate visual perception. Moreover, judgments of numerosity were more accurate for multiple repetitions of the same exemplar than for
single presentations of multiple exemplars. This rules out
the possibility that apparent capacity limitations reflect habituation or reduced attention. The fact that multiple exemplars were in fact worse than single exemplars could relate to
failures of source monitoring (Dougherty & Franco-Watkins,
2003; Johnson, Hashtroudi, & Lindsay, 1993): when cued by
a category, participants may have been unable to screen out
extra-experimental memories. Such failures may have been
minimized when retrieval was cued by an image rather than a
category label, but the effect persisted when retrieval cue was
equated. When discriminating between two incidentally encoded numerosities, performance increased with distance but
decreased as the magnitude or the absolute size of the numbers increased. These results were again in line with findings
on numerosity comparison based on immediate visual perception (Whalen et al., 1999; Barth et al., 2003).
Since numerosity judgments based of long-term memory
exhibited similar properties and constraints as compared to
immediate perception, our findings are consistent with the
existence of a common underlying numerosity mechanism
for perception and memory. While our focus has been on
drawing this analogy, there may also be important differences
between the perception and memory of number information.
For example, while the perception of number has been wellcharacterized by a hard capacity limit on exact judgments,
memory for number may be better characterized by a more
continuous logarithmic or power law function. Moreover,
we do not yet know whether input representations retrieved
from long-term memory are the same as those constructed
during online perception (e.g., whether numerosity is estimated over a set of retrieved episodes, or directly read out
from a symbolic or analog representation of quantity updated
during encoding). These are important questions for future
research, but our results nevertheless provide initial evidence
for a striking symmetry between snap judgments of number
from a single sensory stimulus, and delayed (surprise) judgments based purely on long-term memory. In sum, mechanisms that seem to exist in the service of sensory processing may have broader functional roles in cognition, operating
similarly over input from internal or external sources.

References
Barth, H., Kanwisher, N., & Spelke, E. (2003). The construction of large number representations in adults. Cognition,
86, 201–221.
Brown, N. R. (1995). Estimation strategies and the judgment
of event frequency. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21, 1539–1553.
Brown, N. R. (1997). Context memory and the selection of
frequency estimation strategies. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 23, 898–

914.
Brown, N. R. (2002). Frequency processing and cognition.
In P. Sedlmeier & T. Betsch (Eds.), (chap. Encoding, representing, and estimating event frequencies: A multiple strategy perspective). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dehaene, S., Dupoux, E., & Mehler, J. (1990). Is numerical comparison digital? analogical and symbolic effects
in two-digit number comparison. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 16,
625–641.
Dougherty, M. R. P., & Franco-Watkins, A. M. (2003). Reducing bias in frequency judgment by improving source
monitoring. Acta Psychologica, 113, 23–44.
Feigenson, L., Dehaene, S., & Spelke, E. (2004). Core systems of number. Trends in cognitive sciences, 8, 307–314.
Hasher, L., & Zacks, R. T. (1979). Automatic and effortful
processes in memory. Journal of Epxerimental Psychology:
General, 108, 356–388.
Hintzman, D. L. (1969). Apparent frequency as a function
of frequency and the spacing of information. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 80, 139–145.
Hintzman, D. L., & Block, R. A. (1971). Repetition and
memory: Evidence for a multiple-trace hypothesis. Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 88, 297–306.
Howell, W. C. (1973). Representation of frequency in memory. Psychological Bulletin, 80, 317–331.
Johnson, M. K., Hashtroudi, S., & Lindsay, D. S. (1993).
Source monitoring. Psychological Bulletin, 114, 3–28.
Kaufman, E. L., Lord, M. W., Reese, T. W., & Volkman, J.
(1949). The discrimination of visual number. American
Journal of Psychology, 62, 498–525.
Mandler, G., & Shebo, B. J. (1982). Subitizing: An analysis of its component processes. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 111, 1–22.
Moyer, R. S., & Landauer, T. K. (1967). Time required
for judgments of numerical inequality. Nature, 215, 1519–
1520.
Opfer, J. E., & Siegler, R. S. (2007). Representational change
and children’s numerical estimation. Cognitive Psychology, 55, 169–195.
Trick, L. M., & Pylyshyn, Z. W. (1994). Why are small and
large numbers enumerated differently? a limited-capacity
preattentive stage in vision. Psychological Review, 101,
80–102.
Whalen, J., Gallistel, C. R., & Gelman, R. (1999). Nonverbal
counting in humans: The psychophysics of number representation. Psychological Science, 10, 130–137.
Wood, J. N., & Spelke, E. S. (2005). Chronometric studies of
numerical cognition in five-month-old infants. Cognition,
97, 23–39.
Xu, Y., & Chun, M. M. (2006). Dissociable neural mechanisms supporting visual short-term memory for objects.
Nature, 440, 91–95.

1245

