UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Game Lies in the Eye of the Beholder: The Influence of Expertise on Watching Soccer

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2ms0d37r

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Smuc, Michael
Mayr, Eva
Windhager, Florian

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Game Lies in the Eye of the Beholder:
The Influence of Expertise on Watching Soccer
Michael Smuc (michael.smuc@donau-uni.ac.at)
Eva Mayr (eva.mayr@donau-uni.ac.at)
Florian Windhager (florian.windhager@donau-uni.ac.at)
Research Center KnowComm, Danube University Krems, Dr.-Karl-Dorrek-Str. 30
3500 Krems, Austria

Abstract
The influence of expertise on viewing soccer matches is
already an area of extensive research focusing on training.
However, free viewing of soccer matches did receive less
attention. In an explorative eye-tracking study we compared
the viewing behavior of novices, amateur players, and
professional players watching soccer scenes freely. Overall,
novices seem to view a soccer match quite similar to
professional players, whereas amateurs engage in more visual
work. The viewing behavior differs when watching soccer
freely or with a task in mind – a result worth a second glance.
Keywords: Soccer, viewing behavior, eye tracking, expertise

Introduction
Watching soccer without the corresponding experience and
domain knowledge is a real challenge. Without knowledge
about standard situations and tactical behavior, an unskilled
observer is restricted to following the ball’s trajectory
mainly. On the other extreme, a good commentator is able
to take in the whole scene at once and comment on the
events and possible next moves. But what is it that enables
an experienced soccer viewer to direct his or her attention
more strategically and to take in more relevant information
in comparison to an inexperienced one?
To answer this question, we review existing research on
eye-movements in sports and their relation to expertise. We
present a study that compares the television viewing
behavior of soccer laypersons, amateurs, and professional
players.

Eye-Movements in Watching Television
In general, viewing television is a complex activity
(Josephson & Holmes, 2006): A huge amount of
information has to be processed at a speed, which cannot be
controlled by the viewer. Kirkorian (2007) assumes that
watching television is nearest to perceiving scenes (e.g.,
Henderson, 2007). Both convey complex visual stimuli, but
instead of viewing only one scene, television includes a
series of static frames.
To examine visual information processing, eye tracking
technology provides a means to observe a viewer’s point-ofgaze (e.g., Rayner, 1998). In the past, eye tracking focused
mainly on scene perception and reading under laboratory
conditions (Henderson, 2007; Rayner, 1998); only in the last
years, applications in more everyday settings (e.g., Hayhoe

& Ballard, 2005; Mayr, Knipfer, & Wessel, 2009) became
possible with the emergence of more usable technology.
Central eye-movement measures are fixations and
saccades. Saccades are shifts from one point of gaze to
another; fixations indicate visual attention to that
information (Rayner, 1998). In scene perception, top-down
and bottom-up influences control where one looks
(Henderson, 2007). Bottom-up influences are stimulusdriven, whereas top-down influences are viewer-driven.
Bottom-up influences are mainly based on the visual
salience of the stimulus, i.e., color, saturation, and – which
is especially important in television – movement
(Mahapatra, Winkler, & Yen, 2008). Also, research on eyemovements during film watching shows that a high degree
of the fixations is within the center of the screen (Goldstein,
Woods, & Peli, 2007). An open question is whether this is
due to a trend to fixate the center or due to movie making
conventions placing the most relevant information in the
center of the screen.
Top-down influences on the other hand are a viewer’s
knowledge about the stimulus, his or her domain
knowledge, and his or her goals (Henderson, 2003). It was
shown that expectations about camera angles, cuts and
close-ups determine television viewing behavior (Kirkorian,
2007). These expectations are learned and, therefore, get
stronger with viewing experience.
Another top-down influence is the viewer’s domain
knowledge. Chase and Simon (1973) showed that due to
their higher knowledge on possible configurations experts in
chess can easier create chunks of information. A similar
mechanism can be assumed in soccer experts and was
already shown to be influential (Ward & Williams, 2003).
A third top-down influence is the existence of specific
goals. Only little research exists on humans watching
television freely, i.e. without any task or instruction (see
Goldstein et al., 2007, for an exception). However, Spanne
(2006) showed that similar to viewing natural scenes
(DeAngelus & Pelz, 2009) viewing behavior of movies
differs according to the task at hand and in free viewing. But
until now no research on free viewing behavior in soccer
exists. Rather, most research asked players to anticipate the
next move, recall the players’ positions (e.g., Ward &
Williams, 2003), or actively pass the ball (Helsen & Starkes,
1999).
As watching soccer for leisure purposes is a free viewing
condition, it has to be questioned whether existing research

1631

on the influence of expertise on watching soccer with a
specific task holds under this condition as well.

Expertise in Soccer and Viewing Behavior
Research on eye-movements in sports focused on the
sportsmen’s performance and how it relates to perceptual
processes mainly (see Memmert, 2009, for a review). The
aim of such research was on the one hand to train the
sportsmen’s viewing behaviour and, thereby, to improve
their performance; on the other hand, this research aimed at
testing theories of expertise, perception, and attention under
ecologically more valid conditions (Casanova, Oliveira,
Williams, & Garganta, 2009).
In comparison to amateurs, professional soccer players
can better use advance visual cues, they can better recall and
recognize visual patterns, they engage in more effective
search behaviour, and can better judge situational
probabilities (Casanova et al., 2009). With respect to the
viewing behaviour, experts have fewer fixations (Helsen &
Starkes, 1999), but those last longer than the fixations of
amateurs (Williams, 2000). It is assumed that during those
longer fixations, experts take in information not only from
central, but also from more peripheral areas (Casanova et
al., 2009; Ghasemi, Momeni, Rezaee, & Gholami, 2009).
Informative visual cues in soccer are, next to the ball and
the goal, the player’s teammates and opponents, but also
free spaces. Amateurs fixate on the more obvious
informative areas only (players, ball), whereas professional
players fixate on more sophisticated informative areas like
possible free spaces as well (Casanova et al., 2009).
In dependence of the player’s position, the number of
players visible and the viewers´ tasks, different viewing
patterns were observed (Poulter, Jackson, Wann, & Berry,
2005; Williams, Janelle, & Davids, 2003).
Pattern recognition is an important skill in watching
games – especially in team sports, like soccer (Ward &
Williams, 2003). Experts have a higher repertoire of
patterns stored in their long-term memory and can more
effectively retrieve appropriate patterns based on visual
input (Casanova et al., 2009). Williams, Hodges, North, and
Barton (2006) showed that the relation between players and
the presence of key players are important features that
facilitate pattern recall in soccer experts.

perception. No hypothesis for novices can be build upon the
existing knowledge base.
Do professional soccer players pay more attention to
informative regions than amateurs? Casanova and
colleagues (2009) report that amateurs do focus on less
informative regions like the ball and the players. We
therefore assume that professional soccer players do fixate
more informative regions than amateurs. As the informative
content of some visual cues has to be acquired with soccer
domain knowledge (e.g., free kick), we hypothesize that
novices to soccer do fixate only the most obvious
informative regions, i.e. the ball, the player in possession of
the ball, and the goal.
Are experts better at anticipating the next pass? Ward and
Williams (2003) found that professional soccer players are
better in predicting the next pass in 11 to 11 simulations.
We assume that this superior predictive performance also
coincides with fixations on the according player and that
amateurs and novices do have less fixations in this area
prior to the pass.

Method
The study was conducted in November 2009. Professional
soccer players’ viewing behavior was recorded at the
training camp of their Austrian first league soccer club
Magna Wiener Neustadt. The viewing behavior of amateur
soccer players and novices was recorded at the Austrian
open research night at Danube University Krems.

Sample
The viewing behavior of 7 professional soccer players, 8
amateur soccer players, and 11 soccer novices was recorded.
Three participants (1 amateur, 2 novices) with corneal
irregularity and varifocals were excluded from further
analyses, as there eye gaze data could not be recorded
validly. An overall sample of 23 participants remained (see
table 1).
The age distribution is similar in all three groups
(F2, 22 = 1.43, p > .05). Though more female participants
were soccer novices, this difference reached no significance
(χ² = 5.35, df = 2, p > .05).
Table 1: Descriptive statistics.

Research Questions
Based on the existing research on expertise in soccer, this
study examines free viewing behavior while watching
soccer without a concrete task. As prior studies compared
only professional and amateur soccer players, we included a
third less skilled group in our study: Novices, with little or
no knowledge in soccer so far (like Poulter et al., 2005). In
detail, we address the following research questions:
Do soccer laypersons, amateurs and professional players
differ in their soccer viewing behavior? As reported in
previous research (Casanova et al., 2009; Williams, 2000)
we assume that professional players show less, but longer
fixations than amateurs, and that they have better peripheral

N
age
male

professionals
7
30.9 (5.4)
100 %

amateurs
7
39.9 (9.6)
86 %

novices
9
33.4 (12.8)
55 %

Material
Some studies on soccer expertise used recordings from a
single camera which takes in the whole soccer field instead
of television reports (Vaeyens, Lenoir, Philippaerts, &
Williams, 2007; Williams et al., 2006). As our study focuses
on watching soccer on television, we used original soccer
reports from different not well-known games. We chose

1632

four scenes with an overall duration of 3’43 mins: Scene 1
consists of a cascade of successful passes. Scene 2 is a free
kick sequence. Scene 3 deals with a questionable offside
decision. Scene 4 shows a quick offense over the whole
field.

Measures
Eye movements were recorded using an SMI iView X™
RED eye tracker at a temporal resolution of 60 Hz. It tracks
the corneal reflection of the pupils and allows relatively free
movement of the head when seated approximately 60 cm
from the tracking device. As it allows eye tracking with
glasses and contact lenses, a wide range of participants
could be included.
Expertise was assessed with multiple questions: whether
participants’ had experience in actively playing soccer in a
club or not, how often they watched soccer on television
(never, seldom, several times a year, several times a month),
and how they evaluate their own soccer knowledge in
comparison to a famous soccer player on a rating scale.
Participants who actively played soccer in a club, watched
soccer more frequently by trend (t = -1.98, df = 16, p < .1)
and had higher knowledge (t = 3.12, df = 16, p < .01).
Therefore, a differentiation based on experience in playing
soccer seems to be a valid measure of expertise.

Procedure
Each participant was tested individually. After an
explanation on the purpose of the study, the functionality of
the eye tracking device was explained to the participants.
The device was calibrated using a five-point-calibration.
Then the participants were instructed to watch the scenes
freely, as they would usually watch soccer.
Participants viewed the soccer scenes on the 17’’
computer screen integrated in the eye tracking device. The
experimenter was seated next to the participant with a
control screen of the participant’s gazes to intervene, if the
gaze was lost by the eye tracking system (see figure 1).
After viewing the scenes, participants received some
questions on demographic data and their soccer expertise.

Figure 1: Experiment setup at the training camp (left) and
at the long research night (right).

Figure 2: Dynamic AOIs for two frames from the passing
scene (top) and the free kick scene (bottom). Filled circles
and ellipses denote the dynamic AOIs. The smaller bold
rings represent the fixations of amateurs, novices (both red),
and professional soccer players (blue, green).

Analyses
Eye tracking data were analyzed with BeGaze™ analysis
software. We segmented the videos based on single scenes
and extracted the fixations (number, duration) and saccades
(number, amplitude).
To analyze the visual attention given to highly
informative regions, the soccer scenes were coded in
accordance to predefined Areas of Interest (AOIs) similar to
Helsen and Starkes (1999), dependent on the scenes. In the
following, two of four analyzed scenes are described in
detail to exemplify the analysis procedure.
Scene 1 is shown from an overview perspective without
close-ups. It consists of a cascade of successful passes for
33 seconds in the middle of the field. At least five players of
the offending team and four players of the defending team
can be seen. In this scene each player and the ball were
coded as an AOI (see figure 2, top). To gain more
information on peripheral perception of the ball‘s
surrounding, we used 5 AOIs of different size with the ball
at its center. The AOIs’ radiuses grew approximately with
the size of an average player. As a measure of anticipation,
we coded the player who will be the recipient of the next
pass as an AOI.
Scene 2 is a free kick sequence next to the goal (13 sec.),
representing a typical standard situation in soccer. All
players except for three of the offending team can be seen

1633

(see figure 2, bottom). In this free kick situation, the viewers
had approximately five seconds to follow the players’
prearrangements before the free kick was carried out. The
different roles were coded as individual AOIs; namely
goalkeeper, referee, free kick shooter, the player next to the
free kick shooter, and the bunch of players in front of the
goal.
The ability to define dynamic AOIs allowed us to analyze
eye movement parameters for each AOI automatically. The
main measurements are the number of fixations per AOI,
the glance time (where all saccades, including the entry and
exit saccade, and all fixation times on an AOI are summed
up), and the fixation duration in percent (fixation time in ms
divided by the difference of end- and start-time).
Eye tracking data were exported and further analyzed in
SPSS to examine differences between professional players,
amateur players, and novices in soccer.

Results
Viewing Behavior
As a first indicator of viewing behavior we compared the
fixations’ number and average duration between the
expertise groups across all scenes.
Overall and in contrast to our first assumption, the
professional players did not make more fixations than the
amateur players (t = 0.65, df = 13, p > .05). Still, as was
assumed, their fixations endured longer (t = -1.99, df = 13,
p < .05). Interestingly, novices’ viewing behavior did not
differ from professional players’. But they did make less
fixation than the amateur players (t = 2.37, df = 16, p < .05).

seconds. This analysis offers some details about viewers’
visual search patterns for relevant information.
Amateurs more often and longer fixated one player who
had a rather longer ball possession time (amateurs vs.
professionals: glance duration: t = -2.86, df = 13, p < .05;
fixation count: t = -2.98, df = 13, p < .01; novices vs.
amateurs: glance duration t = -4.28, df = 16, p < .01;
fixation count. t = -3.61, df = 16, p < .01). One player who
was an attractive alternative to pass to was fixated earlier by
professionals than by novice viewers (t = 4.58, df = 9,
p < .01). This attractive pass alternative had a defensive
counterpart who covered him a bit later in the sequence.
This defensive player turned out to be an interesting fixation
object for professionals in contrast to amateurs (glance
duration: t = -2.63, df = 13, p < .05; fixation count: t = 2.32, df = 13, p < .05) For professionals vs. novices a trend
exists in the same direction.
As an indicator of anticipation, we also analyzed fixations
to the player receiving the next pass prior to ball contact. No
difference existed between participants of different expertise
in the number of fixations and in their glance duration.

Knowledge-Driven Viewing
Scenes with an inactive ball provide more time for topdown, knowledge-driven processing of the scene. The
beginning of scene 2, before the ball was shot, was therefore
very interesting to analyze.
Table 2: Eye tracking performance matrix for AOIs of
different sizes around the ball. The label of the group with
higher values is plotted in case there is a trend. Asterisks
denote significant differences.

Peripheral Perception
As stated earlier, the ball plays the decisive role in soccer
and drives the game. Let us take a closer look at the ball and
the space around it. As described in the analysis section, we
analyzed areas of five different sizes around the ball. The
AOI ball 1 equates an AOI with a radius of approximately
the size of one player; ball 2 has the radius of two players
and so forth.
While the smallest AOI around the ball showed no
differences, amateurs differed from the professional players
and novices for the bigger ones (see table 2). With
increasing size of the AOI ball, professionals fixated this
AOI less and had lower glance durations in this AOI. This is
an indicator that they perceived the region surrounding the
ball already with their central fixation in the nearer ball
area; whereas amateurs had to fixate the outer areas as well
to take in this information.
As for the overall viewing behavior, we found no
remarkable differences between novices and professionals.

Seeking for Relevant Information
For the passing scene (scene 1), the AOIs of the offending
and defending players were analyzed for a period of 15

higher for …
ball 1 glance dur.
fix. count
fix. time %
ball 2 glance dur.
fix. count
fix. time %
ball 3 glance dur.
fix. count
fix. time %
ball 4 glance dur.
fix. count
fix. time %
ball 5 glance dur.
fix. count
fix. time %

1634

novices
or
amateurs
amateurs
amateurs
amateurs
amateurs
amateurs
amateurs*
amateurs*
amateurs*
amateurs*
amateurs*
amateurs

novices
or
profess.

amateurs
or
profess.

-

amateurs
amateurs*
amateurs
amateurs
amateurs
-

In the free kick sequence (scene 2), professional players
fixated free regions (that is, regions without players) longer
than amateurs (t = -2.41, df = 13, p < .05). Further,
professionals more often fixated the player next to the free
kick shooter (t = -2.62, df = 13, p < .05). Both, amateurs’
glances (duration: t = -2.31, df = 16, p < .05) and
professionals’ (duration: t = -2.21, df = 13, p < .05), stayed
longer in the area where most players were and where the
ball will most likely be played to – in comparison to novices
(see figure 2, bunch at the bottom). No significant
differences were found between professionals, amateurs and
novices in their viewing behavior on the goalkeeper, the free
kick wall, the referee, and actions of single offensive or
defensive players.

Discussion
Watching a soccer match freely is an everyday activity
that is not connected to any task. Prior research on viewing
behaviour during watching soccer was insofar restricted as
participants were asked to answer questions, anticipate
behaviour, or recall information (e.g., Ward & Williams,
2003). Human eye-movements in a free viewing condition
of moving visual stimuli were recorded only seldom until
now (Mayr et al., 2009; Spanne, 2006) and never for
watching a soccer match. This study is the first to analyse
the influence of expertise on viewing behaviour.
Still, some of the results which were gained under task
conditions hold under free viewing as well: We observed
longer fixations in professional than in amateur players like
found in many other studies (Casanova et al., 2009,
Williams, 2000). In addition, they exhibited higher
peripheral perception skills like reported in prior research
(Casanova et al., 2009; Ghasemi et al., 2009): Professional
players fixate less often the wider area surrounding the ball
compared to amateurs. Fewer fixations do not mean that
professionals perceive less parts of the game but rather that
they perceive more relevant visual cues with fewer
fixations.
We assumed that professional soccer players pay more
attention to informative regions. This top-down controlled
viewing behaviour should increase with higher domain
knowledge. Indeed, we ascertained that professional players
fixated some informative regions (certain key players, free
regions) which amateurs fixated only to a lesser extent.
Other areas, like the bunch of players during the free-kick,
were perceived by professional and amateur players to a
similar extent. Due to our comparison with novices we
could show that this perception is knowledge-driven as well.
In contrast to prior research, we observed some profound
differences as well: Our assumption that professional
players would anticipate the next pass visually is not
supported by our participants’ viewing behaviour. It remains
to be studied whether this difference is due to the absence of
an according task or due to the short duration of the
analysed scene. Further analyses of longer sequences would
be necessary to validate this finding.

In contrast to prior research (Casanova et al., 2009;
Williams, 2000) we found no differences between the
number of fixations by amateurs and professionals. As this
visual indicator depends on the number of players displayed
in a scene (see Vaeyens et al., 2007), a more differentiated
analysis might reveal differences according to the
proportion of the field displayed.
Prior research on soccer expertise compared only
professionals with high and low performance (e.g., Vaeyens
et al., 2007), professionals with amateurs (e.g., Ward &
Williams, 2003), or people with high vs. low self-reported
soccer knowledge (Dijksterhuis, Bos, van der Leij, & van
Baarne, 2009). To our knowledge barely any research
extended these boundaries of expertise so far to include also
professional soccer observers (like referees, see Ghasemi et
al., 2009, for an exception) or novices without any soccer
knowledge (see Poulter et al., 2005, for an exception).
Though the first gap remains to be filled, this study was able
to shed some light on the viewing behaviour of novices:
In contrast to our assumption that novices would mainly
focus on the ball (as the most obvious, and highly salient
informative region) they watched similarly to professional
soccer players. A possible explanation for this similarity
could be that though they looked on the same region, they
extracted different information.
Novices as well as professionals focused on the ball less
time than the amateur players. This result raises the
question, why amateurs do view a soccer match differently
from professional players and novices? Maybe the amateurs
were very motivated to compare their own gazes to those of
professionals in comparison to the more carefree novices.
They seemed to seek for as much information as possible,
especially in regions of 8-10 meters around the ball. They
also had a higher fixation dispersion than professionals and
novices (F2,21 = 3.34, p < .1). Another explanation could be
that the situation was not as goal-free as intended, because
different learned viewing behaviors were activated:
Professional soccer players frequently watch soccer matches
to analyze their behavior for training purposes. Amateur
soccer players in contrast watch the game not only to “read”
it, but mainly to reach the soccer fan’s “fever pitch”.

Limitations
This study is limited by the artificial experimental setting of
watching a match in front of a computer screen instead of a
wide-screen television (cp. Josephson & Holmes, 2006).
Even though nowadays soccer matches are often watched on
youtube, a typical match-viewing situation is characterized
by a stimulating, emotion-rich environment.
A second limitation of our results is the methodology
used: Eye tracking methodology can only show the gaze
focus, but not the focus of attention (e.g., Treisman, 2006).
A triangulation with other methodologies would be
necessary, but would restrict the free-viewing paradigm.

1635

Further Research Questions
One of the main novelties in this study is the free viewing
paradigm applied to watching soccer. It would be interesting
– also in the sense of the limitations – to analyze free
viewing in different environments (i.e., stadium, private TV,
public viewing areas).
Qualitative analysis of the professional players’ viewing
behavior indicated differences between playing positions:
Whereas goal keepers observed the behavior of the goal
keepers to a higher extent, trainers scanned the soccer field
more frequently. A more differentiated analysis of experts is
needed (see also Casanova et al., 2009).
Further research should also compare passive sport
experts, i.e. real viewing experts (e.g., referees – see
Ghasemi et al., 2009) vs. couch potatoes, and active sport
experts, i.e. professional vs. amateur players, in their
viewing behavior.
Soccer is a male-biased sport – and so is research on it.
With one exception (Poulter et al., 2005), no women were
included in prior studies on soccer expertise. We would
therefore like to encourage further research on female
soccer players and their passive counterparts.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful for the willingness of the SC Magna Wiener
Neustadt’s players to participate in this study. Further
thanks are given to the visitors at the “Lange Nacht der
Forschung 09” (the Austrian open research night) for their
interest and to ecoplus for supporting our travel expanses.

References
Casanova, F., Oliveira, J., Williams, M., & Garganta, J.
(2009). Expertise and perceptual-cognitive performance
in soccer: A review. Revista Portuguesa de Ciências do
Desporto, 9, 115-122.
Chase, W. G., & Simon, H. A. (1973). Perception in chess.
Cognitive Psychology, 4, 55-81.
DeAngelus, M., & Pelz, J. (2009). Top-down control of eye
movements: Yarbus revisited. Vis Cognition, 17, 790-811.
Dijksterhuis, A., Bos, M. W., van der Leij, A., & van
Baarne, R. B. (2009). Predicting soccer matches after
unconscious and conscious thought as a function of
expertise. Psychological Science, 20, 1381-1387.
Ghasemi, A., Momeni, M., Rezaee, M., & Gholami, A.
(2009). The difference in visual skills between expert
versus novice soccer referees. Journal of Human Kinetics,
22, 15-20.
Goldstein, R. B., Woods, R. L., & Peli, E. (2007). Where
people look when watching movies: Do all viewers look
at the same place? Computers in Biology & Medicine, 37,
957-964.
Hayhoe, M., & Ballard, D. (2005). Eye movements in
natural behavior. Trends in Cognitive Science, 9, 188-194.
Helsen, W. F., & Starkes, J. L. (1999). A multidimensional
approach to skilled perception and performance in sport.
Applied Cognitive Psychology, 13, 1-27.

Henderson, J. M. (2007). Regarding scenes. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 16, 219-222.
Josephson, S., & Holmes, M. E. (2006). Clutter or content?
How on-screen enhancements affect how TV viewers
scan and what they learn. In Proceedings of the 2006
symposium on Eye tracking research &; applications (pp.
155-162). San Diego, CA: ACM.
Kirkorian, H. L. (2007). Age differences in eye movements
during video viewing. Dissertation, University of
Massachusetts Amherst.
Mahapatra, D., Winkler, S., & Yen, S. C. (2008). Motion
saliency outweighs other low-level features while
watching videos. In Society of Photo-Optical
Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series,
6806, 68060P1-68060P10.
Mayr, E., Knipfer, K., & Wessel, D. (2009). In-sights into
mobile learning. An exploration of mobile eye tracking
methodology for learning in museums. In G. Vavoula, N.
Pachter, & A. Kukulska-Hulme (Eds.), Researching
mobile learning: Frameworks, methods, and research
designs (pp. 189-204). Oxford, UK: Peter Lang.
Memmert, D. (2009). Pay attention! A review of visual
attentional expertise in sport. International Review of
Sport and Exercise Psychology, 2, 119-138.
Poulter, D. R., Jackson, R. C., Wann, J. P., & Berry, D. C.
(2005). The effect of learning condition on perceptual
anticipation, awareness, and visual search. Human
Movement Science, 24, 345-361.
Rayner, K. (1998). Eye movements in reading and
information processing: 20 years of research.
Psychological Bulletin, 124, 372-422.
Spanne, J. G. (2006). Task impact on cognitive processing
of narrative fiction film. Master thesis, Lund University.
Treisman, A. (2006). How the deployment of attention
determines what we see. Visual Cognition, 14, 411-443.
Vaeyens, R., Lenoir, M., Philippaerts, R. M., & Williams,
A. M. (2007). Mechanisms underpinning successful
decision making in skilled youth soccer players: An
analysis of visual search behaviors. Journal of Motor
Behavior, 39, 395-408.
Ward, P., & Williams, A. M. (2003). Perceptual and
cognitive
skill
development
in
soccer:
The
multidimensional nature of expert performance. Journal
of Sport & Exercise Psychology, 25, 93-111.
Williams, A. M. (2000). Perceptual skill in team games:
Research, theory, and practice. In INSEP 2000 (p. 15-16).
Williams, A. M. (2002). Eye movement measurement
systems and key visual search parameters. Expertise in
Elite Sports, 43.
Williams, A. M., Hodges, N. J., North, J. S., & Barton, G.
(2006). Perceiving patterns of play in dynamic sport
tasks: Investigating the essential information underlying
skilled performance. Perception, 35, 317-332.
Williams, A. M., Janelle, C. M., & Davids, K. (2003).
Constraints on the search for visual information in sports.
Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology, 2, 301-318.

1636

