UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Effect of Cognitive Load and Meaning on Selective Attention

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5q6079mr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Weast, Rebecca
Neiman, Nicole

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Effect of Cognitive Load and Meaning on Selective Attention
Rebecca A. Weast (rweast2787@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, Franklin & Marshall College
Lancaster, PA 17604 USA

Nicole G. Neiman (nicole.neiman@fandm.edu)
Department of Psychology, Franklin & Marshall College
Lancaster, PA 17604 USA
Abstract
Nillie Lavie’s Load Theory of selective attention suggests
that the size of the cognitive load affects selective
attention ability: the larger the cognitive load, the poorer
the selective attention performance. Other authors have
found that the relationship between distracting and
relevant information can influence how well distractors
are ignored. Our study hypothesized that a) larger
cognitive load would (as previously shown) hinder
reaction time on a selective attention task, b) that
distractors (words) semantically related to the words being
held in memory (as part of the cognitive load
manipulation) would be more distracting than unrelated
and neutral distracters. The findings instead showed that
unrelated distractors were more distracting.

Lavie’s Load Theory of selective attention suggests
that the quantity of stimuli presented to a person
determines how their selective attention system will
function – whether they will be more or less
distractible (Lavie, Hirst, de Fockert, & Viding,
2004). The Load Theory suggests that selective
attention consists of two mechanisms: a passive,
perceptual system, and an active mechanism of
cognitive control. The perceptual system functions
in line with the early selection model, where the
number of stimuli modulates the effectiveness of
attentional selection. When there is a low load on
the perceptual system – as in a visual search task
with few (1-3) items to search through – there is
extra, unused perceptual capacity that involuntarily
picks
up
other
(irrelevant,
distracting)
environmental information, and the person is more
likely to perceive distractors. In a high perceptual
load condition, the opposite is true: the task uses up
all attentional capacity, and extra environmental
elements can’t interfere. In this model, the second
stage of selective attention is an active, cognitive
process. In conditions of high cognitive load, where
most of the person’s cognitive capacity is consumed
with a difficult working memory task, for example,
the person has few cognitive resources available to
resist distraction by irrelevant information. The
person can better disregard distractors in a lowcognitive load condition. When the working

memory (or other task) contains fewer items, there
is more cognitive capacity available to focus on
relevant information, while effectively weeding our
perceived distractors. This cognitive system only
comes into play in conditions of low perceptual
load, when distractors have been perceived and need
to be actively suppressed (Lavie, Hirst, de Fockert
& Viding 2004; Lavie & Cox, 1997; Lavie, 1995).
Many studies have addressed the intricacies of
this model, usually using simple, single letter or
digit stimuli. Past studies used stimuli that are
unrelated to each other and that carry as little
semantic information as possible. Presumably, they
do this to get at the attention issue in its purest form,
with the simplest stimuli possible. Stimulus material
used in past studies includes letters, numbers,
colors, and simple black and white symbols. Few
have examined the model in relation to the semantic,
content of the stimuli. This raises the obvious
questions: are distractors more distracting when they
are
meaningfully
related
to
task-relevant
information? Is this effect modulated by cognitive
load?
Most of the work done to test Load Theory has
focused on the perceptual mechanism of selective
attention. Lavie and colleagues have investigated the
effect of cross-modal distractor presentation in a
decision task, and the possible relationship between
the cognitive load resulting from task-switching
between and within sensory modalities (Rees, Frith
& Lavie, 2001; Brand-D’abrescia & Lavie 2008).
Only Lavie’s 2004 study has really addressed the
effect of cognitive load on selective attention tasks.
This makes sense; the question of involuntary
attention grabbing by stimuli is a more direct way to
study selective attention, and according to the Lavie
model, the cognitive system plays only a supporting
role in attention control. However, we wanted to
investigate the effect of cognitive load further. The
current study investigated the impact of the
cognitive load on selective attention. More
specifically, we examined what effect, if any, the
semantic content of the information being held in
working memory has on distractibility when

1477

distractors are related to the information in working
memory. Lavie et al.’s 2004 study used digits to
compose their memory sets, the current study used
words. By using words instead of digits, the
memory set words could be related to each other,
and could allow for distractors to also be related (or
not) to the words in the memory set. By
manipulating the meaningful relationships between
memory set and distractor we hoped to have an
effect on distractor interference.
One study has examined the effects of distractors
with semantic meaning (words) when that meaning
is either task congruent or non-congruent. Fabrice
Parmentier (2008) found that task-relevant and taskirrelevant novel distractor words modulated
performance of a decision task in a way that
suggested that the words were semantically
analyzed immediately following presentation.
Specifically, when an auditory distractor word
(either ‘left’ or ‘right’), presented simultaneously
with a target arrow, was incongruent with the
direction of a target arrow, it took longer than with a
congruent distractor word for participants to identify
the direction of the arrow. This suggests that task
relevant information can be more distracting than
task irrelevant information. It should be noted,
however, that this interference did not occur when
the congruent and incongruent distractors were
standard distractors (presented on every trial). The
authors conducted two different manipulations of
the neutral:word distractor ratio, and observed
interference only when a neutral distractor was used
(a sinusoidal tone) on 80% of trials, and congruent
and incongruent distractors each appeared in 10% of
trials. This indicates that interference occurred only
when the meaningful distractors were novel as well.
(The current study also examined the interference
caused by semantically relevant and irrelevant
distractors, but in a uni-modal design. Parmentier
(2008) used a bimodal design, with auditory
distractor words and a visual decision task.)
Lavie and colleagues have also manipulated the
similarity of the distractor and the target in a visual
search task. For example, in sections of her study
outlining the two-part attention model, half of the
distractors would be the same as the target (X and
X), and half of them would be different (X target
with N distractor) (Lavie et al., 2004). These studies
have shown that task non-congruent distractors
cause greater interference with attention control than
congruent distractors. Still, these studies used only
stimuli and distractors without semantic meaning.
Lavie and Forester (2008) noted that most
selective attention studies (including most of
Lavie’s own) utilize the same or similar stimuli as
the distractor item and target item (i.e. black and

white letters, numbers, symbols, etc.). Therefore, the
experimenters focused on the effects of truly-task
irrelevant distractors, distractors that were
completely unrelated to the target stimuli. Such
studies are valuable because they aim to more
closely simulate real-world distraction and selective
attention in a controlled clinical setting. During a
visual search task, participants had to identify
whether an X or an N was present. During the task
standard distractors (X or N) were presented in 80%
of trials, related distractors (similar to target items)
were presented in 10% of trials, and unrelated
distractors (images of cartoon characters) were
presented in the remaining 10%. They found that
these novel distractors could create more disruption
of performance than standard distractors, but only
when participants had a longer period of time to
identify the target. When a time pressure was added
to the search task—they were given 500 ms to
respond rather than no time limit—the extra
interference of irrelevant distractors was eliminated
in high perceptual load conditions, in agreement
with the Load Theory’s prediction.
Belke, et al. (2008) also investigated the effects of
target-similar distractor items in a visual search task.
Their experimental tasks presented participants with
a target, presented as a single word, followed by an
array of images. In some trials the array would
contain the target, and some trials would contain an
item semantically related to the target (target:
“shirt,” related item: an image of a pair of pants).
Using an eye-tracker, they found that when the
target was present, even in trials where the related
item was also present the participant’s first fixation
would fall on that target significantly more
frequently than non-target items. When the target
was absent, however, the first fixation would fall on
the related item significantly more than the other
items in the array (Belke et al., 2008). These results
suggest that, when primed with a target item, the
participant is more likely to look at an item related
to that prime than an item unrelated to that prime.
Finally, Belke et al. (2008) found that items
semantically related to a target are more attentiongrabbing than unrelated items. This, along with the
broad finding that task-congruent distractors are
more distracting than neutral distractors (Lavie et.
Al. 2004; Parmentier, 2008; Lavie & Forester 2008),
and Parmentier’s findings that semantic information
can be obtained from novel distracters, lead us to
four hypotheses. First, we hypothesized that
distractors with semantic content related to the
semantic content of the memory set would cause
more interference (more distraction, slower RTs)
than either distractors unrelated to the memory set,
or neutral distractors (which should have caused the

1478

least interference). Second, we also expected to see
an effect of load on distractibility compatible with
the Load Theory: we expected to see greater
distractibility (slower RTs) in the high cognitive
load condition. Third, based on the Load Theory we
hypothesized that there would be no interaction
between cognitive load and distractor type; past
studies produced no results that would suggest an
interaction either way. Finally, we expected to see a
higher rate of false positive identifications in the
memory probe in the high load condition, as there
should have been less cognitive capacity available to
actively ignore distractor words.

Methods
Thirty-four Introduction to Psychology students
from Franklin and Marshall College participated, in
exchange for course credit. Participants volunteered
for participation via sign up sheet. No demographic
factors were recorded or controlled for.
Stimulus images were generated using Graphic
Converter software, and sets of stimuli (trials) were
constructed and ordered manually (although a
random order was generated by computer to guide
the organization of the trials). Stimulus sets were
presented using Generic Psychology Lab software.
All software was run on Mac OS9. Accuracy and
mean reaction times for each participant were
recorded by the software and analyzed using SPSS
statistical software.
Each trial consisted of three phases that were
presented serially at fixed time intervals: part 1, the
memory set presentation, part 2, the selective
attention task, and part 3, the memory probe. The
memory set consisted of a small set of words the
participants were asked to remember. The selective
attention task was a simple decision task. Each
attention task presentation consisted of a target letter
(N or X) and a non-target (an O), one above the
fixation point and one below. The target appeared
randomly and equally in each location. The trials
were also split evenly between the two target letters,
each target letter appeared equally. One and only
one of the two targets were present on every trial.
Participants were asked to identify which of two
target letters were present (X or N). During this
time, a distractor presented simultaneously with the
selective attention task, in the periphery of the
screen aligned horizontally with the fixation point.
The target and non-target stimuli (the N or X, and
O) appeared, along with a flanker distractor, for
250ms. This display was followed immediately by a
blank screen. Participants had from the offset of the
selective attention screen (the onset of the blank
screen) onward to make their response, either
pressing the N key if the N was present, or the X

key if the X was present. Finally, participants were
shown a word, and asked if it was present in the
original set.
This study had a 2x3 within subjects design:
cognitive load x semantic content of distractors.
Cognitive load was defined here (as in Lavie et. al.
2004) as the number of items presented in the
memory set. The two conditions, high and low, were
defined as memory sets containing 5 and 2 items
respectively. In the low load condition, the memory
set was presented for 2s and in the high load
condition it appeared for 4s. These presentation
times were meant to eliminate extra search/reading
time from the low load condition, while still
allowing enough time in the high load condition for
the participant to read and process all memory set
words. A similar method was used in Lavie (2004)
when manipulating cognitive load. The two levels of
cognitive load, as manipulated by memory set size,
were presented in separate experimental blocks.
Participants were assigned one of two groups at the
start of the study, and group assignments alternated
every-other participant. Presentation order was
counterbalanced between groups.
In order to allow distractors to be semantically
related (or not) to the words in the memory set, all
memory sets consisted of either 2 or 5 words
meaningfully related to each other. Our study’s 3
distractor conditions were 1) a “neutral” distractor: a
single symbol (#) without semantic meaning; 2)
“related” distracters: words that are in the same
semantic category as the words in the memory set;
and 3) “unrelated” distracters: words that carry
semantic meaning but are unrelated to the words in
its trial’s memory set. Words were semantically
related based on broad categorization by meaning,
or words were grouped under one broad category.
For example, a high load memory set could consist
of the words “apple, pear, grape, orange, cherry.” A
related distractor word would be “plum,” and an
unrelated distractor could be “truck.”
The memory probe could have either been one of
the words from the memory set (apple), or a word
still related to the set, but not present (peach). While
words were recycled between the two trial blocks,
no words were presented more than once in the
same trial block. Words were only used if they
contained less than three syllables, and were easily
recognizable.
In order to preserve the novelty of the meaningful
distractors (which, according to Parmentier, 2008,
was essential to the recognition of the distractors), a
longer string of meaningless symbols (ex. #$%!?)
was not used as the neutral distractor. Within each
block of trials, 50% of distractors were neutral

1479

Results

Mean Reaction Time (s)

The 2 x 3 ANOVA (cognitive load x relatedness of
distractor) results indicated a significant main effect
of relatedness, F(2,62)=16.008, p<.001, partial
η2=.341. However, there was no main effect of
cognitive load, F(1,31)=.018, p=.894, and partial
η2=.001. The interaction between cognitive load and
relatedness
was
statistically
significant,
F(2,62)=.028, p=.028, and partial η2=.109. Fisher’s
LSD post hoc test was conducted to determine
which groups of relatedness were significantly
different in reaction times. Results revealed that all
three groups differed significantly.
0.95

High
Load
Low
Load

0.9
0.85
0.8
0.75
0.7
0.65
Related

Unrelated
Neutral
Distractor Type
Figure 1: Mean reaction time as a function of cognitive
load and distractor type.

A 2 x 2 ANOVA (presence of memory probe x
cognitive load) indicated significant main effect of
cognitive load, F(1,31)=6.779, p=.014, and partial
η2=.179, as well as a significant main effect of
presence, F(1,31)=30.998, p<.001, and partial
η2=..500. There was no interaction between
cognitive load and presence, F(1,31)=.005, p=.943,
and partial η2<.001.
Post-hoc t-tests were conducted to look at
differences among related and neutral distractors in
different cognitive loads. The results revealed a
significant difference between mean reaction times
of high related distractors and high neutral

distractors, t (31)=3.123 and p=.004. There was not
a significant difference between mean reaction times
of low related distractors and low neutral distractors,
t(31)=.371 and p=.713.

10
Mean Error Rate (%
wrong)

distractors (#), 25% were related, and 25% were
unrelated.
Reaction times on the decision task and accuracy
rates in the memory probe were collected. A 2 x 3
within subjects ANOVA (cognitive load x
relatedness of distractor) was run to analyze the
possible effects of our variables as they pertain to
the first three hypotheses, and appropriate post-hoc
tests were run as necessary. Error rates were also
calculated, and a 2x2 within subjects ANOVA
(presence of the memory probe x cognitive load)
was run to examine any patterns regarding false
positives or false negatives (as discussed in our
fourth hypothesis).

High Load

8

Low Load

6
4
2
0

Present
Absent
Memory Probe Type
Figure 2: Mean error rate (%) as a function of cognitive
load and memory probe condition.

Discussion
The first hypothesis was not supported. While a
significant main effect of distractor type was found,
the unrelated distractors caused more interference
than related distractors. Neutral distractors caused
the least interference, in line with the hypothesis.
The background literature leading to this hypothesis
was not cohesive, and at the time the hypotheses
were written, the literature suggesting the greater
interference capacity of related, rather than
unrelated, distractor items was more compelling
than the other findings available. Given the current
findings, a second examination of the background
information highlights several studies that do
support the present results. As noted, Lavie et al.
(2004) found that task non-congruent distractors
were more distracting than task congruent
distractors, Lavie & Forester (2008) found that
novel, task irrelevant image distractors were more
distracting than familiar or relevant distractors, and
Parmentier (2008) found that task relevant items
presented simultaneously with a task facilitated
performance, while irrelevant items interfered.
These results might suggest a sort of priming
effect. Perhaps the memory set primes some larger
category or group meaning, and as a result the
participant is not surprised by the presence of a
related distractor; an unrelated distractor, then, is
unexpected and more attention-grabbing. This is not
completely satisfactory, however, because it might
imply that related distractors would produce faster
RTs than even neutral distractors would. This is
only partially supported by our results. While in the
high load condition, the neutral distractor caused
significantly less interference than the related
distractor, in the low load condition the two
distractor categories produced mean RTs that were

1480

virtually the same. If priming were involved, we
would have expected to see related distractors
produce significantly faster RTs than both unrelated
and neutral distractors, or very similar RTs to
neutral distractors. While these results have
interesting implications in the broader discussion of
priming effects and working memory, further
discussion of the topic is beyond the scope of this
study.
Although our results are not consistent with our
original predictions, they still build on the previous
literature in valuable ways. All previous work cited
here related their distractors only to the items in
their selective attention or perceptual load tasks; the
related (or unrelated) information appeared all on
the same screen. The current study sought to
examine relatedness between the attention task and
the cognitive load, to manipulate relatedness across
tasks and attention mechanisms. Because of this the
results were slightly unpredictable, but valuable
nonetheless.
The second hypothesis was also not supported: no
main effect of cognitive load was observed. This
result was unexpected, as the effect of cognitive
load has been observed in past work. A trend
towards significance was observed—high load RTs
were slower than low load RTs—but only in the
‘related’ and ‘unrelated’ condition. This suggests
that, possibly, the cognitive load manipulations were
not adequate representations of ‘high’ and ‘low’
cognitive load. One possible explanation of this
involves the related nature of the stimuli. Perhaps
the fact that all memory set items fell under one
broad category or meaning provided a strategy for
remembering them: maybe participants remembered
the group rather than each individual word
(consciously or not) in an effort to reduce the load
on the cognitive system. The results regarding our
fourth hypothesis provide more evidence to this
effect.
Our fourth hypothesis was supported. We
observed significantly more false positives in the
high load condition than in the low load condition:
participants were failing to accurately remember the
words in the larger memory sets. After considering
the related nature of the memory set words, this
result suggests that participants noted the category
of the words presented along with individual words.
As all memory set words, present and absent, were
related to their memory set (it would have been too
obvious had the probe words been unrelated) false
positives indicate that participants recognized the
category membership/ semantic meaning of the
probe word and responded accordingly.
The results concerning the second and fourth
hypotheses point to semantic grouping as a

characteristic that can mitigate the effects of
cognitive load in both directions. In high load
conditions, it appears that semantic grouping
reduces the load that would otherwise be placed on a
cognitive system by trying to retain five unrelated or
meaningless items. Relating memory set provides a
crutch, a strategy for the participant to make
remembering easier. By relating the high load
memory set items to each other, we may have
created a pseudo-high cognitive load, not high
enough to mimic previous results. The current
manipulation of low load does differ from past
studies’. In Lavie et al. (2004), the low cognitive
load condition contained one item: a single letter. In
Belke et al.’s (2008) manipulation of cognitive load
a single number was used in the low load memory
sets. To compare, the current study used two one- or
two - syllable words. Setting aside the extra item in
our low load condition, words have meaning, single
letters do not. It is possible that the combination of
these two factors brought the low load condition’s
difficulty closer to that of the high load condition.
Adding the factor of meaningfully related memory
sets, seems to have knocked the significance out of
the effect of cognitive load.
Our third hypothesis was, again, not supported. A
significant interaction occurred between cognitive
load and distractor relatedness. The relationship
between the two variables was very similar between
the two conditions with meaningful distractors (the
‘related’ and ‘unrelated’ conditions). The interaction
appears between these conditions and the neutral
distractor condition: neutral distractors were more
distracting in the low load condition than in the
high. This is not consistent with load theory, which
would predict faster RTs in the low cognitive load
condition all around. Most of the background
studies cited here disregard their neutral data, there
isn’t much in the literature to compare our results to.
The degree of the difference between RTs of
contentful and non-contentful distracters—the fact
that the trend is reversed in the neutral condition—
may indicate a different mechanism is at work when
the distractor and the memory set information are
presented in the same form (all words, as opposed to
words and symbols). This interpretation is not fully
compatible with the past findings, however. Lavie
and Forester (2008) found that when target stimuli
were letters and distractors were images of cartoon
characters, the images were still significantly
distracting (when compared to letter distractors).
This study, though, did not manipulate cognitive
load; the novel distractors were not novel to
cognitive load content, as in the current study, they
were novel to perceptual load items. Perhaps, as the
current results suggest, the interaction between

1481

attention mechanisms is qualitatively different than
that within mechanisms. This qualitative difference
is interesting and warrants further study.
The size of the sample may have limited the
study. Using additional participants was not
feasible, however, and because of the withinsubjects design was not essential. The software used
to present stimuli, and record reaction times,
responses and error rates also limited our ability to
fully explore the data. A more sophisticated
program like E-Prime could alleviate these
technological issues.
The current study is incomplete in that it does not
compare related memory sets to unrelated memory
sets. Further exploration is necessary to determine
whether the results seen here are truly attributable to
the semantic relatedness of the memory set and the
distractor, or if they are simply a product of using
whole words as stimuli. Adding a third independent
variable, that of memory set relatedness, would
enhance the literature in this area.
More detailed data regarding error rates and the
type of distractor task would shed further light on
the issue of false memories: it is possible that the
greater the interference of the distractor in the
selective attention task, the higher the error rates
would climb. If unrelated distractors are more
distracting, it follows that error rates in the unrelated
distractor condition would be significantly higher
than those in the related or neutral conditions.
Because of technological limitations, it could be
valuable to re-examine the interaction between
distractor type and cognitive load. Validating the
current results regarding neutral distractors could
point to different mechanisms used in ignoring
extraneous information.

Conclusion
A desire to better understand what interrupts or
facilitates selective attention continues to drive
research in cognitive psychology. While Lavie’s
Load Theory provides a valuable theoretical
explanation of the phenomena, it is also vital that
studies explore selective attention in real-world
settings using real-world stimuli. The present results
indicate that while the Load Theory provides a
strong theoretical base, there are stimulus
characteristics, like meaning and relationships
between stimuli, that can alter the general pattern,

but not without a cost. While it is possible that
relating stimuli to one another reduces the cognitive
capacity required to retain it, retention and recall
suffer when such strategies are used. Knowing how
attention and working memory are disrupted and
aided could be particularly applicable in the field of
education, and could be used to teach strategies for
better retention and more effective methods of
teaching and information presentation.

References
Belke, E., Humphreys, G., Watson, D., Meyer, A.
and Telling, A. (2008). Top-down effects of
semantic knowledge in visual search are
modulated by cognitive but not perceptual load.
Perception & Psychophysics, 70 (8), 1444 – 1458.
Brand-D’abrescia, M. and Lavie, N. (2008). Task
coordination between and within sensory
modalities: effects on distraction. Perception and
Psychophysics, 70 (3), 508-515.
Forster, S. & Lavie, N. (2008). Failures to ignore
entirely irrelevant distractors: The role of load.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 14,
73-83.
Lavie, N. (1995). Perceptual load as a necessary
condition for selective attention. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception &
Performance, 21, 451-468.
Lavie, N., and Cox, S. (1997). On the efficiency of
visual selective attention: Efficient visual search
leads to inefficient distractor rejection.
Psychological Science, 8, 395 – 398.
Lavie, N., Hirst, A., de Fockert, J., and Viding, E.
(2004). Load theory of selective attention and
cognitive control. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 133(3), 339-354.
Parmentier, F. (2008). Towards a cognitive model of
distraction by auditory novelty: The role of
involuntary attention capture and semantic
processing. Cognition, 109, 345-362.
Rees, G., Frith, C., and Lavie, N. (2001). Processing
of irrelevant visual motion during performance of
an auditory attention task. Neuropsychologia,
39(9), 937-949.
Wilson, D., MacLeod, C., & Muroi, M. (2008).
Practice in visual search produces decreased
capacity demands but increased distraction.
Perception and Psychophysics, 70(6), 1130-113.

1482

