UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Theories of God: Explanatory Coherence in a Non-Scientific Domain

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/66w005bg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Author
Shtulman, Andrew

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Theories of God: Explanatory Coherence in a Non-Scientific Domain
Andrew Shtulman (shtulman@oxy.edu)
Department of Psychology, Occidental College
1600 Campus Rd., Los Angeles, CA 91106

Abstract
Public representations of God range from the highly
anthropomorphic to the highly abstract, and the present study
explored whether differences in the interpretation of those
representations are correlated with differences in one’s religious
beliefs and religious practices more generally. American adults
of varying ages and religious backgrounds completed a
questionnaire that probed their beliefs about a wide range of
religious matters, including prayer, ritual, worship, sin,
cosmogenesis, anthropogenesis, angels, Satan, Heaven, and
Hell. Participants were divided into two groups based on their
propensity to anthropomorphize God in a property-attribution
task, and their responses were analyzed for internal consistency.
Overall, the two groups exhibited explanatorily coherent, yet
qualitatively different, patterns of beliefs and practices –
patterns interpreted contrastively as a “humanistic theology” and
an “existential theology.” These findings suggest that
individuals’ religious beliefs are organized in a theory-like
manner despite their lack of direct perceptual support.
Keywords: Intuitive theories; religious cognition; conceptual
representation; cultural transmission; explanation

Introduction
Belief in the existence of a divine being is prevalent both
within and across cultures (Brown, 1991). This belief is
particularly prevalent in the US, where the percent of
individuals who report holding such a belief has hovered
around 95% for the last six decades (Gallup, 2003). Theistic
beliefs are of potential interest to cognitive developmentalists, as they present a challenge to standard, constructivist
models of knowledge acquisition (e.g., Piaget, 1954;
Gopnik & Meltzoff, 1997). Such models construe
knowledge as a product of direct observation and
exploration of the physical world, yet “knowledge” of God
is rarely (if ever) acquired in this manner. Rather,
individuals must learn about God from the art, literature,
and discourse of their culture. How individuals make sense
of such public representations is the topic of investigation in
the present study.
The task of interpreting public representations of God is
by no means trivial, for these representations range from the
highly anthropomorphic (e.g., “heavenly father,” “divine
ruler,” “intelligent designer”) to the highly abstract (e.g.,
“first cause,” “unmoved mover,” “universal spirit”). As a
group, they paint a picture of God that is neither consistent
nor coherent. For instance, God is commonly said to listen
to prayers, yet an omniscient being would already know the
content of those prayers. Likewise, God is commonly said
to have created man in his image, yet an omnipresent being
presumably has no “image.”

One way to resolve the tension between anthropomorphic
and nonanthropomorphic representations of God is to treat
the anthropomorphic representations as metaphors and the
nonanthropomorphic representations as literal descriptions.
Barrett & Keil (1996) investigated this possibility by
comparing participants’ self-professed beliefs about God to
the kinds of beliefs revealed in a story-recall task. Although
all participants claimed that God is omniscient and
omnipresent when asked directly, many participants drew
anthropomorphic inferences on the story-recall task that
contradicted such claims. For instance, participants
frequently mistook the statement “God was pleased by
seeing the girl put the bird in its nest” for the statement
“God was aware of the girl’s deed and was pleased by it” in
even though the former, but not the latter, implies that God
must perceive an event in order to be aware of its
occurrence. Likewise, participants frequently mistook the
statement “When the woman awoke, God had already left”
for the statement “When she woke, she saw no one” even
though the former, but not the latter, implies that God
occupies a discrete location in space.
These findings suggest that anthropomorphic descriptions
of God do, in fact, influence the way individuals reason
about God’s actions and abilities, particularly in a narrative
context. Still, not all the participants in Barrett and Keil’s
study anthropomorphized God to the same extent. Indeed,
participants’ accuracy in differentiating anthropomorphic
descriptions of God from nonanthropomorphic descriptions
ranged from 27% to 91%. Consistent with this finding,
several other studies have documented significant
differences in the anthropomorphization of God (e.g.,
Bassett & Williams, 2003; Shtulman, 2008; Trimeche,
Vinsonneau, & Mullet, 2006), yet it is unclear how to
interpret those differences in light of the commonly held
view that what people say they believe about God is not
necessarily true of what they actually believe (Boyer, 2003;
Slone, 2004). One interpretation is that they are artifactual,
reflecting nothing more than variation in participants’
understanding of, or engagement with, the task at hand.
Another (more interesting) interpretation is that they are
symptomatic of variation in how to make sense of God’s
public representations as a whole, with anthropomorphic
responses reflecting a fundamentally different interpretation
of religious claims than nonanthropomorphic responses.
One reason to suspect the latter – i.e., that different God
concepts are correlated with different patterns of religious
belief – is that correlations of this nature have been documented in many other domains of knowledge. For instance,
different concepts of matter are correlated with different
beliefs about mass, weight, and density (Smith, Snir, &

1295

Grosslight, 1992); different concepts of force are correlated
with different beliefs about acceleration, momentum, and
inertia (McCloskey, 1983); and different concepts of
evolution are correlated with different beliefs about
adaptation, speciation, and extinction (Shtulman, 2006).
These correlations have been interpreted as evidence that
our knowledge of natural kinds is organized in selfconsistent, causal-explanatory networks (Carey, 1985; Keil,
1989; Murphy & Medin, 1985). Whether or not our
knowledge of “supernatural kinds” is organized an a similar
manner is an open question.
Previous research on religious cognition has not
specifically looked for correspondences between God
concepts and overall theologies. Instead, this research has
focused either on explicating the content of God concepts
apart from their associated beliefs (Bassett & Williams,
2003; Trimeche, Vinsonneau, & Mullet, 2006) or on
comparing children’s God concepts to those of adults
(Barrett, Richert, & Driesenga, 2001; Gimenez-Dasi,
Guerrero, & Harris, 2005). In contrast, the present study
sought to determine whether variation in adults’ God
concepts tracks variation in their religious beliefs and
religious practices more generally. Such a finding would
imply not only that resolving the ambiguity inherent in
God’s public representations has different consequences for
different individuals but also that religious beliefs, like
scientific beliefs, are organized in a theory-like manner.

Method
Participants
Thirty-two American adults, ranging in age from 18 to 46,
were recruited from the study pool of a large, urban
university and were compensated for their participation
either monetarily or with course credit in an introductory
psychology class. Participation was restricted to individuals
who believed in the existence of God, though participants
varied widely in their particular religious affiliations: 34%
self-identified as Protestant, 16% Catholic, 9% Unitarian,
6% Jewish, 6% Buddhist, 3% Muslim, and 25% claimed not
to be affiliated with any particular religion.

Procedure
Each participant completed a six-part questionnaire that
probed their beliefs about (1) God’s appearance and
occupation, (2) God’s relationship to nature, (3) God’s
relationship to humankind, (4) supernatural beings
associated with God (angels and Satan), (5) supernatural
locations associated with God (Heaven and Hell), and (6)
prayer, ritual, and worship. The particular questions on each
topic are presented in combination with participants’
responses in the Results section. Questions for which
participants’ responses exhibited little to no variation were
omitted from these analyses for the sake of brevity.
Participants’ religious beliefs were analyzed in relation to
their God concepts as measured by a property-attribution
task. In this task, participants were asked to decide whether

God could or could not be attributed twelve human
properties: “dreams,” “sees,” “talks,” “thinks,” “eats,”
“grows,” “sleeps,” “sneezes,” “gets cold,” “gets wet,” “sits,”
and “stretches.” The first four properties were intended to
exemplify human psychological properties, the middle four
human biological properties, and the last four human
physical properties. The properties were arranged in
alphabetical order, and the task itself was sandwiched
between questions about God’s occupation and questions
about God’s existence in the first part of the questionnaire.
Participants’ responses to the open-ended questions were
coded using the schema presented in Table 1. All responses
were coded by two independent judges. Overall agreement
between judges was 90%, and all disagreements were
resolved through discussion.

Results
Beliefs about God
The first part of the questionnaire probed participants’
beliefs about God’s appearance and occupation. It also
probed participants’ beliefs about God’s anthropomorphic
properties, as assessed by the aforementioned propertyattribution task. Replicating previous research (Shtulman,
2008), participants attributed more psychological properties
to God (M = 2.8, SD = 1.1) than biological properties (M =
0.7, SD = 1.3) or physical properties (M = 0.7, SD = 1.1),
and they varied widely in the total number of properties
attributed (range = 0 to 12).
For the purposes of data analysis, participants were split
into two groups: those who attributed zero to three human
properties to God (n = 16) and those who attributed four to
twelve human properties to God (n = 16). The first group
were labeled “weak anthropomorphizers” and the second
“strong anthropomorphizers.” Note that the labels “strong”
and “weak” denote relative, not absolute, amounts of
anthropomorphism, for even the strong anthropomorphizers
typically attributed fewer than half of the 12 properties to
God. Still, 96% of the strong anthropomorphizers attributed
at least one biological or physical property to God, whereas
only 6% of the weak anthropomorphizers did. Thus, strong
anthropomorphizers differed from weak anthropomorphizers not only in the number of properties attributed to God
but also in the type of properties attributed.
Participants answered an additional five questions about
God’s nature and existence. In response to the question
“What does God look like?,” 56% of participants claimed
that God has a definite physical appearance (e.g., “looks like
a human being”), and 44% claimed that God’s appearance is
either unknown or unknowable (e.g., “in our limitation as
humans we cannot conceive of what God looks like”). In
response to the question “What does God do?”, 69%
claimed that God intervenes in human affairs (e.g., “he
guides, chastises, advises, sacrifices, reminds and loves”),
and 31% claimed that God’s occupation is either unknown
or unknowable (e.g., “God is omnipresent, so he does not
‘do’ anything in the conventional sense”). In response to the

1296

Table 1: The percentage of weak anthropomorphizers (WA) and strong anthropomorphizers (SA) who professed each of
the following beliefs and practices, and the strength of association (φ) between being a strong anthropomorphizer and
professing each belief/practice (df = 1 for all statistical comparisons).
Topic
God

Cosmogenesis

Anthropogenesis

Problem of evil

Problem of sin
Angels

Satan

Heaven

Hell

Prayer
Worship

Education

Professed belief/practice
God has a physical appearance.
God intervenes in human affairs.
God answers prayers.
God’s existence is discernible from experience.
God’s existence is 100% certain.
God created the universe as is.
God created the universe via the Big Bang.
God did not create the universe.
God created human beings as is.
God created human beings via evolution.
God did not create human beings.
God is not omnipotent and/or omnibenevolent.
Suffering is part of the human condition.
God uses suffering to teach or to punish.
God is not omniscient and/or judgmental.
God gave humans the freedom to disobey him.
Angels exist.
Angels have biological or physical properties.
Angels have a physical appearance.
Angels act as God’s helpers.
Satan exists.
Satan has biological or physical properties.
Satan has a physical appearance.
Satan acts as God’s enemy.
Heaven exists.
Heaven occupies a discrete location in space.
Heaven has a physical appearance.
Human activities continue in Heaven.
Hell exists.
Hell occupies a discrete location in space.
Hell has a physical appearance.
Human activities continue in Hell.
Prays at least occasionally.
Prays once or more per day.
Attends religious services at least occasionally.
Attends religious services once or more per week.
Belongs to an organized religion.
Belongs to a denomination of Christianity.
Acquired beliefs from a religious authority.
Acquired beliefs from family.
Acquired beliefs from scholarship, reflection.

question “Does God answer prayers?,” 56% claimed that he
does, and 44% claimed that he does not. In response to the
question “How do you know that God exists?,” 44%
provided an “experiential” justification (e.g., “I can feel him
in my soul”), 41% provided an “intellectual” justification
(e.g., “acknowledging a higher power feels like a good way
to order the universe”), and 16% simply appealed to faith.
Finally, in response to the question “How confident are you,
on a scale from 1 (not confident) to 7 (100% confident), that
God exists?,” participants provided an average confidence

WA
19
50
38
25
13
25
38
38
6
50
44
50
31
19
69
25
50
6
25
19
44
13
19
13
50
13
19
25
38
13
19
19
63
13
56
19
75
38
25
38
38

SA
94
88
75
63
63
63
25
6
56
13
31
25
0
69
25
69
81
56
69
56
69
63
63
50
81
38
56
69
81
38
56
69
69
44
88
44
75
63
63
31
6

φ
.76**
.41*
.38*
.38*
.52**
.39*
-.14
-.39*
.54**
-.41*
-.13
-.26
-.43**
.50*
-.44*
.44*
.33
.54**
.44*
.39*
.25
.52**
.45*
.41*
.33
.29
.39*
.44*
.45*
.29
.44*
.50**
.07
.35*
.35*
.27
.00
.25
.38*
-.07
-.38*

rating of 5.2 (SD = 2.0), and a modal confidence rating of 7.
Displayed in Table 1 are the percentage of weak and
strong anthropomorphizers who provided the five most
common responses summarized above. Accompanying
these percentages are a measure of the association between
being a strong anthropomorphizer and providing each of
response. As can be seen from this table, strong anthropomorphizers were significantly more likely than weak
anthropomorphizers to claim that God (a) has a physical
appearance, (b) intervenes in human affairs, and (c) answers

1297

prayers. Moreover, strong anthropomorphizers were
significantly more likely than weak anthropomorphizers to
claim that they have experienced God’s presence in their
lives and are 100% certain that God exists. Participants’
propensity to anthropomorphize God was thus correlated
with their propensity to view God as a palpable (and
pertinent) influence on everyday human affairs.

Beliefs about God’s Relationship to Nature
The second part of the questionnaire probed participants’
beliefs about God’s role in the origin of the universe
(cosmogenesis) and the origin of human beings
(anthropogenesis). Participants’ beliefs about cosmogenesis
were elicited with the questions (1) “Do you believe that
God created the universe?,” (2) “Do you believe that the
universe was created in the Big Bang?,” and (3) “If you
answered ‘yes’ to both questions, how do you resolve the
apparent inconsistency between these two ideas?”
Participants’ beliefs about anthropogenesis were elicited
with the questions (1) “Do you believe that God created
human beings?,” (2) “Do you believe that human beings
evolved from other organisms?,” and (3) “If you answered
‘yes’ to both questions, how do you resolve the apparent
inconsistency between these two ideas?”
On the topic of cosmogenesis, 44% of participants
claimed that the universe was created by God alone, 25% by
the Big Bang alone, and 31% by both God and the Big
Bang. Those who claimed that the universe was created by
both God and the Big Bang justified their claim by
appealing to some kind of dual process (e.g., “God set in
motion the forces that created the Big Bang”). On the topic
of anthropogenesis, 31% of participants claimed that human
beings were created by God alone, 38% by evolution alone,
and 31% by both God and evolution via some kind of dual
process (e.g., “God created the organisms that ultimately
evolved into humans”).
The percentages of weak and strong anthropomorphizers
who provided each of the above responses are displayed in
Table 1. Strong anthropomorphizers were significantly more
likely than weak anthropomorphizers to endorse a
creationist explanation for both phenomena. Weak
anthropomorphizers, on the other hand, were significantly
more likely than strong anthropomorphizers to adopt a
naturalistic explanation for cosmogenesis and a quasinaturalistic explanation for anthropogenesis. Collapsing
across “God only” explanations and “dual-process”
explanations, strong anthropomorphizers were no more
likely than weak anthropomorphizers to claim that God
played at least some role in each process, indicating that the
aforementioned differences are more nuanced than the
difference between wholly accepting or wholly rejecting
divine causation.

Beliefs about God’s Relationship to Humankind
The third part of the questionnaire probed participants’
beliefs about God’s role in human suffering and human sin.
These beliefs were elicited by asking participants to reason

about two theological problems, traditionally known as the
“problem of evil” and the “problem of sin” (see Plantinga,
1977). Reasoning about the first problem was elicited with
the questions (1) “Do you believe that God is all
powerful?,” (2) “Do you believe that God is all good?,” and
(3) “If you answered ‘yes’ to both, why do you think God
allows (or fails to prevent) human suffering?” Reasoning
about the second problem was elicited with the questions (1)
“Do you believe that God is all knowing?,” (2) “Do you
believe that God holds human beings responsible for their
actions?,” and (3) “If you answered ‘yes’ to both, why do
you think God holds human beings responsible for actions
he knows they will make?”
With regard to the problem of evil, 38% of participants
denied that God is either omnipotent or omnibenevolent,
44% claimed that God is both omnipotent and
omnibenevolent but that God uses suffering to teach or to
punish (e.g., “God gave man free will and man chose to sin
and suffering is a result of this sin”), 16% claimed that God
is both omnipotent and omnibenevolent but that suffering is
simply part of the human condition (e.g., “suffering, in
various degrees, is part of the natural course of life”), and
3% plead ignorance. With regard to the problem of sin, 47%
of participants denied that God is omniscient, judgmental, or
both, 47% claimed that God is both omniscient and
judgmental but that he also gave human beings the freedom
to disobey him (e.g., “God gave man free will and hopes
they will make the right choice, but sometimes they don’t”),
and 6% plead ignorance.
The percentages of weak and strong anthropomorphizers
who provided each of the above responses are displayed in
Table 1. Strong anthropomorphizers were significantly more
likely than weak anthropomorphizers to claim that God uses
suffering to teach or punish, and weak anthropomorphizers
were significantly more likely than strong anthropomorphizers to claim that suffering is part of the human condition.
Moreover, strong anthropomorphizers were significantly
more likely than weak anthropomorph-izers to claim that
God gave humans the freedom to disobey him, and weak
anthropomorphizers were significantly more likely than
strong anthropomorphizers to deny that God is omniscient,
judgmental, or both. In short, weak anthropomorphizers
tended to treat suffering and sin as secular phenomena, not
particularly linked to God, and strong anthropomorphizers
tended to interpret sin as the defiance of divine law and
suffering as the consequence of divine justice – beliefs
reminiscent of those previously characterized as “belief in a
just world” (Lerner, 1980).

Beliefs about Angels and Satan
The fourth part of the questionnaire probed participants’
beliefs about two supernatural beings commonly associated
with God: angels and Satan. Participants were first asked a
series of property-attribution questions identical to those
described earlier for God, and their responses were analyzed
for the presence of biological and physical attributions.
They were then asked whether they believed in the existence

1298

of each being, and, if so, what they thought those beings
looked like and how they thought those beings were related
to God. Responses to the first question were coded for
evidence that angels and Satan were believed to possess a
physical appearance (e.g., “most angels have wings and are
bright,” “Satan looks like a ball of fire”), and responses to
the second were coded for evidence that angels and Satan
were believed to maintain a social relationship with God
(e.g., “angels are God’s servants,” “Satan is God’s enemy”)
rather than some type of existential relationship (e.g., “God
is angels and angels are God,” “Satan is a part of God
because God is everything”).
These responses are summarized in Table 1 as a function
of participant group. Overall, strong anthropomorphizers
were not significantly more likely than weak anthropomorphizers to believe in the existence of either angels or
Satan, but they were significantly more likely to claim that
these beings (a) possess the biological and physical
properties of a human, (b) have a physical appearance, and
(c) maintain a social relationship with God. In short,
participants’ propensity to anthropomorphize God was
correlated with their propensity to anthropomorphize other
members of their religious cosmology.

Beliefs about Heaven and Hell
The fifth part of the questionnaire probed participants’
beliefs about two supernatural places associated with God:
Heaven and Hell. Participants were asked whether they
believed in the existence of each place, and, if so, where
they thought those places were located, what they thought
those places looked like, and what they thought the
occupants of those places did. Responses to the first
question were coded for evidence that Heaven and Hell
were believed to occupy a discrete location in space (e.g.,
“Heaven is in the sky,” “Hell is below the earth’s crust”);
responses to the second were coded for evidence that
Heaven and Hell were believed to possess a physical
appearance (e.g., “Heaven looks like a garden,” “Hell looks
like a prison”); and responses to the third were coded for
evidence that the occupants of Heaven and Hell continue to
engage in human activities (e.g., “singing, talking, dancing,”
“weeping and gnashing of teeth”).
These responses are summarized in Table 1. Consistent
with the belief that God possesses discrete physical
properties, strong anthropomorphizers were significantly
more likely than weak anthropomorphizers to claim that
Heaven and Hell occupy discrete locations in space and that
the occupants of Heaven and Hell engage in human
activities. Strong anthropomorphizers were also more likely
than weak anthropomorphizers to believe in the very
existence of Heaven and Hell. In short, participants’
propensity to anthropomorphize God was correlated with
their propensity to accept, and to “spatialize,” both places.

Religious Practices
The last part of the questionnaire contained questions about
participants’ religious practices and religious upbringing.

Most participants (66%) claimed to engage in prayer at least
occasionally, with 28% claiming to engage in prayer
weekly. Likewise, most participants (72%) claimed to
attend religious services at least occasionally, with 31%
claiming to attend religious services weekly. In terms of
affiliation, 50% claimed to belong to a Christian religion,
25% claimed to belong to a non-Christian religion, and 25%
claimed to belong to no religious whatsoever. Finally, in
response to the question “From whom did you acquire your
current religious beliefs?,” 44% claimed to have acquired
their beliefs from a religious authority (e.g., a priest, a rabbi,
“the church”), 34% claimed to have acquired their beliefs
from their family, and 22% claimed to have acquired their
beliefs from independent scholarship or personal reflection.
The percentage of weak and strong anthropomorphizers
who claimed to engage in each of the aforementioned
practices is displayed at the bottom of Table 1. Overall,
strong anthropomorphizers were significantly more likely
than weak anthropomorphizers to pray once or more per
week, to attend religious services (at all), and to have
acquired their beliefs from a religious authority. Weak
anthropomorphizers, on the other hand, were significantly
more likely to have acquired their beliefs from independent
scholarship or personal reflection. The finding that
participants’ propensity to anthropomorphize God was
correlated with their propensity to subscribe to the teachings
of a religious authority is particularly interesting in light of
the popular assumption that an anthropomorphic concept of
God is not a “theologically correct” concept of God (e.g.,
Barrett & Keil, 1996; Boyer, 2003). Apparently, many
strong anthropomorphizers would disagree.

Discussion
The present study explored the relationship between
individuals’ endorsement of an anthropomorphic God
concept and their various beliefs and practices related to
God. Overall, it was found that participants’ propensity to
anthropomorphize God was correlated with their propensity
to (a) view God as a palpable and pertinent influence on
human affairs, (b) adopt a creationist stance toward the
origin of the universe and the origin of human beings, (c)
adopt a “just world” view of human suffering and human
sin, (d) anthropomorphize angels and Satan; (e) spatialize
Heaven and Hell, and (f) engage in traditional religious
activities, like prayer and worship.
Underlying these correlations were two qualitatively
different, yet internally consistent, patterns of belief. One
pattern, exhibited by strong anthropomorphizers, appeared
to be structured around participants’ understanding of
human existence and human affairs. On this pattern, God is
conceptualized as a divine ruler, angels are conceptualized
as God’s political allies, Satan is conceptualized as God’s
political opponent, Heaven and Hell are conceptualized as
God’s political territory, cosmogenesis and anthropogenesis
are conceptualized as God’s greatest achievements, and sin
and suffering are conceptualized as God’s primary spheres
of influence. The other pattern of belief, exhibited by weak

1299

anthropomorphizers, appeared to be structured around more
abstract, and more limited, metaphysical commitments. On
this pattern, God is conceptualized as an immaterial entity
(rather than a physical object), angels and Satan are
conceptualized as aspects of God (rather than independent
agents), Heaven and Hell are conceptualized as states of
being (rather than spatial locations), cosmogenesis and
anthropogenesis are conceptualized as acts of nature (rather
than acts of God), and sin and suffering are conceptualized
as part of human nature (rather than part of a divine plan).
Whereas the first pattern might best be described as a
“humanistic theology,” the second might best be described
as an “existential theology.”
The fact that these patterns of belief were associated with
different religious practices suggests that different God
concepts have different behavioral implications in addition
to different cognitive implications. Presumably, the reason
strong anthropomorphizers are more likely than weak
anthropomorphizers to engage in prayer and worship is that
only an anthropomorphic God would attend to, or care
about, such activities. Of course, these correlations may be
interpreted in the opposite manner – i.e., that individuals
who engage in religious activities are more likely to hold a
concept of God that is consistent with those activities. Tied
to this concern is the broader concern that individual
differences in God concepts may be due more to differences
in religious education than to differences in the inferential
relationship between one’s God concept and one’s Godrelated beliefs and practices.
There are at least three reasons to doubt that individuals
inherent, rather than create, their personal theologies in the
course of religious education. First, complete theologies are
likely difficult to communicate given that God concepts are
only one of many religious concepts open to multiple
interpretations, as evidenced by participants’ divergent
interpretations of angels, Satan, Heaven, Hell, prayer, sin,
and suffering. Second, the theologies documented in the
present study were not specific to any one religion (see the
section on religious affiliation in Table 1), implying that
they are not the byproduct of a particular religious education
(e.g., a Protestant education). Third, participants were
unlikely to have pondered each and every issue broached by
the questionnaire prior to participation, yet their responses
to these questions were internally consistent nonetheless.
That said, future research could explore the development
of personal theologies more directly. For instance, one could
investigate the theologies of young children and chart how
these theologies change over time, particularly their
explanatory coherence and inferential scope. Alternatively,
one could compare the theologies of different members of
the same cultural unit, like the same church or the same
family, to assess the dimensions along which personal
theologies are most likely (and least likely) to differ. Such
research would not only increase our understanding of
religious cognition but would also increase our
understanding of the interaction between culture and
cognition more generally.

References
Barrett, J. L. & Keil, F. C. (1996). Conceptualizing a
nonnatural entity: anthropomorphism in God concepts.
Cognitive Psychology, 31, 219-247.
Barrett, J. L., Richert, R. A., & Driesenga, A. (2001). God’s
beliefs versus mother’s: The development of nonhuman
agent concepts. Child Development, 72, 50-65.
Bassett, J. F., & Williams, J. E. (2003). Protestants’ images
of self, God, and Satan as seen in adjective check list
descriptors. International Journal for the Psychology of
Religion, 13, 123-135.
Boyer, P. (2003). Religious thoughts and behaviors as
byproducts of brain function. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 7, 119-124.
Brown, D. E. (1991). Human universals. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Carey, S. (1985). Conceptual change in childhood.
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Gallup, G. H. (2003). Is religious faith collapsing in Great
Britain? Princeton, NJ: The Gallup Organization.
Gimenez-Dasi, M., Guerrero, S., & Harris, P. (2005).
Intimations of omniscience and immortality in early
childhood. European Journal of Developmental
Psychology, 2, 285-297.
Gopnik, A., & Meltzoff, A. (1997). Words, thoughts, and
theories. Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Keil, F. C. (1989). Concepts, kinds, and cognitive
development. Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Lerner, M. (1980). Belief in a just world: A fundamental
delusion. New York: Plenum.
McCloskey, M. (1983). Naïve theories of motion. In D.
Gentner & A. Stevens (Eds.), Mental models, Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Murphy, G. L., & Medin, D. L. (1985). The role of theories
in conceptual coherence. Psychological Review, 92, 289316.
Piaget, J. (1954). The construction of reality in the child.
New York: Basic Books.
Plantinga, A. (1977). God, freedom, and evil. New York:
Harper & Rowe.
Shtulman, A. (2006). Qualitative differences between naïve
and scientific theories of evolution. Cognitive
Psychology, 52, 170-194.
Shtulman, A. (2008). Variation in the anthropomorphization
of supernatural beings and its implications for cognitive
theories of religion, Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 34, 1123-1138.
Slone, J. D. (2004). Theological incorrectness. Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.
Smith, C., Snir, J., & Grosslight, L. (1992). Using
conceptual models to facilitate conceptual change: The
case of weight-density differentiation. Cognition and
Instruction, 9, 221-283.
Trimeche, S., Vinsonneau, G., & Mullet, E. (2006).
Individual differences in the theological concept of God.
International Journal for the Psychology of Religion, 16,
83-100.

1300

