UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Time Course of Visual Attention in Statistical Learning of Words and Categories

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7qm4d82w

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Chen, Chi-hsin
Yu, Chen
Fricker, Damian
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Time Course of Visual Attention in Statistical Learning of Words and Categories
Chi-hsin Chen1, Chen Yu2 ({chen75, chenyu}@indiana.edu)
Damian Fricker2, Thomas G. Smith2, Lisa Gershkoff-Stowe1
Department of Speech and Hearing Sciences1, Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences2
Indiana University, IN 47405 USA

Abstract
Previous research indicates that adult learners are able to use
co-occurrence information to learn word-to-object mappings
and form object categories simultaneously. The current eyetracking study investigated the dynamics of attention
allocation during concurrent statistical learning of words and
categories. The results showed that the participants’ learning
performance was associated with the numbers of short and
mid-length fixations generated during training. Moreover, the
learners’ patterns of attention allocation indicated online
interaction and bi-directional bootstrapping between word and
category learning processes.
Keywords: Eye-tracking; statistical learning; word learning;
category learning.

Introduction
Over the past few decades, researchers have found that
humans are sensitive to statistical regularities in the
environment. People are able to use statistical information in
non-linguistic tasks, such as making inferences (e.g., Xu &
Denison, 2009) or finding predictive features of complex
visual scenes (e.g., Fiser & Aslin, 2001). They can use
statistical information in linguistic tasks as well, such as
learning phonetic distributions (e.g., Maye et al., 2002),
word boundaries (e.g., Saffran et al. 1996b), word and
meaning mappings (e.g., Smith & Yu, 2008), and
rudimentary syntax (e.g., Gomez & Gerken, 1999). These
studies suggest that statistical learning is a domain-general
ability in human cognition.
An earlier cross-linguistic study conducted in our
laboratory (Chen et al., 2009) also showed that adult
English and Mandarin speakers were able to use cooccurrence information to learn word-to-object mappings
and to form object categories at the same time. However,
even though these two groups of learners had comparable
performance in learning word-to-object mappings, they
showed different levels of sensitivity to the cues associated
with category learning. Participants were better at learning
the types of regularities that were present in their native
language than the ones that were incongruent with their
linguistic input. In Experiment 1 of the study, objects from
the same category had similar attached object parts and their
labels ended with the same final syllable. This syllable-tocategory association simulated a prevalent linguistic feature
in Mandarin in that the final syllables of object names often
indicated category membership. The results showed that
Mandarin speakers were able to learn individual word-toobject mappings and to form syllable-to-category
associations under cross-situational learning contexts. On

the other hand, English speakers tended not to use the final
syllables of labels as cues in category learning. In
Experiment 2 of that study, the category markers were
moved to the beginning of labels to simulate a more
frequent feature in English (e.g., the adjectives in noun
phrases). As the structures of the training stimuli were more
congruent with the input in the naturalistic environment, the
English speakers’ category learning performance became
significantly better. More importantly, they also had better
performance in the word learning task. One possible
explanation of the improvement of word learning
performance is that category learning bootstraps word
learning. That is, learning which objects belong to the same
category helps the learners to focus on relevant features of
the stimuli and to rule out certain distractors as possible
referents of a word. However, from the design of that study,
we were not able to draw a conclusive link between the
English speakers’ success in forming categories and their
improvement in word learning.
The present study was designed to address this issue by
using eye-tracking techniques. Category learning studies
using eye-tracking techniques have shown that learners
generally attend to all possible dimensions early in learning.
But during the process of learning, they gradually shift their
attention to relevant dimensions (e.g., Rehder & Hoffman,
2005; Blair et al., 2009). Based on previous studies, similar
patterns might be observed in statistical word learning and
category learning. Our prediction is that at the beginning of
training, learners will pay attention to all objects on the
screen when hearing a word. Across learning, they will
gradually tune their attention to the most probable referent
of a word. Moreover, after successfully forming a few wordto-object mappings, the learners should notice that the
objects (and their labels) can be grouped into different
categories, each having its own distinctive feature. After
establishing primitive category structures, the learners
should then use this information to rule out certain
distractors as possible referents of a word. The goals of the
current study are to examine the dynamics of attention
allocation in statistical learning of words and categories and
to investigate the real-time interaction between word
learning and category formation.

Method
Participants
Participants were 23 undergraduates (14 females, mean age:
19.1 years) who received course credit for volunteering.

2236

None had previously participated in any cross-situational
learning experiments.

Design and Stimuli
The experimental design in this study was the same as the
one used in Experiment 2 of Chen et al. (2009) with slight
modification in the length of training trials. Participants
were trained under a cross-situational learning paradigm,
which was first proposed by Yu and Smith (2007). In each
training trial, the participants viewed four novel objects on a
computer screen and heard four novel words. However, the
temporal order of the word presentations was not related to
the spatial locations of the words’ target referents. In order
to find the correct word-to-object mappings, the participants
had to track the co-occurrence regularities between objects
and words across different trials. There was a total of 18
object-word pairs to learn. Over the training, there were 12
repetitions per object-word pairing, yielding a total of 54
trials (18 pairs *12 repetitions / 4 pairs per trial). The length
of each trial was 14 seconds and the whole training lasted
for 12.6 minutes.
The to-be-learned objects were divided into three
different categories, with six items in each category.
Members in a category had an attached part that looked
similar to each other. As an example, Figure 1 shows two
items from a category in which all members had an attached
spiral part that spread at the end. Moreover, these objects all
had labels that began with the same syllable (e.g., la- in this
case).

Figure 1 Sample objects and labels used in the study

Apparatus
The course of the experiment was controlled by a computer
using E-prime. The visual stimuli were presented on a 17
inch monitor with a resolution of 1280*1024 pixels. The
learners’ eye gaze was measured by a Tobii 1750 near
infrared eye-tracker (www.tobii.se). The eye-tracking
system recorded gaze data at 50Hz (accuracy = 0.5°, and
spatial resolution = 0.25°).

Procedure
Before the experiment, the eye-tracker system was
calibrated. We used a procedure including nine calibration
points. The experiment consisted of a Training session,
followed by a Testing session. In the Training session, the
participants were presented with 4 novel objects and 4 novel
words in each trial without any information about which

word referred to which object. The learners had to keep
track of the co-occurrences between objects and words
across trials to find the correct word-to-object mappings.
Once they formed several correct word-to-object mappings,
we expected they would be able to detect the associations
between the first syllables of words and the attached object
parts and to form object categories accordingly. The
syllable-to-category associations should in turn facilitate
word-to-object mappings, because the learners would be
able to use the first syllable of a label to determine its
possible referents. Eye movements were recorded during the
Training session.
There were two tasks in the Testing session, a word-toobject Mapping task and a Generalization task. The
Mapping task tested how well the participants learned the
names of the training objects. The participants were
instructed to select the referent of a training word from 4
alternatives. There were 18 trials in the Mapping task.
In the Generalization task, the participants were asked to
select the referent of one novel word from three alternatives,
each containing the object-part that corresponded to the
particular feature of one category. The first syllable of the
novel word was the same as the labels from one of the three
categories. If the learners had formed the syllable-tocategory associations, they should be able to use the first
syllable of the novel word to find its referent. There were 9
trials in the Generalization task (3 for each category).

Eye-tracking dependent variables
To derive eye movement measures, we defined four
rectangular region-of-interests (ROIs) that covered the
objects displayed on the screen for each trial. We took the
onset of a series of gaze data that fell within an ROI as the
onset of a fixation and the end of the fixation was
determined when the gaze fell outside of the same ROI. The
minimum length of a gaze was 20ms (i.e., the length of 1
data point recorded by the eye-tracker). All gaze data
outside the ROIs were viewed as saccadic eye movements
and not included in the analyses.
Based on the remaining gaze data, we computed two
dependent measures. The first variable was the number of
fixations per trial. We set the thresholds at 100ms, 500ms,
and 1000ms and counted the numbers of fixations exceeding
these thresholds. Moreover, fixations with a length between
100ms and 500ms were defined as Short fixations; fixations
between 500ms and 1000ms were viewed as Mid-length
fixations; and those longer than 1000ms were taken as Long
fixations. The reason for setting different thresholds was
that previous category learning studies using eye-tracking
techniques have found that looking more at the correct or
relevant features during training was positively correlated
with behavioral performance (e.g., Rehder & Hoffman,
2005; Blair et al., 2009). This indicates that more looking at
the relevant features during training might lead to better
learning. However, more looking could result from either
having a few long fixations or having many short fixations
combined together. Setting different thresholds would allow

2237

learned, the more likely they were to use the first syllable as
a cue in categorizing novel objects.
Proportion
Correct

us to examine whether longer looking also leads to better
learning.
The second measure was proportion looking time
(ranging from 0 to 1), which took the time spent fixating on
one object divided by total time spent fixating on all objects.
Moreover, based on the word being presented, we divided
the objects into 3 categories: Correct Object, WithinCategory Distractor, and Between-Category Distractor.
Because there were 4 objects in each training trial while
there were only 3 categories to learn, there could be more
than 1 object from a specific category in a trial. Therefore,
for each word, the Correct Object was the target referent
while a Within-Category Distractor was an object from the
same category. On the other hand, the Between-Category
Distractors were the ones from a different category. Figure 2
illustrates a situation in which there are two objects from the
la- category, one from the jo- and one from the mucategory. The label of each object can be found above it
(please note that in real training, the labels were presented
auditorily). For the word “lati”, there is one WithinCategory Distractor and two Between-Category Distractors
in this trial. In contrast, for the word “joler”, there are three
Between-Category Distractors. However, in this case none
of the objects is a Within-Category Distractor for this word.
The mean numbers of Correct Object, Within-Category
Distractor, and Between-Category Distractor for the training
words in each trial are: 1, 0.74, and 2.26, respectively.

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

------------chance

------------chance

Mapping

Task Generalization
Figure 3: Proportion of accurate responses in Mapping and
Generalization tasks

Eye Movement Data Analyses
According to the participants’ performance in the Mapping
task, we divided them into three groups. The participants
that had more than 70% correct responses were viewed as
High Learners. The people that made less than 35% correct
responses were viewed as Low Learners. People having
35% to 70% correct responses were viewed as Mid
Learners. There were 8, 6, and 9 people in the High, Mid,
Low group, respectively. We compared the number of
fixations and proportion looking time to different types of
objects of the High, Mid, and Low Learners to see if there
were differences in their eye movement patterns during the
training.

Number of Fixations

Figure 2 Sample stimuli in Training

Behavioral Results
On average, more than 50% of the participants’ responses
were correct in the Mapping task and in the Generalization
task as well (see Figure 3). Consistent with earlier findings,
participants learned more word-to-object mappings than
expected by chance (t(22) = 4.211, p < .001). They also
performed significantly above chance in the Generalization
task (t(22) = 3.227, p = .004). That is, they could use the
first syllable of a novel label to find its referent. In addition,
we found a strong positive correlation between the learners’
Mapping and Generalization performance (r = .773, p <
.001). This suggests that the more words participants

As mentioned previously, we counted the numbers of
fixations exceeding 100ms, 500ms, and 1000ms for each
participant. The results can be found in Figure 4. The solid
lines indicate the numbers of fixations exceeding 100ms.
The High, Mid, and Low Learners had comparable numbers
of fixations at the beginning of training. Across the Training
session, the numbers of fixations of the Mid and Low
Learners gradually decreased and the decreasing rate was
slightly higher for the Low Learners. The dashed lines show
that when the threshold was set at 500ms, the High Learners
tended to have more fixations than the other two groups,
especially in the second half of training. When the threshold
was set at 1000ms, there did not seem to be group
differences.
The patterns observed above were confirmed by statistical
analyses. We compared the numbers of Short (100ms500ms), Mid-length (500ms-1000ms), and Long fixations
(<1000ms) of different groups of learners. With regard to
Short fixations, trial-by-trial ANOVAs showed that group
differences were significant between Trial 38 and Trial 42
(ps <.05). Pair-wise comparisons showed that the High
Learners generated more Short fixations than the Low
Learners (ps <.05). For Mid-length fixations, Trial-by-Trial
ANOVAs revealed that significant group differences
occurred between Trial 31 and Trial 39 at p level of .05.
Pair-wise comparisons showed that the High Learners
generated more Mid-length fixations than the Mid and Low
Learners (ps < .05). In addition, the Mid Learners also
generated more Mid-length fixations than the Low Learners

2238

in Trial 13, 16, 39 and 40. When the threshold was raised to
1000ms, all three groups had about equal numbers of
fixations across trials. Significant group differences were
only found at Trial 26, in which the High Learners
generated more fixations than the Mid and Low Learners
(ps<.05).
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

Number of Fixations

100ms High
100ms Mid
100ms Low
500ms High
500ms Mid
500ms Low

Figure 8. There was also a trend that the Mid Learners
looked at the Correct Object more than the Low Learners at
the last third of training. But the pattern was not reliable. As
to Within-Category Distractors, there were significant group
differences in a few trials in which the High and Mid
Learners looked at the Within-Category Distractors more
than the Low Learners. But the patterns were not reliable
either. With regard to Between-Category Distractors, there
were significant group differences starting from Trial 24.
Compared to the High Learners, the Low Learners looked
more at the Between-Category Distractors in the second half
of training. Additionally, they looked more at the BetweenCategory Distractors than the Mid Learners in the last third
of training.

To summarize, the major differences between the High,
Mid, and Low Learners were caused by the decreasing Short
and Mid-length fixations of the Mid and Low Learners. The
High Learners had more Short and Mid-length fixations
than the other two groups, especially in the second half of
training. The Mid learners also generated more Mid-length
fixations than the Low learners.

Proportion Looking Time
Proportion Looking Time By Trial We first looked at the
dynamics of attention allocation during the course of
statistical learning. For ease of comparison, Figure 5 to
Figure 7 present the normalized Proportion Looking Time
of the High, Mid, and Low Learners across training trials.
The Proportion Looking Time to a certain type of object is
normalized so that the chance level is 25%. As can be seen
from Figure 5, there was a drastic increase in the High
Learners’ Proportion Looking Time to the Correct Object.
There was also a decreasing trend in their looking at the
Between-Category Distractors. Starting from Trial 34, the
High Learners looked at the Correct Object significantly
more than expected by chance (ps < .05). They also looked
at the Between-Category Distracters significantly less than
chance from Trial 35 on (ps < .05). As to the Mid Learners
in Figure 6, even though there was an increasing trend in
their Proportion Looking Time to the Correct Object, it did
not reach statistical significance. As can be seen in Figure 7,
the Low Learners had chance level performance across the
training. Though they had above- or below-chance
performance in a few trials, the patterns were not reliable.
We also conducted trial-by-trial ANOVAs to compare
group performance. Starting from Trial 38, the High
Learners looked at the Correct Object more than the Mid
and Low Learners (at ps <.05). The pattern can be seen in

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Corrrect

1 5 9 13 17 21 25 29 33 37 41 45 49 53

WithinCategory
Distractor
BetweenCategory
Distractor

Figure 5 Proportion Looking Time of High Learners
Proportion Looking

Figure 4 Number of Fixations of High, Mid, and Low
Learners. The number of fixations was counted separately
with 100ms, 500ms, and 1000ms as thresholds of minimal
eye fixation length.

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Corrrect

1 5 9 13 17 21 25 29 33 37 41 45 49 53

WithinCategory
Distractor
BetweenCategory
Distractor

Figure 6 Proportion Looking Time of Mid Learners
Proportion Looking

1 5 9 13 17 21 25 29 33 37 41 45 49 53
Trial

1000ms Low

0.6

Corrrect

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
1 5 9 13 17 21 25 29 33 37 41 45 49 53

WithinCategory
Distractor
BetweenCategory
Distractor

Figure 7 Proportion Looking Time of Low Learners
0.6
Proportion Looking

1000ms Mid

Proportion Looking

1000ms High

0.5
0.4

High

0.3

Mid

0.2

Low

0.1
0
1

5

9 13 17 21 25 29 33 37 41 45 49 53

Figure 8 Proportion Looking Time to the Correct Object

2239

Proportion Looking Time By Occurrences Across the
Training session, each word-object pair occurred 12 times.
For each participant, we calculated the Proportion Looking
Time by word-object occurrences. For example, we took
their Proportion Looking Time at the first occurrence of
individual objects and averaged it across objects to get the
Proportion Looking Time at Occurrence 1. This gave us 12
values for each participant. We then compared the High,
Mid, and Low Learners’ Proportion Looking Time to the
Correct Object by occurrence.
Figure 9 illustrates that at about the third time the High
Learners heard a word, they looked more at the Correct
Objects than the Mid and Low Learners. Trial-by-trial
analyses showed that group differences became significant
at the third occurrence of a word (ps < .05). Except for the
6th occurrence, the High Learners were more likely to look
at the Correct Object than the other two groups. The Mid
Learners looked more at the Correct Objects than the Low
Learners from Occurrence 10 to Occurrence 12.
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

chose the time between 600ms and 900ms based on the
approximation that it took at least 200ms to generate
stimulus-driven fixations and 600ms is about 200ms after
the end of the first syllable while 900ms is about 200ms
after the end of the word 1. The Proportion Looking Time to
object from a Relevant Category of the High, Mid, and Low
Learners can be seen in Figure 10. For ease of comparison,
the results were normalized, so that the chance value was .5.
In the first half of training, all three groups had similar
performance. In the second half of training, the Mid and the
High Learners started to fixate on objects from a Relevant
category even BEFORE the whole word was completed.
However, for the Mid Learners, the trend was not as reliable
as the High Learners.
It is noteworthy that the High Learners’ predictive
looking could only be reliably observed in the last third of
training, which occurred after their reliable above-chance
looking at the Correct Objects. This indicates that prior to
forming syllable-to-category associations, the learners
needed to establish at least a few correct word-to-object
mappings in order to extract the regularities across objects.

High

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Mid
Low
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12

Figure 9 Proportion Looking Time to Correct Object by
Occurrences

High
Mid
Low
1

Compared to chance, the High Learners looked at the
Correct Objects significantly above chance from the 7th to
the last time they encountered a word (ps < .05). The Mid
Learners looked at the Correct Objects significantly above
chance from the 10th to the last time they heard a word (ps <
.05). As for the Low Learners, they did not look at the
Correct Objects more than chance. This indicates that it took
only a few repetitions for the High Learners to detect the
word-to-object co-occurrence regularities and that they
could quickly tune their attention to the most probable
referent of a word. However, it took longer for the Mid
Learners to find the correct referent of a word.

5

9 13 17 21 25 29 33 37 41 45 49 53

Figure 10 Proportion Looking between 600ms and 900ms
after the onset of a word

Predictors of Behavioral Performance
As mentioned, the participants were grouped based on their
performance in the Mapping task, which is a behavioral task
administered after training. The above analyses showed that
group differences could be observed from eye movement
data during training. This suggests that eye gaze patterns
during training might be used as predictors of behavioral
performance.

Predictive Looking
Because the first syllable of a label indicated an object’s
membership, another question we were interested in was
whether the participants made predictive looking and
attended to objects from a relevant category even before the
whole word was finished. For example, if the learners
formed the association between the syllable la- and the
spiral part, they might be able to use the syllable la- as a cue
to rule out Between-Category Distractors even before the
word “lati” was completed.
We calculated Proportion Looking Time to objects from a
relevant category (i.e., the Correct Object and Withincategory Distractor) and objects from irrelevant categories
between 600ms and 900ms after the onset of a word. We

Table 1: Correlations between Eye Gaze and Behavioral
Measures.
Mapping Generalization
Short
.167
.107
Number
Mid-length
.339
.400*
of
Fixation
Long
.150
.118
Correct
.803**
.586*
Proportion
Within-category
.046
.278
Looking
Between-category
-.749**
-.609**
* p < .05
** p < .001
1
We also tried 500ms-800ms and 500ms-900ms. The trends are
similar to the patterns observed here.

2240

To find the best predictor of behavioral performance,
multiple linear regression analyses were conducted. As can
be seen from Table 1, there is a positive correlation between
the number of Mid-length fixations and Generalization
performance. The learners’ Proportion Looking Time to the
Correct Object is positively correlated with their Mapping
and Generalization performance. In contrast, Proportion
Looking Time to the Between-Category Distractors is
negatively correlated with Mapping and Generalization
performance. Stepwise regression showed that the best
predictor of the Mapping performance is Proportion
Looking Time to the Correct Objects during training.
Consistent with the findings of previous studies, the more
the learners looked at the correct features during training,
namely the correct object, the better they performed in the
following behavioral task. On the other hand, the best
predictor of the Generalization performance is Proportion
Looking Time to the Between-Category Distractors. The
less the learners looked at the Between-Category
Distractors, the better they did in the following
Generalization task. This suggests that less looking at the
Between-Category Distractors can be viewed as an indicator
of category learning.

General Discussion
This study replicates previous findings that adult learners
are able to use co-occurrence information to simultaneously
learn word-to-object mappings and to form object
categories. In addition, the current study shows that the
learners’ behavioral performance in the Mapping and
Generalization tasks can be predicted from their looking
patterns during the course of learning. Learners who
generated more short- and mid-length fixations tended to
perform better in the following behavioral tasks. However,
there was no difference in the numbers of long fixations
generated by different groups of learners. This indicates that
more looking was not due to longer looking. Instead, the
good learners tended to shift their attention back and forth
among objects to check the possible referents of a word.
Thus, rapid gaze shifts between several concurrent visual
objects suggest a real time competition process which leads
to better learning.
Patterns of attention allocation of the High, Mid, and Low
Learners could be detected during the course of learning in
addition. After accumulating certain statistical information,
learners tended to shift their attention to objects containing
relevant features. Moreover, at the third encounter with a
word, the High Learners appear to have (partially) formed
the association between a word and its referent. On the other
hand, it took about 10 times for the Mid Learners to form
correct mappings. This suggests that from eye movement
data, we might be able to observe the accumulation of
partial knowledge and how it leads to successful learning.
After forming a few individual word-to-object mappings,
the High and Mid Learners shifted their attention to relevant
categories BEFORE a word was completed. This suggests
that after establishing syllable-to-category associations, they

use the first syllable of a word to eliminate BetweenCategory Distractors as possible referents of the word.
Together, the results of the present study reflect online
interaction of word learning and category learning. It also
provides evidence that word learning and category learning
bootstrap each other.

References
Blair, M. R., Watson, M. R., Walshe, R. C., & Maj, F.
(2009). Extremely selective attention: Eye-tracking
studies of the dynamic allocation of attention to stimulus
features in categorization. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 35, 11961209.
Chen, C., Yu, C, Wu, C.-Y., & Cheung, H. (2009).
Statistical Word Learning and Object Categorization: A
Cross-Linguistic Study in English and Mandarin.
Proceeding of the 31st Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society.
Colunga, E. and Smith, L. B. (2008). Knowledge embedded
in process: the self-organization of skilled noun learning.
Developmental Science, 11(2), 195-203.
Fiser, J., & Aslin, R. N. (2001). Unsupervised statistical
learning of higher-order spatial structures from visual
scenes. Psychological Science, 12(6), 499-504.
Gomez, R. L., & Gerken, L. (1999). Artificial grammar
learning by 1-year-olds leads to specific and abstract
knowledge. Cognition, 70(2), 109-135.
Maye, J., Werker, J. F., & Gerken, L. (2002). Infant
sensitivity to distributional information can affect
phonetic discrimination. Cognition, 82(3), B101-B111.
Rehder, B. & Hoffman, A. B. (2005). Eyetracking and
selective attention in category learning. Cognitive
Psychology, 51, 1-41.
Saffran, J. R., Newport, E. L., & Aslin, R. N. (1996b). Word
Segmentation: The role of distributional cues. Journal of
Memory and Language, 35, 606-621.
Smith, L., & Yu, C. (2008). Infants rapidly learn wordreferent mappings via cross-situational statistics.
Cognition, 106, 1558-1568.
Xu, F. & Denison, S. (2009). Statistical inference and
sensitivity to sampling in 11-month-old infants.
Cognition, 112, 97-141.
Yu, C., & Smith, L. B. (2007). Rapid word learning under
uncertainty
via
cross-situational
statistics.
Psychological Science, 18(5), 414-420.

2241

