UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
What Is Domain Specificity (and Why Does It Matter)?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/80c303sn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Author
Khalidi, Muhammad Ali

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

What Is Domain Specificity (and Why Does It Matter)?
Muhammad Ali Khalidi (khalidi@yorku.ca)
Department of Philosophy and Cognitive Science Program,
York University, 4700 Keele Street
Toronto, ON M3J 1P3 Canada

By virtue of the way in which modularity was initially
defined by Fodor (1983), there is a strong link between
modularity and domain specificity. Indeed, it follows from
Fodor‟s account that domain specificity is one of the
defining features of modularity, and therefore that all
modular cognitive capacities are domain-specific.1 Of
course, a case might be made for rejecting this definition on
the grounds that it is unwarranted by the empirical facts or
otherwise detrimental to cognitivist research, but I will not
try to make the case, nor do I think that the case ought to be
made. I will simply follow Fodor and much subsequent
theorizing in accepting it. Hence, I take it as uncontroversial
that domain specificity is a necessary feature of modularity,
though the two features ought not to be conflated, since the
former is subsumed by the latter.
The case is more complicated when it comes to
innateness. Although there is also a widespread assumption
that there is a link between innateness and domainspecificity, there is no convincing reason for inferring such
a link. It is neither the case that all innate cognitive
capacities are domain-specific, nor that all domain-specific
cognitive capacities are innate. To illustrate, human beings
may have an innate cognitive capacity for associative
learning that may be entirely domain-general. Conversely,
there may be certain domain-specific cognitive abilities that
are not innate but mainly learned, such as chess-playing
ability. However, despite the lack of a direct link between
the two features of cognition (innateness and domain
specificity), a case could be made for an indirect link
between them. It has been argued that when it comes to
domain-specific abilities, it is easier to tell whether and to
what extent they are innate or not (Khalidi 2001). In other
words, the link between the two features is epistemic or
evidential rather than intrinsic, since we can more easily
gauge the amount of explicit learning or relevant experience
in the case of domain-specific cognitive capacities than in
the case of domain-general ones. This is so because it is
easier to rule out relevant sources of information in the
former case than in the latter.
As for the link between domain specificity and brain
localization, this is also widely made, as is the link between

Abstract
The distinction between domain specificity and domain
generality is widespread in cognitive science. Yet, the
difference between the two types of cognitive capacities has
rarely been made in a principled manner. Moreover, some of
the examples that are put forward to illustrate it in the
literature are either spurious or misleading. In this paper, I use
a number of examples to determine what domain specificity
is, and just as importantly, what it is not. A domain-specific
cognitive system is one that is in principle generalizable, but
which the cognizer does not extend to cases that the system
did not originally evolve to deal with.
Keywords: domain specificity; modularity; innateness;
animal cognition.

Introduction
There are many contexts in cognitive science in which it is
useful to distinguish domain-specific cognitive capacities
from domain-general ones. For instance, according to many
evolutionary psychologists, human cognition consists
largely of domain-specific cognitive capacities, and this
feature of our cognitive makeup provides evidentiary
support for the pervasive influence of evolutionary
processes on the formation of the human mind (Carey &
Spelke 1994, Cosmides & Tooby 1994). By contrast,
according to other researchers, domain-general cognitive
abilities are the norm in the human mind and are what
distinguish human cognition from that of most other animals
(Samuels 1998, Fodor 2000). Yet, the distinction between
the two kinds of capacities is not easily drawn and it is often
drawn erroneously by the researchers who aim to make it.
After identifying some misleading examples of domain
specificity, I will put forward some better examples of the
phenomenon drawn from the literature. Then, I will use
these examples to try and spell out a more satisfactory
account of the phenomenon of domain specificity. Finally, I
will draw on this new understanding to try to shed light on
the significance of this concept and its importance for
cognitive science.

Domain Specificity and Its Confounds
Domain specificity is a feature of cognitive capacities that is
often associated with several other such features, notably:
modularity, innateness, and brain localization. In this
section, I will examine the connections that may or may not
exist between domain specificity and these other features, in
order to gain a preliminary understanding of the concept of
domain specificity.

1

In addition to being domain-specific, according to Fodor
(1983) modular cognitive capacities are supposed to: 2) process
items automatically and in a mandatory manner, 3) be inaccessible
to consciousness, 4) be fast, 5) be cognitively impenetrable (e.g.
resistant to being unlearned), 6) process “shallow” or highly salient
features, 7) have fixed neural architecture, 8) have specific
breakdown patterns (as in aphasia, agnosia), and 9) have fixed
ontogeny (standard pace and sequence of development).

194

brain localization and modularity (which, as seen above,
subsumes domain specificity). However, there does not
seem to be a cogent reason for making either link. For
instance, there are good grounds for thinking that various
cognitive capacities are modular (and hence domainspecific) even though they are not localized in one region of
the brain, indeed even though they are scattered across a
range of brain regions. Modularity and domain-specificity
pertain largely to the functioning of a cognitive capacity
rather than its neural manifestation, so there is limited scope
for inferring brain localization from either of these
phenonema.
In distinguishing domain specificity from other features
of human cognition, I have relied on an implicit preliminary
understanding of the phenomenon. As the term implies,
what it is for a cognitive capacity to be domain-specific is
for it to pertain to a single domain or to a restricted range of
domains, and more importantly, for it not to be
generalizable to other domains. Moreover, this last proviso
highlights the importance of restricting domain specificity to
aspects of cognition that are in principle generalizable
across domains, although they are not in fact generalized. In
other words, it would be vacuous to describe as domainspecific some cognitive system that is not even in principle
generalizable. For example, a body of information
pertaining to some domain or another is not generalizable,
since its subject matter is in principle restricted to a certain
domain. By contrast, a rule that is deployed by a cognizer in
one domain but that could be deployed in another domain is
in principle generalizable. Hence, rather than domainspecific capacities it may be more fruitful to talk about
domain-specific rules or principles. These are the kinds of
cognitive structures that can be generalized across domains
and that are therefore candidates for being domain specific,
though they may not be the only cognitive structures that
can be so generalized. This point will be developed further
in subsequent sections.
One issue that might be raised here concerns the nature
and scope of a domain. If we do not explicitly specify what
a domain consists in, we may open ourselves to the
following objection. Suppose it is claimed that some
linguistic rule R, which is part of a subject‟s cognitive
repertoire, is domain-specific since it only pertains to the
domain of language. Now suppose someone objects to this
on the grounds that language itself is not a single domain
but rather that it comprises various domains, say syntax,
semantics, pragmatics, and so on. Hence, this objector might
contend that the rule is in fact a domain-general one since it
ranges over several domains. This example suggests that it
may always be open for someone to claim that a putative
domain-specific rule is in fact domain-general unless we
have some principled way of delimiting the scope of a
domain. How could we define domain specificity without
specifying the scope of a domain? In response, I would
argue that it is not enough to show that a rule does in fact
apply to what are supposed to be different domains. Rather,
to demonstrate true domain generality with respect to some

rule R used by some cognizer C, it should be shown that C
has the ability to deploy R in some previously
unencountered situation or to apply it to some new cases. In
practice, it does not seem to pose much of a threat to our
account of domain specificity if we do not have a principled
way of distinguishing domains. Typically, it will suffice to
show that a cognitive mechanism is truly domain-general if
we can show that it can be deployed in unfamiliar contexts
that are new to the cognizer. Conversely, it suffices to show
that a cognitive mechanism is domain-specific if we can
demonstrate that when one attempts to apply it to new cases,
the mechanism either does not function or gives
systematically erroneous answers. This point will be
justified further in due course in discussing what constitutes
a new case or a new domain.

Preliminary Examples
Spurious examples of domain specificity, or genuine
examples of domain specificity that are misleadingly
described, are not difficult to find in cognitive science. Two
such instances stand out in Cosmides and Tooby (1994), in
the context of an argument that domain-specific cognitive
mechanisms are more efficient and adaptive that domaingeneral ones. Cosmides and Tooby (1994, 90) state: “A
woman who used the same taste preference mechanisms in
choosing a mate that she used to choose nutritious foods
would choose a very strange mate indeed, and such a design
would rapidly select itself out.” Clearly, something has gone
wrong here: a rule that chooses mates on the same basis as
foods is not a domain-general rule but one that is based on
an error. If we have a cognitive mechanism that enables us
to recognize edible foods, it should only be sensitive to
perceptual stimuli that are plausible candidates for food.
Otherwise, it is not a genuine food-preference cognitive
mechanism. Hence, this is not a plausible example of a
domain-general mechanism being inferior to a domainspecific one. In describing the example, Cosmides and
Tooby seem to be trading on the ambiguity of the term
“taste”, which can either refer to gustatory discrimination or
a broader notion of discrimination, which could comprise
mate selection.
A case of domain specificity that is misleadingly
described can be found in another example given by
Cosmides and Tooby (1994). Although the following
example is a genuine case of domain specificity, it is
improperly contrasted with a putative case of domain
generality. By examining it, we can get a better handle on
the phenomenon of domain specificity. Cosmides and
Tooby explicate the well-known example of the alarm calls
of vervet monkeys, who give three different calls in
response to three different kinds of predators (leopard,
eagle, and snake), leading conspecifics to take three
different types of evasive action (respectively, climbing a
tree, looking up or diving into bushes, and standing on hind
legs and looking into the grass). In this case, they state: “A
single, general-purpose alarm call (and response system)
would be less effective because the recipients of the call

195

would not know which of the three different and
incompatible evasive actions to take” (Cosmides & Tooby
1994, 89-90). The problem here is not there could not be a
general-purpose alarm system; there clearly could. But a
general-purpose alarm system is not one that would issue
the same call for every predator. That would be a system
that fails to discriminate among different stimuli. Rather, an
all-purpose alarm system would be one akin to the human
linguistic alarm system, which issues a different linguistic
warning in the case of different predators. There are clearly
certain advantages to such a system, since it is capable of
handling a much wider range of predators (“Lion!”,
“Hawk!”, “Stampede of buffalo!”) and of being made more
precise in various ways (“Tiger to the right”, “Hyena to the
northwest”, “Human with weapon right behind you”, etc.).
However, it may also involve certain disadvantages, since
given the diversity of inputs and outputs, it may take more
processing time to issue the correct alarm, there may be
more opportunity for error in both transmission and
reception, and the evasive action involved may have to be
figured out from scratch by the respondent once the alarm is
sounded. Determining which of these two alarm systems,
the domain-specific vervet system or the domain-general
human system, is more efficient and adaptive is not an easy
matter. It will clearly depend on various contingencies such
as the nature of the environment, and Cosmides and Tooby
may ultimately be right that in certain circumstances a
domain-specific system may be superior to a domaingeneral one. But they have not made the appropriate
contrast between domain specificity and domain generality.
This example is instructive since, once modified in the
way that I have just done, it provides a fairly clear contrast
between a domain-specific and a domain-general cognitive
mechanism. In the following section I will attempt to give a
more satisfactory formulation of domain specificity and
illustrate it with better examples drawn from the literature.

specificity, to be meaningful, must be a feature of the
cognitive capacity rather than a feature of the subject matter.
Though this point may seem obvious, the attribute of
domain specificity is often conferred on bodies of
knowledge possessed by subjects that are not obviously
generalizable, such as knowledge of animate as opposed to
inanimate domains (e.g. Caramazza & Shelton 1998).
The first proposed feature of domain specificity makes
reference to “new domains,” which is a notion that needs
further explication and justification. The new domain
involved need not be what we might regard as an entirely
disparate area of inquiry. In the case of the vervets, the
original domain is something like: predators commonly
encountered by vervets in the wild. It is in principle
generalizable to include the new domain: all predators, or
even, all threats. The vervet alarm system is domain-specific
because it fails to generalize to these new stimuli. But these
new stimuli do not, strictly speaking, have to be drawn from
what we would normally consider to be another domain,
such as a new sensory modality or a new area of inquiry. At
this point, it might be asked, by virtue of what are they to be
considered genuinely new stimuli? They must at least be
stimuli that the cognizer has not encountered before. But
that condition is surely too weak, since the domain-specific
vervet alarm system clearly generalizes to new exemplars of
leopards, eagles, and snakes, which the individual has not
encountered before, indeed ones which perhaps no vervet
monkey has encountered before. Rather, in this context, new
stimuli are ones that the system was not originally designed
to cope with. This is admittedly a vague formulation and
brings in thorny evolutionary considerations concerning the
proper function of an evolved trait (Millikan 1989, Neander
1991). Though it is not always easy to determine what the
proper function of a cognitive system is, some reference to it
seems inevitable, since cognitive systems have evolved to
fulfill a certain purpose and their generalizability consists in
part in being able to extend beyond that purpose to cases
that they were not designed to cope with, or ones that are
not normally encountered in the environment in which the
system evolved.2 Hence, I propose that the second crucial
feature of a domain-specific cognitive system is as follows:

Domain Specificity Revised
To refine our understanding of domain specificity, it is
useful to build on the example mentioned in the previous
section and attend to its instructive features. The first feature
that can be gleaned from the vervet monkey alarm call
system is that a cognitive mechanism for alarm calls is at
least in principle generalizable. That is to say, even though
the vervet alarms are only issued for a small set of specific
predators, it is easy to conceive of an alarm system that
would extend to other predators. Hence, it seems safe to
conclude that for one to speak meaningfully of a domainspecific cognitive system, that system must have the
following feature:

2) A domain-specific cognitive system is one that
systematically fails to yield a correct result in the case
of stimuli that the system did not evolve to deal with.
The aptness of this second feature can be further justified
by reflecting on appropriate examples from the literature.
One such case is provided by Cheney and Seyfarth (1985,
197), who describe the domain-specificity of certain
cognitive capacities in vervet monkeys, as follows: “Within
the social group, the behavior of monkeys suggests an
understanding of causality, transitive inference, and the
notion of reciprocity. Despite frequent opportunity and often

1) A domain-specific cognitive system is one that is in
principle generalizable to new domains.
This condition may appear vacuous, but it is designed to
rule out cognitive systems that consist of a “database” rather
than rules or principles, as mentioned above. Domain

2

A similar conclusion has been reached by Boyer and Barrett
(2005, 98), who write: “The domain of operation of the system is
best circumscribed by evolutionary considerations.”

196

strong selective pressure, however, comparable behavior
does not readily emerge in dealings with other animal
species or with inanimate objects.” In this example, both
features outlined above are clearly in evidence. First, the
principle of causality and the rule of transitivity clearly have
application outside the realm of social interaction with
conspecifics. The transitivity rule can be used to infer
hierarchy relations among monkeys (if A ranks higher than
B and B ranks higher than C, then A ranks higher than C)
but it can also be used to infer information about size,
quantity, and other matters (if object A is larger than object
B and B is larger than C, then A is larger than C). However,
despite the clear applicability of this rule to domains that go
beyond social interactions with conspecifics, Cheney and
Seyfarth claim that vervets do not so apply the rule. Second,
it is clear that vervets do not use the rule of transitivity on
other species or inanimate objects simply because they
evolved the rule to deal with the restricted domain of social
interaction with conspecifics, which may have been a more
pressing adaptive problem. In this case, it may seem
obvious that interactions with other animal species and with
inanimate objects constitute genuinely new domains. There
may not appear to be a need to use the second feature of
domain specificity to justify the judgment that it does not
generalize to genuinely new domains. But even though it
may not play this role in this case, there are other cases in
which the second condition is necessary to enable us to
make a judgment concerning domain specificity.
Some recent studies of cognition in non-human animals
have debated whether animals have the cognitive capacity to
teach others. Thornton and McAuliffe (2006) demonstrate
that mature meerkats provide young conspecifics with
specimens of their usual prey, scorpions, that are either
dead, disabled (stings removed), or intact. Which of these
three types of scorpion is provided depends on the perceived
age of the young meerkat. Younger pups are provided with
disabled but alive scorpions and this provides them with the
opportunity to learn how to kill the scorpion without being
exposed to the possibility of a sting. Thornton and
MacAuliffe (2006, 228) conclude that “the provisioning
behavior of meerkat helpers constitutes a form of
„opportunity teaching‟ in which teachers provide pupils with
opportunities to practice skills, thus facilitating learning.”
Moreover, they support their findings by relying on a
definition of teaching derived from Caro and Hauser (1992),
according to which an individual is a teacher if it modifies
its behavior in the presence of a naïve observer, at some cost
to itself, and as a result allows the observer to acquire
knowledge or skills. In this case, it appears more difficult to
rule decisively that the teaching is domain-specific rather
than domain-general, since as Csibra (2007, 96) argues: “the
opportunity teaching that has been demonstrated in meerkats
does result in the acquisition of a generalizable skill: it not
only provides youngsters with food but also „teaches‟ them
how to kill scorpions.” However, despite the apparent
(limited) generalizability of this skill, what rules it out as a
genuinely domain-general skill is that it appears to be

restricted to behaviors designed to facilitate preying on
scorpions. Moreover, this is likely to be the function for
which this behavior was evolved. Unless one can
demonstrate otherwise, it is safe to conclude that this is a
domain-specific capacity. (Whether that rules it out as a
genuine case of teaching is another matter.) Hence, the
second condition on domain specificity enables us
provisionally to decide that this is indeed a domain-specific
cognitive capacity.

Further Evidence
So far, the examples I have considered derive primarily
from studies in evolutionary psychology and comparative
cognition. But the concept of domain specificity has also
had considerable influence in cognitive neuroscience and
developmental psychology. I will now consider whether the
notion as I have characterized it can be pressed into service
in other areas of cognitive science.
There is a well-established body of evidence indicating
the existence of category-specific semantic deficits in a
range of patients with brain lesions and other neural
abnormalities. However, the correct interpretation of this
evidence remains a source of contention. Caramazza and
colleagues have interpreted this evidence as indicating that
semantic information is “domain-specific” (Caramazza &
Shelton 1998; Caramazza & Mahon 2003). Other
researchers have adopted different models to explain some
of the same findings. Tyler and Moss hold that the selective
deficits are an emergent phenomenon. Even though
concepts are represented in a unitary distributed system,
different types of concepts are structured differently. Since
concepts in different domains have different internal
structures, impairment of brain function leads to their being
differentially affected (Tyler & Moss 2001).
On the face of it, much of this evidence, and the
surrounding debate, seems to pertain not to the question of
domain specificity but rather to that of brain localization.
When damage to a certain part of the brain results in
selective impairment in naming animals but not plants or
body parts, the question is whether this is evidence that
representations underlying our semantic information
concerning animals is localized in a particular area of the
brain, or whether they are not localized but that some of
them are more impaired than others by such damage.
Although this is an important question in its own right, it
does not bear on domain specificity as such.
Similarly, neuroimaging data that has been brought to
bear on this controversy is largely pertinent to the question
of localization rather than domain specificity. On the one
hand, Caramazza and Mahon (2003, 358) think that “there
clearly does seem to be neural differentiation by semantic
category” based on neuroimaging data. But Tyler and Moss
(2001, 246) find that: “The most striking aspect of the
neuroimaging data is the extent to which living and nonliving concepts activate common regions with only small
and inconsistent differences between domains.” The
neuroimaging data is obtained mainly by testing healthy

197

subjects on a variety of tasks (e.g. silent naming, wordpicture matching) and then using various techniques (fMRI,
PET scans) to determine whether different areas of the brain
are differentially involved when processing content derived
from different domains (e.g. animals, tools, food items,
etc.). But this does not seem to enable us to draw
conclusions regarding whether our capacity to think about
such domains involves abilities that are generalizable or not.
If our knowledge of animals activates different brain areas
than our knowledge of tools, that does not mean that any
cognitive abilities that range over such domains are
restricted to these domains and cannot be applied to others.
Among developmental psychologists, a debate has also
raged concerning the domain specificity of our cognitive
capacities. For instance, Carey and Spelke have argued that
children have innate systems of knowledge that apply to
distinct sets of entities and phenomena. Moreover, the
domains of human knowledge, such as knowledge of
language, physical objects, and number, center on distinct
principles. These “core principles” serve to distinguish one
domain from another. But despite the fact that Carey and
Spelke hold that our cognitive makeup consists of distinct
domains, they also claim that conceptual change in these
domains occurs in part by constructing mappings between
these domains. For instance, mappings between the domains
of physics and number play a role in children‟s
reconceptualization of matter and material objects. Though
the mapping is slow and difficult, children eventually
succeed in using this mapping from one domain to another
to differentiate the concept of weight from the concept of
density (Carey & Spelke 1994, 191-192). But if one can
transplant certain principles of reasoning from one domain
to another, then those principles are surely not domainspecific. As I have already argued, it is wrong to argue that
a cognitive capacity is domain-specific merely on the
grounds that it pertains to a distinct body of knowledge.
Rather, generalizability of rules or principles is key, and in
this instance that condition would seem to be satisfied, thus
casting doubt on whether the capacities in question are truly
domain specific (as opposed to innate).
Opponents of the claim of domain specificity also
sometimes seem to aim their criticism at a different target.
Bates (1994/2001) is at pains to distinguish the claim of
domain specificity from claims of innateness and (brain)
localization. She rightly stresses that a cognitive capacity
can have any two of these features without the third.
However, her characterization of domain specificity is
vague; with respect to language, Bates (1994/2001, 134)
says that the claim of domain specificity is that “localized
language abilities are discontinuous from the rest of mind,
separate and „special‟…” Moreover, despite her explicit
cautionary notes, in presenting the arguments for and
against domain specificity, she sometimes argues against
innateness or brain localization instead. For instance, she
argues against the domain specificity of language on the
grounds that the brain systems that support language show
an extraordinary degree of neural plasticity (Bates

1994/2001, 139). But that does not have a direct bearing on
the issue of whether knowledge of language or the capacity
to learn language can be generalized to other domains. She
also characterizes the controversy over the domain
specificity of language as follows: “Have we evolved new
neural tissue, a new region or a special form of computation
that deals with language, and language alone?” (Bates 1994,
138) Whether or not there is a brain region that has evolved
to deal with language alone concerns innateness and brain
localization rather than domain specificity.
A more promising case for testing this account of domain
specificity can be drawn from the research on face
recognition. Researchers tend to be divided as to whether
the human capacity to recognize the faces of conspecifics is
a domain-specific capacity, or whether it is a capacity that is
acquired as a result of more general cognitive processes, of
the type used to acquire expertise in other areas of human
cognition. Without trying to rehearse the voluminous
evidence involved, I will mention just two findings that are
pertinent to the issue of domain specificity. Humans do not
develop expertise for recognizing the hands or bodies of
conspecifics that is at all comparable to their expertise for
recognizing their faces, as measured by accuracy and
reaction time (McKone, Kanwisher & Duchaine 2007, 12).
Similarly, humans show decrease in accuracy in identifying
faces when those faces are inverted but do not show such a
decrease in identifying houses in the inversion condition
(Yovel & Kanwisher 2004). The capacity to recognize
upright faces rapidly and accurately does not seem to
generalize to other visual stimuli. Object recognition is a
skill that is in principle generalizable to domains beyond
faces (e.g. hands, bodies, houses), but it fails to be so
generalizable in humans. This is clearly in keeping with the
first and second conditions outlined above.
What of the evolutionary clause in the second condition?
Though it is not always explicitly mentioned by the
researchers who work in this area, I venture that it is at least
implicitly assumed. Consider the following scenario.
Suppose it were found that humans can indeed generalize
their face recognition capacities to encompass the faces of
dogs. Proponents of domain specificity might not give up on
their claim that this capacity is domain-specific, but rather
insist that it is a domain-specific capacity that is specific to
the domain of faces in general, or perhaps mammalian faces.
Indeed, even if further evidence came to light suggesting
that this extends to other objects like the facades of houses,
they might continue to posit that it is a domain-specific
capacity dedicated to the detection of objects with certain
parts in particular configurations. What would rule out such
a challenge? As I argued earlier, there are no ready-made
domains that would enable us to dismiss it in principle.
Rather, it seems natural to say that such hypothetical data
would not be evidence of domain specificity (albeit across a
broader domain) because of evolutionary considerations.
Since it is likely that such a cognitive ability would have
arisen to detect faces rather than, say, faces of humans and
dogs (given the relative recency of the domestication of

198

dogs), any extension beyond the domain of human faces is
indeed a generalization of this ability, and an indication that
it is not truly domain-specific. In fact, this is explicitly
acknowledged by proponents of domain specificity in this
area of research. McKone, Kanwisher and Duchaine (2007,
12) hold that the domain-specific theory “proposes that a
face template has developed through evolutionary processes,
reflecting the extreme social importance of faces.”

specific semantic deficits. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
7:8, 354-361.
Caramazza, A. & Shelton, J. R. (1998). Domain-specific
knowledge systems in the brain: The animate-inanimate
distinction. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 10:1, 134.
Carey, S. & Spelke E. (1994). Domain-specific knowledge
and conceptual change. In L. A. Hirschfeld & S. A.
Gelman (Eds.). Mapping the mind: Domain specificity
in cognition and culture, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Caro, T.M. & Hauser, M.D. (1992). Is there teaching in
nonhuman animals? Quarterly Review of Biology, 67,
151–174.
Cheney, D.L. & Seyfarth, R.M. (1985). Social and nonsocial knowledge in vervet monkeys. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society, B308, 187-201.
Cosmides, L. & Tooby, J. (1994). Origins of domain
specificity: The evolution of functional organization. In
L. A. Hirschfeld & S. A. Gelman (Eds.). Mapping the
mind: Domain specificity in cognition and culture,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Csibra, G. (2007). Teachers in the wild. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 11:3, 95-96.
Fodor, J. (1983). The modularity of mind. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Fodor, J. (2000). The mind doesn’t work that way.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Frank, N. R. & Richardson, T. (2006). Teaching in tandemrunning ants. Nature, 439, 153.
Hirschfeld, L. A. & Gelman, S. A. (1994). Toward a
topography of mind: An introduction to domain
specificity. In L. A. Hirschfeld & S. A. Gelman (Eds.).
Mapping the mind: Domain specificity in cognition and
culture, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Khalidi, M.A. (2001). Innateness and domain specificity.
Philosophical Studies, 105, 191-210.
McKone, E. Kanwisher, N. & Duchaine, B.C. (2007). Can
generic expertise explain special processing for faces?
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 11:1, 8-15.
Millikan, R. G. (1989). In defense of proper functions.
Philosophy of Science, 56, 288-302.
Neander, K. (1991). Functions as selected effects: The
conceptual analyst‟s defense. Philosophy of Science, 58,
168-184.
Samuels, R. (1998). Evolutionary psychology and the
massive modularity thesis. British Journal for the
Philosophy of Science, 49, 575-602.
Thornton, A. & McAuliffe, K. (2006). Teaching in wild
meerkats. Science, 313, 227-229.
Tyler, L. K. & Moss, H. E. (2001). Towards a distributed
account of conceptual knowledge. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 5:6, 244-252.
Yovel, G. & Kanwisher, N. (2004). Face perception:
domain specific not process specific. Neuron, 44, 889898.

Conclusion
In this article, I have tried to provide an analysis of domain
specificity in cognition that enables us to make a
theoretically useful distinction between domain-specific and
domain-general cognitive systems. Drawing on examples
from the literature, both genuine and spurious, I have tried
to show that there are two features that make a cognitive
system domain-specific. First, the cognitive system must be
one that is in principle generalizable. Hence, it cannot be
something like a body of information concerning a
particular area, but something more like a rule or principle
that has wider applicability. Second, it must be a system that
the subject cannot apply to genuinely novel cases, where
novel cases are ones of a type which this system was not
originally evolved to deal with, or that are not within what
has been termed the proper function of this cognitive
system. This second condition is important in that it
provides us with a principled way of delimiting domains,
since these are not antecedently given. This condition is
meant to help to address the question of whether or not a
creature can go beyond the cases for which its cognitive
capacities were evolved. The distinction between domain
specificity and domain generality matters because a central
debate in contemporary cognitive science concerns the
extent to which our cognitive capacities are domain-specific
tools evolved to solve certain problems in the evolutionary
environment, or whether they are domain-general problemsolving capacities. A resolution of this disagreement
depends on a clear means of demarcating domain-specific
from domain-general system. In addition, it has often been
claimed that one of the main points of difference between
human cognition and that of other animals is its domaingeneral nature. Again, this debate cannot be properly
adjudicated unless we have a principled way of making the
distinction.

References
Bates, E. (1994/2001). Modularity, domain specificity and
the development of language. In W. Bechtel et. al.
(Eds.). Philosophy and the neurosciences: A reader,
Oxford: Blackwell (first published 1994).
Boyer, P. & Barrett H. C. (2005). Domain specificity and
intuitive ontology. In D. Buss (Ed.). The handbook of
evolutionary psychology, Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Caramazza, A. & Mahon, B. Z. (2003). The organization of
conceptual knowledge: The evidence from category-

199

