UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
What Makes a Good Reasoner?: Brain Potentials and Heuristic Bias Susceptibility

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1b8261kk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
De Neys, Wim
Novitskiy, Nikolay
Ramautar, Jennifer
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

What Makes a Good Reasoner?: Brain Potentials and Heuristic Bias Susceptibility
Wim De Neys (wim.deneys@univ-tlse2.fr)
CNRS, Université de Toulouse, France

Nikolay Novitskiy (nikolay.novitskiy@psy.kuleuven.be)
Lab Experimental Psychology, University of Leuven, Belgium

Jennifer Ramautar (J.Ramautar@nin.knaw.nl)
Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience, Amsterdam, the Netherlands

Johan Wagemans (Johan.wagemans@psy.kuleuven.be)
Lab Experimental Psychology, University of Leuven, Belgium

Abstract
Human reasoning is often biased by intuitive heuristics. A key
question is why some people are less susceptible to this bias
than others. It is debated whether the bias results from a
failure to monitor one’s intuitive conclusions for conflict with
logical considerations or from a failure to inhibit the tempting
intuitions. This results in different views on the role of
individual differences in executive monitoring and inhibition
capacity for sound reasoning. The present study presents a
new approach to address this issue. After an initial reasoning
screening a group of the most and least biased reasoners were
invited for an EEG study in which neural markers of their
executive monitoring (ERN amplitude) and inhibition (N2
amplitude) skills were recorded. Results indicated that biased
reasoners were characterized by less developed inhibition but
not monitoring capacity. Findings support the view that
monitoring one’s intuition for conflict during thinking is a
flawless and undemanding process suggesting that even the
poorest reasoners at least detect that they are biased.
Keywords: Decision-making; Reasoning; EEG

Introduction
Decades of reasoning and decision-making research showed
that human thinking is often biased (Evans, 2008;
Kahneman, 2002). In general, human reasoners seem to
have a strong tendency to base their judgment on fast
intuitive impressions rather than on more demanding,
deliberative reasoning. Although this intuitive or so-called
“heuristic” thinking can be very useful, it will sometimes
cue responses that conflict with traditional normative logical
or probabilistic considerations and bias our decisionmaking.
Whereas it is well established that human judgment is
often biased, the nature of this bias is far less clear. Some
influential authors have argued that the widespread heuristic
bias can be attributed to a failure to monitor our intuition
(e.g., Kahneman & Frederick, 2002). Because of lax
monitoring, people would simply fail to detect that the
intuitive response conflicts with normative considerations.
However, others have argued that there is nothing wrong
with the monitoring process (e.g., Epstein, 1994; Houdé,
2007; Sloman, 1996). According to these authors, people
have little trouble in detecting that their intuitive response is

biased. The problem, according to this view, is that people’s
intuitive beliefs are so tempting that they fail to discard
them. Thus, people “behave against their better judgment”
(Epstein, 1994) when they give an unwarranted heuristic
response: They detect that they are biased but simply fail to
block the biased response. In sum, according to this flawless
detection view, biased decisions are attributed to an
inhibition failure rather than a conflict monitoring failure
per se.
The debate on the nature of heuristic bias results in
opposing views on the interpretation of individual
differences in bias susceptibility. Although the vast majority
of educated adults are typically biased when solving classic
reasoning and decision-making tasks, some people do
manage to reason correctly and refrain from giving the
tempting but unwarranted heuristic response. Individual
differences in executive control capacity (as measured with
general working memory or intelligence test) are widely
cited as the cause of this reasoning performance variability
(e.g., De Neys, 2006; De Neys & Verschueren, 2006; Evans,
2008; Stanovich & West, 2000). However, conflict
monitoring and inhibition are both considered key executive
processes and the precise contribution of each component as
possible mediator of reasoning performance has not been
established. Bluntly put, it is not clear what makes a good
reasoner: Having a superior monitoring capacity, having a
superior inhibition capacity, or a combination of both.
The two views on heuristic bias make differential
predictions here. According to the lax monitoring view,
people are mainly biased because of inefficient monitoring.
Hence, one can expect that good reasoners will be primarily
characterized by superior executive monitoring skills. Good
reasoners will be better at monitoring their intuitively cued
conclusions for conflict with more normative considerations
and will be more likely to detect that their initial response is
biased. However, the flawless monitoring view conceives
monitoring during thinking as a quite undemanding process
by entailing that even the most biased reasoners are
successful at it (De Neys, Moyens, & Vansteenwegen, 2010;
Franssens & De Neys, 2009). Hence, given the postulated
minimal demands of the monitoring process during
thinking, one can predict that individual differences in

1020

executive monitoring skills per se should have little impact
on one’s reasoning performance: Even people with the least
developed monitoring skills should manage to detect the
conflict during thinking. According to this view, it will be
specifically one’s inhibitory capacities that will determine
the reasoning performance.
Clarifying the nature of heuristic bias and the individual
bias differences is crucial for the study of human thinking.
The issue has also far-stretching implications for our view
of human rationality and the design of more optimal
intervention programs to “debias” human thinking (De Neys
& Glumicic, 2008; Evans, 2008). The problem, however, is
that it is hard to decide between the alternative views based
on traditional reasoning data (Evans, 2007, 2008). Although
there have been some recent attempts to break the stalemate
by developing processing measures of conflict detection and
inhibition during reasoning (e.g., De Neys & Franssens,
2009), the rival views persist. The present study introduces a
new approach to address this issue by focusing on neural
markers of individual differences of conflict monitoring and
response inhibition.
In the study we first invited a large number of participants
for an initial screening session in which they were presented
with reasoning problems based on two of the most-famous
tasks from the judgment and decision-making field:
Kahneman and Tversky’s (1973) base-rate neglect and
conjunction fallacy problems. In these tasks a stereotypical
description cues a strong intuitive response that conflicts
with more traditional probabilistic normative considerations
(see Material for examples). Sound reasoning on these
problems requires that people detect the conflict and inhibit
the inappropriate heuristic response. Based on the screening,
we invited a group of the least and most biased reasoners
(i.e., participants with the highest and lowest normative
reasoning scores) for a follow-up study in which they were
presented
with
a
Go/No-No
task
while
electroencephalography (EEG) was recorded. The Go/NoGo task is a classic task that is widely used to measure
people’s executive control abilities (e.g., Amodio et al.,
2007; Nieuwenhuis et al., 2003). In the task participants
must quickly respond to a frequently presented Go stimulus
such that the ‘Go’ response becomes habitual. However, on
a small proportion of trials, a No-Go stimulus appears,
signaling that one’s habitual response should be withheld.
The EEG recording allowed us to test for a possible
neurological marker of the differential executive monitoring
and/or inhibition capacities of the least and most biased
thinkers. Available evidence suggests that the operation of
the executive monitoring and inhibition components are
reflected in two different event-related potentials (ERP). On
one hand, erroneously solved No-Go trials on which
participants give the inappropriate dominant ‘Go’ response
are known to give rise to a specific ERP referred to as the
Error-Related Negativity or ERN. The ERN is a sharp
negative voltage deflection in the EEG that typically peaks
about 50 ms after an erroneous response. The ERN is
believed to reflect executive control activity associated with

the monitoring of conflict and error (Amodio et al., 2004,
2006; Compton et al., 2008; but see Burle et al., 2008).
Available evidence suggests that the ERN amplitude is
typically larger for people with better monitoring skills
(Amodio et al., 2006; Inzlicht et al., 2009).
On the other hand, correctly solved No-Go trials on which
participants manage to withhold the dominant ‘Go’ response
are known to give rise to the so-called N2. The N2 is a
negative voltage deflection in the EEG that typically peaks
about 200 ms after the stimulus onset (i.e., before the
response). The N2 is believed to reflect executive control
activity associated with the successful inhibition of the
prepotent Go response (Nieuwenhuis et al., 2003). Available
evidence suggests that the few times that people with less
developed inhibitory abilities do manage to withhold the Go
response, the N2 amplitude is larger than for people with
high abilities (e.g., Johnstone et al., 2007; Kaiser et al.,
2003; Prox et al., 2007; Smith, Johnstone, & Barry, 2004;
but see also Falkenstein, Hoormann, & Hohnsbein, 1999).
This larger N2 amplitude has been interpreted as reflecting
the fact that people who have fewer inhibitory control
resources will need a much higher activation of the neural
control structures for the response inhibition to be
successful (Prox et al., 2007; Smith et al., 2004).
In sum, the EEG literature suggests that individual
differences in executive inhibition abilities affect the N2
amplitude, whereas individual differences in executive
monitoring abilities affect the ERN amplitude. Hence,
contrasting these components in a group of biased and
unbiased reasoners can help us to clarify the nature of
individual differences in heuristic bias susceptibility. If the
lax monitoring view is right and good reasoners are
characterized by superior monitoring ability, the ERN
should be more pronounced for the unbiased than for the
biased reasoners. If the flawless monitoring view is right
and good reasoners are characterized by superior inhibition
rather than monitoring ability, biased and unbiased
reasoners should not show a differential ERN and only the
N2 should differ in the two groups.

Reasoning Bias Screening
Method
Participants. A total of 399 psychology undergraduates
participated in return for course credit.
Material. To screen participants’ bias susceptibility during
reasoning we presented them with a booklet containing a
total of three conjunction fallacy and three base-rate neglect
problems. Problems were presented in a fixed, randomly
determined order. In all problems a stereotypical description
cued a heuristic response that conflicted with the normative
response that is traditionally considered correct. Problem
content was based on the work of De Neys, Vartanian, and
Goel (2008). The exact problem format is illustrated below.

1021

The average number of correct normative responses was
taken as an index of people’s reasoning performance.
Conjunction fallacy problems. In each problem
participants first read a short personality description of a
character. Next, they were given two statements about the
character and were asked to indicate which one of the two
was most probable. One statement always consisted of a
conjunction of two characteristics (one characteristic that
was likely given the description and one that was unlikely).
The other statement contained only one of these
characteristics (i.e., the unlikely one). Consider the
following example:
Bill is 34. He is intelligent, punctual but unimaginative and
somewhat lifeless. In school, he was strong in mathematics but
weak in social studies and humanities.
Which one of the following statements is most likely?
a. Bill plays in a rock band for a hobby
b. Bill is an accountant and plays in a rock band for a hobby

Normative considerations based on the conjunction rule
always cue selection of the non-conjunctive statement.
However, intuitively, people will tend to select the
statement that best fits with the stereotypical description
(i.e., the most representative statement, see Tversky &
Kahneman, 1983). Clearly, the fit will be higher for the
conjunctive statement than for the unlikely non-conjunctive
statement. Hence, people will be intuitively tempted to pick
the erroneous conjunctive statement.
Base-rate neglect problems. In each problem participants
first read information about the composition of a sample.
People were also informed that short personality
descriptions were made of all the individuals in the sample
and they would get to see one description that was drawn
randomly from the sample. They were asked to indicate to
which one of the two groups the randomly drawn individual
most likely belonged. Consider the following example:
A psychologist wrote thumbnail descriptions of a sample of
1000 participants consisting of 995 females and 5 males. The
description below was chosen at random from the 1000
available descriptions.

Descriptions were selected on the basis of an extensive
pilot study (Franssens & De Neys, 2009). Selected
descriptions moderately but consistently cued one of the two
groups. This point is not trivial. We label responses that are
in line with the base-rates as correct answers. However, if
reasoners adopt a formal Bayesian approach (e.g.,
Gigerenzer, Hell, & Blank, 1988) and combine the baserates with the diagnostic value of the description, this can
lead to complications when the description is extremely
diagnostic. Imagine that we have a sample of males and
females and the description would state that the randomly
drawn individual “gave birth to two children”. Now, by
definition, no matter what the base-rates in the sample are,
one would always need to conclude that the person is a
woman. We limited the impact of this problem by only
selecting descriptions that were judged to have a moderate
diagnostic value. By combining these with quite extreme
base-rates (i.e., 995 and 5) one may generally conclude that
the response that is cued by the base-rates should be
selected if participants manage to refrain from giving too
much weight to the intuitive answer cued by the description.

Results and Discussion
The reasoning performance of our screening sample
replicated the typical results in previous studies. Overall,
participants were typically biased and gave the cued
heuristic responses. The average percentage of correct
normative responses on the six problems was only 24% (SD
= 33%). This pattern was similar for the conjunction (M =
21%, SD = 32%) and base-rate problems (M = 28%, SD =
31%).
After the screening we invited a group of the most (i.e.,
participants who always gave the heuristic response) and
least biased reasoners (i.e., participants who gave at least
one normative response on both the conjunction and baserate problems) for the EEG recording session. This cutoff
value (at least one response correct) corresponded to the
median accuracy for both types of reasoning problems.

EEG Recording
Method

Jo is 23 years old and is finishing a degree in engineering. On
Friday nights, Jo likes to go out cruising with friends while
listening to music and drinking beer.
Which one of the following two statements is most likely?
a. Jo is a man
b. Jo is a woman

Normative considerations based on the group size or baserate information cue response (b). Given the size of the two
groups in the sample, it will be more likely that a randomly
drawn individual will belong to the largest group. However,
people will be tempted to respond (a) on the basis of
stereotypical beliefs cued by the description. Hence, just as
in the conjunction problems, normative considerations will
conflict with the cued heuristic response.

Participants. After the bias screening seven of the least and
seven of the most biased reasoners were recruited for the
main Go/No-Go EEG study. We refer to these groups as the
poor and good reasoners, respectively (see Table 1 for an
overview of their reasoning screening performance).
Participants were paid €25 for their participation.
Material. Go/No-Go task. The Go/No-Go task was based
on the procedure introduced by Nieuwenhuis et al. (2003)
and Amodio et al. (2007). On each trial, either the letter
“M” or “W” was presented in the center of a computer
screen. Approximately half of the participants in each group
were instructed to make a “Go” response (mouse button
press) when they saw “M” but to make no response when

1022

they saw “W”; the remaining participants completed a
version in which “W” was the Go stimulus and “M” the NoGo stimulus. Each trial began with a fixation point,
presented for 500 ms. The target then appeared for 100 ms,
followed by a blank screen. Participants were instructed to
respond within 500 ms of target onset. A warning message
appeared on the screen for 1 s after responses that exceeded
this deadline and after erroneous responses. The inter trial
interval was 1 s.
The task consisted of 600 trials: 80% Go trials and 20%
No-Go trials. The high frequency of Go trials induced a
prepotent “Go” response, enhancing the difficulty of
successfully overriding a response on the critical No-Go
trials. Participants received a short 2-min break after every
150 trials.
Procedure. EEG recording. Participants were fitted with a
Quickcap, and EEG was collected from 128 equidistantly
positioned scalp sites using Ag/AgCl electrodes. The active
reference electrode was placed on the vertex between
electrodes Cz and Cpz. A ground electrode was placed on
the forehead close to AFz. Vertical and horizontal electrooculogram (EOG) was collected to permit the reduction of
the artifact due to eye movements. Impedances were below
5kΩ at each scalp site. EEG was recorded through a 0.15 –
30 Hz bandpass filter and digitized at 1000 Hz using a
SynAmps2 amplifier. Data were referenced to the average
earlobe. Offline, we used a computerized algorithm to
remove eye-blink artifacts. EEG epochs with voltage
exceeding +/- 200 µV were rejected as reflecting additional
artefact.
ERP processing. N2. Our quantification of the N2 and
ERN was based on Amodio et al. (2007). For N2
quantification a 1000 ms epoch of EEG signal, beginning
200 ms prior to stimulus onset, was selected for each
artifact-free trial. Baseline correction procedures subtracted
the average voltage during the 200 ms interval before
stimulus onset within each epoch from the entire epoch.
Epochs associated with correct responses on Go and No-Go
trials were averaged within their respective trial types. The
N2 was scored as the peak negative deflection occurring
between 200 and 400 ms, relative to target onset, at the
vertex site (Cz), where it is typically maximal. The critical
N2 component refers to the average N2 amplitude
associated with correct “No-Go” responses.
ERP processing. ERN. For quantification of the ERN an
800 ms response-locked epoch of EEG signal, centered on
the time of response within each trial, was selected for each
artifact-free trial. Baseline correction procedures subtracted
the average voltage occurring from 400 ms to 50 ms prior to
the response from the entire epoch. Epochs associated with
incorrect responses on No-Go trials and correct responses
on Go trials were averaged within their respective trial
types. The ERN was scored as the peak negative deflection
occurring between -50 and 150 ms, relative to response
onset, at the frontocentral scalp site (Fcz). The critical ERN

component refers to the average amplitude associated with
incorrect “Go” responses on “No-Go” trials.

Results and Discussion
Behavioral findings. The behavioral Go/No-Go performance
of our two groups of reasoners (see Table 1) was as
expected. Accuracy on the No-Go trials is considered an
excellent marker of people’s executive control ability.
Consistent with the well established finding that good
reasoners have superior executive control capacities, we
observed that our group of unbiased reasoners outscored the
more biased group on the No-Go trials, F(1, 12) = 11.26, p <
.01, ŋ2p = .48. As expected, accuracy on the Go trials, where
correct responding did not require monitoring or overriding
the intuitive response, was at ceiling and did not differ for
the two groups of reasoners, F(1, 12) < 1.
Table 1: Average (SD) Reasoning and Go/No-Go Accuracy
Reasoning

Poor
reasoners

Baserate
0%
(-)

Conjunction
0%
(-)

Good
reasoners

52%
(26)

62%
(30)

Go/No-Go
Total
0%
(-)

NoGo
67%
(11)

Go
99%
(1)

57%
(21)

83%
(5)

99%
(1)

N2 findings. Our ERP data indicated that the average N2
amplitude differed in the group of good and poor reasoners,
F(1, 12) = 4.75, p < .05, ŋ 2p = .28. As Figure 1 shows,
whenever the poor reasoners did manage to solve No-Go
trials correctly this was accompanied by a more pronounced
N2 amplitude (i.e., a more negative deflection). Next, we
also calculated the correlation between each individuals’
actual reasoning performance on the base-rate and
conjunction problems and their N2 amplitude. This analysis
showed that in our restricted sample of good and poor
reasoners, the N2 amplitude was a good predictor of the
tendency to give the standard normative response on these
classic reasoning problems, r = .55, p < .05. Hence, the
better participant’s executive inhibition capacity, as indexed
by their N2 amplitude, the more they managed to refrain
from heuristic responding during reasoning.
ERN findings. As Figure 1 indicates, in contrast with the
N2 findings, the average ERN amplitude did not differ for
our group of good and poor reasoners, F(1, 12) < 1. A
correlational analysis also established that the ERN
amplitude was not predictive of participant’s reasoning
performance, r = .14, p = .63. Consistent with the flawless
monitoring view, this suggest that individual differences in
bias susceptibility during reasoning are not driven by
differences in executive monitoring skills as indexed by the
ERN amplitude.

1023

Figure 1. ERP waveforms corresponding to correct No-Go
responses (N2 top panel, stimulus onset at 0 ms) and incorrect NoGo responses (ERN bottom panel, response onset at 0 ms), with
the waveform for correct Go responses subtracted, for the most
(poor) and least (good) biased reasoners.

General Discussion
In the present EEG study we contrasted neural markers of
people’s executive monitoring (ERN amplitude) and
inhibition (N2 amplitude) capacity in two groups who
showed differential susceptibility to heuristic bias during
reasoning. Results indicated that less biased reasoners
showed a smaller N2 amplitude than more biased reasoners
while the ERN amplitude of biased and unbiased reasoners
did not differ. Consistent with the flawless monitoring view,
this suggests that good reasoners are specifically
characterized by a superior executive inhibition capacity
rather than by a superior monitoring capacity. Hence, what
makes a good, unbiased reasoner is not a more developed
ability to monitor one’s intuitive conclusions for conflict
with normative considerations but the ability to inhibit these
tempting erroneous intuitions in case such a conflict occurs.
It should be stressed that the present results do not
downplay the importance of conflict monitoring during
reasoning per se. Both the lax and flawless monitoring
views consider the monitoring of one’s intuitive inferences
as a cornerstone of the reasoning process. Obviously, if
people would not monitor their intuitively cued problem
solutions, they could simply not detect whether or not it is
necessary to override them. Indeed, even the most gifted
reasoners do not simply inhibit intuitive inferences
throughout and tend to rely on heuristic computations in
case it is appropriate (e.g., De Neys & Franssens, 2009; De
Neys, Schaeken, & d’Ydewalle, 2005). As suggested
previously (e.g., De Neys & Glumicic, 2008), the

monitoring process allows reasoners to take advantage of
the computational benefits (e.g., speed) of heuristic thinking
as long as it does not conflict with normative principles. The
key point, however, is that this crucial monitoring process
does not seem to be very demanding. According to the
flawless monitoring view, monitoring one’s intuitions
during reasoning is an effortless process that requires only
minimal executive monitoring resources. It is this postulated
undemanding or automatic nature of the monitoring process
during reasoning that can explain why individual differences
in executive monitoring capacity do not affect the reasoning
performance. The undemanding nature of the monitoring
during thinking entails that even for people with minimal
executive monitoring resources, the process will be
successful.
Our individual differences findings fit with some recent
studies that started examining the processing characteristics
of the conflict monitoring process during thinking. For
example, Franssens and De Neys (2009) tested the
postulated effortless nature of the monitoring process in a
dual task study. People were asked to solve base-rate
problems while their executive resources were burdened
with a secondary task. After the reasoning task participants
were also presented with a surprise recall test that can be
used to measure whether people were monitoring their
intuitive inferences and detected the conflict between cued
intuitive and normative responses (see De Neys & Glumicic,
2008). Results showed that reasoning accuracy decreased
under load (i.e., people gave more heuristic responses).
However, the crucial finding was that the conflict
monitoring index was not affected by the load. People were
equally accurate in detecting the presence of conflict
whether or not they were reasoning under load. Combined
with the present individual differences findings these studies
lend credence to the idea that conflict monitoring during
thinking is effortless and flawless.
The present study is the first one to introduce EEG
methodology to examine the nature of individual differences
in bias susceptibility. Clearly, this implies that our results
need to be interpreted with some caution. Although our data
fits with recent findings pointing to the effortless nature of
the monitoring process during thinking, the results will need
to be validated in future studies. Bearing this in mind, our
initial findings do suggest that individual differences in
executive monitoring are not playing a major role in
people’s bias susceptibility. A good, unbiased reasoner
seems to be primarily characterized by superior inhibitory
skills. Although most reasoners might be detecting that their
intuitive answer is biased, only people with superior
inhibitory capacity manage to discard the tempting intuitive
response.

References
Amodio, D. M., Jost, J. T., Master, S. L., & Yee, C. M.
(2007). Neurocognitive correlates of liberalism and
conservatism. Nature Neuroscience, 10, 1246-1247.

1024

Amodio, D. M., Kubota, J. T., Harmon-Jones, E., & Devine,
P. G. (2006). Alternative mechanisms for regulating racial
responses according to internal vs external cues. Social,
Cognitive, and Affective Neuroscience, 1, 26-36.
Amodio, D. M., Harmon-Jones, E., Devine, P. G., Curtin, J.
J., Hartley, S. L., & Covert, A. E. (2004). Neural signals
for the detection of unintentional race bias. Psychological
Science, 15, 88-93.
Burle, B., Roger, C., Allain, S., Vidal, F., & Hasbroucq, T.
(2008). Error negativity does not reflect conflict: A
reappraisal of conflict monitoring and anterior cingulate
cortex activity. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 20,
1637-1655.
Compton, R. J., Robinson, M. D., Ode, S., Quandt, L. C.,
Fineman, S. L., & Carp, J. (2008). Error-monitoring
ability predicts daily stress regulation. Psychological
Science, 19, 702-708.
De Neys, W. (2006). Dual processing in reasoning: Two
systems but one reasoner. Psychological Science, 17, 428433.
De Neys, W., & Franssens, S. (2009). Belief inhibition
during thinking: Not always winning but at least taking
part. Cognition, 113, 45-61.
De Neys, W., & Glumicic, T. (2008). Conflict monitoring in
dual process theories of reasoning. Cognition, 106, 12481299.
De Neys, W., Moyens, E., & Vansteenwegen, D. (2010).
Feeling we’re biased: autonomic arousal and reasoning
conflict.
Cognitive,
Affective,
and
Behavioral
Neuroscience, 10, 208-216.
De Neys, W., Schaeken, W., & d’Ydewalle, G. (2005).
Working memory and everyday conditional reasoning:
Retrieval and inhibition of stored counterexamples.
Thinking & Reasoning, 11, 349-381.
De Neys, W., Vartanian, O., & Goel, V. (2008). Smarter
than we think: When our brains detect that we are biased.
Psychological Science, 19, 483-489.
De Neys, W., & Verschueren, N. (2006). Working memory
capacity and a notorious brain teaser: The case of the
Monty Hall Dilemma. Experimental Psychology, 53, 123131.
Epstein, S. (1994). Integration of the cognitive and
psychodynamic unconscious. American Psychologists, 49,
709-724.
Evans, J. St. B. T. (2007). On the resolution of conflict in
dual process theories of reasoning. Thinking & Reasoning,
13, 321-329.
Evans, J. St. B. T. (2008). Dual-processing accounts of
reasoning, judgement and social cognition. Annual Review
of Psychology, 59, 255-278.
Falkenstein, M., Hoormann, J., & Hohnsbein, J. (1999).
ERP components in Go Nogo tasks and their relation to
inhibition. Acta Psychologica, 101, 267-291.
Franssens, S., & De Neys, W. (2009). The effortless nature
of conflict detection during thinking. Thinking &
Reasoning, 15, 105-128.

Gigerenzer, G., Hell, W., & Blank, H. (1988). Presentation
and Content: the use of base-rates as a continuous
variable. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 14, 513-525.
Houdé, O. (2007). First insights on “neuropedagogy of
reasoning”. Thinking and Reasoning, 13, 81-89.
Inzlicht, M., McGregor, I., Hirsh, J. B., & Nash, K. (2009).
Neural markers of religious conviction. Psychological
Science, 20, 385-392.
Johnstone, S. J., Dimoska, A., Smith, J. L., Barry, R. J.,
Pleffer, C. B., Chiswick, D., et al. (2007). The
development of stop-signal and Go/Nogo response
inhibition in children aged 7-12 years: Performance and
event-related potential indices. International Journal of
Psychophysiology, 63, 25-38.
Kahneman, D. (2002, December). Maps of bounded
rationality: A perspective on intuitive judgement and
choice. Nobel Prize Lecture. Retrieved January 11, 2006,
from
http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/economics/
laureates/2002/kahnemann-lecture.pdf
Kahneman, D., & Frederick, S. (2002). Representativeness
revisited: Attribute substitution in intuitive judgement. In
T. Gilovich, D. Griffin, & D. Kahneman (Eds.),
Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive
Judgement (pp. 49-81).
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1973). On the psychology of
prediction. Psychological Review, 80, 237-251.
Kaiser, S., Unger, J., Kiefer, M., Markela, J., Mundt, C., &
Weisbrod, M. (2003). Executive control deficit in
depression: event-related potentials in a Go/Nogo task.
Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging, 122, 169-184.
Nieuwenhuis, S., Yeung, N., van den Wildenberg, W., &
Ridderinkhof, K. (2003). Electrophysiological correlates
of anterior cingulate function in a go/no-go task: effects of
response conflict and trial type frequency. Cognitive,
Affective, and Behavioral Neuroscience, 3, 17-26.
Prox, V., Dietrich, D. E., Zhang, Y. Y., Emrich, H. M., &
Ohlmeier, M. D. (2007). Attentional processing in adults
with ADHD as reflected by event-related potentials.
Neuroscience Letters, 419, 236-241.
Sloman, S. A. (1996). The empirical case for two systems
of reasoning. Psychological Bulletin, 119, 3-22.
Smith, J. L., Johnstone, S. J., & Barry, R. J. (2004).
Inhibitory processing during the Go/NoGo task: an ERP
analysis of children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder. Clinical Neurophysiology, 115, 1320-1331.
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (2000). Individual
differences in reasoning: Implications for the rationality
debate. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 23, 645-726.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1983). Extensional versus
intuitive reasoning: The conjunction fallacy in probability
judgment. Psychological Review, 90, 293-315.

1025

