UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Why Does Explaining Help Learning? Insight From an Explanation Impairment Effect.

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/79w8q0pj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Williams, Joseph Jay
Lombrozo, Tania
Rehder, Bob

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Why does explaining help learning? Insight from an explanation impairment effect
Joseph Jay Williams (joseph_williams@berkeley.edu)
Tania Lombrozo (lombrozo@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley
Bob Rehder (bob.rehder@nyu.edu)
Department of Psychology, New York University
Abstract
Engaging in explanation, even to oneself, can enhance learning.
What underlies this effect? Williams & Lombrozo (in press)
propose that explanation exerts subsumptive constraints on
processing, driving learners to discover underlying patterns. A
category-learning experiment demonstrates that explanation can
enhance or impair learning depending on whether these constraints
match the structure of the material being learned. Explaining can
help learning when reliable patterns are present, but actually
impairs learning when patterns are misleading. This explanation
impairment effect is predicted by the subsumptive constraints
account, but challenges alternative hypotheses according to which
explaining helps learning by increasing task engagement through
motivation, attention, or processing time. The findings have both
theoretical and practical implications for learning and education.
Keywords: explanation; self-explanation; learning;
constraints; impairment; category learning

Most teachers and tutors have had the experience of
explaining a concept to another person and achieving
greater understanding as a result. How does engaging in
explanation generate this beneficial effect? This question’s
importance is underscored by the ubiquity of the
phenomenon, and by converging evidence from cognitive
science, education, and cognitive development confirming
that explanation plays a significant role in learning.
Explanations have been implicated in theories of how
conceptual knowledge is represented and how categories are
learned (Carey, 1985; Gopnik & Meltzoff, 1997; Murphy &
Medin, 1985). Education researchers have demonstrated that
explaining has a potent effect on students’ learning and
fosters deep understanding that allows generalization to
novel contexts (Chi et al, 1989; Chi et al, 1994). Research in
cognitive development reveals even more profound effects
(Wellman & Liu, 2006; Wellman, in press). Prompting
children to explain can accelerate conceptual change, such
as developing an understanding of number conservation
(Siegler, 2002) and false belief (Amsterlaw & Wellman,
2006).
Many extant accounts of explanation’s effects have
emphasized the metacognitive benefits of explanation, such
as prompting learners to identify and fill gaps in their
knowledge (Chi et al, 1994; Chi, 2000). Explanations may
also focus learners on uncovering the causes that underlie
observed outcomes (Wellman & Liu, 2006), or may enhance
learning by increasing task engagement in the form of

additional motivation, attention, or processing time (for
discussion see Siegler, 2002).
Williams and Lombrozo (in press) propose and find
empirical support for the subsumptive constraints account,
according to which explaining exerts constraints on
processing that drive people to interpret what they are
learning in terms of underlying patterns and regularities.
The account is motivated in part by “subsumption” and
“unification” theories of explanation from philosophy
(Friedman, 1974; Kitcher, 1981), which propose that good
explanations show how what is being explained is an
instance of a unifying pattern: explanations cite
generalizations that subsume what is being explained. If the
explanations learners generate must satisfy this constraint,
explaining will drive learners to reason and construct beliefs
in the service of identifying patterns. When useful
regularities exist, the subsumptive constraints account
predicts positive effects of explanation through the
discovery of generalizations. However, this account also
predicts that seeking explanations can impair learning if
there is a mismatch between the subsumptive constraints
and the material being learned—for example, in situations in
which patterns are nonexistent or misleading.
This paper tests the prediction that such an explanation
impairment effect exists. Investigating the conditions under
which explanation hurts learning can inform theories which
aim to specify the mechanisms by which explanation helps
learning, analogous to the study of visual illusions in
perception. The conditions under which human perception
or cognition succeeds can be less informative than those
under which it breaks down and produces errors because the
latter serve as a window onto the cognitive machinery
underlying perception, in the case of visual illusions, or
cognition, in the case of explanation and learning.
In fact, examining explanation’s detrimental effects can
discriminate the subsumptive constraints account from
current theories, which to date have not predicted
explanation impairment effects. In particular, a task
engagement account advocates that engaging in explanation
leads learners to be more engaged with the learning task,
through increased motivation, attention, or time, which
should benefit learning in virtually all contexts. The task
engagement account provides an intuitive explanation for
the beneficial effects of explaining, positing mechanisms
that extend to contexts beyond explanation.
Some studies argue that explanation has effects that go
beyond task engagement, showing that its effects surpass

2906

control conditions that promote motivation, attention and
processing time (e.g. Amsterlaw & Wellman, 2006; Chi et
al, 1994; Williams & Lombrozo, in press). However, these
studies cannot rule out the possibility that explaining simply
engages these mechanisms to a greater degree than the
control tasks, highlighting the difficulty of discriminating
between competing accounts solely on the basis of
explanation’s beneficial effects.
Identifying explanation impairment effects is also of clear
practical importance, as educators must know when
prompted or spontaneous explanation will be detrimental
(see also Kuhn & Katz, 2009). Moreover, a deeper
understanding of the process by which explaining helps
learning can inform educational interventions. If explaining
simply boosts students’ engagement with the task of
learning or increases metacognitive awareness, then it can
be expected to produce an ‘all-purpose’ benefit for learning.
But if it helps through more specific mechanisms, such as
constraining learners to find underlying principles, then it
will be more helpful in some contexts than in others. Its
effect may depend on the content being learned, learners’
prior knowledge, and other factors.
As in previous work (Williams & Lombrozo, in press) , to
investigate explanation our study utilizes category learning,
which has been studied extensively and lends itself to
carefully controlled artificial materials, permitting rigorous
tests of competing accounts. Moreover, previous research
supports the idea that explanation can and does play a role
in category learning. When learners possess prior
knowledge that explains why category features co-occur,
they discover patterns underlying category membership and
learn to classify items more quickly (Bott & Heit, 2000;
Kaplan & Murphy, 2000; Murphy & Allopenna, 1994;
Rehder & Ross, 2001; Wattenmaker, Dewey, Murphy, &
Medin, 1986). There is also evidence that explanations
influence the relative importance of features in learning
novel categories (Lombrozo, 2009), and that explaining
category membership can influence which features are used
in categorization (Chin-Parker et al, 2006). Understanding
how explaining influences category learning can thus shed
light on the acquisition and representation of conceptual
knowledge.
Experiment
Our category learning experiment tested the prediction
that explanation can help or hinder learning, depending on
the relationship between the material being explained and
the subsumptive constraints imposed by explanation.
Participants learned about two artificial categories of
vehicles by classifying unlabeled items and then receiving
feedback on their classification. After feedback and while
studying the labeled item, participants in the explain
condition were prompted to provide an explanation (out
loud) for the item’s category membership. In contrast,
participants in the classify condition were free to use any
study strategy and simply prompted to share what they were

thinking out loud.
The category structures supported at least two bases for
categorization, which are illustrated in Table 1 (materials
adapted from Kaplan & Murphy, 2000). First, each of the 5
items in each category had a unique color feature.
Remembering the 10 idiosyncratic color features always
permitted accurate classification of all 10 items. Second,
each item contained a feature that was associated with the
unifying thematic pattern of jungle vehicles (e.g., drives in
jungles, lightly insulated) or arctic vehicles (e.g., drives on
glaciers, heavily insulated). In the reliable pattern
condition, the theme could also be used to perfectly classify
10 out of 10 items based on the presence of an arctic or
jungle vehicle feature. However, in the misleading pattern
condition, the theme led to accurate classification for only 8
out of 10 items, and incorrect classification for the
remaining 2 items. The experiment therefore used a 2 (study
condition: explain vs. classify) x 2 (pattern type: reliable vs.
misleading) design.
Dax
Kez
Theme Feature (1)
Made in Norway
Made in Africa
Has Treads
Has Wheels
Heavily Insulated
Lightly Insulated
Used in Mountain Climbing
Used on Safaris
Drives on Glaciers
Drives in Jungles
Idiosyncratic Color Feature (1)
Blue
Cyan
Silver
Magenta
Purple
Olive
Red
Maroon
Yellow
Lime
Irrelevant Features (3)
Two doors/four doors
Manual transmission/Automatic transmission
Vinyl seats/Cloth seats

Table 1. Features associated with each category. Each
category item contained one theme feature, one
idiosyncratic color feature, and three irrelevant features that
were not diagnostic of category membership.
The subsumptive constraints account predicts that
engaging in explanation should drive participants to
discover and utilize the theme whether it is reliable or
misleading, as the theme is more subsuming than the
idiosyncratic color features. However, use of the theme
should help learning when it is reliable but perpetuate
classification errors when it is misleading, thereby
impairing learning. In contrast, if explanation helps learning
by boosting task engagement through increased motivation,
attention, or processing time, it should produce a benefit
regardless of pattern type.
Method

2907

Participants There were 240 participants (60 in each of
four conditions) from the UC Berkeley community who
participated for monetary reimbursement or course credit.
Materials Each category was represented by five items,
for a total of ten items. Each item was described by a list of
five features (see Table 1): one idiosyncratic color feature
(e.g. blue), one theme-related feature from either the arctic
vehicle theme (e.g. heavily insulated) or the jungle vehicle
theme (e.g. lightly insulated), and three irrelevant features
that (a) occurred equally often in each category and so were
not diagnostic and (b) were unrelated to the arctic/jungle
themes (e.g. two doors). The pairing of theme and
idiosyncratic color features was randomly chosen in each
block of 10 items. The idiosyncratic color features were
perfectly predictive of category membership (10 out of 10
items). The theme-related features were perfectly predictive
(10 out of 10) in the reliable pattern condition, but
predictive for only 8 out of 10 items in the misleading
pattern condition. In each block, a different pair of theme
features was randomly chosen to be misleading.

thinking.)” In both conditions participants spoke out loud to
a voice recorder.
A random ordering of all 10 items constituted a block.
Participants completed the experiment when they reached
the learning criterion of correctly categorizing all 10 items
in a single block, or the maximum of 15 blocks.
Classification test. Each of the 10 idiosyncratic and 10
theme features was individually presented onscreen and
participants categorized it as belonging to a Dax or Kez,
rated confidence in their decision (from 1 to 10), and how
typical the feature was of its chosen category (1 to 7).1
Idiosyncratic and theme features were presented in separate,
randomly ordered blocks.
Ten conflict items were then presented in which an
idiosyncratic feature was pitted against a theme feature.
Features were paired so that using the idiosyncratic color
features to categorize would generate an opposite response
to using the theme features.2
Explicit report. At the end of the experiment participants
were asked what differences might exist between categories
and about their strategy for categorization; responses were
typed onscreen.
Results
Learning measures, discovered differences between
categories, and accuracy in the classification test are shown
in Table 2. Significant differences between the explain and
classify conditions are bolded.
Reliable Pattern
Misleading Pattern
Measures
Explain Classify Explain Classify
Learning
Perc. Reaching Criterion 93%
88%
48%
75%

Figure 1: Structure of a single learning trial: item
presentation and classification, feedback, and study.
Procedure The reliable and misleading conditions were
run sequentially: data were first collected for 120
participants in the misleading pattern condition, then for 120
in the reliable condition. The explain and classify conditions
were randomly interleaved, with participants randomly
assigned to one or the other study condition. The experiment
consisted of learning, test, and explicit report phases.
Learning phase. The structure of a learning trial is shown
in Figure 1. On each learning trial an item description was
presented as a list of five features, and participants had up to
10 seconds to categorize it as a “Dax” or a “Kez.” The
idiosyncratic color feature was always displayed on the first
line in the color it named (e.g. the feature “red” was shown
in red). All other features were presented below it in a
random order, and shown in black. Feedback was provided
after categorization, and the item was shown with the
correct category label for 7 seconds. During this study
period, participants in the explain condition were prompted
(for example) to “Explain why this might be a Dax,” and
those in the classify condition were prompted with: “This
item is a Dax. (Remember to say out loud whatever you are

Mean No. Blocks
6.9
7.9
11.5
10.2
Discovered differences between categories (from explicit reports)
Theme Features
62%
43%
28%
10%
Color Features
37%
57%
45%
70%
Classification test accuracy
Theme Features
0.83
0.74
0.70
0.60
Color Features
0.78
0.83
0.81
0.89
Conflict Items
0.40
0.55
0.63
0.83

Table 2. Measures of learning, discovered differences
between categories, and classification test accuracy, as a
function of study condition and pattern type. Significant
differences between study conditions are bolded.

1

These measures mirrored the results on classification accuracy
and are not discussed further.
2
After the classification test in the reliable condition, eight
transfer theme features that were related to the arctic/jungle themes
but had not been studied in the learning phase were presented for
individual categorization and in transfer conflict items.
Performance on these items was similar to those with studied
theme features and are not discussed further.

2908

Measures of learning. The mean number of blocks to
reach the learning criterion is shown in Table 2, and
frequency histograms in Figure 2, as a function of study
condition and pattern type. A 2 (study condition: explain vs.
classify) x 2 (pattern type: reliable vs. misleading) ANOVA
on the number of blocks to learn revealed a significant
interaction: the effects of explanation differed depending on
whether the pattern was reliable or misleading, F(1, 236) =
6.33, p < 0.05.3

block of 10 items) was lower in the explain condition than
the classify condition, 2 (1) = 5.4, p < 0.05. As predicted
by the subsumptive constraints account, explanation’s
effects interacted with the structure of what was being
learned, and actually impaired learning when a misleading
pattern was present.
Discovered differences between categories. To test
whether explaining exerted its effects through discovery of
the theme, participants’ explicit reports about the
differences between categories and their categorization
strategy were coded for mention of the theme-related and
color features (see Fig. 3).5 Participants in the explain
condition more often reported theme features as a difference
between categories than those in the classify condition,
whether the pattern was reliable, 2 (1) = 4.04, p < 0.05, or
misleading, 2 (1) = 9.79, p < 0.05. Participants in the
classify condition more often reported color features
(reliable pattern: 2 (1) = 4.82, p < 0.05; misleading pattern:
2 (1) = 4.48, p < 0.05). Explaining increased learning of
theme-related category differences and decreased learning
of theme-unrelated (color) features.

Figure 1: Mean number of blocks to reach the learning
criterion of correctly categorizing all 10 items in a block, as
a function of study condition and pattern type. Maximum
number of blocks is 15.

Figure 3: Proportion of participants whose explicit
reports revealed discovery that theme and color features
differed across categories, as a function of study condition
and pattern type.

Figure 2: Frequency histogram of the number of blocks
to reach learning criterion, as a function of study condition
and pattern type. Bin size is three blocks.
The main effect of pattern type was also significant, F(1,
236) = 44.49, p < 0.05, suggesting that the misleading
pattern slowed learning, although this interpretation should
be qualified because participants were not randomly
assigned to these two conditions. When the thematic pattern
was reliable, there was a non-significant trend for the
explain group to learn faster than the classify group, t(118)
= 1.43, p = 0.16.4 When it was misleading, the explain
group took longer to learn, t(118) = 2.11, p < 0.05. In fact,
the number of participants who learned how to classify
(reached the learning criterion of correctly categorizing one
3

To address concerns about non-normality, we sorted the
number of blocks to learning into five bins of three blocks (as in
the histogram in Figure 1) and performed an ordinal regression
with study condition and pattern type as factors. This analysis also
found a significant interaction.
4
To address concerns about non-normality, all t-tests reported in
this paper were checked with non-parametric Mann-Whitney U
tests, which generated the same conclusions.

Classification test results. Accuracy in classifying theme
and color features presented in Figure 4 shows that the
explain and classify groups’ different knowledge of theme
versus color features also manifested itself in categorization
performance. A 2 (study condition: explain vs. classify) x 2
(feature type: theme vs. color) repeated measures ANOVA
on accuracy revealed a significant interaction for both the
reliable, F(1, 118) = 3.96, p < 0.05, and misleading, F(1,
118) = 9.85, p < 0.05, conditions. Participants who
explained learned which category the theme features were
associated with better than those who classified, with the
reverse pattern for color features.
The conflict items pitted an idiosyncratic color feature
against a theme feature in a categorization decision, and the
proportion of items categorized in accordance with the color
features was defined as the conflict score. This measure was
5

Agreement between two independent coders was 84% and
reported results are for the first coder.

2909

    !

larger for the classify condition than the explain condition,
whether the pattern was reliable, t(118) = 2.00, p < 0.05, or
misleading, t(118) = 3.42, p < 0.05.


 



 





 

 

  

 

 

 !

 

 
















  !

  !

Figure 4: Accuracy in classifying theme and color
features, as a function of study condition and pattern type.
Discussion
While most past research has documented explanation’s
positive effects, we found an explanation impairment effect:
when a misleading pattern was present, explaining category
membership impaired learning to categorize. Although
counterintuitive, this impairment confirms a prediction of
the subsumptive constraints account (Williams &
Lombrozo, in press), according to which explaining exerts
constraints that drive learners to interpret what they are
learning in terms of underlying patterns.
The experiment provides evidence for an interaction
between the subsumptive constraints exerted by explanation
and the structure of the category. When compared to merely
thinking aloud during study, explaining category
membership further drove participants to rely on a unifying
thematic pattern in categorization rather than use
idiosyncratic features, even though both conditions engaged
in the demanding task of classification learning with
feedback. This produced (nonsignificant) positive
consequences for learning when the thematic pattern was
reliable, and (significant) negative consequences when it
was misleading. Our explanation impairment effect provides
evidence against a task engagement account of why
explaining helps learning: if explaining merely increases
motivation, attention, or processing time, it should not have
impaired learning when the pattern was misleading.
A critical reader might have the intuition that the results
of this experiment are unsurprising: prompting participants
to explain tells them to find a pattern, which helps or harms
learning depending on its existence. However, no previous
account of explanation and learning has explicitly proposed
that explaining constrains people to find patterns or
predicted an impairment, instead focusing on metacognitive
monitoring, identifying gaps in knowledge, or motivation
and attention. A prompt to explain could have made
participants attend more to their errors, justify individual
categorizations by appeal to the salient and objective color
features, or increased motivation to find a reliable basis for
categorization. The subsumptive constraints account
motivates our specific design and accounts for why people

feel compelled to seek underlying patterns in response to
explanation prompts.
Another criticism could be that this impairment effect is
an artifact of an artificial lab task involving a “misleading”
theme. However, our goal was precisely to characterize the
conditions under which explanation’s subsumptive
constraints are detrimental. The finding that eliciting
explanations impairs learning in any context is novel and
consequential for current theories. Moreover, real-world
cases involving misleading regularities and suspicious
coincidences abound (Griffiths & Tenenbaum, 2007) and
provide a promising direction for examining this effect
outside the lab. It should be noted that deeper processing
was not considered under the umbrella of task engagement.
We do not see deeper processing as a specific competing
account (like motivation) because we interpret the
subsumptive constraints account as a specific proposal about
the nature of the deeper processing explanation evokes.
Evidence for the subsumptive constraints account over the
task engagement account has potential implications for
education. If explaining does not merely produce an ‘allpurpose’ enhancement but exerts particular constraints on
learning, more research is needed to understand the contexts
in which self-explanation interventions are most effective
and when they may be detrimental. First, one important
question is how the explanation impairment effect varies
with the quality of the explanatory pattern, that is, how
misleading it is. In our misleading condition, the themes
were misleading but only partially so: Classifying on the
basis of theme features alone could result in moderately
good accuracy (80%). The size of the learning impairment
may have increased if the themes were even more
misleading, but it is equally plausible that it would have
decreased because subjects might choose to discard use of
an explanatory pattern that is yielding poor performance
(Murphy & Kaplan, 2000). The extent to which explaining
may encourage learners to perseverate on a very low quality
explanatory pattern remains to be determined.
Second, it is also important to assess the benefits of
explanation relative to alternative learning activities, such as
elaboration, direct instruction, or analogical comparison,
and to examine how their complementary strengths and
limitations can be combined. Williams and Lombrozo (in
press) found that explaining drove discovery of underlying
patterns but resulted in worse memory for details than
describing. This is problematic because elaborating
information in memory and receiving direct instruction may
be more valuable at an early stage of learning. The
subsumptive constraints account suggests that explaining
will not necessarily be useful throughout a study episode (as
would be predicted if it promoted task engagement), but will
have its strongest effects when learners have already
acquired factual background knowledge and need to
discover and understand principles that underlie these facts.
Successful demonstrations of the self-explanation effect
may involve precisely such cases.

2910

Other interesting directions for future research include the
role of explanation in generating beliefs about both correct
and misconceived underlying principles, in the effects of
anomalies in belief revision (Chi, 2000), and in the
deployment of prior knowledge (Chi et al, 1994; Williams
& Lombrozo, in press). Such research will also be
practically important for avoiding classroom manifestations
of explanation impairment effects. For example, Kuhn and
Katz (2009) suggested that requests for explanations on one
task led children to later justify their knowledge of causal
relationships by explaining how the relationships could
exist, rather than citing observed evidence.
This is the first experiment to examine category learning
through classification and feedback with (and without)
additional prompts to explain. The learning differences
generated by explaining suggest that category learning may
involve processes beyond those that reduce immediate
classification error. Bott et al. (2007) report that people
learned about a thematic pattern underlying category
membership (the same used in this experiment) in the
absence of classification errors – a surprising violation of
the classic blocking effect – while in the current experiment
explaining drove learning about this pattern despite
classification errors. A deeper understanding of these and
other learning phenomena may be gained by considering the
contribution of both classification error and the construction
of knowledge that satisfies the constraints of explanation,
whether it is prompted or spontaneous. For example,
participants’ spontaneous explanations may shed light on
how prior knowledge is deployed, and when category
learning is driven by explicit rule use versus bottom-up
exemplar-based processing that reduces classification error.
The current research emphasizes the importance of
subsumptive constraints in explanation’s effects on learning,
and demonstrates the value of explanation impairment
effects for identifying the mechanisms by which explaining
enhances learning. We are beginning to explore the
relationship between prior knowledge and explanation
(Williams & Lombrozo, in press (b)) and expect further
investigation, in category learning and other learning
contexts, to reveal a complex interaction between the
constraints imposed by explanation, prior knowledge, and
the structure of what is being explained.
Acknowledgments
We thank the Concepts and Cognition Lab, and in
particular Preeti Talwai, for providing feedback on this
project, assistance with analyzing data, and preparation of
this paper. This work was partially supported by the
McDonnell Foundation Collaborative Initiative on Causal
Learning, and JJW was supported by an NSERC postgraduate scholarship.
References
Amsterlaw, J., & Wellman, H. (2006). Theories of mind in
transition: A microgenetic study of the development of false belief
understanding. Journal of Cognition and Development, 7, 139-172.

Bott, L., Hoffman, A., & Murphy, G. L. (2007). Blocking in
category learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
136, 685-699.
Chi, M. T. H., Bassok, M., Lewis, M., Reimann, P., & Glaser,
R. (1989). Self-explanations: How students study and use
examples in learning to solve problems. Cognitive Science, 13,
145-182.
Chi, M.T.H., de Leeuw, N., Chiu, M.H., LaVancher, C. (1994).
Eliciting self-explanations improves understanding. Cognitive
Science, 18, 439-477.
Chi, M.T.H. (2000). Self-explaining expository texts: The dual
processes of generating inferences and repairing mental models. In
R. Glaser (Ed.), Advances in Instructional Psychology, Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 161-238.
Chin-Parker, S., Hernandez, O., & Matens, M. (2006).
Explanation in category learning. In R. Sun & N. Miyake (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 28th annual conference of the cognitive science
society (pp. 1098–1103). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Heit, E. & Bott, L. (2000). Knowledge selection in category
learning. In D. Medin (Ed.), Psychology of Learning and
Motivation, 39, 163-199. Academic Press.
Kaplan, A. S., & Murphy, G. L. (2000). Category learning with
minimal prior knowledge. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26, 829-846.
Kitcher, P. (1981). Explanatory Unification. Philosophy of
Science, 48, 507-31.
Kuhn, D., & Katz, J. (2009). Are self-explanations always
beneficial? Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 103, 386–
394.
Lombrozo, T. (2009). Explanation and categorization: How
“why?” informs “what?”. Cognition, 110, 248-253.
Murphy, G. L., & Allopenna, P. D. (1994). The locus of
knowledge effects in concept learning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 20, 904-919.
Murphy, G. L., & Kaplan, A. S. (2000). Feature distribution and
background knowledge in category learning. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Experimental Psychology, 53A,
962-982.
Rehder, B. & Ross, B.H. (2001). Abstract coherent concepts.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 27, 1261-1275.
Siegler, R. S. (2002). Microgenetic studies of self-explanations.
In N. Granott & J. Parziale (Eds.), Microdevelopment: Transition
processes in development and learning (pp. 31-58). New York:
Cambridge University.
Wattenmaker, W. D., Dewey, G. I., Murphy, T. D., & Medin, D.
L. (1986). Linear separability and concept learning: Context,
relational properties, and concept naturalness. Cognitive
Psychology, 18, 158-194.
Wellman, H. M. (in press). Reinvigorating explanations for the
study of early cognitive development. Child Development
Perspectives.
Wellman, H. M., & Liu, D. (2007). Causal reasoning as
informed by the early development of explanations. Causal
learning: psychology, philosophy, and computation, 261–279.
Williams, J. J., & Lombrozo, T. (in press). The role of
explanation in discovery and generalization: evidence from
category learning. Cognitive Science.
Williams, J. J., & Lombrozo, T. (in press (b)). Explanation
constrains learning, and prior knowledge constrains explanation. In
S. Ohlsson & R. Catrambone (Eds.), Proceedings of the 32nd
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.

2911

