UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Why do four- year- olds show poor cross-modal transfer between haptic and vision?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/99r4h7jc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Kalagher, Hilary
Jones, Susan

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Why do four- year- olds show poor cross-modal transfer between haptic and vision?
Hilary Kalagher (hkalaghe@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, 1101 E 10th Street
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
Susan S. Jones (jones1@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, 1101 E 10th Street
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

Abstract

Qualitatively different representations

Four year olds have difficulty transferring information from
the haptic to the visual modality. This difficulty may reflect
qualitative differences in haptic and visual object
representations or children’s inability to obtain the same kinds
of perceptual information in the two modalities. Twenty 4year-olds explored novel objects either haptically or visually,
then haptically chose a match from among three test objects
that each matched the exemplar on one perceptual dimension.
Children chose shape-based matches after visually exploring
category exemplars.
However, after haptic exemplar
exploration, children were equally likely to pick a shape- or
texture-based match. Analysis of children’s hand movements
during haptic exploration showed that certain movements
reliably predicted shape-based matches.
This finding
suggests that children have difficulties in cross-modal transfer
because their haptic exploration is not driven by a top-down
perceptual focus as it is in adults.
Keywords: Haptic
Development

Perception;

Cross-modal

Transfer;

Introduction
The use of perceptual information obtained in one modality
- for example, haptics – for use in a task in another modality
- for example, a visual task - involves cross-modal
information transfer. Cross-modal transfer is important
because it allows for inter-sensory predictions. For example,
being able to anticipate what an object will look like given
that you have only touched it allows for efficient and quick
interactions with the world. Adults appear to have no
difficulty transferring novel information gathered in one
perceptual modality for use in a second modality (e.g.,
Abravanel, 1971, 1973; Easton, Srinivas, & Greene, 1997;
Reales & Ballesteros, 1999). However, there are reports that
preschool-aged children have difficulty in cross-modal
transfer. In particular, children perform poorly in object
recognition tasks requiring the transfer of information from
haptics to vision. Two explanations for these findings have
been proposed. The first proposal is that there are qualitative
differences between the representations that children form
from visual and haptic experience, so that translation
between the two modalities is hampered. The second
proposal is simply that young children have poor haptic
perception. The present study explores these two
possibilities.

Bushnell and Baxt (1999) used real-world familiar and
novel objects to test 5-year-olds in object recognition
requiring either intra- or cross-modal use of haptic or visual
information. The children did well in object recognition in
intra-modal tasks with both familiar and novel objects, and
in cross- modal tasks with familiar objects. Children’s
performance was markedly poorer, however, with novel
objects. Bushnell and Baxt (1999) suggested that “handmages” – representations formed entirely from haptic
exploration – differ importantly from visual images (“eyemages”). They proposed that attention during haptic
exploration might be focused on material-based properties
(texture, mass, rigidity) whereas in vision attention is
focused more on shape and color. These differences in
perceptual focus would then presumably lead to
qualitatively different representations and therefore poorer
performance in cross-modal tasks as compared to intramodal tasks.
Kalagher and Jones (2010) used a novel name extension
tasks to test Bushnell and Baxt’s (1999) hypothesis that
representations formed through experiences in different
modalities are qualitatively different. In the standard version
of this task (c.f., Landau, Smith, & Jones, 1988), children
are visually presented with a novel object (the exemplar)
and told its novel name. Children are then visually presented
with three test objects; each matches the exemplar on one
perceptual dimension – color, texture, or shape - and differs
from the other two test objects on the other perceptual
dimensions. Children are asked to indicate the object that
has the same novel name as the exemplar. Past experiments
have shown that children by 2 years of age typically choose
shape-based matches predominately over texture- or colorbased matches (e.g., Smith, Jones, Landau, GershkoffStowe, & Samuelson, 2002). This “shape-bias” is thought to
reflect an acquired attentional bias. Kalagher and Jones
(2010) tested children 2 ½ to 5 years of age and adults in a
modified version of this task. Children in their experiment
explored exemplar objects either haptically or visually. Test
objects were then presented visually. All ages in that
experiment chose a preponderance of same-shape matches
after visual exemplar exploration. However, only 5-year-

1655

olds and adults made shape-based matches after haptic
exploration. Children younger than 5- years- old chose test
objects at random. Importantly, when older children and
adults did choose matches systematically after haptic
exploration, they did not make texture matches as Bushnell
and Baxt (1999) might predict. Instead, they chose shapebased object matches just as they did after visual
exploration. This finding suggests that representations in the
two perceptual modalities are not qualitatively different.

Haptic perception
The mature haptic perceptual abilities of adults have been
studied extensively. Lederman and Klatzky (1987) studied
the hand and finger movements of adults who were
attempting to extract information about specific object
properties using haptics alone. The researches identified a
number of stereotyped manual movements that they called
“exploratory procedures” (EPs). EPs are thought to be
driven primarily by top-down processes such as task goals
but also, to a lesser extent, by bottom-up sensory
information. What then is known about young children’s
haptic perception? A number of studies have reported poor
haptic perception in young children (e.g., Abravanel, 1972;
Rose, Blank, & Bridger, 1972). For example, Milner and
Bryan (1970) asked 5 to 7 year olds to make same/different
judgments about object shape in both intra- and crossmodal conditions. The magnitude of the improvements
made between 5 and 7 years of age were comparable in both
the intra- and cross-modal conditions. The authors therefore
concluded that the developmental change was due to gains
in children’s haptic abilities. However, other researchers
have found that 5-year-old children’s haptic perception is
actually quite advanced, at least when they are asked to
explore familiar objects (e.g., Bigelow, 1981). Kalagher and
Jones (2010) found mature haptic exploratory behaviors in
5- year- olds but fewer such behaviors in younger children.
Their analysis of children’s hand movements during haptic
exploration showed that certain movements reliably
predicted subsequent shape- or texture-based matches:
however, children younger than 5 produced these hand
movements at very low frequencies.
In summary, young children’s difficulties with haptic-tovision information transfer appeared in a previous study to
stem from their failure to execute mature hand movements
rather than from qualitative differences of object
representations in the two modalities. In the present study,
we asked whether additional tests of children’s haptic
exploratory abilities would point to the same conclusion.
More specifically, children in the present study participated
in two new conditions: (1) a visual exemplar exploration –
to – haptic recognition condition; and (2) a haptic exemplar
exploration – to – haptic recognition condition. The visual
exemplar exploration – to – haptic recognition condition,
like the haptic exemplar exploration - to – visual recognition
condition in the previous research, required children to
transfer information across perceptual modalities. However,

because children’s attention during visual exploration is
consistently biased towards object shape (e.g., Smith et al.,
2002), we speculated that children might make more
systematic choices using information from vision to make
haptic object matches than they had made using information
from haptic to make visual matches. In the former case, they
would know what they were looking for: that is, their visual
explorations would lead them to focus on object shape. A
finding that children did not make systematic shape-based
matches in this condition would be further evidence against
the idea that representations in the two perceptual modalities
are qualitatively different and do not translate.
The haptic exemplar exploration – to – haptic recognition
condition eliminated the need to transfer perceptual
information across modalities. Thus, this condition tested
children’s haptic perception only. A finding that children
made systematic matches in this condition would indicate
that their haptic perceptual abilities were good. Systematic
texture matches would support Bushnell and Baxt’s (1999)
idea of “hand-mages”. A failure to match objects
systematically would suggest that neither shape nor texture
had been perceived well enough during object exploration
for subsequent use in object recognition in the haptic mode.

Methods
Twenty four- year- old children (range = 46.8 to 56.1
months; Mean = 51.65; 10 males) participated in the study.
Participants reflected the local community in social class,
ethnicity, and racial identity: almost all participants were
from white, middle class families.
The stimuli consisted of 16 object sets, each with one
exemplar, and three test objects. Exemplars and test objects
were 3-dimensional, novel objects constructed from a
variety of materials including wood, clay, and cloth. Sizes
ranged from 7 to 17 cm. Colors, textures, shapes and
masses were widely varied. Each of the test objects shared
a different attribute –its color, texture, or shape – with the
exemplar, and differed from the exemplar and the other two
test objects on the other two dimensions (See Figure 1 for a
sample stimulus set).

Figure 1: Sample stimulus set: 1 exemplar object, and 3 test
objects, each matching the exemplar on 1 dimension –
shape, texture, color – and differing from the exemplar and
each other on the other 2 dimensions.
All participants completed two blocks of trials, each
consisting of three warm-up trials and eight test trials. In
one block of trials, children were limited to visual

1656

Results
Object Recognition To determine whether visual or haptic
exemplar exploration led predominantly to shape or texture
matches, the proportions of shape and texture matches in
each condition were calculated.
This resulted in 4

categories of scores: (1) visual exemplar exploration
resulting in shape match (V->SH), (2) visual exemplar
exploration resulting in texture match (V->TX), (3) haptic
exemplar exploration resulting in shape match (H->SH), and
(4) haptic exemplar exploration resulting in texture match
(H->TX). The mean proportions of children’s scores in each
category can be found in Table 1.
Table 1. Means and Standard deviations for proportions of
shape- and texture- based matching in the Visual Exemplar
Exploration and the Haptic Exemplar Exploration
conditions.
Mean
SD
V-SH
V-TX
H-SH
H-TX

0.54
0.32
0.42
0.39

0.27
0.22
0.14
0.13

The proportions were first entered into a 2 Order (Visual
Exemplar Exploration first or second) x 2 Gender
(male/female) x 2 (Exemplar Exploratory Modality:
Haptic/Visual) x 2 (Match Type: Shape/Texture) mixed
analysis of variance. There were no between subjects main
effects for either Gender (F (1,16) = 2.67, p = ns) or Order (F
(1,16) = .17, p = ns). There was a significant main effect of
Match Type (F (1,16) = 4.5, p <.05) with more shape-based
matches exceeding texture-based matches. We did not find a
main effect of Exemplar Exploratory Modality (F (1,16) = .79,
p = ns). Figure 2 graphs the marginally significant
Exploratory Modality by Match Type interaction and
illustrates the fact that shape choices dominated choices
after visual exploration (F(1,16) = 3.82, p = .06).

0.6
Mean Proportions

exploration of the exemplars (“Visual Exemplar
Exploration” condition). In the other block of trials,
children were limited to haptic exploration of the exemplars
(“Haptic Exemplar Exploration” condition). The order of
conditions was counterbalanced across participants. The 16
stimulus sets were divided into two groups and the stimulus
groups were counterbalanced within conditions. Thus, half
of the participants saw Stimulus Group 1 in the Visual
Exemplar Exploration condition, and the other half of the
participants saw Stimulus Group 2 in that condition.
Each participant was seated at a table next to his or her
parent and across from the Experimenter who explained that
they were going to play a “matching game”. The procedure
began with three warm-up trials to ensure that participants
understood the task. Warm-up trials differed between the
two conditions. In each warm-up trial in the Visual
Exemplar Exploration condition, participants were simply
handed a familiar object and told its name (e.g., “Look, here
is a spoon). After three seconds, the Experimenter retrieved
the object. In each warm-up trial in the Haptic Exemplar
Exploration condition, participants placed their hands and
forearms inside a box; a piece of cloth was pulled over their
arms to prevent participants from seeing inside the box. The
Experimenter put a familiar object into the hands of the
participant within the box, identified it by name, and asked
the participant whether he or she could feel it (e.g., “This is
a spoon. Can you feel the spoon?”). For the test trials in
both conditions, participants had their hands and forearms
inside the box and a piece of cloth draped over their arms to
prevent them from seeing inside the box. On each trial, three
test objects were placed inside the box (e.g., a cup, a comb,
and a spoon) and the child was asked to pull out the test
object with the same name as the exemplar (e.g., “Can you
find me the spoon?).
Test trials followed warm-up trials immediately and were
structured in the same way: participants were shown or
handed the exemplar from one object set at a time and told
its novel name (e.g., “This is a teeka”) then asked to find a
haptic match for the exemplar (e.g., “Can you find me
another teeka?”) from among the three test items inside the
box. Children were given a sticker after each trial
regardless of which choice they made. The experiment was
digitally recorded, and records were later scored for the test
objects – shape match, texture match, or color match –
chosen on each trial.
The recordings were also coded for the children’s hand
movements while exploring test objects in the Visual
Exemplar Exploration condition, and category exemplars
and test objects in the Haptic Exemplar Exploration
condition.

0.5
Haptic

0.4
0.3

Vision

0.2
0.1
0
Shape

Texture

MatchType
Figure 2. Match Type by Exploration Modality interaction
The proportions of shape and texture choices shown in
Table 1 were also compared to chance (.33) using onesample t-tests. Children chose same-shape matches at above
chance levels in both conditions (H->SH: t (19) = 2.59, p<
.05; V->SH: t (19) = 3.46, p< .05). Their texture-based
matches were marginally above chance following haptic
exemplar exploration of the exemplar (t (19) = 2.05, p =

1657

.054), but not following visual exploration (t (19) = -.34, p =
ns).
In sum: children showed the previously well-documented
bias to preferentially attend to shape in object matching
(e.g., Smith et al., 2002) in the Visual Exemplar Exploration
condition. However, children in the Haptic Exemplar
Exploration condition were equally likely to pick a shape or
texture match. Thus, after visual exemplar exploration,
children systematically chose shape-based matches
suggesting that the representations they formed focused
predominately on shape. After haptic exemplar exploration
we do not see a similar systematic preference and therefore
cannot claim that children’s representations formed through
haptic experiences are or are not qualitatively different from
their representations formed through visual experiences.
We next examined children’s hand movements during the
test phase in the Visual Exemplar Exploration condition and
during both the exemplar exploration and the test phase
portions of the Haptic Exemplar Exploration condition.

0.6
0.5
0.4

V.E.E.

0.3

H.E.E.
H.E.T.O.

0.2
0.1

Hand Press

Hand Grasp

Static Fingers

Finger Palpating

0.0
Sequential Finger

Hand movements Initially, we attempted to use the
taxonomy of exploratory hand movements developed by
Lederman and Klatzky (1987) to code children’s hand
movements while exploring objects in both conditions.
However, children in the present study did not produce
these movements. Therefore, 5 categories of manual
exploratory behavior identified by Kalagher & Jones (2010)
in the same age group were used instead. The categories
are: (1) “sequential finger movements” (rotating the object
around only with fingertips), (2) “fingers palpating” (fingers
palpating/ squeezing the object), (3) “static fingers” (fingers
placed on object but not moving), (4) “hand grasping”
(grasping the object with one hand), and (5) “hand press”
(pressing the object between both hands with fingers
outstretched).
We also coded instances of children’s verbalization
specifically recording shape-related verbalizations (e.g.,
“This feels like the letter ‘Z’”) and texture-related
verbalizations (e.g., “This feels fuzzy”). However, such
verbalizations were rare, occurring in fewer than 15% of
trials, and were therefore not analyzed.
Hand movements were clearly visible in 108 exemplar
exploration trials and 101 test trials in the Haptic Exemplar
Exploration condition (H.E.E. and H.E.T.O., respectively)
and in 97 test trials in the Visual Exemplar Exploration
condition (V.E.E.). Figure 3 shows the frequencies of the 5
kinds of hand movements produced by children in each of
these kinds of trials.

Frequencies of Behaviors

Figure 3. Frequencies of exploratory hand movement
behaviors.
We then asked whether any of these five behaviors
predicted whether children would make a shape-based,
texture-based, or color-based (i.e., random) object match.
We used multinomial logistic regression to address this
question. Multinomial logistic regression is a generalization
of the binomial regression and is useful when the dependent
variable has more than two discrete choices. In a
multinomial logistic regression model, the estimates for the
parameter can be identified compared to a baseline category.
For our analyses, we used a dependent variable SCORE (1=
shape match, 2 = texture match, and 3 = color match), and
independent predictor variables of hand movement patterns.
A SCORE value of 3 was specified as the baseline category.
The test then estimated the effects of the independent
variables on choosing texture or shape matches over making
a color-based match.
When the multinomial logistic regression test was carried
out on the data the Likelihood Ratio (LR) chi-square test
that at least one of the predictors’ regression coefficients
was not equal to zero yielded significant results, χ2 (2,14) =
118.5, p< .0001. This outcome indicated that particular
hand movement behaviors affected subsequent matches (i.e.,
the participant’s score). From the results of the multinomial
logistic regression analysis, 2 main effects were
significantly predictive of SCORE. The significant main
effects were: sequential finger movements (χ2 (2,14) = 48.22,
p< .0001), and hand press (χ2 (2,14) = 24.4, p< .0001).
Further chi- square analyses showed that children’s use of
sequential finger movements was predictive of later shape

1658

matches, χ2 (2,14) = 73.34, p< .0001, while the absence of the
hand movement pattern hand press was also predictive of
later shape matches, χ2 (2,14) = 30.36, p< .0001.
The fact that two specific hand movements (i.e.,
sequential finger movements, and hand press) during haptic
exploration predicted children’s subsequent choice of a
same-shape match suggests that children were able to obtain
shape information and use that information intra and intermodally.
Item Analysis Individual items were classified into three
categories by the extent to which each was matched
predominately by shape, texture, or color. These categories
and their criteria are as follows: (1) “dominant match”
criterion: one feature (shape or texture) is matched more
than twice as often as the second more frequently used
feature; (2) “selective match” criterion: item is selectively
matched but differently by different children (both shape
and texture matches separately are chosen at least twice as
often as color); (3) “random matches” – remainder. Figure
4 displays the results of applying these criteria to the objects
in both conditions.

Frequencies of Matching Types
10
8
6
4
2
0

Visual Exemplar
Exploration
Haptic Exemplar
Exploration
Dominant Selective Random
Matches Matches Matches

Figure 4. Frequencies of item analysis match types for the
Visual Exemplar Exploration condition (white bar) and the
Haptic Exemplar Exploration condition (black bar).
When the 16 category exemplars were explored visually,
eight objects were subsequently matched consistently and
by different children on one dominant perceptual dimension
(shape-6 and texture-2). When those same objects were
explored haptically, only 5 were matched on one dominant
dimension (shape-3 and texture-2). A chi square analysis
found no difference between conditions in the kinds of
dominant matches (shape or texture) that children made (χ2
(1) = .33, p= ns).

Discussion
Our primary interest was in whether restricting exemplar
exploration to either vision or haptics would have
consequences for the kinds of test object that children chose
in the haptic modality to match the exemplar objects. When
children explored category exemplars visually, they were
more likely to pick a same-shape match than if they had

explored the exemplar haptically. This finding is consistent
both with Bushnell and Baxt’s (1999) suggestion that “eyemages” represent different perceptual information than
“hand-mages”, and with the abundant evidence that young
children’s attentional focus on shape in visual object
perception leads to a predominance of shape-based object
matches (e.g., Smith, et al., 2002).
When category exemplars were explored haptically,
children were equally likely to pick a shape- match or a
texture- match. This finding is not consistent with Bushnell
and Baxt’s (1999) idea that “hand-mages” formed from
haptic input predominantly represent object texture, mass,
and rigidity. Instead, children in this study appeared to be
matching each item on whatever perceptual information
gained from exploration of each exemplar object was most
salient to them. They do not appear to be using a top-down
perceptual focus that would allow them to match objects
systematically by either shape or texture.
Overall, we did not find compelling evidence of
qualitative differences in the object representations from
visual and haptic inputs. Instead, children’s use of
representations formed through haptic experience seemed to
be affected by the most salient properties of the exemplar
object (bottom- up), rather than by a particular perceptual
focus such as the “shape bias” seen in vision (top-down).
The item analysis provides further support for this last
point. When comparing children’s consistency in making
shape or texture matches in the Visual Exemplar
Exploration condition to the children’s consistency in
making shape or texture matches in the Haptic Exemplar
Exploration condition, we did not find a reliable difference
in the number or kinds of dominant matches made. This
result suggests that representations from input in the two
modalities are not qualitatively different.
A secondary goal of this experiment was to further
examine the status of young children’s haptic abilities.
Examination of haptic exploratory behavior indicated that
when children executed sequential finger movements it was
likely that they would make a subsequent shape-based
match. This finding replicated the results Kalagher and
Jones (2010). However, we found no parallel relation
between particular hand movements during haptic
exploration and children’s later choices of texture matches.
Again this finding suggests that children’s haptic
exploratory behavior is not guided by a particular perceptual
focus or goal.
Interestingly, the present results show that 4- year -olds
can haptically obtain shape information when they have a
clear idea of what they are looking for as reflected in the
predominance of shape matches in the Visual Exemplar
Exploration condition. This predominance suggests that
when children visually explored exemplar objects, they
formed representations that contained and perhaps
emphasized shape information.
Guided by these
representations, children’s haptic abilities were good enough
to obtain the shape information needed for a same-shape
match. This finding is consistent with previous reports that

1659

found that young children have good haptic perception of
familiar objects (Bigelow, 1981; Bushnell & Baxt, 1999;
Morrongiello, Humphrey, Timney, Choi, & Rocca, 1994).
In summary, 4 year olds’ representations of novel
categories experienced haptically do not appear to be
focused on either texture or shape. However, the object
representations constructed from haptic perceptual input
appear to be good enough to support object matches on
whichever perceptual dimension is most salient. Thus, the
present results indicate that children younger than 5 years of
age have functional haptic abilities.
Although haptic perceptual exploration did not appear to
be bias towards one kind of perceptual information over
another, visual experience of novel categories appeared in
this study, as in many previous studies, to lead to the
formation of representations focused of shape. A new
finding in the present study is evidence that representations
built from visual input can transfer, complete with their
focus on shape, into the haptic mode. Specifically, the
present findings of a predominance of same-shape object
matches in the haptic modality given only visual experience
of the exemplar object suggests that representations of that
visual experience guided the haptic identification of a
matching objet. Thus, it appears that the shape bias in visual
object matching remained intact during the transfer of
perceptual information about exemplar objects from the
visual into the haptic realm.

Morrongiello, B. A., Humphrey, G. K., Timney, B., Choi, J., &
Rocca, P. T. (1994). Tactual Object Exploration and
Recognition in Blind and Sighted Children. Perception,
23(7), 833-848.
Reales, J. M., & Ballesteros, S. (1999). Implicit and explicit
memory for visual and haptic objects: Cross-modal
priming depends on structural descriptions. Journal of
Experimental Psychology-Learning Memory and
Cognition, 25(3), 644-663.
Rose, S. A., Blank, M. S., & Bridger, W. H. (1972). Intermodal
and Intramodal Retention of Visual and Tactual
Information in Young Children. Developmental
Psychology, 6(3), 482-486.
Smith, L. B., Jones, S. S., Landau, B., Gershkoff-Stowe, L., &
Samuelson, L. (2002). Object Name Learning Provides
On-The-Job Training for Attention. Psychological
Science, 13(1), 13-19.

References
Abravanel, E. (1971). Active Detection of Solid-Shape Information
by Touch and Vision. Perception & Psychophysics,
10(5), 358-360.
Abravanel, E. (1972). Short-Term Memory for Shape Information
Processed Intramodally and Intermodally at 3 Ages.
Perceptual and Motor Skills, 35(2), 419-425.
Abravanel, E. (1973). Division of Labor between Hand and Eye
When Perceiving Shape. Neuropsychologia, 11(7), 207211.
Bigelow, A. E. (1981). Children's Tactile Identification of
Miniaturized
Common
Objects.
Developmental
Psychology, 17(1), 111-114.
Bushnell, E. W., & Baxt, C. (1999). Children's haptic and crossmodal recognition with familiar and unfamiliar objects.
Journal of Experimental Psychology-Human Perception
and Performance, 25(6), 1867-1881.
Easton, R. D., Srinivas, K., & Greene, A. J. (1997). Do vision and
haptics share common representations? Implicit and
explicit memory within and between modalities. Journal
of Experimental Psychology-Learning Memory and
Cognition, 23(1), 153-163.
Landau, B., Smith, L. B., & Jones, S. S. (1988). The Importance of
Shape in Early Lexical Learning. Cognitive
Development, 3, 299-321.
Lederman, S., & Klatzky, R. (1987). Hand movements: A Window
into Haptic Object Recognition. Cognitive Psychology,
19, 342-368.
Milner, A. D., & Bryant, P. E. (1970). Cross-Modal Matching by
Young Children. Journal of Comparative and
Physiological Psychology, 71(3), 453-458.

1660

