UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Wild Systems Theory: Overcoming the Computational-Ecological Divide

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0bh018tn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Author
Jordan, Jerome Scott

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Wild Systems Theory:
Overcoming the Computational-Ecological Divide via Self-Sustaining Systems
J. Scott Jordan (jsjorda@ilstu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Illinois State University, Campus Box 4620
Normal, IL 61790-4620
Abstract

gravity and plants, respectively. Do they really constitute
meaning? Of course, I have to say yes, but I would also add
that this is not the type of meaning that ultimately evolved
into mind. To be sure, the designers of submarines, cars and
farm tools constructed such bodies so that their internal
structure reflected the external constraints within which they
have to function. The difference between these bodies
however, and biological bodies is the means by which they
sustain themselves. Biological bodies do so by continuously
taking in, transforming, and dissipating energy. Nonbiological bodies do not. It is my position that it is this wild,
interactive-internalization of local context (i.e., energy
transformation) that afforded, and continues to afford
biological systems the means by which their embodied
meaning was and is capable of evolving into mind. This is
because the work (i.e., energy transformation) that
constitutes biological bodies is self-sustaining. That is, it
produces products that feed back into and sustain the work.
Kaufmann (1995) recognized this principle at the chemical
level and refereed to it as autocatalysis. Specifically, an
autocatalytic (i.e., self-sustaining) chemical system is one in
which the work (energy transformations) taking place
among molecules, produces its own catalyst. By producing
its own catalyst, the work sustains itself, as well as the
system as a whole. Kauffman conceptualizes such work as a
self-sustaining metabolism and argues that the emergence of
such systems constituted the emergence of living systems.
According to Wild Systems theory, such self-sustaining
“work” constituted a type of meaning—what Jordan and
Ghin (2006) refer to as content—that proved capable of
evolving into mind. It constituted meaning because the
work, as well as the global whole it sustained, was naturally
and necessarily “about” the external constraints the system
had to embody in order to sustain itself. It constituted
content because it gave rise to (i.e., was for) the global
whole (i.e., the body) it sustained, while the body (i.e., the
sustained global whole) synergistically provided a sustained
context in which the internal work could be for something
(cf., Bickhard, 2001; Jordan & Ghin, 2006). And it proved
capable of affording the evolution of mind because it
constituted a potential fuel source (i.e. encapsulated energy).
That is, the energy entailed in such a system could be
captured by another system. But to be capable of doing so,
the latter had to internalize (i.e., embody) all the constraints
that needed to be addressed in order to capture the energy
encapsulated in the former. Said another way, once plant
energy was widely available, it provided a context in which
a system could emerge that sustained itself on plant energy.
From this perspective, herbivores can be seen as

For years, there has been a tension between computationalist
cognitive scientists who utilize the notion of representation
and efficient-cause in their accounts of mind, and dynamicalsystems oriented ecological psychologists who eschew
representationalism and efficient-cause in favor of multiscale, contingent interactions and embodiment. The present
paper presents a recently-developed theory of embodiment,
Wild Systems Theory (WST), that was developed to
overcome this riff. WST conceptualizes organisms as multiscale self-sustaining embodiments of the phylogenetic,
cultural, social, and developmental contexts in which they
emerged and in which they sustain themselves. Such selfsustaining embodiments of context are naturally and
necessarily about the multi-scale contexts they embody. As a
result, meaning (i.e., content) is constitutive of what they are.
This approach to content overcomes the computationalist
need for representation while simultaneously satisfying the
ecological penchant for multi-scale contingent interactions.
Keywords: representation; phenomenology; embodiment;
philosophy.

Wild Systems Theory
For years, there has been a tension between computationalist
cognitive scientists who utilize the notion of representation
and efficient-cause in their accounts of mind, and
dynamical-systems oriented ecological psychologists who
eschew representationalism and efficient-cause in favor of
multi-scale, contingent interactions and embodiment. Wild
Systems Theory (WST) is a new theory of embodiment that
was developed to overcome this riff. My central thesis is
that organisms (i.e., bodies) are meaning (and ultimately
mind), precisely because they constitute embodiments of the
external constraints (i.e., contexts) they have had to
phylogenetically, as well as ontogenetically internalize in
order to sustain themselves (Jordan, 1998). Within this
framework, fins constitute an embodiment of the
hydrodynamic properties of water, bones, an embodiment of
the constraints that need to be overcome in order to propel a
body through a gravity field, and teeth, an embodiment of
the make-up of plants and what it takes to release the
chemical energy they contain. In every case, these
embodiments are naturally and necessarily “about” the
environmental constraints they evolved to address. It is this
necessary “aboutness” that I want to define as meaning and,
ultimately mind.
But does this notion of internalized constraints really
naturalize meaning and, ultimately mind? One could argue
that the body of a submarine, the body of a car and the body
of certain farm tools also constitute embodiments of water,

15

embodiments of the constraints that need to be internalized
in order for a system to sustain itself on the energy
encapsulated in plants, and carnivores, the constraints to be
addressed to sustain a system on the energy encapsulated in
herbivores. What we have here then, is a continuing
recursion on a simple theme; specifically, the fuel source
dictates the consumer. From this perspective, the world of
nature is conceptualized as a self-organizing energy
transformation hierarchy (Odum,1988; Vandervert, 1995) in
which any newly emerging systems constitute embodiments
of the constraints they have to address to sustain themselves
within this transformation hierarchy.
According to WST, within the context of such a selfsustaining hierarchy, mind emerges when systems emerge
that are capable of embodying (i.e., internalizing) virtual
content. By virtual, I simply mean content that is “about”
events that are non-existent in the present context. Take, for
example, a lion chasing a gazelle. Lotka (1945) recognized
that in order to capture the energy entailed in the gazelle, the
lion must propel itself as a whole on an anticipatory pursuit
curve. What makes the pursuit curve anticipatory is the fact
the lion runs toward a location the gazelle does not yet
occupy. In short, it propels itself toward the gazelle’s future.
The reason it can do so is because it has embodied (i.e.,
internalized) the constraint of having to capture a moving
energy source. Specifically, certain structures in the lion’s
cerebellum have access to both the movement commands
leaving motor cortex, and the immediate sensory
consequences of the resultant movements. These cerebellar
structures project back up to motor cortex and influence its
activity. This is important, for it affords the lion the ability
to embody (i.e., internalize), in the weights of its cerebralcerebellar circuitry, patterns between motor commands and
their resultant sensory effects. Thus, as the lion garners
experience controlling its body in relation to moving prey,
successful command-feedback patterns become embodied in
the cerebral-cerebellar circuits. And given these cerebralcerebellar loops influence motor cortex and function at a
time scale of 10-20 milliseconds, versus the 120 millisecond
time-scale between motor commands and sensory feedback,
the system can basically control is propulsion on virtual
feedback (Clark, 1997; Grush, 2004) and, as a result, propel
itself toward internalized (i.e., embodied) virtual prey
locations (i.e., where the prey will be in the next 200 or so
milliseconds).
There are five important points to be made about such
virtual content. First, it is not virtual in the sense it does not
exist. To the contrary, it does exist. It is virtual in the sense
it is about future body-prey states. Second, it is possible for
the lion to embed (i.e., embody) such content within its
brain because neural networks function according to the
principle of self-sustaining work. Hebb (1949) recognized
this aspect of neural work and refereed to it as the cellassembly; the notion that neurons sustain themselves by
becoming part of a neural network. Edelman (1989) also
noted this principle in the developing brain, and referred to
it as Neuronal Darwinism. In short, the work of being a

neuron (i.e., producing action potentials and forming
synapses with other neurons) sustains the neuron. Thus,
patterns of neural activity sustain themselves, and factors
that cause neural patterns to repeat (i.e., command-feedback
patterns in cerebral-cerebellar loops and their relationship to
prey patterns) become embedded (i.e., embodied) within
these self-sustaining neural patterns.
Third, all of this embodied work is naturally and
necessarily about the external (as well as internal) contexts
(patterns) that have to addressed in order for the work to
sustain itself; from the single neuron, to the neural circuit, to
the neuro-muscular system, to the organism as a whole.
Thus, there is no epistemic divide between internal and
external states (including virtual states)—organisms are
reciprocally nested eco-systems of self-sustaining work.
They are a representation, at every level, of the
phylogenetic, as well as ontogenetic constraints their species
has had to overcome in order to sustain itself.
This leads to the fourth point. Virtual content emerged in
self-sustaining systems precisely because of their need to
capture energy that was on the move. The virtual content
therefore, is necessarily about the other. That is, it is not just
about the command-feedback patterns in the lion’s brain,
but rather, the relationship between command-feedback
patterns and their relationship to prey patterns. The point
I’m after here is that the virtual content is inherently otherrelative. If we assume that the ability to chase gazelles
phylogenetically emerged prior to the ability to have selfconsciousness about chasing gazelles, it seems to be the
case that others were in the brain before the self was. In
short, the brain has never been alone. This claim is
supported by the discovery of areas in the brain (i.e., mirror
neurons) that are active both when one plans a goal related
action, as well as when one observes another execute such
an action (Rizzolatti, Fadiga Fogassi, & Gallese, 2002). This
means that as others produce goal-directed actions, they
simultaneously put my brain in a planning state for the same
goal-related action. The discovery of such mechanisms
indicates that resonance (i.e., doing what others are doing)
constitutes the default value in human interaction.
Kinsbourne (2002) agrees with this position and argues that
infant imitation is actually uninhibited perception “on the
fly”. Only as the cortex develops inhibitory circuits, he
argues, are we able to “not” resonate to the actions of others.
He cites echopraxia as further evidence of this claim.
Rizzolatti et al. agree with this notion of resonance, and
distinguish between low- and high-level resonance. While
the former refers to the ability of an organism’s body
movements to entrain similar movements in conspecifics
(e.g., a school of fish moving together, or a flock of birds
flying together), the latter refers to resonance at the level of
goal related actions (e.g., a chimp watching another eat a
peanut, or a person watching another dance). Collectively,
these findings indicate that the other was embodied in the
structure of the brain very early on, and has been there ever
since.

16

And finally, the fifth point about virtual content is that it
sets the stage for the emergence of phenomenal selfexperience (Ghin, 2005; Metzinger, 2003). For since neural
networks emerge and function according to the principle of
self-sustaining work, the virtual content embedded in a brain
is always available for “capture” by newly-emerging neural
networks (Grush, 2004). The content of these new circuits
will necessarily constitute an abstraction from the content
embedded and sustained in the network it is tapping into.
As systems emerged that were capable of externalizing
and sharing virtual content (i.e., communicate), the ability to
“capture” such content required the system be able to
distinguish its own, internally-generated virtual content
from that entering the system from the outside. These are
the constraints that I believe forced the emergence of “self”
and “other” (Jordan, 2003c; Jordan & Knoblich, 2003;
Knoblich & Jordan, 2003). In short, the self emerges as
foreground amidst a background of virtual others, and it
does so in order to sustain itself with those others in virtual
contexts (i.e., within a world of ideas). The phenomenal self
then garners its content (i.e., phenomenal properties) as do
all self-sustaining systems; from the fact it is naturally and
necessarily “about” the context (i.e., the externalized virtual
content of others) it must embody in order to sustain itself.
The idea that the other has always been there, embodied
within us, seems to render communication more an act of
self-sustaining resonance among embodied others than an
act of information exchange between lone cognizers. It does
so because self-sustaining systems do not need to “perceive”
their environment in order to be “about” it. Rather, they are
naturally and necessarily about the contexts they have
embodied, including the context of others. Environments
therefore, including the world of others, modulate (versus
‘cause’) what self-sustaining systems are “about”.
Communication therefore, at least among self-sustaining
embodiments, is an act of reciprocal modulation (i.e.,
resonance). And in order for such resonance to sustain itself,
participants must generate work (e.g., eye-contact, gestures
and head nods) to sustain the joint modulation. In short,
communication itself is a self-sustaining process. Instead of
constituting work among chemical systems embedded in a
pre-biotic soup however, it constitutes work among
embodied others embedded in a sea of virtual meaning.

distinguishes brains for other aspects of an organism. What
distinguishes brains however, is the time-scale at which
embodiment takes place. The emergence of a particular
memory emerges and sustains itself at a much faster set of
time scales than the time-scales by which individual
neurons, neural nets, and entire brains emerge and sustain
themselves. Regardless of this difference however,
representation is there at every time-scale of self-sustaining
work.
In addition to addressing representation in an ecologicallyfriendly way, WST also addresses computationalism’s
reliance on efficient cause as an explanation of content
manipulation. Computationalism is led to efficient-cause by
its assumption there exist specific levels in a cognitive
architecture that are sufficiently isolated from other levels to
enable them to ‘bear’ content. This assertion is proving
increasingly difficult to defend as neuroscience provides
more and more data indicating the immensely recursive,
interconnected nature of neural organization. WST address
this issue by conceptualizing neural dynamics in terms of
multi-scale,
contingent
interactions.
Given
such
embodiments are naturally and necessarily about the
contexts they embody, WST encounters no need to pose
sufficiently isolated ‘vehicles’ of content. Content is
constitutive of what self-sustaining embodiments are. And
conscious and cognition are not so much computational
processes that take place in specific levels of a cognitive
architecture, as they are emergent levels of self-sustaining
work whose ‘aboutness’ cannot be reduced to any one level
of work. Consciousness and cognition are irreducibly
‘about’ all such levels of work.

References
Bickhard, M. H. (2001). The emergence of contentful
experience. In T. Kitamura (Ed.), What should be
computed to understand and model brain function?
Singapore: World Scientific.
Clark, A. (1997). Being there: Putting brain, body, and
world together again. London: MIT Press.
Edelman, G. M. (1989). Neural Darwinism: The theory of
group neuronal selection. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Ghin, M. (2005, June). What a self could be. Psyche, 11(5).
Online:
http://psyche.cs.monash.edu.au/symposia/metzinger/Marc
ello.pdf
Grush, R. (2004). The emulation theory of representation:
motor control, imagery, and perception. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 27, 377-442.
Hebb, D. O. (1949). The organization of behavior: A
neuropsychological theory. New York: Wiley.
Jordan, J.S. (1998). Recasting Dewey’s critique of the
reflex-arc concept via a theory of anticipatory
consciousness: Implications for theories of perception.
New Ideas in Psychology, 16(3), 165-187.
Jordan, J. S. (2003a). The embodiment of intentionality. In

Overcoming the Divide
Given its ability to satisfy the concerns of both
computationalists and ecological psychologists without
violating the assumptions of either, WST might be in a
position to integrate the two theories. As regards
computationalism, WST address the notion of
representation by arguing that all aspects of an organism
constitute representations, in that, all aspects of the
organism constitute embodiments of context. In short, an
organism represents all the scales of context that have had to
be addressed for it to phylogenetically emerge and sustain
itself. Representation, therefore, is not a property that

17

W. Tschacher & J. Dauwalder (Eds.), Dynamical systems
approaches to embodied cognition. Berlin: Springer
Verlag.
Jordan, J.S. (2003b). Consciousness on the edge: The
intentional nature of experience. Science and
Consciousness Review (December, No.1). Online serial,
URL:http://www.scicon.org/news/articles/20040101.html
Jordan, J. S. (2003c). Emergence of self and other in
perception and action. Consciousness and Cognition, 12,
633-646.
Jordan, J. S., & Ghin, M. (2006). (Proto-) consciousness as
a contextually emergent property of self-sustaining
systems. Mind & Matter, 4(1), 45-68.
Jordan, J. S., & Knoblich, G. (2004). Spatial perception and
control. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 11(1), 54-59.
Kauffman, S. (1995). At home in the universe. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Kinsbourne, M. (2002). The role of imitation in body
ownership and mental growth. In A. Meltzoff and W.
Prinz (Eds.), The imitative mind. New York, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Knoblich, G., & Jordan, J. S. (2003). Action coordination in
groups and individuals: Learning anticipatory control.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 29(5), 1006-1016.
Lotka, A. J. (1945). The law of evolution as a maximal
principle. Human Biology, 17, 167-194.
Metzinger, T. (2003). Being no one. The self-model theory
of subjectivity. The MIT Press.
Odum, H. T. (1988). Self-organization, transformity, and
information. Science, 242, 132-1139.
Rizzolatti G., Fadiga L., Fogassi L., Gallese V. (2002).
From mirror neurons to imitation: facts and speculations.
In A. M: The Imitative Mind Development, Evolution and
Brain Bases. A. Meltzoff & W. Prinz (Eds.), Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Vandervert, L. (1995). Chaos theory and the evolution of
consciousness and mind: A thermodynamic-holographic
resolution to the mind-body problem. New Ideas in
Psychology, 13(2), 107-127.

18

