UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
WIN!! vs. win: Impact of "Outcome" Salience on Illusion of Control

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5wn3z9p5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Mereu, Stefania
Lleras, Alejandro

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

WIN!! vs. win:
Impact of “Outcome” Salience on Illusion of Control
Stefania Mereu (smereu@illinois.edu)
Psychology Department, 603 E. Daniel Street
Champaign, IL 61820 USA

Alejandro Lleras (AlejandroLleras@gmail.com)
Psychology Department, 603 E. Daniel Street
Champaign, IL 61820 USA
Abstract

density instead of the actual contingency. In an active CJT,
observers typically have to perform an action (e.g., pressing
a button) to which it may, or may not follow a desirable
outcome. After the task they are asked to judge to what
extent their action affected the outcome. The key finding is
that people tend to base their judgment of control on the
frequency of reinforcement instead of on the objective
evaluation of the actual contingency (Jerkins & Ward,
1965). In other words, high outcome’s density leads to a
higher judgment of control, while lower outcome’s density
leads to an underestimation of control.
According to a study conducted by Alloy and Abramson
(1979), only non-depressed individuals show the outcome
density effect, while depressed subjects tend to estimate
their control more realistically. Alloy and Abramson (1979)
argued that the lack of the outcome density effect in
depression (depressive realism) indicates that depressed
people are "sadder but wiser" than non-depressed people.
While non-depressed individuals seem to succumb to
positive illusion, depressed people lack this illusion and
show a more accurate judgment of the contingency between
their actions and external effects. The outcome density
effect has been referred to as a type of “illusion of control”
(see Alloy & Abramson, 1979). In the illusion of control
(Langer, 1975) people overestimate their chance to success,
ignoring the objective evaluation of the actual contingency.
Only few studies (e.g., Msetfi et al., 2005) have proposed
a link between the lack of illusion of control in depressed
individuals and an attentional dysfunction. Msetfi and
colleagues (2005) observed that differences between
depressed and non-depressed individuals disappear at long
inter trial intervals (ITI). They suggested that depressed
people might be deficient in exploring all the contextual
elements, due to an attentional deficit. This conclusion is
supported by studies showing attentional deficits in
depression (e.g. Paelecke-Habermann, Pohl & Leplow,
2005). Similarly, Allan, Siegel and Hannah (2007)
suggested that differences between depressed and nondepressed people might rely on a change in the decision
criterion related to the salience of the outcome (i.e. the one
with lower density rate as in the case of low density
outcome), instead of a distorted perception of contingency.
Here we suggest an alternative hypothesis, that illusion of
control is due to an attentional bias toward positive
outcomes, which may lead one to selectively ignore

In contingency judgment tasks (CJT) people typically
overestimate their control over an outcome. We hypothesized
that this outcome density effect (a type of illusion of control)
may be due to an attentional bias toward positive outcomes,
which may lead one to ignore negative outcomes and thus to
underestimate their occurrence. In order to directly test this
hypothesis, we manipulated the outcome’s salience in a CJT,
inducing participants to focus on either positive or negative
outcomes. Results showed that enhancing the salience of
positive outcomes (wins) enhanced participant’s judgment of
control more so than enhancing than of negative outcomes
(losses). Moreover, when positive outcomes were salient,
participants overestimated the amount of money they had
earned during the experiment. In sum, the salience of the
“outcome event” affected both judgment of control and
memory for positive, more than for negative events, implying
that attentional mechanisms may play an important the role in
the illusion of control phenomenon.
Keywords: Illusion of Control; Density Outcome Effect;
Salience; Attention; Memory; Mood.

Introduction
The desire for control is widespread across both normal
(see Keinan, 2002) and psychiatric (e.g. Moulding &
Kyrios, 2007) populations, often leading to magical
thinking, superstitious behavior and distortion of reality
(e.g. Bar-Hillel & Neter, 1996). According to Taylor and
Brown (1988), although correlating with psychiatric
disorders (e.g. Reuven-Magril, Dar & Liberman, 2008), a
moderately amount of positively distorted self-perceptions
and expectations about the future might be functional in
preserving mental health, through maintaining an adequate
self-esteem. An important aspect of any adaptive behavior is
the ability to selectively attend to salient or relevant
information (Bradley, 2009). In fact, biased attention leads
to distorted perception, often observed in major clinical
disorders such as, depression (e.g., Leyman et al., 2007) and
anxiety (e.g., Bradley et al., 1998). The present study
focuses on the role of attentional biases in the establishment
of cognitive illusions, specifically, the illusion of control
(Langer, 1975).
Jerkins and Ward (1965) observed that in an active
contingency judgment task (CJT), where participants had to
judge the contingency between their action and an outcome,
the perceived control correlates with the desired outcome’s

489

Method

negative outcomes, thus, to underestimate their occurrence.
There is a growing number of studies showing that major
depression is characterized by an impairment of selective
attention (e.g., Purcell et al., 1997), increased sensitivity to
negative reinforcement (Pizzagalli et al., in press) and
enhanced brain response to negative feedback (Santesso et
al., 2008). Moreover, Nelson and Craighead (1977) showed
that depressed individuals recall the frequency of the
negative feedback more accurately that non-depressed
individuals. An attentional bias toward negative outcomes
could enhance the memory for negative feedback and
therefore, improve the performance in the judgment task.
In their Experiment 3, Alloy and Abramson (1979)
implicitly manipulated attention, associating either positive
outcome with a monetary winning or negative outcome with
a money loss, separately. Illusion of control was observed
only when the positive outcome was associated with a
monetary winning. It has now been documented that
monetary rewards have strong effects on the attentional
system (e.g., Della Libera & Chelazzi 2009), thus it is likely
that the value assigned to the outcomes may have modulated
the attentional pull of these events. Specifically, the money
loss associated with the negative outcome may have
encouraged the observer to attend to the negative outcomes,
eliminating the bias and therefore, the illusion of control.
On the other hand, emphasizing the salience of positive
outcomes should enhance the bias, therefore leading to an
increase of the illusion.
The goal of the present study was to directly test the
hypothesis that attentional mechanisms are involved both in
the judgment of control and in the memory for events, in the
CJT. We asked observers to estimate their control over an
outcome in an active CJT, by pressing one of two buttons in
the attempt to maximize their winnings. In the present
experiment, although the relative density of the outcome
changed (P(O)=.25 or .75), the actual control (ΔP)—defined
as the difference between the probability of the outcome
given an answer and the probability of the outcome given
the other answer—was zero.
We manipulated attention by means of the outcome’s
salience by having two salience conditions (blocked
between subjects): a condition in which the negative
outcome was perceptually more salient than the positive
outcome, and a condition in which the positive outcome was
more salient than the negative outcome. In order to evaluate
whether attention also affects the memory representation for
winning and losses, we also asked participants to estimate
the amount of money they thought they won in the
experiment. Predictions are straightforward: if illusion of
control is modulated by a natural tendency to neglect
negative outcomes, an increase of the negative event’s
salience should accompany a reduction of the illusion. On
the contrary, an enhancement of positive event’s salience
should enhance the illusion. If the same attentional bias also
affects memory for positive and negative events, we also
expect salience to affect the perceived money winning or
loss.

Participants
Fifty-four females and 43 males (age=21±3) participated in
the experiment. All participants had normal or corrected to
normal vision, signed an informed consent before the
experiment and were paid $8 per hour. Participants assigned
to the high reward rate condition were given extra $5 at the
end of the experimental session.

Stimuli and Materials
Stimuli (Figure 1) were presented on a 21-inch monitor
running at 85Hz. All stimuli were white unless otherwise
specified, and they were displayed on a black background.
All writings were typed in white, Helvetica font. The
fixation point appeared in the center of the monitor, and
consisted of a cross sign subtending 0.6° visual angle. The
“get ready” message appeared at fixation and occupied 1°
visual angle vertically and 16° horizontally. The countdown
numbers subtended about 1°x2° visual angle and replaced
fixation, when displayed.

Figure 1. Stimuli used in the contingency judgment task.
The outcome display consisted in a box (6.4° x4.4° visual
angle) located 6˚ above the fixation point. One of two
messages could be displayed inside the box: the word
“WIN” presented above the amount of money actually won
on that trial, or the word “LOSE” above the amount of
money lost on the trial (see Figure 1). On salient trials, the
outcome boxes were very similar to the boxes on regular
trials, with the only difference that the inner part was red
and the outline was yellow; the font size was also increased.
Visual Analogue Mood Scales (VAMS) We used the
VAMS to assess the mood of participants in the experiment.
In this procedure, six positive adjectives are presented. The
bottom of the page contained the question: “How do you
feel right now?”. Below the question, the adjectives:
“Pleased”,
“Cheerful”,
“Optimistic”,
“Contented”,
“Satisfied” and “Happy” are displayed. Underneath each
adjective there was a 100mm long line. Participants were
verbally instructed to draw a mark along the line, at the
point that best described their feelings, in that particular

490

moment. Score varies from 0 to 100, with “Not at all” at the
left-most position in the line, and “Very much” at the rightmost position. Intermediate values correspond to
intermediate states.

was detected, a warning message appeared and a new trial
began.
After the task participants were asked to judge both, how
much control they had over the outcome on a scale from 0
(no control) and 100 (complete control). Intermediate values
corresponded to intermediate judgments of control. In
addition, they had to indicate the total amount of dollars
they believed to have earned throughout the whole
experiment.

General procedure
Upon arrival to the lab, participants were asked to sign an
informed consent and to fill out the first VAMS. Through
the whole exchange, the experimenter acted very friendly,
using a cheerful attitude and trying to set up a positive
interaction. Participants then watched a 5 minutes long,
pleasant movie after receiving a treat (i.e., a candy). After
the video, they were asked to recall a happy memory. The
goal of these manipulations was to improve participants’
mood (e.g. Rottenberg, Raye & Gross, 2007), because it has
been shown that positive mood enhances the illusion of
control (Alloy, Abramson & Viscusi, 1981). Importantly, it
was not our goal to study the effects of mood on the illusion
of control, but simply to maximize the magnitude of the
effect, so that we could in turn study modulations of this
magnitude by our attention manipulations. Once these
manipulations were completed, participants filled out a
second VAMS and then, performed the CJT. A subset of
participants also completed a third VAMS after the CJT.

Design
Participants were randomly assigned to one of the six
possible conditions (each made-up of 40 trials). There were
two levels of reward frequency: low reward rate, in which
the relative density of the positive outcome P(W) was
0.25—i.e., the negative outcome occurred 75% of the
trials—and a high reward rate, in which the relative density
of the positive outcome P(W) was 0.75—i.e., the negative
outcome occurred 25% of the trials. One half of the
participants were assigned the low reward rate condition and
the other half was assigned the high reward rate condition.
Within each group, one third of the subject were assigned to
the control condition (identical salience for win and loss
feedback messages), one third were assigned to the
condition in which the negative outcomes (the loss events)
were salient (the loss salient condition) and the remaining
third received the one in which the positive outcomes (the
win events) were salient (the reward salient condition).
Independently of the reward rate, the CJT gave
participants no control (ΔP=0). That is, the reward rate
varied independently from which button the participant
decided to press.

Procedure
Participants sat in a comfortable chair, positioned at 56cm
from the monitor and located in a dim-lighted, thermoregulated room. Given that realistic circumstances enhance
illusion of control (Matute, 1996), participants were told
that they had the actual opportunity to win money
depending on their button pressing, and they were asked to
make an effort in order to figure out the best strategy to win
more money. They were suggested to explore the use of the
two buttons as much as possible. This was meant to
discourage participants from adopting the strategy of
pressing only one of the two buttons. Such strategy would
not be desirable in this type of task because it would inflate
the participant’s perceived control. Even if the instruction
were clear and effective (only two subjects pressed the same
button throughout the whole task), uncontrolled imbalance
was taken into account.
Each trial (Figure 1) begun with a fixation point, which
participants were instructed to look at. One second later, a
“Get Ready” message appeared (also 800 ms in duration).
Following this message, participants were given 3 seconds
to make a choice between two keyboard buttons (“c” or
“n”). During this time, there was a numerical countdown
display on the monitor, with the numbers 10 counting down
towards one, three times in a row. The countdown stopped
after 3 repetitions or upon the subject’s response. This
procedure had the purpose to maximize the illusion of
control, which has been shown to increase using stopping
devices (Ladouceur, & Savigny, 2005). Participants were
simply asked to press a button during the countdown.
After the response, a box appeared for 3000 ms to tell
participants whether they won or lost $0.25. If no response

Data analysis
Six people were excluded from the analysis because of
missing data; one was excluded for participating in the
experiment twice and another one was excluded for
providing an unrealistic answer about the winning’s amount.
In order to evaluate the effectiveness of our mood
induction procedure, and to rule out the possibility that our
results could be caused by mood differences, a mixed
ANOVA was carried out on the VAMS scores (before mood
induction, after mood induction) with reward rate (low,
high) and salience (control, loss salient, reward salient) as
factors.
In order to evaluate the effect of attention on the outcome
density effect, judgments of control and win were analyzed
using a between-subjects ANOVA with reward rate (low,
high) and salience (control, loss salient, reward salient) as
factors. VAMS scores collected after mood inductions were
included as covariate.
Judgments of control were corrected for the actual amount
of control that participants experienced during the task, by
means of the formula adapted from Allan (1980):

491

where P(W|C) is the relative probability to win by
pressing one button (“c”) and P(W|~C) is the relative
probability to win by pressing the other button (“n”).
Judgments of control were also analyzed using a series of ttests, in order to evaluate whether they differed from zero
(correct estimation of control).
Judgments of winnings were corrected for the actual
amount of money won during the CJT, so that positive
values correspond to an overestimation of winnings and
negative values correspond to an underestimation of the
winnings.

Further post hoc analyses revealed that this significant
interaction was reflecting the fact that the group assigned to
the [high reward rate, reward salient] condition reported
higher perceived control (F2,31=7.1; p<.01) than the other
groups.
Further analysis on the judgment of control, using
Student’s t-test, showed that none of ratings of control for
the groups in low reward conditions differed than zero (all
ps>.05). Moreover, judgments of control expressed by
participants assigned to the high reward rate condition were
significantly higher than zero only when the positive
outcome (p<.001) was salient; when none of the outcomes
was salient there was a tendency to significance (p=.06)
while when the negative outcome was salient the judgments
of control were no significantly higher that zero (p=.08).

Results
Mood The 3 (mood; before mood induction, after mood
induction, after task) by 2 (reward rate; low, high) by 3
(salience; control, loss salient, reward salient) ANOVA on
VAMS scores for happiness showed a significant effect of
mood induction (F2,132=10.3; p<.001). Happiness after mood
induction (mean=82 ±16.15) increased by 12%, when
compared to the first assessment (mean=70 ±19.29; p<.001)
and decreased again after the experiment (p<.001). More
important, there was a significant interaction (F2,132=4.8;
p<.01). Post hoc tests showed that, after the CJT, the mood
in the high reward rate groups was higher than the one in the
low reward rate (p<.001). Mood decreased by 26% after the
CJT in the low reward rates groups (p<.01), while in the
high reward rate condition it remained higher than the first
assessment (p<.001) but it did not change with respect to the
second assessment (p>.05).
Judgment of Control as a function of reward rate and
Outcome Salience The 2 (reward rate; low, high) by 3
(salience; control, loss salient, reward salient) ANCOVA on
judgments of control (corrected by the actual control, ΔP)
showed a significant effect of the reward rate (F1,90=25.23;
p<.001). Participants assigned to the high reward condition
(mean = 22.19) reported higher perceived control than the
ones assigned to the low reward rate condition (mean = 4.19). The interaction between reward rate and salience
showed a tendency towards significance (F2,90=2.91; p=.06).
In order to better understand this result, we ran an
ANCOVA using reward rate (low, high) and only two levels
of reward salience (control, loss salient). This analysis only
showed an effect of the reward rate (F1,58=8.32; p<.01).
Participants who performed the high reward condition
(mean = 15.41) reported higher perceived control than the
ones assigned to the low reward rate condition (mean=2.97). The interaction between reward rate and reward
salience was not significant (F<1). A second analysis
focused on the reward-salient results: we ran an ANCOVA
with factors reward rate (low, high) and two levels of
salience (control, reward salient). This analysis showed an
effect of the reward rate (F1,64=22.9; p<.001), with groups
assigned to the high reward condition (mean = 23.66)
reporting higher perceived control than the ones assigned to
the low reward rate condition (mean = -5.08). More
importantly, the interaction between reward rate and reward
salience was significant, F2,64=6; p<.05 (see Figure 2).

Figure 2. Reported judgment of control corrected by the
actual control experienced during the task.
Winnings results The 2 (reward rate; low, high) by 3
(salience; control, loss salient, reward salient) ANCOVA on
the difference between the reported and the actual winnings
showed a significant effect of the reward rate (F1,90=41.1;
p<.001).

Figure 3. Errors in perceived money won, corrected for
the actual winning displayed by a) salience and b) reward
rate. Positive values indicate overestimation and negative
values indicate underestimation of winnings.
The groups assigned to the low reward condition (mean =
4.39; corrected for the actual winning) overestimated their
winnings more than the ones assigned to the high reward
rate condition (mean =0.03). The analysis also showed an
effect of salience (F2,90=3.04; p<.05; Figure 3), with overall
larger overestimation errors in the reward salient condition
(mean = 3.5) compared to control and loss salient conditions
(mean = 1.6, mean = 1.4, respectively). The interaction
between reward rate and salience was not significant (F<1).
Post hoc tests showed that the group assigned to the reward

492

salient condition overestimated their winnings more than the
ones assigned to the loss salient condition (p<.05);
moreover, the difference between the control condition and
the reward salient condition also tended towards
significance (p=.06), but failed to reach it due to relatively
larger variability in that condition, compared to the loss
salient condition.

cognitive tasks in which negative stimuli are involved
(Mehta, & Zhu, 2009) suggest that positive and negative
salient outcomes may have been processed differently.
Specifically, red may have increased accuracy in
remembering the occurrence of the negative outcomes only.
That said, this would not explain why the illusion grew in
size in the reward condition. Lastly, it is well known that
gains and losses are perceived asymmetrically to begin with
(Kahneman & Tversky, 1979). As such, it is possible that
loss aversion may have been at play in our experiment,
making participants in the loss salient conditions overall
more cautious than in the reward salient condition, or turned
them into more “objective” assessors of the events (much
like in the “depressed realism” effect). In contrast,
participants in the reward salient condition may have been
more prone to get excited about their winnings, inducing
something like a positive-mood amplification of the illusion
of control effect. Overall, the asymmetry in the effects of
event salience on perceived control and perceived winnings
has strong implications in terms of understanding some
aspects of gambling behavior: in most gambling situations,
loss events have little salience, whereas win events tend to
be very salient. This may be contributing to increase levels
of illusion of control in gambling scenarios (like slot
machines), and further, our results suggest that simply
increasing the salience of the loss events (making them as
bright and noisy as win events) may be insufficient to
counteract the increased illusion of control arising from
salient win events.
A reverse outcome density effect was observed in the
winning ratings. On the one hand, participants generally
overestimated the amount of money won in the experiment.
On the other hand, the biggest mistake in overestimating the
amount of money was observed in the low reward rate
condition (i.e., when the win events happened more rarely).
This result, although surprising, could be due to a bias
induced by the experimental procedure: subjects signed an
informed consent in which they were promised a fixed
amount for the experimental session, plus the possibility to
increase their earnings for the day. This manipulation is
intended to increase the illusion (Matute, 1996), but could
have caused participants to be skeptical on the actual
possibility to lose money during the experiment,
encouraging them not to state a money loss.
A particularly striking result was the salience effect
observed on the winnings recall. When the positive outcome
was salient, participants overestimated the winnings more
than in either of the other two conditions (salient loss
outcome and control conditions). This result was
independent of the reward rate and, although preliminary,
might also be potentially relevant to gambling. Winnings are
often exaggerated and amplified by means of lights, sound
and colors and the saliency is not necessarily commensurate
to the actual winning. This may not only increase the
gambler’s tendency to overestimate its own control over the
situation but also to remember inflated winnings throughout
the gambling experience.

Discussion
The aim of this study was to evaluate the role of attention
in the outcome density effect. We hypothesized that, if the
illusion of control is caused by an attentional bias toward
the positive outcome, increasing the negative outcome’s
salience should reduce the illusion. On the other hand,
salient positive outcomes were expected to enhance the
illusion.
The results partially confirmed our hypotheses: judgments
of control were indeed inflated when the positive outcomes
were made more salient; yet, judgments of control were
unaffected by the salience of the loss outcomes.
Overall, our results replicated the traditional outcome
density effect (Jerkins & Ward, 1965). Judgments of control
of participants who were often rewarded were higher than
those of participants who received fewer rewards.
Furthermore, participants in the high reward rate condition
tended to overestimate the control they exerted over the
outcome (p=.06).
The enhancement of perceived control when the positive
outcome occurs often and when it is more salient than the
negative one, is in accordance with the hypotheses that
attention modulates the illusion of control: the increased
salience of positive outcomes likely attracted attention
towards those events, enhancing a baseline bias towards
attending to those events in the first place, increasing the
illusion of control. That said, it is also important to note that
equivalent salience manipulations on the feedback of “loss”
events did not significantly modulate neither the illusion of
control nor the perceived winnings in the task.
Our mood induction procedure was successful in
enhancing the general mood in participants. Importantly,
differences in the mood of participants across groups were
not responsible for the differences observed in perceived
control or winnings, since no difference in participant’s
mood was observed across conditions.
There may be several reasons why our salience
manipulation failed to influence the illusion of control in the
loss salient condition. It is possible that the specific colors
we chose in our manipulation may have interacted
differently with the perceptions of gain and loss. There is a
lifetime associations between yellow and cautious behavior
and red with maximum levels of hazard (see Williams and
Noyes, 2007; for a review). If the observers interpreted the
color of the outcome as a warning clue, it is possible that
this encouraged them to abandon a risk taking strategy,
which is common in gamblers and known to be correlated
with illusion of control (Fenton-O’Creevy et al., 2003).
Moreover, results showing that red color facilitates

493

In sum, in line with our initial hypothesis, attentional
biases seem to partly contribute to the illusion of control
phenomenon. Salience of the outcome, in fact, modulated
both the contingency judgment and the memory for
winnings. These results are promising and have potentially
important implications for the understanding of cognitive
mechanisms underlying gambling behaviors.

Ladouceur, R., & Sévigny S. (2005). Structural
characteristics of video lotteries: effects of a stopping
device on illusion of control and gambling persistence.
Journal of Gambling Studies, 21(2),117–31.
Langer, E. J. (1975). The illusion of control. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 32, 311–328.
Leyman, L., De Raedt, R., Schacht, R., & Koster, E. H.
(2007). Attentional biases for angry faces in unipolar
depression. Psychological Medicine, 37(3), 393–402.
Matute, H. (1996). Illusion of control: Detecting responseoutcome independence in analytic but not naturalistic
conditions. Psychological Science, 7, 289–293.
Moulding, R., & Kyrios, M. (2007). Desire for Control,
Sense of Control and Obsessive-Compulsive Symptoms.
Cognitive Therapy and Research, 31,759–772.
Msetfi, R. M., Murphy, R. A., Simpson, J., & Kornbrot, D.
E. (2005). Depressive realism and outcome density bias in
contingency judgements: The effect of the context and
inter-trial interval. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 134, 10–22.
Nelson, R. E., & Craighead, W. E. (1977). Selective recall
of positive and negative feedback, self-control behaviors,
and depression. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
86(4):379-88.
Paelecke-Habermann, Y., Pohl, J., & Leplow, B. (2005).
Attention and executive functions in remitted major
depression patients. Journal of Affective Disorders; 89(1–
3):125-35.
Pizzagalli, D. A., Dillon, D. G., Bogdan, R., & Holmes, A.
J. Reward and punishment processing in the human brain:
Clues from affective neuroscience and implications for
depression research. In: Vartanian O, Mandel D, editors.
Neuroscience of decision making. New York, NY:
Psychology Press (in press).
Purcell, R., Maruff, P., Kyrios, M., & Pantelis, C. (1997).
Neuropsychological function in young patients with
unipolar depression. Psychological Medicine, 27, 1277–
1285.
Reuven-Magril, O., Dar, R., & Liberman, N. (2008).
Illusion of control and behavioral control attempts in
obsessive-compulsive disorder. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 117(2):334–41.
Rottenberg, J., Raye, R.D., & Gross, J.J. (2007). Emotion
elicitation using films. In J.A. Coan & J.J.B. Allen (Eds.),
Handbook of Emotion Elicitation and Assessment (pp. 928). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Santesso, D. L., Steele, K. T., Bogdan, R., Holmes, A. J.,
Deveney, C. M., Meites, T. M., & Pizzagalli, D. A.
(2008). Enhanced negative feedback responses in remitted
depression. Neuroreport, 19(10):1045–8.
Taylor, S. E., & Brown, J. D. (1988). Illusion and wellbeing: A social psychological perspective on mental
health. Psychological Bulletin, 103, 193–210.
Williams, D. J., & Noyes, J. M. (2007). How does our
perception
of
risk
influence
decision-making?
Implications for the design of risk information.
Theoretical Issues in Ergonomics Science, 8(1), 1–35.

Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank Matthew Harding for his
permission to use his video in this experiment. The research
of S. Mereu was supported by Regione Sardegna (T2-MABA2008-608).

References
Allan, L. G. (1980). A note on measurement of contingency
between two binary variables in judgment tasks. Bulletin
of the Psychonomic Society, 15, 147–149.
Allan, L. G., Siegel, S., & Hannah, S. (2007). The sad truth
about depressive realism. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 60, 482–495.
Alloy, L. B., & Abramson, L. Y. (1979). Judgment of
contingency in depressed and nondepressed students:
Sadder but wiser? Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 108, 441–485.
Alloy, L. B., Abramson, L. Y, & Viscusi, D. (1981).
Induced mood and the illusion of control. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 41, 1129–1140.
Bar-Hillel, M., & Neter, E. (1996). Why are people reluctant
to exchange lottery tickets? Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 70(1), 17-27.
Bradley, B. P. Mogg, K., Falla, S. J., & Hamilton L.R.
(1998). Attentional bias for threatening facial expressions
in anxiety: manipulation of stimulus duration. Cognition
and Emotion, 12, 737–753.
Bradley, M. M. (2009). Natural selective attention: orienting
and emotion. Psychophysiology, 46(1), 1–11.
Della Libera, C., & Chelazzi, L. (2009) Learning to attend
and to ignore is a matter of gains and losses.
Psychological Science, 20(6), 778–784.
Fenton-O’Creevy, M., Nicholson, N., & Soane, E.,
Willman, P. (2003). Trading on illusions: Unrealistic
perceptions of control and trading performance. Journal
of Occupational and Organisational Psychology, 76, 53–
68.
Fisher, S., & Ledwith, M. (1984).The perception of control
in loud noise. Perception. 13(6) 709–718.
Jenkins, H., & Ward, W. C. (1965). Judgment of
contingency between responses and outcomes.
Psychological Monographs: General & Applied, 79,
SUPPL 1, 1–17.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky., A. (1979). Prospect Theory: An
Analysis of Decision under Risk. Econometrica, 47(2),
263–291.
Keinan, G. (2002). The effects of stress and desire for
control on superstitious behavior. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 28, 102–108.

494

