UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Wrongness and Representational Thought

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5qc87394

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Hoicka, Elena
Gattis, Merideth

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Wrongness and Representational Thought
Elena Hoicka (elena.hoicka@stir.ac.uk)
Psychology Department, University of Stirling, Stirling, FK9 4LA, UK

Merideth Gattis (gattism@cardiff.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, Cardiff University, Tower Building, Park Place, Cardiff, CF10 3AT, UK
Abstract
This paper examines the concept of wrongness as a violation
of intention, convention, or fact. We demonstrate that
wrongness is an underlying factor in mistakes, jokes, pretense,
lying, metaphor, and irony. We argue that children’s use and
understanding of wrongness evolves in four steps through a
developing understanding of representation. First, children
understand that a wrong act can refer to a right act, through
mistakes and basic jokes. Second, this leads to understanding
that a wrong act can represent a right act, through pretense,
puns and metaphor. Third, this leads to understanding mental
representation, which in combination with understanding
reference allows understanding of intentional jokes and lies.
Finally, this leads to understanding mental representation in
combination with representation, allowing an understanding
of irony, and intentional pretense, metaphor, and puns.
Keywords: Wrongness; Representation; Mistakes; Jokes;
Pretense; Lying; Metaphor; Irony

Wrongness and Representational Thought
Parents, educators, and even psychologists generally assume
that an important goal of development is learning to do the
right thing. In this paper, we consider the value of learning
to do the wrong thing. We propose that learning about
wrongness proceeds through four stages, each of which
plays a critical role in the development of representational
thought.

What is wrongness?
Most analyses of wrongness focus on the moral aspects of
doing the wrong thing. For example, philosophers have
argued that wrongness is something prohibited by morality
(e.g. Calder, 2005), such as murder or cheating (e.g. Feezell,
1988; Marquis, 2001). The moral concept of wrongness is
also examined in research on lying (e.g., Sorenson, 2007).
Similarly, psychologists interested in wrongness have
focused on deontic reasoning, that is, the speaker’s attitude
towards what she is saying, and in particular, how necessary
a speaker deems some condition or act. This includes
permission (what one may do), and obligation (what one
must do), thus wrongness might violate what one is obliged
or expected to do (Cummins, 1996; Tomasello, 2003).
Morality is not, however, the only basis for wrongness.
Wrongness can be evaluated as a violation of fact,
irrespective of moral issues. For example, if you eat the last
cookie, and say that you did not, your statement, “I did not
eat the last cookie” is wrong simply because it does not

reflect truth-values in the world (Carson, 2006). Similarly,
metaphors, pretending, and joking all involve wrongness
because they do not represent the true state of affairs
(Amsel, et al., 1996; Kazmerski, Blasko, & Desalegn, 2003;
Leekam, 1991).
Wrongness extends beyond truth values, and can also
describe violations of convention. Conventions do not have
absolute truth values. Nonetheless an action which breaks
convention, such as moving 6 places on a board game after
having rolled a 5, is also wrong. Conventions can apply to
how we speak, use objects, eat, dress, play games, interact
with others, and hence permeate many aspects of our daily
lives. Searle (2005) posits that there are two types of
conventions in regards to objects. One type includes causal
usage functions, in which we have the convention of using
an object in a certain way, supported by the physical
features of the object (e.g., knives are sharp, and so are used
to cut things). Status functions are more conventional and
attach arbitrary functions to objects, for example, in the case
of paper used as money. Thus while you could technically
try to use a knife as a paper weight, or tissues to pay for
your purchase, this would be wrong according to
convention. Children as young as 2 years demonstrate
sensitivity to the conventions associated with objects,
displaying what is called functional fixedness, where they
refuse to use objects in unconventional ways, after only one
exposure to how an object should be used (Casler &
Kelemen, 2005). Language itself is also a set of conventions
where certain words happen to be paired with certain
actions, objects, and so on (Searle, 1969). Futhermore,
different languages have different conventions, and within a
language one must adhere to the specific labels given to
specific objects and actions. Infants and toddlers respect the
conventionality of language, demonstrating hesitance to
assign the same label to multiple objects (e.g, Markman &
Wachtel, 1988). Thus using the wrong words can be wrong
by violating convention.
Wrongness can also describe violations of intentions. For
example, it is not more right to request chocolate versus
vanilla ice cream. However if you intend to eat chocolate,
and instead ask for vanilla, such an utterance would be
wrong in terms of the current goal. Thus mistakes embody a
form of wrongness that violates one’s intentions.

Wrongness as Violation
We define wrongness as a violation of intention,
convention, or fact, independent of the moral standing of the
act. Several concepts involve understanding wrongness. In

1046

the next section we review relevant empirical findings on
mistakes, jokes, pretending, lies, irony, and metaphor,
which all involve wrongness (e.g., Carpenter, Akhtar, &
Tomasello, 1998; Hoicka, Jutsum, & Gattis, 2008;
Kazmerski, et al., 2003; Leekam, 1991).
Mistakes
Mistakes by definition involve doing the wrong thing.
This type of wrongness necessarily involves a violation of
intention: you meant to perform one act, but performed
another instead. This could be for one of two reasons: you
could do something in an accidental fashion, such as fall
over, which might be considered a true mistake. You could
also truly believe that what you are doing is the right thing,
even though it is not, and perform what might be better
called an error, where you violate your intention because of
lack of knowledge (e.g., Lee & Cameron, 2000). As an
example of a mistake (or error), you may wish to turn on the
television, but press the wrong button (either through an
accidental physical movement or a false belief that it is the
right button), such that it does not light up, and the goal of
turning on the television is not achieved. Additionally,
mistakes could involve a violation of convention
(accidentally driving on the wrong side of the road, either
because you falsely believed that that is the convention in
that country, or perhaps because the road is poorly lit), as
well as a violation of fact (e.g., Saying that Tony Blair is the
Prime Minister of the United Kingdom either because you
did not realize that Gordon Brown had taken his place, or
because the wrong name came out). However mistakes need
not require a violation of convention or fact, for example,
when accidentally requesting the wrong object the request
cannot be wrong, but it still violates an intention.
Mistakes may be the earliest understood form of
wrongness. Meltzoff (1995) found that when adults
performed incomplete actions with objects (i.e., failed
attempts, which could be viewed as a mistake) 18-montholds completed (or corrected) those actions. From 14
months, infants avoid actions accompanied by the
expression “Whoops!” (Carpenter, et al., 1998) and by
rising intonation (Sakkalou & Gattis, in press). Finally,
infants as young as 9 months (but not 6 months) react
differently to someone unwilling to give an object, versus
unable, due to an accident or failed attempt, a.k.a., a
mistake, through looking and reaching less (Behne, et al.,
2005).
Jokes
Basic jokes, which involve saying or doing something
wrong, violate convention or fact (Hoicka & Gattis, 2008;
Hoicka, et al., 2008). For example, one could joke that
ducks say, “moo” (violating fact) or one could point to a
duck and call it a “moogy” (violating English language
conventions). Jokes by definition cannot violate intention
since joking involves intentionally doing or saying the
wrong thing.

Basic jokes are another form of wrongness that is
understood early in development. Three- to 5-year-olds
primarily laugh at events that others, or they themselves,
intend to be humorous, such as clowning or being silly
(Bainum, Lounsbury, & Pollio, 1984). This suggests that
they appreciate that others do the wrong thing in order to
joke. As early as 30 months, children copy mislabelling
behaviors when couched in a humorous context¸ but not in a
non-humorous context (Hoicka & Akhtar, 2010). From 25
months children copy incorrect actions followed by
laughter, but correct the same incorrect actions followed by
the expression, “Whoops!” indicating that they interpret
others’ wrong actions as humorous (Hoicka & Gattis, 2008).
Finally, 15-month-olds match humorous cues to humorous
actions, and from around 10 months, infants laugh when
their mothers perform incongruous actions, such as putting
socks in their mouths (Hoicka & Wang, 2010; Sroufe &
Wunsch, 1972). Finally, observational evidence suggests
that infants may not only appreciate others’ jokes, but may
create jokes as well. From 15 months, infants have been
observed to create jokes such as putting sponges in their
mouths, and from 8 months, repeat incongruous actions,
such as screwing up their faces, in order to re-elicit laughter
(Loizou, 2005; Reddy, 2001).
More complex joking, such as puns, involves saying
something that initially appears to violate fact or
convention, but upon further reflection is consistent with
fact or convention (e.g., Shultz, 1974). By initially
appearing to be unrelated, puns appear to be wrong answers
to questions as they violate conventions of communication,
specifically Grice’s Maxim of relation, and by being
ambiguous (having two meanings), puns also violate Grice’s
maxim of Manner (e.g., Grice, 1975). These types of jokes
are not normally understood until later. From 8 years,
children choose joke endings with double meanings as more
humorous than non-sequitor joke endings. However 6-yearolds judge both joke endings to be equally humorous,
demonstrating that they only find a violation of the Maxim
of relation humorous, or put another way, saying something
wrong in the context of the previous utterance (Shultz,
1974). However using cartoons instead of words, even 4year-olds appreciate jokes involving double meanings (Pien
& Rothbart, 1976).
Pretense
Pretense involves understanding that someone has done
the wrong thing, but has represented this action as right in a
possible world (Nichols & Stich, 2003). In particular,
pretense violates conventions and facts. For example, one
might pretend that a block is a bar of soap, and violate
convention by rubbing the block on one’s body. One might
also make statements which violate fact, for example, if a
child says, “I can fly”, which is not technically true. Like
joking, pretense cannot violate intention, since pretense
involves intentionally doing the wrong thing by its very
nature (Hoicka & Gattis, 2008; Hoicka, et al., 2008).

1047

Lillard (1998) found that 4- and 5-year-olds did not
understand intentions to pretend. However the task involved
hearing stories illustrated by pictures or dolls, and verbal
responses were required. In experiments using an actionbased task, 36-month-olds, but not 26-month-olds,
differentiated intentions to pretend from trying (Rakoczy,
Tomasello & Striano, 2004). Additionally, children can tell
whether someone else is pretending or doing the real thing
from 2.5 years (Ma & Lillard, 2007). Finally, using a
looking-time paradigm, infants as young as 15 months
detected violations in a pretense scheme (Onishi,
Baillargeon, & Leslie, 2007). Children themselves pretend
from around 18 months (e.g., Elder & Pederson, 1978;
Ungerer, et al., 1981).
Lies
Lying involves understanding that someone has said the
wrong thing for the purpose of deceiving someone (e.g.,
Leekam, 1991). Lying can be a violation of fact (e.g., saying
one has not eaten cake when one has) and could also be a
violation of convention (e.g., telling someone that they
should drive on the left side of the road whilst in Spain).
Lee and Cameron (2000) argue that a lie need not actually
violate a fact as long as the liar thinks that the lie violates
fact. Thus one could argue that lying either involves
violating fact or convention, or having false (or wrong)
beliefs about facts and conventions.
In order to truly understand that someone is lying, it is
necessary to understand their intention to lie. While joking,
pretending, and metaphor can be detected without
understanding the intention behind an action or utterance,
for example, by finding the joke funny, or noticing a
similarity between a pretend act or metaphor and its
representation, this is not the case for lying. If one simply
notices that someone has said the wrong thing, this could be
due to their lying, or it could be due to them having made a
mistake. What is crucial is thus whether the liar intended to
deceive.
Depending on how studies are performed, children start to
understand lies between 3 and 5 years. Lee, et al., (2002)
conducted an experiment in which young children were told
lies that violated a reality-fantasy distinction. Five- and 6year-olds identified the lies, and hence did not believe them,
while 3- and 4-year-olds accepted the lies. Wimmer, Gruber,
and Perner (1985) used a story-based method to assess what
young children understood about lying. When asked
whether the character should be punished, children as young
as 4.5 years assigned punishment to liars, but not to people
who were mistaken. However when asked whether the
person had lied, children did not reliably distinguish the liar
from the mistaken person. Thus 4.5-year-olds have a
moralistic understanding of lies, without necessarily
understanding the lexical term relating to lies. Using a
picture-based method, 4-year-olds differentiated lies from
promises (Maas, 2008). Finally, children as young as 3
years distinguished lies from mistakes, (Siegal & Peterson,
1996, 1998). Considering when children begin to lie, from
around 3 or 4 years children lie in order to hide a

transgression of peeking when they were not supposed to,
and tell white lies when receiving an unwanted gift (Talwar,
et al., 2002; Talwar, Murphy, & Lee, 2007).
Metaphor
Metaphor involves intentionally saying the wrong thing,
(e.g., Harris, Friel, & Mickelson, 2006) for purposes such as
to provoke thought, compare similarities, and add interest,
describe, and clarify (e.g., Gardner & Winner, 1986;
Roberts & Kreuz, 1994; Sperber, 1984). Metaphor can
violate fact, for example, saying, “Your room is a pig sty”
when in fact it’s just a room (e.g., Andrews, et al., 1986).
It is not until school age that children understand that
people can intend to create metaphors. Eight-year-olds, but
not 6-year-olds, differentiate metaphors from mistakes
(Andrews et al., 1986). When one does not consider
intentions, younger children appear to understand
metaphors. In one task, 3-, 4-, and 5-year-olds were told
stories that used time-based metaphors, and were then asked
comprehension questions based on the metaphors. From 4
years, children correctly answered questions relating to
metaphors (Ozcaliskan, 2005). In another task, 3- and 4year-olds produced significantly more errors when repeating
anomalous versus metaphorical utterances, and made the
same number of errors when producing metaphorical and
literal utterances, suggesting that the children understood
the metaphors (Pearson, 1990). Finally, in terms of
metaphor production, from 3 years children can produce
appropriate metaphorical compounds. For example, if a
stick-shaped bug is called a “leaf-bug” children might make
a more appropriate metaphor by calling it a “stick-bug”
(Gottfried, 1997).
Irony
Like metaphor, irony involves intentionally saying the
wrong thing. Irony can violate fact, for example, saying,
“That bungalow is the tallest building in the world” (e.g.,
Andrews, et al., 1986). Irony can also violate convention,
for example, saying, “Driving on the right side of the road
in London was a great idea.” Again, irony cannot involve a
violation of intention as irony is intentional in nature.
Indeed, like lying, intention is the most important part of
irony. An utterance is only ironic if the person meant it to be
(e.g., Andrews, et al., 1986; Winner & Leekam, 1991).
Irony, like metaphor, is notoriously difficult for children
to understand. It is not until school age that children
understand intentions to be ironic. Eight-year-olds, but not
6-year-olds, differentiated irony from lies (Andrews et al.,
1986). Winner and Leekam (1991) tested 7-year-olds on
their ability to distinguish irony from deception. They
found that children’s ability to do so was contingent on their
ability to distinguish second order intentions, that is, that the
liar intended for the audience to believe the falsehood,
whereas the ironist did not.

1048

Wrongness, Reference, and Representation
Understanding the various types of wrongness involves
understanding representation at different levels, and this
understanding develops in stages (see Figure 1). The first
stage involves understanding that a wrong act refers to a
right act. While representation makes one think of a wrong
act as a right act, reference only makes one think of a right
act. Reference should be easier to understand since it can be
accomplished by considering two different acts sequentially
rather than simultaneously. Without being able to make a
reference between a wrong act and a right act, it would be
difficult to determine that an act was wrong in the first
place: reference allows comparison between two acts. The
ability to compare two acts appears to be present by 9
months, as children are first able to detect mistakes at 9
months (Behne, et al., 2005), and jokes at 10 months
(Sroufe & Wunsch, 1972).
The second stage in understanding wrongness involves
understanding representation, such that a wrong act can
represent a right act (e.g., Nichols & Stich, 2003). Thus one
act can have two meanings at the same time: the literal, and
the imagined. This should be more difficult to understand
than reference as representation requires simultaneous,
rather than sequential processing. Understanding
representation is essential for understanding pretense,
metaphor, and pun-type jokes (e.g., Leslie, 1987; Shultz,
1974). Pretense is likely the first instance of understanding
that a wrong act represents a right act. As metaphors and
verbal puns require advanced linguistic skills as compared
to pretense, understanding of metaphor and verbal puns
should be delayed compared to pretense, but should involve
the same underlying representational skills. Since children
generally understand pretense from around 18 months (e.g.,
Ungerer, et al., 1981) this should mark when children
understand the representation of wrong acts as right acts.
Once children understand that a wrong act can represent a
right act, then they have the possibility to distinguish
mistakes and jokes from pretense. Thus a wrong act for
which children cannot determine how it represents a right
act could be thought of as a mistake or joke, and a wrong act
for which children could determine how it represents a right
act could be thought of as a general “as-if” for pretending
(perhaps if action based). Later, when children’s language
abilities develop, they should also be able to distinguish
metaphors from puns as well. At this point, lies and irony, if
the verbal content were to be understood, might still be
thought of as mistakes or jokes, since they (at least appear)
to refer to right acts, instead of representing them.
The third stage involves a basic understanding of mental
representation. This involves processing a mental
representation and its reference sequentially: understanding
that an intended wrong act refers to a right act. The earliest
instance of this may be when children understand that others
can intentionally do the wrong thing through joking from 25
months (Hoicka & Gattis, 2008), since both the actor’s
intention, and the reference between right and wrong acts
are detected.

For the fourth stage, children must understand mental
representation in terms of representations themselves. This
requires understanding a representation in relation to mental
representation, or in other words, understanding that an
intended wrong act represents a right act. This may first be
understood when children understand that others’ can intend
to pretend, at 36 months (Rakoczy, et al., 2004), when both
the actor’s intention, and the corresponding representation
are detected.
Irony is more complex still. Like metaphor, it involves
saying something wrong which represents something right.
However, in metaphor, the similarity between concepts can
lead a child to infer that a metaphor was made, without
reference to the speaker’s mental state. In contrast, like
lying, irony is about the attitude of the speaker, and cannot
be inferred without understanding intention and belief (e.g.,
Andrews, et al., 1986; Winner & Leekam, 1991). Thus irony
involves understanding two mental representations
simultaneously: the wrong act (what the ironist intended to
say) and the right act (what the ironist believed). At this
point, when children can simultaneously process two mental
representations: the intention to perform a wrong act, and
the belief of a right act, children should be able to
distinguish all types of wrong acts from each other.
We propose that these four stages of representation are
linked. First, understanding the reference point between
right and wrong, through mistakes and basic jokes, could
help children later understand the representation of a wrong
act as a right act, through pretense. By processing two acts
sequentially when detecting jokes or mistakes, children may
get used to considering two ideas in relation to each other.
This may bootstrap an understanding of representation as it
involves a shift from considering two ideas sequentially to
considering two ideas simultaneously. This should be easier
than making a bigger shift of never processing two ideas in
relation to each other, to processing two ideas
simultaneously.
Second, we propose that understanding that a wrong act
can represent a right act (e.g., through pretense) is a
precursor to mental representation (following, Leslie, 1987),
since understanding mental representations, such as
intentions, involves understanding something that is
inferred, and not concretely perceivable. At this point,
children should already understand reference, and should
thus bootstrap their understanding that a wrong act refers to
a right act, to understanding that an intended wrong act
refers to a right act. This would be a simpler cognitive leap
versus having no understanding or reference, and then
suddenly having an understanding of reference in terms of
mental representations. Finally, once children can process
an intentional wrong act, and a (belief-based) right act,
sequentially, this should create a smoother transition for
processing an intentional wrong act, and a (belief-based)
right act, simultaneously.

1049

Figure
Bootstraps
Reference

Bootstraps
Representation

Mental
Representation

Stage 1
-Detect
Mistakes
Jokes
-No
distinction

Stage 2
Stage 3
Stage 4
-Detect
-Detect
-Detect
pretense,
intentions to
irony;
metaphors,
joke; lies
intentions to
puns
-Distinguish
pretend or
-Distinguish
lies, jokes,
use metaphor
above
from
-Distinguish
mistakes
Figuremistakes,
1: The development
of wrongness.
jokes
all types of
wrongness

Figure 1. Stages of wrongness understanding.

Acknowledgments
The research was supported by a NIH Postdoctoral
Fellowship (T32-HD046423) to Elena Hoicka.

References
Amsel, E., Bobadilla, W., Coch, D., & Remy, R. (1996),
Young children’s memory for the true and pretend
identities of objects. Developmental Psychology, 32, 479491.
Andrews, J., Rosenblatt, E., Malkus, U., Gardner, H., &
Winner, E. (1986). Children’s abilities to distinguish
metaphoric and ironic utterances from mistakes and lies.
Communication & Cognition, 19, 281-298.
Bainum, C. K., Lounsbury, K.R., & Pollio, H. R. (1984)
The development of laughing and smiling in nursery
school children. Child Development, 55, 1946-1957.
Behne, T., Carpenter, M. Call, J. & Tomasello, M. (2005).
Developmental Psychology, 41, 328-337.
Calder, T. (2005). Kant and degrees of wrongness. Journal
of Value Inquiry, 39, 229-244.
Carpenter, M., Akhtar, N., & Tomasello, M.
(1998).Fourteenthrough
18-month-old
infants
differentially imitate intentional and accidental actions.
Infant Behavior & Development, 21, 315-330.
Carson, T. L. (2006). The definition of lying. Nous, 40, 284306.
Cummins, D. D. (1996). Evidence of deontic reasoning in 3and 4-year-old children. Memory & Cognition, 24, 823829.
Elder, J. L., & Pederson, D. R. (1978). Preschool children’s
use of objects in symbolic play. Child Development, 49,
500-504.
Feezell, R. M. (1988). On the wrongness of cheating and
why cheaters can’t play the game. Journal of the
Philosophy of Sport, 15, 57-68.
Gottfried, G. M. (1997). Using metaphors as modifiers:
Children’s production of metaphoric compounds. Journal
of Child Language, 24, 567-601.

Harris, R. J., Friel, B. M., & Mickelson, N. R. (2006).
Attribution of discourse goals for using concrete- and
abstract-tenor metaphors and similes with or without
discourse context. Journal of Pragmatics, 38, 863-879.
Hoicka, E., & Akhtar, N. (2010). Say the Wrong Thing:
Toddlers Joke with Jokers, but Correct Foreigners.
Sumitted manuscript.
Hoicka, E. & Gattis, M. (2008). Do the wrong thing: how toddlers
tell a joke from a mistake. Cognitive Development, 23, 180-190.
Hoicka, E., Jutsum, S., & Gattis, M. (2008). Humor, abstraction,
and disbelief. Cognitive Science, 32, 985-1002.
Hoicka, E., & Wang, S. (2010). 15-Month-Olds Match
Humorous Cues to Humorous Actions. Submitted
manuscript.
Kazmerski, V.A., Blasko, D. G., & Dessalegn, B. G. (2003).
ERP and behavioral evidence of individual differences in
metaphor comprehension. Memory & Cognition, 31, 673689.
Lee, K., & Cameron, C. A. (2000). Extracting truthful
information from lies: Emergence of the expressionrepresentation distinction. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 46,
1-20.
Lee, K., Cameron, C. A., Doucette, J. & Talwar, V. (2002).
Phantoms and fabrications: Young children’s detection of
implausible lies. Child Development, 73, 1688-1702.
Leekam, S. (1991). Jokes and lies: Children’s understanding
of intentional falsehood. In A. Whiten (ed.). Natural
Theories of Mind. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Lillard, A. S. (1998). Wanting to be it: Children’s
understanding of intentions underlying pretense. Child
Development, 69, 981-993.
Loizou, E. (2005). Infant humor: The theory of the absurd
and the empowerment theory. International Journal of
Early Years Education, 13, 43-53.
Ma, L., & Lillard, A. S. (2007). Where is the real cheese?
Young children’s ability to discriminate between real and
pretend acts. Developmental Psychology, 77, 1762-1777.
Maas, F. K. (2008). Children’s understanding of promising,
lying, and false belief. The Journal of General
Psychology, 135, 301-321.
Markman, E. M., & Wachtel, G. F. (1988). Children’s use
of mutual exclusivity to constrain the meaning of a word.
Cognitive Psychology, 20, 121-157.
Marquis, D. (2001). Deprivations, futures and the
wrongness of killing. Journal of Medical Ethics, 27, 363369.
Meltzoff, A. N. (1995). Understanding the intentions of
others: Re-enactment of intended acts by 18-month-old
children. Developmental Psychology, 31, 838-850.
Nichols, S., & Stich, S. P. (2003). Mindreading: An
integrated account of pretense, self-awareness, and
understanding other minds. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Onishi, K., Baillargeon, R., & Leslie, A. M. (2007). 15month-olds infants detect violations in pretend scenarios.
Acta Psychologica, 124, 106-128.

1050

Ozcaliskan, S. (2005). On learning to draw the distinction
between physical and metaphorical motion: Is metaphor
and early emerging cognitive and linguistic capacity?
Journal of Child Language,32, 281-318.
Pearson, B. Z., (1990). The comprehension of metaphor by
preschool children. Journal of Child Language, 17, 185203.
Pien, D., & Rothbart, M. K. (1976). Incongruity and
resolution in children’s humor: A reexamination. Child
Development, 47, 966-971.
Rakoczy, H., Tomasello, M., & Striano, T. (2004). Young
children know that trying is not pretending: a test of the
“behaving-as-if” construal of children's early concept of
pretense. Developmental Psychology, 40, 388–399.
Reddy, V. (2001). Infant clowns: The interpersonal creation
of humour in infancy. Enfance, 53, 247-256.
Roberts, R. M., & Kreuz, R. J. (1994). Why do people use
figurative language? Psychological Science, 5, 159-163.
Sakkalou, E., & Gattis, M. (in press). Fourteen- to 18month-old infants infer others’ intentions from intonation.
Infancy.
Searle, J. R. (1969). Speech Acts: An Essay in the
Philosophy of Language. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Searle, J. R. (2005). What is an institution? Journal of

Ungerer, J., Zelazo, P., Kearsley, R., & O’Leary, K. (1981).
Developmental changes in the representation of objects in
symbolic play from 18 to 34 months of age. Child
Development, 52, 186–195.
Wimmer, H., Gruber, S., & Perner, J. (1985). Young
children’s conception of lying: Moral intuition and the
denotation and connotation of “to lie”. Developmental
Psychology, 21, 993-995.
Winner, E., & Leekam, S. (1991). Distinguishing irony from
deception: Understanding the speaker's second-order
intention.

Institutional Economics, 1, 1–22.

Shultz, T. R. (1974). Development of the appreciation of
riddles. Child Development, 45, 100-105.
Siegal, M., & Peterson, C. (1996). Breaking the mold: a
fresh look at children’s understanding of questions about
lies and mistakes. Developmental Psychology, 32, 322334.
Siegal, M., & Peterson, C. (1998). Preschoolers’
understanding of lies and innocent and negligent mistakes.
Developmental Psychology, 34, 332-341.
Sorenson, R. (2007). Bald-faced lies! Lying without the
intent to deceive. Pacific Philosophical Quarterly, 88,
251-264.
Sperber 1984, D., & Wilson, D. (1981). Irony and the use –
Mention distinction. In P. Cole (Ed.). Radical Pragmatics.
New York: Academic Press.
Sroufe, A., & Wunsch, J. (1972). The development of
laughter in the first year of life. Child Development, 43,
1326-1344.
Talwar, V., Lee, K., Bala, N., & Lindsay, R. C. L. (2002).
Children’s conceptual knowledge of lying and its relation
to their actual behaviors: Implications for court
competence examinations. Law and Human Behavior, 26,
395-415.
Talwar, V., Murphy, S. M., & Lee, K. (2007). White lietelling in children for politeness purposes. International
Journal of Behavioral Development, 31, 1-11.
Tomasello, M. (2003). Constructing a Language: A UsageBased Theory of Language Acquisition. London: Harvard
University Press.
Tzouvaras, A. (1998). Logic of knowledge and utterances
and the liar. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 27, 85-108.

1051

