UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Bi-Polar Theory of Nominal and Clause Structure and Function

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/38w1838s

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
Ball, Jerry T.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Bi-Polar Theory of Nominal and Clause Structure and Function
Jerry T. Ball (jerry.ball@mesa.afmc.af.mil
Human Effectiveness Directorate, Air Force Research Laboratory
6030 S. Kent St., Mesa, AZ 85212
head is to identify the relational type of an expression—in 1
a type of object. The specifier and head combine to form a
referring expression—in 1 an object referring expression
that refers to a type of object.
Contrast example 1 with

Abstract
Two key dimensions of meaning that get grammatically
encoded are referential meaning and relational meaning. In
English, these two dimensions are typically encoded in
distinct grammatical poles—a referential pole and a
relational pole—with a specifier functioning as the locus of
the referential pole and a head functioning as the locus of the
relational pole. Specifiers and heads combine to form
referring expressions. Lexical items and expressions
functioning as modifiers are preferentially attracted to one
pole or the other. One or more complements may be
associated with relational lexical items. The grammatical
functions specifier, head, modifier and complement are
generally adequate to represent much of the basic structure
and function of nominals and clauses.

2. The kick
in which the specifier functions to identify an object
referring expression even though the head describes a type
of relation—more specifically, a type of action. The
specifier dominates the head in determining the referential
type of the expression. The effect is the construal of an
action as though it were an object. In this objective
construal, the participants in the relation are suppressed. In
allowing relations to head nominals, English grammar
provides a fairly general mechanism for construing relations
as though they were objects. This is particularly true of
words describing actions which occur instantaneously and
are easily objectified:

Keywords: meaning; refer; relation; head; specifier; grammar

Introduction
In Cognitive Linguistics (Langacker, 1987, 1991; Lakoff,
1987; Talmy, 2000) it is axiomatic that grammar encodes
meaning. According to Langacker (1987) “grammar is
simply the structuring and symbolization of semantic
content”. This axiom is related to Jackendoff’s Grammatical
Constraint (1983) “…one should prefer a semantic theory
that explains otherwise arbitrary generalizations about the
syntax and the lexicon…a theory’s deviations from efficient
encoding must be vigorously justified, for what appears to
be an irregular relationship between syntax and semantics
may turn out merely to be a bad theory of one or the other”.
In its strongest form—the form adopted in this paper,
though not by Jackendoff—syntactic and semantic
representations are not distinct and the grammatical
constraint and cognitive linguistics align closely.
Two key dimensions of meaning that get grammatically
encoded are referential meaning and relational meaning. In
English, these two dimensions of meaning are typically
encoded in distinct grammatical poles—a referential pole
and a relational pole—with a specifier functioning as the
locus of the referential pole and a head functioning as the
locus of the relational pole. At this level of description,
relational pole is used generally to encompass objective
(noun, pronoun, proper noun) as well as relational (verb,
adjective, adverb, preposition) heads. For example, in the
expression

3. The hit
4. The strike
5. The crunch
It is important to distinguish the inherent part of speech of a
lexical item from its grammatical function in any particular
text. Insisting that the head of a nominal is necessarily a
noun only leads to confusion resulting from the confounding
of grammatical function with part of speech. Further, the
methodology of using syntactic location to determine part of
speech exacerbates the effects of this confusion. Based on
syntactic location and the confusion of grammatical
function with part of speech, the word “running” in
6. The bull is running
7. The running bull
8. The running of the bull
would be categorized as a verb (participle) in 6, an adjective
in 7, and a noun in 8. Yet there is no obvious difference in
the meaning of “running” across these expressions. A better
approach is to treat “running” as a present participle verb
that functions as the head of a clause in 6, a pre-head
modifier in 7, and a nominal head in 8.
The important grammatical function of specifiers is
evidenced by the following contrasting examples:
9. The dance
10. The drink
11. The kill
12. The splash
13. The cat

1. The dog
the determiner “the” functions as a specifier and the noun
“dog” functions as the head. The function of a specifier is to
identify the referential type of an expression—in example 1
an object referring expression or nominal. The function of a
190

to dance
to drink
to kill
to splash
to cat (about)

14. The dog

Theory (Chomsky, 1970). It is acknowledged that X-Bar
Theory captures an important grammatical generalization,
with the distinction between specifiers and modifiers
representing an important advance in linguistic theorizing,
but these categories are in need of semantic motivation
which, when provided, necessitates certain modifications to
the basic X-Bar schema.
The focus of this paper is on the joint encoding of
referential and relational meaning. The following sentence
and nominal expression

to dog (someone)

The head has the same word form in each contrasting
expression, and there is no basis for the head determining
the grammatical function of the expression. Rather, it is the
specifier—either the determiner “the” or the infinitive
marker “to”—that determines the function of the expression.
The specifier “the” picks out an objective sense of “dance”
and “drink” in forming a nominal, whereas the specifier “to”
picks out an action sense of these words in forming an
infinitive phrase. Even in the case of words which have a
strong action preference, the specifier “the” forces an object
reading as in the case of “the kill” or “the splash”. “The” has
the effect of objectifying the following head, often forcing
action words to be interpreted as one of the typical
participants in the action, rather than the action itself.
Likewise “to” has the effect of relationalizing the following
head. The words “cat” and “dog”, which are almost always
used in expressions that refer to particular kinds of objects,
are relationalized by “to” and the base meanings of “cat”
and “dog” are extended to support reference to relational
attributes of the objects and not the objects themselves.
The combining of the referential and relational poles in
creating a referring expression provides semantic motivation
for the syntactic notion of a maximal projection. A
relational pole alone does not constitute a referring
expression and is not a maximal projection. However, there
are lexical items in English (e.g. pronoun, proper nouns,
deictic words, tensed verbs) that combine the referential and
relational poles in functioning as referring expressions and
constituting maximal projections. Further, there is no claim
that the division of referential and relational meaning into
distinct poles is universal and there may be languages (e.g.
Chinese) in which this division does not occur. However, it
is claimed that referential and relational meaning are two
dimensions of meaning that are likely to be universally
encoded by some mechanism in the grammar and lexicon of
all languages.
In describing specifiers and heads as the loci or poles of
referential and relational meaning, it is implied that
additional grammatical elements may surround these two
poles and may be preferentially attracted to one pole or the
other. These grammatical elements perform the important
grammatical function of modification which serves to
constrain the range of referential and relational meaning as
expressed in heads and specifiers. In addition, relational
lexical items establish expectations for the occurrence of
one or more complements to express the participants
conventionally involved in the relation.
The grammatical functions specifier, head, modifier and
complement are generally adequate to represent the basic
structure and function of nominals and clauses. These
grammatical functions can be further subcategorized (e.g.
object specifier, predicate specifier, object modifier,
relation modifier, subject complement, object complement,
indirect object complement, clausal complement) to
explicate the structure and function of nominals and clauses
in more detail. The general terms are borrowed from X-Bar

15. The book is on the table
16. The book on the table
have essentially the same relational meaning. They both
describe a relation on existing between a book and a table.
However, they differ in their referential meaning with 15
referring to a situation and 16 referring to an object. This
difference is reflected in their grammatical realization. In
English, reference to a situation is typically expressed by
predicating a relation functioning as the head of a clause and
expressing the conventionalized participants of the relation
as nominals functioning as the subject and object
complements of the relation. On the other hand, reference to
an object is typically expressed by a nominal consisting of a
specifier and head and, in 16, an optional prepositional
phrase modifier. The requirements for the joint encoding of
referential and relational meaning often lead to grammatical
variation like that evidenced in 15 and 16.

Relational Pole Heads
Although a noun typically functions as the head of a
nominal, and a verb typically functions as the head of a
clause, lexical items of numerous parts of speech can
function as the heads of nominals and clauses. Consider the
following nominal heads:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Noun
o The book
Proper Noun
o The Donald
Verb
o He gave the ball a kick
o The running of the bulls
Adjective
o The quick and the dead
o The noblest of motives
Preposition
o The up (and down) of the elevator
Adverb
o The ayes have it

Although it is uncommon for proper nouns to be preceded
by a determiner in English and the expression “the Donald”
has the effect of referring to a specific person even out of
immediate context (namely Donald Trump), specifiers often
precede proper nouns in other languages (e.g. Portuguese,
German) reflecting the fact that proper nouns do not, in
general, pick out specific individuals out of context. It has
191

way that a relation which heads a nominal is construed
objectively, a noun which heads a clause is construed
relationally. Typically, some attribute of the noun is made
salient and is ascribed to the subject of the clause.
In addition to lexical items of different parts of speech
heading nominals, there are numerous forms of expression
that can function as the heads of nominals:

already been argued that verbs like “running” and “kick”
can function as objectified heads of nominals. In “the quick
and the dead” it may be argued that the heads of the
nominals “the quick…” and “the dead…” are missing and
must be recovered from the context. However, it may also
be argued that an adjective can take on the function of a
head when no other candidate is available. When an
adjective functions as the head of a nominal, the effect is to
objectify the adjective and construe it as referring to an
individual or type of individual. The use of prepositions and
adverbs as heads of nominals is not common in English, but
such uses do occur.
Consider the following clausal heads:
•
•
•
•
•

•

Verb + Particle
o The buy out of the corporation
Gerund
o Our going to the movies was fun
That clause
o That you like him is nice

•
•

Verb
o He runs; He is running
Adjective
o He is sad
Preposition
o He is out (of the office)
Adverb
o He is there
Noun
o I am woman; Jesus is Lord

Other researchers have suggested that any strong notion of
endocentricity as in X-Bar Theory where the head (e.g.
Noun) always determines the type of an expression (e.g.
Noun Phrase) needs to be relaxed to deal with constructions
like those above (e.g. Pullum, 1991; Malouf, 2000).
Like nominals, clauses may also be headed by
expressions
•

Verbs are the typical heads of clauses. However, when there
are two verbs in a clause (e.g. “is” and “running” in “he is
running”) which one functions as the head? Since the clause
“he is running” is essentially about “running” and not about
“being”, “running” is the obvious candidate to be the
head—if the grammatical function head is to be
semantically motivated. The common use of the term
auxiliary verb to refer to “is” reflects its more peripheral
role in the clause. On the other hand, it is the auxiliary verb
which provides the tense that marks a tensed clause. Tense
performs a referential function in identifying the situation
being referred to with respect to the context of use of the
text. When the referential and relational dimensions of
meaning are distinguished, the functions of the auxiliary and
main verb become clear. And once the referential function
of the auxiliary verb is made clear, the occurrence of
relational heads in clauses that are not verbs becomes
unproblematic. For example, “he is sad” is essentially about
being sad, and “sad” functions as the head despite the
occurrence of the auxiliary verb “is” in the clause. It is a fact
about English that relations other than verbs are uninflected
for tense and must be accompanied by an auxiliary verb to
provide that tense when they head clauses. The alternative
treatment of “sad” as a complement of the auxiliary verb
“is” with “is” functioning as the head (cf. Quirk et al. 1985)
distorts the notion of what a head (and complement) is.
Unlike English, Russian and Chinese allow adjectives to
head clauses without the occurrence of an auxiliary verb or
tense marking. Once it is accepted that adjectives can head
clauses, the extension to prepositions, adverbs and untensed
relations more generally, is straightforward as the above
examples show. Even the use of a noun as the head of a
clause (common in Russian) is explainable. Similar to the

•
•

Nominal
o He is a child vs.
o He is a child
Prepositional phrase
o The book is on the table vs.
o The book is on the table
Verb phrase
o He is eating a sandwich vs.
o He is eating a sandwich

One analysis of “he is a child” treats “is a child” as a
predicate nominal. Under this analysis the predicate
specifier “is” has the effect of predicatizing the nominal “a
child” allowing it (or salient attributes) to be predicated of
the subject. There is also an equational analysis in which
the auxiliary verb “is” is functioning as a main verb that
equates two co-referential nominals “he” and “a child”.
Both analyses are reasonable and humans may well vary in
their representations of such constructions.
Two analyses are also possible for prepositional phrases.
The question of whether the prepositional phrase “on the
table” is functioning as the head of “the book is on the
table” or whether the preposition “on” is the head taking the
complements “he” and “the table” hinges on the integration
of referential and relational meaning. If “on the table” is
functioning as a referential unit that refers to a location, then
the treatment of “on the table” as the head is supported. On
the other hand, if the relation “on” is the focus of the clause,
then the two complement relational representation is
supported. English supports both possibilities as is
evidenced by the question forms:
17. Where is the book?
18. What is the book on?
In 17 a location is explicitly referenced by “where”, whereas
in 18 the object of the relation “on” is explicitly referenced

192

by “what” and the reference to a location is less salient. On
the assumption that a single representation is constructed
during the processing of this text, one or the other will
dominate depending on the context. From a processing
perspective, the resulting representation depends on whether
the specifier “is” combines with the relation “on” before the
nominal “the table” combines with “on”.

specification for isolated clauses. The predicate specifier
indicates reference to a relation and predicates that relation
as occurring. The predicated relation when combined with
its complements refers to a situation without additional
specification. Note the implication that the predicate
specifier combines with the relational head before the
relational head combines with its complements. The
predicate specifier combines with the relational head to
form a predicate referring expression which refers to a
relation. This predicate referring expression then combines
with its complements to form a situation referring
expression which refers to a situation consisting of the
relation and associated participants.
The infinitive marker “to” typically functions to specify a
situation that is not predicated as actually occurring. This is
essentially a generic reference to a non-specific instance or
type of situation, rather than to a specific instance of a
situation. The infinitive clause can function as a
complement in a matrix clause with the subject of the
infinitive clause typically being provided by the matrix
clause.

Referential Pole Specifiers
The typical specifier of a nominal is a determiner, and the
typical specifier of a clause is an auxiliary verb. However,
there is a range of lexical items of different parts of speech
and a few expression forms that may function as specifiers.
•
•
•
•
•
•

Determiner
o The book; A book
Quantifier
o Some books
Negative
o No book
Wh-word
o What book
Possessive pronoun
o My book
Possessive nominal
o Joe’s book

Modifiers
While specifiers and heads are important determinants of
the basic character of referring expressions, modifiers play a
more peripheral and optional role. A modifier adds
information that may serve to further refine the category of
the head, but does not typically determine the base relational
category or the referring category. For example, in the
expression

The specifier in a nominal in combination with the head
may indicate reference to a specific instance of an object
(“the book”) or objectified relation (“the kick”), to a
collection of instances (“some books”), to a mass (“some
rice”), to a non-specific instance (“a book”), and even to a
questioned instance (“what book”), a non-existent instance
(“no book”) or a type (“a dog is a type of animal”). The
possessive nominal indicates reference to an object with
respect to a reference point which is itself an object
reference. Reference as used herein is to objects, relations
and situations in a situation model (Zwann & Radvansky,
1998) which is a mental representation that may or may not
correspond to actual objects, relations or situations in the
real world. An expression like “no books” in “no books are
on the table” establishes reference to a collection of objects
of type book, but indicates that the collection is empty. The
negation is handled within the context of an object referring
expression in accordance with the grammatical constraint
rather than being propagated to the clausal level as is done
in quantificational logic.
Consider the following clausal specifiers:
•
•

19. the old man
the modifier “old” further refines the category “man”, but
does not establish the base category. “Old man” may be a
subtype of “man”, but “old man” is still a type of “man”.
Nor does the addition of “old” to “man” determine a
referring expression.
Consider the following modifiers:
•
•
•
•
•

Auxiliary
o He is running
Infinitive marker
o I like to sleep

•
•

The auxiliary verb “is” in “he is running” establishes
reference to a specific situation via tense marking. In so
doing, the situation referred to by the expression is
predicated as actually occurring. In English, there is no
distinction between predicate specification and situation

Adjective
o The old book
Quantifier
o The three books
Noun
o The bird dog
Proper Noun
o A Bin Laden confidant
Verb Participle
o The running bull
Prepositional Phrase
o The book on the table
o His in your face manner
Relative Clause
o The book that I told you about

Pre-head modifiers in nominals typically function to
constrain the type of the unspecified head, perhaps creating
a subtype, but the head determines the profile of the
193

Object specification may also consist of more than one
lexical item or morphological marker. Consider the
expressions

resulting combination, not the modifier. Post-head modifiers
usually modify referring expressions and not just the
unspecified heads of those expressions. In “the book on the
table”, “on the table” modifies the referring expression “the
book” and not just the head “book”. This position is
motivated by consideration of relational meaning. The
complements of relations are assumed to be referring
expressions that refer to the participants in the relation. In
“the book on the table”, the preposition “on” is a locative
relation that relates the two complements “the book” and
“the table”. It is unclear from a relational perspective what it
would mean for the arguments of a relation not to be full
referring expressions, since the arguments would fail to
indicate reference to the participants in the relation. From a
relational perspective “the book” is an complement of “on”
and not just the non-referential word “book”. On the other
hand, from a referential perspective, “the book” refers to
some object and that reference is subsequently constrained
by the modifier “on the table”. The integration of referential
and relational meaning is facilitated if post-head modifiers
modify referring expressions and not just the unspecified
heads of those expressions.
In pre-head modification, the unspecified head is not a
complement of the relational modifier, since the head is not
a referring expression. The relationship between a pre-head
modifier and a head is essentially a modifier-head
relationship resulting in a modified head and not a relationargument (or head-complement) relationship.
The referential function of a specifier need not be filled
by a single lexical item. Predicate specification may include
a modal auxiliary, up to three other auxiliaries, and a
negative. Consider the expression

21. books
22. two books
23. first two books
24. the first two books
The word “books” by itself can function as an object
referring expression (or nominal) (providing a
morphologically based indefinite specification) as in “books
are fun to read”. Adding the cardinal quantifier “two”
constrains the range of the object referring expression, but
does not change its grammatical status as an (indefinite)
object referring expression as is evidenced by “two books
are on the table”. On the other hand, the addition of an
ordinal quantifier changes the grammatical status and “first
two books” in “first two books are on the table” is not a
well-formed object referring expression. If “first” is
functioning as a modifier of the head “two books” this is
unexpected, since a modifier does not change the
grammatical status of the head it modifies (i.e. the modifierhead relationship is endocentric). However, if ordinal
quantifiers function as modifiers of specifiers and not
modifiers of heads, the awkwardness of example 23 is
explained since there is no specifier for “first” to modify. In
example 24, “first” in “the first” further constrains the
definite reference indicated by “the” and “the first”
combines with the indefinite expression “two books” to
form a definite object referring expression.

Complements
A complement is a referring expression that describes a
participant in a relation as part of a situation referring
expression or clause. The complement does not determine
the referential type of the expression in which it participates,
nor does it determine the relational type of that expression.
The relationship between a head and its complements is
primarily relational in nature. Only relational heads take
complements and those complements are full referring
expressions. The number and type of complements that a
relational word or expression takes is a conventionalization
of the situation that the word or expression is used to
describe. That conventionalization provides a particular
perspective on the situation (Fillmore, 1977) that may vary
from language to language (and within a language), but is
nonetheless
meaningfully
motivated.
Such
conventionalization may be driven in part by psychological
limits on the number of separate chunks of information that
can be separately entertained at one time (i.e., short-term
working memory limitations).
The relationship between a specifier and a relational head
and between a relational head and its complement(s) is
largely, though not entirely, orthogonal. The specifier-head
relationship is primarily referential, whereas, the headcomplement
relationship
is
primarily
relational.
Grammatically, there is often a closer affinity between a

20. He could not have been hitting the ball
In 20, the predicate specifier consists of the modal auxiliary
“could”, the negative “not”, and the auxiliary verbs “have”
and “been”. The modal auxiliary is the locus of the predicate
specification with “not” “have” and “been” functioning as
modifiers. That the negative “not” combines with the modal
auxiliary is suggested by the contracted forms of negation
(e.g. “couldn’t”, “shouldn’t”, “won’t”) and by the
requirement for do-support in negation (e.g. “he does not
run” vs. “he runs”) where the auxiliary verb “do” is inserted
as the locus for attachment of the modifying negative.
A processing argument can also be made for the
combination of the negative and additional auxiliary verbs
with the first auxiliary verb. If the auxiliaries and negative
combine with the main verb, then the auxiliaries and
negative will need to be retained in memory as separate
linguistic units until the main verb occurs. On the
assumption that short-term working memory only has the
capacity to retain a few distinct linguistic units, this is likely
to lead to an overloading of the capacity of short-term
working memory which should result in processing
difficulty. Such difficulty is unattested in adult native
speakers of English.

194

Cheng and Sybesma, 1998). For example, in “the dog”
treating “the” as the head of a DP (determiner phrase) taking
the NP (noun phrase) complement “dog”—when “dog” by
itself isn’t even an NP. Likewise, Hudson’s strongly
endocentric version of dependency grammar leads him to
suggest that “the” is a pronoun that just happens to take a
complement.
The grammatical functions specifier, head, modifier, and
complement are generally adequate to represent much of the
basic structure and function of nominals and clauses—
especially with respect to the encoding of referential and
relational meaning. Lexical items of different parts of
speech and various forms of expression may fulfill these
grammatical functions making it important to distinguish
the grammatical function of a lexical item and expression
from its inherent part of speech and expression form.
Additional grammatical functions may be needed to
represent other dimensions of meanings that get encoded in
language and to handle noncanonical forms of expression.

specifier and a relational head than there is between a
relational head and its complements. The closer affinity of a
predicate specifier and relational head is suggested by the
fact that the infinitive marker “to” which specifies a nonfinite predicate referring expression, also sanctions the nonoccurrence of the subject complement (an example of the
interdependence of referential and relational meaning).
Although, the infinitive marker sanctions the nonoccurrence of the subject complement, that complement is
typically retrievable in the context of use of the expression.
On the other hand, in the expression “the book is on the
table” the relationship between the predicate specifier “is”
and the relational head “on” may be subordinated to the
relationship between “on” and its object complement “the
table.” If so, “on” first combines with “the table” to form a
higher order relation (that takes one less complement)
before combining with the predicate specifier “is” (and the
subject complement).
The complements in a clause can be further
subcategorized into subject, (direct) object, indirect object,
and complement (e.g. clausal complement). From a
relational perspective, the subject complement has the same
status as the other complements of the relation. However,
many linguists treat the subject as distinct from other
complements, often according it the status of external
argument (i.e. external to the verb phrase which includes
object complements, but not the subject). In extreme cases,
the subject is not even treated as a complement of the
relational head of a clause—distorting the notion of what a
complement is. For example, some variants of X-Bar
Theory treat the subject as a specifier (of IP) and not a
complement (external or otherwise). The treatment of
objects as internal arguments of the verb and the subject as
an external argument of the verb is deeply entrenched (at
least for syntactic analyses of English). In part, this is based
on the occurrence of subjectless constructions like gerunds
and infinitive clauses which suggest the existence of verb
phrase constituents. Clearly, there is some merit to this
position. Further, it may be that there are pragmatic reasons
for treating subjects as distinguished from other objects (e.g.
topicalization, saliency). However, from a relational
perspective, subjects and objects have equal relational
status. To the extent that the notion of an external subject is
legitimate, it is presumably tied to dimensions of meaning
like topicalization and saliency, or to processing
considerations (e.g. retaining the subject as a separate unit
in short-term working memory) which are not currently
addressed.

Acknowledgments
I would like to thank Kevin Gluck, Wink Bennett, Maj
Heather Pringle and Col Stuart Rodgers of the Air Force
Research Laboratory for supporting this research.

References
Cheng, L, and Sybesma, R. (1998). Interview with James
McCawley, University of Chicago. Glot International 3:5.
Chomsky, N. (1970). Remarks on Nominalization. R.
Jacobs & P. Rosembaum, eds., Readings in English
Transformational Grammar. Ginn, Waltham, MA.
Fillmore, C. (1977). Scenes-and-frames semantics. In
Linguistic Structures Processing pp. 55-82. Edited by A.
Zampolli. Holland: North Holland Publishing.
Hudson, R. (2000). Grammar without functional categories.
R. Borsley ed, The Nature and Function of Syntactic
Categories. New York: Adademic Press.
Jackendoff, R. (1983). Semantics and Cognition. The MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA.
Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, Fire and Dangerous Things.
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Langacker, R. (1987, 1991). Foundations of Cognitive
Grammar, Volumes 1 & 2. Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press.
Malouf, R.. (2000). Verbal Gerunds as Mixed Categories in
Head-Driven Phrase Structure Grammar. Syntax and
Semantics, V32, 133-165, R. Borsley (ed). NY: Academic
Pullum, G. (1991). English nominal gerunds as noun
phrases with verb phrase heads. Linguistics 29, 763-99.
Quirk, R., S. Greenbaum, G. Leech, & J. Svartvik (1985). A
Comprehensive Grammar of the English Language.
London: Longman.
Talmy, L. (2000). Toward a Cognitive Semantics, Vols I
and II. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press
Zwann, R., and Radvansky, G. (1998). Situation models in
language comprehension and memory. Psychological
Bulletin, 123, 162-185.

Conclusion
The bi-polar theory presented in this paper (and in more
detail at www.DoubleRTheory.com) resolves problems that
have plagued uni-polar theories like X-Bar Theory
(Chomsky, 1970) and Dependency Grammar (Hudson,
2000). The shift to functional “heads” in X-Bar Theory
leads McCawley to lament “…all sorts of things…get
represented as heads of things they aren’t heads of” (in

195

