UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Computational Approach to Mental Models

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4173g4qs

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
D'Mello, Sidney
Graesser, Art
Ventura, Matthew

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Computational Approach to Mental Models
Matthew Ventura(mventura@memphis.edu)
Department of Psychology/ Institute for Intelligent Systems, 365 Innovation Drive
Memphis, TN 38152-3115 USA

Sidney D’Mello (sdmello@memphis.edu)
Department of Mathematical Science/ Institute for Intelligent Systems, 365 Innovation Drive
Memphis, TN 38152-3115 USA

Art Graesser(a-graesser@memphis.edu)
Department of Psychology/ Institute for Intelligent Systems, 365 Innovation Drive
Memphis, TN 38152-3115 USA

Barsalou’s (1999) perceptual symbol system. This
distinction could be seen as a formalization of the “what”
and “where” system of Landau and Jackendoff (1993). The
“what” system handles object meaning and the “where”
system handles the spatial orientations of objects in space.
The purpose of this paper is to show how a simple
coordinate system can generate inferences about where
objects are located on a wide variety of spatial reasoning
problems without extensive rules.

Abstract
This paper outlines the Mental Model Algorithm
(MMA), a model of spatial reasoning that uses a
coordinate based representation to specify the spatial
relations between objects. Based on humans’
performance on undetermined spatial reasoning
problems, the MMA predicted preferences in the
resolutions of undetermined positions of shapes.
Additionally, the MMA is proposed to be a simpler
and more scalable algorithm than propositional
calculus models in that only a small set of rules are
required to generate spatial inferences.

Mental models and Propositional
calculus

Introduction
Spatial comprehension in discourse can be claimed to
require a construction process: John is to the left of Mary,
Mary is to the left of Steve, that generates inferences such as
John is to the left of Steve (Graesser, Singer, & Trabasso,
1994). In this construction process an important component
consists of constructing mental models that arguably are
generated from analog-based representations (JohnsonLaird, 1983; Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991). This theory has
traditionally been contrasted with context-free propositional
calculus (PC) models. The PC models stipulate that humans
construct mental propositions by context-free formal rules of
inference that apply to explicit assertions and that derive
conclusions that are not sensitive to an argument’s content
(Hagert, 1985; Pylyshyn, 1981; Rips, 1986). PC models
have formally been applied to the generation of spatial
inferences but fail to make predictions of human spatial
reasoning that are compatible with mental models (for a
review, see McNAmara, Miller, & Bransford, 1996).
Nevertheless a formal algorithm for mental models needs to
be specified to advance theory development and
experimentation on mental models. In creating such an
algorithm, it is assumed that mental models are neither
proposition lists nor detailed images, but a hybrid of
symbolic representations that get instantiated in a formalized
coordinate space (Johnson-Laird, 1983), much like

Byrne and Johnson-Laird (1989) gave evidence that mental
models predict difficulty for certain spatial reasoning
problems. Consider problem 1.
A is to the left of B.
C is to the left of B.
D is below B.
E is below C.
What is the relationship between D and E?
In this problem two mental models can be constructed:
(a)

A C
E

B
D

(b)

C A
E

B
D

Figure 1: Two mental models for problem 1.
The mental model theory predicted difficulty with this
problem since there is indeterminacy with A and C. Since
there then are two alternative models that can be
constructed, humans have more difficulty with this type of
problem. A PC model does not make this prediction since a
conflict with A and C does not affect the inference question
(Byrne & Johnson-Laird, 1989).

2289

In the following sections we provide a computational
framework for mental models that established further
theoretical support for such models. In providing this
theoretical support, mental models must be operationally
defined under a representational system. Johnson-Laird &
Byrne (1991) briefly describes how a coordinate based
algorithm can be written that builds mental models for
spatial reasoning. Additionally, Glenberg, Kruley, and
Langston (1994), describe how mental models can be
constructed in a three-dimensional spatial medium to
account for increased activations of spatially close objects in
sentence comprehension. The purpose of the present
algorithm is to formally describe how a mental model can
generate spatial inferences in discourse.

descriptions. In this space the MMA takes each point P and
checks for other points that fall anywhere on the x, y, or z
axis. Points on higher/lower y coordinates than P are
considered above/below, points higher/lower than P on the x
coordinate is considered right/left, and points higher/lower
than P on the z coordinate is considered in front/behind (see
figure 3). This process will yield all the linguistic spatial
relations for each point. With simple process the model will
report the inference that the A is in left of C without explicit
rules.

Mental Model Algorithm
The Mental Model Algorithm (MMA) is proposed to
formally model spatial reasoning by using a simple
analogical representation in 3-D space to construct
coordinate boundaries of linguistically described spatial
relations. After spatial relations are plotted, an inference
process translates the spatial array back into linguistic
descriptions.
To assigned coordinate boundaries the bounding box
model was used (Regier, & Carlson, 2001) to specify 6
spatial relationships (i.e., above, below, left, right, behind,
front right). In the bounding box model (see Figure 2), each
preposition states a coordinate rule which specifies a three
dimensional box relative to a landmark. A trajector is any
object that falls in the two dimensional coordinates of the
landmark.

Figure 3: Three dimensional plane for inferring spatial
relations relative to P. In this figure, P is in front, and to the
right of O. P is also to the right, and below, N.

Model Complexity for 2-D problems
One question that arises in the MMA and PC models are the
number of rules required in solving spatial inference
problems. Increasing rules suggest limitations in scalability
towards varying applications. In the following example we
will show how increasing complexity in spatial
configurations poses increasing rules for PC models.
Conversely, the MMA only has a small set of rules that need
no modification for increasingly complex spatial
configurations. Consider problem 2.
A is to the left of B.
B is to the left of C.
D is below A.
E is below C.
What is the relationship between D and E?

Figure 2: Bounding box model for above relative to a
landmark (LM).
The MMA constructs simple spatial relationships by
linguistic propositions stating the relationship between two
objects (e.g., (1a) A is on the left of B (1b) B is on the left of
C). The MMA displays the spatial relations between the
three shapes by using the box model to configure each pair
of shapes in each proposition. On a n x n x n coordinate
plane, the MMA constructs (1a) by representing B as a point
at the origin (0,0) and A as a point at (-1,0); MMA always
places the first landmark of a spatial problem at the origin.
Where the landmark thereafter in each pair is always the
object already set in the coordinate plane. Then in (1b) the
MMA adds C to the plane at point (1,0) to display A B C.
Spatial inferences are made between the points in 3-D
space with a simple interpreter. This inference process takes
nonlinguistic information and recodes it back into linguistic

The depiction is shown below where object-pair relations are
assumed to be adjacent (Byrne & Johnson-Laird, 1989).
A
D

B

C
E

Figure 4: Mental model for problem 2.
In this case 6 rules (from Hagert, 1983) in the logic program
Prolog are required to answer that D is to the left of E for
any length between A and C, A and D, or C and E. Rules are
written in non-variable form to better understand the rules
for the problem.

2290

construction(P)
{
foreach proposition p in P
{
landmark = parse(p, 0);
relation = parse(p, 1);
trajector = parse(p, 2);

(1) Left (A, C) If Left (A, B) & Left (B, C).
(2) Left (D, B) If Below (D, A) & Left (A, B).
(3) Left (B, E) If Below (E, C) & Left (B, C).
(4) Below (A, C) If Below (A, B) & Below (B, C).
(5) Left (A, B) = Right (B, A).
(6) Above (A, D) = Below (D, A).
For the MMA 3 algorithms are needed to answer any 3-D
spatial relation. Since the rules in the MMA are constrained
by space, they pose a greater advantage for solving any
spatial configuration. Algorithm 1 and 2 state the steps
involved in plotting trajectors relative to landmarks in keyvalue hash tables.
Algorithm 1: subdirection
Input: Two objects, the landmark, the trajector, and a
spatial relationship relation between the landmark and
trajector.
Preconditions: The landmark should already have its coordinates mapped in the hashtables.
Postconditions: The hashtables, x_map and y_map,
maintaining the co-ordinates of each object in the X and Y
directions respectively will be updated.
subdirection(trajector, landmark, relation)
{
if(relation == “LEFT”)
{
x_map(trajector) = x_map(landmark) - 1;
y_map(trajector) = y_map(landmark);
}
else if(relation == “RIGHT”)
{
x_map(trajector) = x_map(landmark) + 1;
y_map(trajector) = y_map(landmark);
}
else if(relation == “BELOW”)
{
x_map(trajector) = x_map(landmark);
y_map(trajector) = y_map(landmark) - 1;
}
else if(relation == “ABOVE”)
{
x_map(trajector) = x_map(landmark);
y_map(trajector) = y_map(landmark) + 1;
}
}

if (empty(x_map) && empty(y_map)
{
x_map(landmark) = 0;
y_map(landmark) = 0;
}
if(exists(x_map,landmark)&& exists(y_map,landmark))
subdirection(trajector, landmark, relation);
else
print_error(“undefined landmark”);
}
}
Figure 5: Algorithm 1 and 2 for the x and y axis.
Algorithm 2 takes each proposition and parses the pair into
the landmark and the trajector. The landmark is always the
object that already has been plotted in the plane. Then
algorithm 1 assigns coordinates to each trajector relative to
the landmark.
After all objects have been plotted in the plane, Algorithm 3
generates spatial relations between all objects on the x and y
axis.
Algorithm 3: spatial relations
Input: None
Preconditions: Coordinates for each object should be
mapped to the hashtables x_map and y_map.
Postconditions: Spatial relations between all objects are
listed.

Algorithm 2: construction
Input: A set of propositions in an array P. For clarity but
not necessity, the landmark is always assumed to be the third
position, the landmark is assumed to be in the first position
and the relation is in the middle position.
Preconditions: None
Postconditions: Two global Hashtables, x_map and
y_map, maintaining the co-ordinates of each object in the X
and Y directions respectively will be created.

relations()
{
foreach landmark in x_map
{
foreach trajector in y_map
{
if(landmark != trajector)
{
if(x_map(landmark) < x_map(trajector))
print(landmark “LEFT” trajector)
else if(x_map(landmark) > x_map(trajector))
print(landmark “RIGHT” trajector)
else if(y_map(landmark) < y_map(trajector))
print(landmark “BELOW” trajector)
else if(x_map(landmark) > x_map(trajector))
print(landmark “ABOVE” trajector)
}
}
}
}
Figure 6: Algorithm3 for the x and y axis. This assigns
spatial orientations between every object on the x and y axis.

2291

Currently it may appear that the MMA is more complex than
the PC models. But as we will see the MMA does not
change for any 2-D problems. While PC models can solve
any symmetrical variations of problem 2, difficulties arise
under simple spatial augmentations. Consider problem 3
with E placed directly left of D:
A is to the left of B.
B is the left of C.
D is below A.
D is to the left of E.
What is the relationship between E and B?

Where a depiction would look like the following:
A/B/C
DE
Figure 8: Mental model for problem 5. Where x/y indicates
x is behind y.
The MMA will have to incorporate 2 plotting rules and 2
more inference rules (front/behind) to detect the relations
between E and B (i.e., behind, below, and to the right). PC
models need rules to account for relations between the z to y
and z to x axis. Here is a sample of a few.

A depiction is shown in Figure 7.
(9) Behind (A,B) = Front (B,A).
(10) Behind (D,B) If Below (D,A) & Behind (A,B).
(11) Behind (D,B) If Left (D,A) & Behind (A,B).
(12) Behind (A,C) If Behind (A,B) & Behind (B,C).
(13) Behind (E,B) If Left (E,D) & Behind (D,B).
(14) Behind (E,B) If Left (D,E) & Behind (D,B).
(15) Left (B,E) If Behind (D,A) & Left (D,E).
(16) Left (E,B) If Behind (D,A) & Left (E,D).
(17) Below (E,B) If Left (E,D) & Below (D,A).
(18) Below (E,B) If Left (D,E) & Below (D,A).

A B C
D E
Figure 7: Mental model for problem 3.
The inference that E is below B can not be solved by the
current rule set using Prolog. By adding the following rule:
(7) Below (E,B) If Left (D,E) & Left (A,B) & Below
(D,A).
Now consider problem 4 with E placed on the left of D. In
this situation the PC model would not be able to infer that E
is to the left of A. The following rule would be needed:

Thus for any 3-D spatial problem the MMA has 6
inference rules while a PC model has at least 18. In addition
to the MMA advantages computationally, the following
experiment will investigate further theoretical predictions of
the MMA and PC models.

(8) Left (E,A) If Left (E,D) & Below (D,A).
A final variation worth mentioning is to consider problem 4
with F added below E. In this case F is also below D. The
PC model would not be able to infer this relationship with
the current rule set.
Thus it appears that PC models are not scalable to
variations of spatial reasoning problems. There are other
spatial relations not mentioned in problem 2 that would need
additional rules (e.g., D is below B and C, E is below A and
B, etc…). This is contrasted with 4 inference rules needed in
the MMA to calculate all possible 2-D spatial relations. The
following section will illustrate further complexity in PC
models for 3-D spatial relations.

Model Complexity for 3-D problems
Adding a third dimension in spatial reasoning creates three
spatial relations for every object. Consider problem 5.
A is behind B.
B is behind C.
D is below A.
D is to the left of E.
What is the relationship between E and B?

Experiment: spatial inferences in undetermined
spatial reasoning
This construction of a mental model assumes an incremental
updating of the representation on the basis of the present and
past input. So the resultant representation in any given
moment guides the interpretation of subsequent input. A
question arises as to the integration of previous information
with the interpretation of each new sentence (see Sanford &
Garrod, 1989). One issue in this integration process is how
to resolve conflict in indeterminate spatial problems. In this
process the MMA assumes comprehension proceeds in a
linear fashion and can not have objects share the same space
in the coordinate plane. One key prediction of the MMA is
to prefer certain resolutions over others for simple
indeterminate problems such as A left of B, B right of C.
Where resolutions are assumed to be depicted on one
dimension as either A C B or C A B (see Hayward and Tarr,
1995; Regier, & Carlson, 2001). Givon’s iconicity
assumption (1992), would predict C A B, which states
humans assume an event t stated in discourse gets
constructed and remains unchanged when integrated with
new information q. To build this depiction, the MMA
constructs the first premise and displays A B. Since C can
not occupy the same space as A, C is placed on the left of
the A to make C A B (see Figure 9 for the added subroutine
for this process). PC models would not predict any

2292

preference for a resolution since there are no constraints of
space for PC, thus it does not matter that A and C occupy the
same space.
subundetermined(trajector)
{
if(exists(x_map, trajector)
{
if(relation == “LEFT”)
{
x_map(trajector) = min(x_map) – 1;
y_map(trajector) = y_map(landmark);
}
if(relation == “RIGHT”)
{
x_map(trajector) = max(x_map) +1;
y_map(trajector) = y_map(landmark);
}
}
if(exists(y_map, trajector)
{
if(relation == “BELOW”)
{
y_map(trajector) = min(y_map) -1;
x_map(trajector) = x_map(landmark);
}
if(relation == “ABOVE”)
{
y_map(trajector) = max(y_map) +1;
x_map(trajector) = x_map(landmark);

other correct alternatives, and 8% were incorrect. A
comparison of the correct alternatives yielded a significant
one-tailed difference x2 = 3.25, p < .05. Additionally, all
subjects drew the spatial depictions to generate inferences.
In these drawings 94% were drawn on one dimension,
supporting theories of spatial prototypically (Hayward &
Tarr, 1995; Regier, & Carlson, 2001).

Discussion

}
}
}
Figure 9: Undetermined coordinate assignment for the x
and y axis. This rule says that if the assigned coordinate
already exists in the hash table, replace its x or y axis with
the (the min) -1 or (the max) + 1 of the values in the hash
table.

Data Collection
Twenty college students were presented with 6
undetermined spatial problems consisting of left and right,
(e.g., (1a) circle is on the right of the square, (1b) square is
on the left of the triangle). Instructions were to list all
possible shape spatial relations that were not already stated
in the 2 propositions. Subjects were not explicitly instructed
to draw, but were told they could use any means necessary
to generate the spatial relations between the shapes. The
dependent measure was the subjects’ first spatial inference
given for each problem.

Our data suggest that a simple coordinate based construction
system is sufficient to model many characteristics of spatial
reasoning in discourse. This is consistent with intuitions of
proponents of Mental Models (Johnson-Laird & Byrne,
1991). By using simple Euclidian based rules for spatial
relations between object pairs, inferences can be made as to
spatial relationships between complex spatial arrays.
Additionally, the MMA requires a small set of rules that can
be generalized to spatial reasoning problems that pose
complexity for PC. By testing formally PC models and the
MMA it is apparent that mental models of MMA have
advantages theoretically as well as computationally.
Arguments have been made that humans may not process
mental models in a Euclidian like space (Langston, Kramer,
& Glenberg, 1998), these experiments looked at implicit
spatial relations in text comprehension. Spatial reasoning
mainly involves explicit instructions to look for spatial
relations between objects. This process can be argued to be
Euclidian based since it is a simple strategy to use for
generating spatial inferences. Further research should be
conducted to determine the validity of Euclidian based
representations.
Additionally, the MMA can be easily applied to 3
dimensional problems since the subroutine for assigning
coordinates and scanning directions is not qualitatively
different for a third dimension. Including a third dimension
also would allow for an “in/out” relation. This relation
would have to incorporate notions of space for objects
beyond points, since the notion of containment has
assumptions of size for landmarks and trajectors.

MMA in Language Comprehension
In the domain of language comprehension, spatial reasoning
plays an important role. Landau and Jackendoff (1993)
describe language comprehension as a combination of “what
and “where” process. This “where” process can be seen as a
formalization in the MMA to establish situation models of
objects or agents in discourse. A major theoretical question
arises as to how humans combine the “what” with the
“where” in situation models. One option possibility is that
semantic “what” information is bound to “where”
information through pointers in long-term memory (Sanford
& Garrod, 1981). The details of this possibility pose a
challenge for further research.

Results and Discussion
For undetermined spatial inference problems, 54% of the
observations preferred the MMA prediction, 38% supported

Conclusion
This paper represents a scalable computational approach to
Mental Models using simple coordinates in 3-D space.

2293

While PC models can also generate spatial relationships, the
nature of its representation causes challenges both
theoretically and computationally.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the National Science
Foundation (SBR 9720314, REC 0106965, REC 0126265,
ITR 0325428) and the DoD Multidisciplinary University
Research Initiative (MURI) administered by ONR under
grant N00014-00-1-0600. Any opinions, findings, and
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of DoD, ONR, or NSF.

References
Barsalou, L.W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 577-609.
Byrne, R.M.J. & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1989). Spatial
reasoning. Journal of Memory and Language, 28, 564575.
Givon, T. (1992) The grammar of referential coherence as
mental processing instructions. Linguistics, 30, 5-55.
Glenberg, A. M., Kruley, P., & Langston, W. E. (1994).
Analogical processes in comprehension: Simulation of a
mental model. In M. A. Gernsbacher (Ed.), Handbook of
psycholinguistics (pp. 609-640). New York: Academic
Press.
Graesser, A. C., Singer, M., & Trabasso, T. (1994)
Constructing inferences during narrative text
comprehension. Psychological Review, 101, 371-395.
Hagert, G. (1983). Report of the Uppsala Programming
methodology and artificial intelligence laboratory.
Hagert, G. (1985). Modeling mental models: Experiments
in cognitive modeling of spatial reasoning. In T. O'Shea
(Ed.), Advances in artificial intelligence (pp. 389-398).
Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Hayward, W. G., & Tarr, M. J. (1995). Spatial language
and spatial representation. Cognition, 39, 39-80.
Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1983) Mental Models: Towards a
Cognitive Science of Language, Inference, and
Consciousness. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press; Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Johnson-Laird, P.N., and Byrne, R.M.J. (1991) Deduction.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Landau, B., & Jackendoff, R. (1993). "What" and "where"
in spatial language and spatial cognition. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 16(2), 217-238, 255-265.
Langston, W., Kramer, D. C. & Glenberg, A.M. (1998)
The representation of space in mental models derived
from text. Memory and Cognition, 26, 247-262.
McNamara, T. P., Miller, D. L., & Bransford, J. D. (1991,
reprinted
1996).
Mentalmodels
and
reading
comprehension. In R. Barr, M. L. Kamil, P. Mosenthal,
&P. D. Pearson (Eds.), Handbook of reading research:
Vol. II (pp. 490-511). WhitePlains, NY: Longman.
Pylyshyn, Z. 1981. The imagery debate: Analogue media
versus tacit knowledge. In N Block, ed. Imagery.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Regier, T. & Carlson, L. A. (2001). Grounding spatial
language in perception: An empirical and computational
investigation. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 130, 273-298.
Rips, L. J. 1986. Mental muddles. In M. Brand and R. M.
Harnish, eds. Problems in the Representation of
Knowledge and Belief Tucson, AZ: University of
Arizona Press.
Sanford, A. J., and S. C. Garrod. 1981.Understanding
written language. Chichester: Wiley.
Sanford, A. J., & Garrod, S. C. (1989). What, when, and
how ?: Questions of immediacy in anaphoric reference
resolution. Language and Cognitive Processes, 4, 235262.

2294

