plicative interaction of independent variables is called gainfield coding. Pouget and collaborators (Pouget & Sejnowski,
1997; Pouget & Snyder, 2000) suggested that parietal gainmodulated neurons may serve as basis functions with which
the brain computes sensorimotor transformations. A population of these neurons may provide a complete basis set for the
combined space allowing to approximate any arbitrary function of the input variables by taking a linear sum of their outputs (Poggio & Girosi, 1990). It follows that encoding space
with basis function units renders it possible to reduce nonlinear coordinate transformations to simple linear mappings.
The resulting basis function representation codes spatial locations in a format which contains implicitly any frame of
reference that can be derived from the input variables. For
instance, a basis function map combining visual information
with eye position may be used to compute target location in
head-centred coordinates with a linear combination of a specific set of weights.

Figure 1: Recurrent neural network model for saccadic planning and spatial attention using basis functions. The model
contains two basis function maps reciprocally connected: an
input map (LIP) composed of basis function units which combine visual and posture information, and a memory buffer
(MB) which stores target location in head-centred coordinates
modulated by eye position. The output layer contains an oculomotor map (FEF). Each map has lateral connections with
local excitation and long range inhibition.

Retinotopic representations, however, are not sufficient to
store spatial locations, because the remembered spatial location will not be in register with the external space after an eye
shift (Miller & Bockisch, 1997). When the task requires to
foveate a remembered location and the eyes move during the
memory period, the saccadic system must take into account
the change in eye position. Primates can easily and accurately
perform saccadic tasks in which the retinal error is dissociated
from the motor error, such as in the case of ocular perturbation by electrical stimulation (Mays & Sparks, 1980) and
the double-saccade task (Goldberg & Bruce, 1990, Mazzoni
et al., 1996). Mays and Sparks showed that a perturbation in
the eye position, induced by electrical stimulation of the superior colliculus during the preparation of a saccade toward
a visual target, is compensated by the saccadic system even
when the target is no longer visible. In the double-saccade
task, two visual targets are presented sequentially and very
briefly. The task requires to direct the gaze at targets in order of presentation. When the first saccade is performed, the
retinal coordinates of the second target do not match the motor coordinates required to foveate it. Thus, the system must
take into account the displacement of the eye due to the first
saccadic movement.

Simulations
Description of the model
The architecture of the model (Figure 1) consists of two basis
function maps which simulate the activation of gain modulated neurons described in the PPC and an output layer consisting of a computational motor map which is meant to simulate the activity within the FEF.
The first basis function map (LIP) is composed of 847 units
which generate a representation of the oculomotor space by
combining multiplicatively retinal input (r) with eye position
(e) encoded in head-centred coordinates (Figure 2):
xLIP = G(r)S(e)
The tuning curve of visual response is a Gaussian function
of target location in retinal coordinates (rx and ry ):
2

(r −r )2 − (ry −ryi )
− x 2xi
2σ2yi
2σ

G(r)i = e
Two alternatives corresponding to different encoding
schemes have been proposed to explain how the brain performs this computation (Bremmer, Pouget & Hoffmann,
1998). The first hypothesis is based on extraretinal encoding by means of a coordinate transformation. For instance,
the position of the eye can be combined with the retinal coordinates of the target in order to obtain a head-centred representation, which is invariant with respect to eye movements.
The second hypothesis is based on a perisaccadic updating
mechanism. It has been shown that spatial representations
within area LIP are remapped in the coordinates of the new
fixation point after an intervening saccade (Duhamel, Colby
& Goldberg, 1992), but the source and the properties of the
signal that drives the updating process are still not clearly understood.

xi

e

where rxi and ryi indicates the centres of the visual receptive
fields (RFs), uniformly spread between -40◦ and 40◦ in increments of 8◦ , both in the horizontal and vertical dimensions.
The width of the Gaussians, σ, changes linearly with the horizontal and vertical eccentricity of the units’ RF according to
the following equation: 2.491 + 0.439 ∗ Eccentricity (Platt &
Glimcher, 1998). As a result, the response field radius increases by nearly 0.5◦ for every degree increase in eccentricity. Gaussian functions optimally fit intraparietal neurons accounting for most of the variance in their activity (Gnadt &
Breznen, 1996; Platt & Glimcher, 1998).
Eye position is encoded with a sigmoid function:
S(e)i =

397

1
1 + exp−

e−ei
s

where xi is the activation of the unit i, wim is the synaptic
weight coming from the unit m in the connected map, vi j is
the lateral connection coming from the neighbouring neuron
j, k and q are passive decays of activation.

Synaptic weights and learning procedure
Each set of weights in the model renders it possible to read
out a specific frame of reference (postsynaptic representation) from the activity within a basis function map (presynaptic representation). The training procedure consisted of
repeatedly presenting input patterns to the network, propagating the activation to the postsynaptic units and adjusting
the weights by using the delta rule (Widrow & Hoff, 1960):
dϖi j = η(a∗i − ai )a j
where dϖi j is the change in the weight connecting the presynaptic unit j with the postsynaptic unit i, a j is the activation of
the presynaptic unit j, ai * is the expected postsynaptic activity and ai is the predicted postsynaptic activity. The learning
rate, η, was set to 0.01.
The training set consisted of 330 patterns generated by selecting random visual targets, given initial eye positions. Expected outputs were generated by computing Gaussian functions of target location in the frame of reference corresponding to the postsynaptic representation. Training was repeated
until the mean square error between the centre of mass of the
expected postsynaptic patterns and the predicted postsynaptic
patterns was less than 1◦ .
The lateral connections were given by:

Figure 2: Activity of a basis function unit which computes the
product of a Gaussian of target location (eye-centred position)
multiplied by a sigmoid function of eye position.

where e is the current horizontal eye position and ei is the
inflection point of the function, spread between -24◦ and +24◦
in steps of 8◦ . The slope of the sigmoid, s, is set to 8.
LIP units are reciprocally connected with another basis
function map (MB, memory buffer) which stores target location in head-centred coordinates modulated by eye position. Connections from LIP units to MB units allow the system to transform retinal coordinates into head-centred coordinates, while feed-back connections from MB units to LIP
units allow system to achieve the opposite transformation,
from head-centred to eye-centred coordinates. As a result,
the extraretinal encoding in MB renders it possible to achieve
perisaccadic updating in LIP after intervening saccades.
LIP units send connections also to the output layer that
contains an oculocentric map composed of 11 x 11 units covering a 40◦ x 40◦ space with 8◦ spacing. The activation of the
output units is given by the linear sum of the weighted signals
coming from the LIP units.
For sustaining activity in the absence of visual input, we
introduced in each map of the recurrent model lateral connections that generate local excitation and long range inhibition.
This kind of connectivity allows to maintain the hill of activity within a computational map over time after the stimulus
disappears and has been used in a number of computational
models of cortical activity (e.g., Somers, Nelson & Sur, 1995;
Zhang, 1996; Salinas, 2003).
The dynamics of the model are captured by the following
equations:

2

(c −c )
− xi 2x j
2σ

vi j = e

xi

2

(c −c )
− yi 2y j
2σ

e

yi

2

(c −c )
−d xi 2x j
2σ

− ge

xi

2

(c −c )
− yi 2y j
2σ

e

yi

where vi j is the weight connecting the unit j to the unit i
within a specific map, g and d are constants which control
respectively the value and the width of the inhibitory region
within the RF of the unit i.

Results
The premotor theory of spatial attention maintains that motor
planning generates top-down signals that produce a processing facilitation for stimuli located in the region of space towards which they were prepared.
The basic claim of the premotor theory was tested in the
model by implementing a spatial cueing paradigm (Posner,
1980), which requires to detect as fast as possible a visual
target presented to the left or the right side of fixation. In endogenous cueing, participants voluntarily orient their spatial
attention to the region of visual space indicated by a cognitive
cue and the target can be presented on the same side (valid
trials) or on the opposite side (invalid trials). In neutral trials
attention is not spatially oriented. Typically, valid trials give
rise to attentional benefits (faster reaction times with respect
to neutral trials), while invalid trials give rise to attentional
costs (slower reaction times with respect to neutral trials).
In accordance with the premotor theory, attention orienting was simulated by generating a saccadic plan in the output
map of the model and feeding back the activation to LIP units
through the same connections involved in sensorimotor transformations for saccadic movements. After a variable number

dxiLIP
LIP
LIP
= (G(r) + ∑ wim aMB
m + ∑ vi j x j − kxi )S(e)
dt
m
j
dxiMB
MB
MB
= (∑ wim aLIP
m + ∑ vi j x j − qxi )S(e)
dt
m
j
dxiOUT
OUT
= ∑ wim aLIP
− qxiOUT
m + ∑ vi j x j
dt
m
j
398

Figure 3: Reaction times for detecting visual targets in a spatial cueing paradigm. Orienting of attention was simulated by
computing a saccadic plan in the output map and propagating
the activation to the input units using the same connections
involved in the sensorimotor mapping. Attention orienting
produces reliable benefits (valid trials faster that neural trials)
and costs (invalid trials slower that neutral trials).

Figure 4: Reaction times for detecting visual targets in a variant of the spatial cueing paradigm with an ocular perturbation
(OP). Attention orienting produces reliable benefits and costs,
which decrease as the interval between the OP and the target
presentation increases. Eye-centered trials are slower than the
invalid trials (remapping interference).

of time steps, a visual target was presented to the input units
in the same location of the planned saccade (valid trials) or
in another location (invalid condition). Neutral trials without attention orienting were used to establish a baseline for
the detection task. The number of cycles required to reach a
detection threshold in the LIP map was used as an index of
the reaction times for detecting the target. In order to collect good statistics, we performed a number of trials by randomly changing the goal location of the planned saccade and
the retinal coordinates of the target. An analysis of Variance
(ANOVA) was performed on mean reaction times as a function of type of trials (Valid, Neutral, Invalid). Since the analysis of Variance was significant, F(2, 198) = 39.01, MSE =
1705.44, p < 0.001, we performed multiple comparison tests
indicating that the valid condition produces faster responses
(180 cycles) than the neutral condition (209 cycles), which is
in turn faster than the invalid condition (232 cycles). These
results clearly indicate that attention orienting in our recurrent model of saccadic planning produces reliable benefits
and costs (Figure 3) consistent with behavioural data.

the motor error, 100 random eye-centred trials in which the
retinal coordinates of the target matched the original motor
error, and 100 random neutral trials without attention orienting. An analysis of Variance (ANOVA) was performed on
mean reaction times as a function of type of trials (Valid,
Neutral, Invalid, Eye-centred) and interval between ocular
perturbation and target presentation (1 vs. 10 time steps).
The main effect of type of trials [F(3, 72) = 479.25, MSE =
363.47, p < 0.001] and interval [F(1, 24) = 21.14, MSE =
622.13, p < 0.001], as well as their interaction [F(3, 72) =
49.47, MSE = 524.40, p < 0.001] were significant (Figure 4).
Reaction times were faster on valid trials than neutral trials
[F(1, 24) = 68986.59, MSE = 2.343, p < 0.001], and slower
on invalid trials than neutral trials [F(1, 24) = 106.05, MSE =
717.41, p < 0.001], indicating reliable benefits and costs.
Both benefits and costs decreased at the longer interval as a
consequence of the activation decay. Interestingly, we found
that the eye-centred trials, in which the visual target appeared
in the same location of the saccadic goal, were slower than
invalid trials [F(1, 24) = 1973.03, MSE = 87.68, p < 0.001].
This result can be explained considering that after ocular perturbation the updating mechanism moves the attentional code
away from the original location interfering with target detection. We will refer to this effect as ”remapping interference”.

Perisaccadic updating and spatial attention
In order to investigate the role of the remapping process in
spatial attention, a variant of the spatial cueing paradigm with
an ocular perturbation before the onset of the target. The sequence of events was the following: a saccadic plan was first
generated in the saccadic map and after a temporal delay an
ocular perturbation was simulated by changing the eye position. After 1 or 10 time steps a random visual target was
presented to the LIP units and the number of cycles required
to reach a threshold value was measured. We performed 25
runs with 100 random valid trials, in which target location
corresponded to the remapped motor error of the planned saccade, 100 random invalid trials in which target location corresponded neither with the remapped motor error nor with

Discussion
In the present research we examined whether a recurrent
model of saccadic planning can account for attentional effects without requiring additional learning or specific computational mechanisms separated from the sensorimotor circuit. The model employs basis function units which simulate

399

parietal neurons involved in the representation of oculomotor
space. Moreover, it incorporates the updating of remembered
spatial locations after intervening saccades by means of coordinate transformations between basis function units.
We tested the model by implementing a spatial cueing paradigm which is a typical task used in behavioural research.
The recurrent architecture allowed us to measure the number of cycles required to reach a detection threshold and to
compare the simulation results with behavioural data. Simulations showed the typical patterns of results described in
behavioural studies, with reliable benefits and costs in a spatial cueing paradigm under conditions of endogenous cueing.
Moreover, we examined the role of perisaccadic remapping
in attention orienting by implementing a variant of the spatial cueing paradigm in which an eye shift was interposed between attentional allocation and target presentation.
Simulations allowed to make novel and testable predictions: when attention is directed to a particular location with
retinal coordinates Rx and Ry and then a saccadic movement
is performed toward a different location, the attentional code
is fast and efficiently remapped in the coordinates of the new
fixation point. As a consequence, attention can be maintained
over a specific region of the visual space while moving the
eyes. Moreover, presenting a visual target with coordinates
Rx and Ry immediately after the end of the saccade gives rise
to additional costs with respect to any other retinal location.
We called this effect remapping interference.
In summary, our simulations are consistent with the premotor theory of attention which maintains that attention and eye
movements are tightly coupled, demonstrating that a plausible model of saccadic planning renders it possible to simulate
attentional effects described in behavioural research.

Corbetta, M., & Shulman, G. L. (2002). Control of goaldirected and stimulus-driven attention in the brain. Nature
Reviews Neuroscience, 3, 201–215.
Duhamel, J. R., Colby, C. L., & Goldberg, M. E. (1992). The
updating of the representation of visual space in parietal
cortex by intended eye movements. Science, 255, 90–92.
Gnadt, and J. W., & Breznen, B. (1996). Statistical analysis of
the information content in the activity of cortical neurons.
Vision Research, 36, 3525–3537.
Goldberg, M. E., Bisley, J., Powell, K. D., Gottlieb, J., &
Kusunoki, M. (2002). The role of the lateral intraparietal
area of the monkey in the generation of saccades and visuospatial attention. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 956, 205–215.
Goldberg, M. E., & Bruce, C. J. (1990). Primate frontal eye
fields. III. Maintenance of a spatially accurate saccade signal. Journal of Neurophysiology, 64, 489–508.
Heslenfeld, D. J., Kenemans, J. L., Kok, A., & Molenaar, P.
C. M. (1997). Feature processing and attention in the human visual system: An overview. Biological Psychology,
45, 183–215.
LaBerge, D. (1990). Thalamic and cortical mechanisms of attention suggested by recent positron emission tomographic
experiments. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 2, 358–
372.
Mays, L. E., & Sparks, D. L. (1980). Saccades are spatially,
not retinocentrically, coded. Science, 208, 1163–1165.
Mazzoni, P., Bracewell, R. M., Barash, S., & Andersen, R.
A. (1996). Motor intention activity in the macaque’s lateral intraparietal area. I. Dissociation of motor plan from
sensory memory. Journal of Neurophysiology, 76, 1439–
1456.
Miller, J. M., & Bockisch, C. (1997). Visual perception.
Where are the things we see? Nature, 386, 550–551.
Mozer, M.C. (1991). The perception of multiple objects: a
connectionist approach. MA: MIT Press/Bradford Books.
Nobre, A. C., Gitelman, D. R., Dias, E. C., & Mesulam, M.
M. (2000). Covert visual spatial orienting and saccades:
overlapping neural systems. Neuroimage, 3, 210–216.
Phaf, R. H., Van der Heijden, A. H., & Hudson, P. T. (1990).
SLAM: a connectionist model for attention in visual selection tasks. Cognitive Psychology, 22, 273–341.
Platt, M. L., & Glimcher, P. W. (1998). Response fields of
intraparietal neurons quantified with multiple saccadic targets. Experimental Brain Research, 121, 65–75.
Poggio, T., & Girosi, F. (1990). Regularization algorithms
for learning that are equivalent to multilayer networks. Science, 247, 978–982.
Posner, M. I. (1980). Orienting of attention. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 32, 3–25.
Pouget, A., & Sejnowski, J. T.(1997). Spatial transformations in the parietal cortex using basis functions. Journal
of Cogntive Neuroscience, 9, 222–237.
Pouget, A., & Snyder, L. H. (2000). Computational approaches to sensorimotor transformations. Nature Neuroscience, 3, 1192–1198.

References
Andersen, R. A. (1989). Visual and eye movement functions
of the posterior parietal cortex. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 12, 377–403.
Andersen, R. A., Essick, G. K., & Siegel, R. M. (1985). Encoding of spatial location by posterior parietal neurons.
Science, 230, 456–458.
Bisley, J. W., & Goldberg, M. E. (2003). Neuronal activity in
the lateral intraparietal area and spatial attention. Science,
299, 81–86.
Bremmer, F., Pouget, A., & Hoffmann, K.-P. (1998). Eye
position encoding in the macaque posterior parietal cortex.
European Journal of Neuroscience, 10, 153–160.
Cohen, J. D., Romero, R. D., Servan-Schreiber, D., & Farah,
M. J. (1994). Mechanisms of spatial attention: the relation of macrostructure to microstructure in parietal neglect.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 6, 377–387.
Colby, C. L., & Goldberg, M. E. (1999). Space and attention
in parietal cortex. Annual Reviews Neuroscience, 22, 319–
349.
Corbetta, M., Akbudak, E., Conturo, T. E., Snyder, A. Z.,
Ollinger, J. M., Drury, H. A., et al. (1998). A common network of functional areas for attention and eye movements.
Neuron, 21, 761–773.

400

Umiltà, C., Riggio, L., Dascola, I., & Rizzolatti, G. (1991).
Differential effects of central and peripheral cues on the
reorienting of spatial attention. European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 3, 247–267.

Rizzolatti, G., Riggio, L., Dascola, I., & Umiltà, C. (1987).
Reorienting attention across the horizontal and vertical
meridians: evidence in favor of a premotor theory of attention. Neuropsychologia, 25, 31–40.
Rizzolatti, G., Riggio, L., & Sheliga, B. M. (1994). Space and
selective attention. In C. Umiltà & M. Moscovitch (Eds.),
Attention and Performance XV. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Salinas, E. (2003). Self-sustained activity in networks of
gain-modulated neurons. Neurocomputing, 52, 913–918.

Van der Heijden, A. H. C. (1992). Selective attention in vision. London: Routledge. London: Routledge.
Widrow, B., & Hoff, M. E. (1960). Adaptive switching
circuits. In IRE Western Electric Show and Convention
Record. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Zhang, K. (1996). Representation of spatial orientation by
the intrinsic dynamics of the head-direction cell ensemble:
a theory. Journal of Neuroscience, 16, 2112–2126.

Somers, D. C., Nelson, S. B., & Sur, M. (1995). An emergent
model of orientation selectivity in cat visual cortical simple
cells. Journal of Neuroscience, 15, 5448–5465.
Treisman, A. (1988). Features and objects: The Fourteenth
Barlett Memorial Lecture. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 40, 201–237.

401

