UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A "Sudden Appearance" Model for the Evolution of Human Cognition and Language

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/72h8v257

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
Lee, Jae-Ho

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A “Sudden Appearance” model for the Evolution of Human Cognition
and Language
Susan J. Lanyon (susanlanyon@bigpond.com)
Cognitive Science Program
School of History & Philosophy of Science
the University of New South Wales
Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia

Abstract

shape can also define a move away from an ape-like cranial morphology.
Naturally, we cannot deduce the behaviour directly from
any fossilized hominin bones although the context in
which they are found can sometimes prompt some intuitions about their life-style. Unless we uncover some
evidence for a written language or notation among these
remains, we will never be able to say for certain whether
any of these hominins could speak or use a signed language. However, by showing that both the anatomy and
the behavioural traits of modern humans did not evolve
gradually over time, I believe that doubt must be cast
on accounts that posit a gradual evolution of modern
human cognition and language.

The debate over the evolution of an innate language
capacity seems to divide into two principle schools of
thought. Jackendoff (1999a, 1999b) has argued that language processing is based on three autonomous generative components, phonological, syntactic, and semantic/conceptual and he is committed to the view that the
language faculty evolved incrementally through natural
selection. Pinker (1994, 333) also sees “no reason to
doubt that the principle explanation is the same as for
any other complex instinct or organ, Darwin’s theory
of natural selection”, when theorizing about language
evolution. An alternative approach has been taken recently by Hauser, Chomsky and Fitch (2002). They
argue that the property that makes human language
unique (recursion), may be a recent emergence in hominid evolution. It follows from this line of thought
that most of the anatomical characteristics that support language (e.g. vocal tract and controlled breathing) may be merely variations of previously evolved biological structures, and not of a different kind. Leaving
aside the argument of whether these structures evolved
gradually, they did not evolve nor were they “tuned”
to serve the faculty of language. Jackendoff (1999a) accuses those who do not accept that language arose gradually through natural selection as having been “forced
to devalue evolutionary argumentation”. Jackendoff’s
concern seems to stem from the view that there is only
one way that evolution can proceed, through gradual
change honed by natural selection. My concern is for
the neglect of the vast amount of evidence supporting
the theory that modern humans did not emerged in a
gradual, step-wise fashion. Here I argue that hominins
evolved through major evolutionary leaps, which may
have numbered only two or three significant mutation
“events”. Neoteny (the retention of infant or juvenile
growth rates) has been the major force in the evolution
of our primate ancestors and this process can explain the
sudden emergence of many of the traits that define what
it means to be human, including the sudden emergence
of human cognition and language.

Evolution - Gradual vs Saltational

How do we define what is human?
When we find a primate fossil of any antiquity, we generally look for certain traits that are deemed to separate
the hominin1 clade from the Great Apes. The key defining trait is bipedalism, which can be deduced from the
shape of the pelvis, spine, knee and foot bones. Another trait is the morphology of the teeth, especially the
reduction in size of the canines, which lose their ‘daggerlike’ appearance. Some variations in skull, jaw and face
1
Hominins refer to humans and all ancestors back to the
human/ape split.

1248

Evolution by natural selection in the Darwinian tradition
is the most commonly attested theory for the evolution
of modern humans. This theory assumes that human
evolution, including of course, the evolution of the brain,
has progressed incrementally as a trend toward complexity. Regardless of the “unit of selection”, be it the phenotype or an individual gene, the neo-Darwinian model
emphasizes gradualism. Most current human traits are
assumed to be the result of an adaptive advantage in our
past, and they have survived to serve the reproductive
success of an individual, or the entire species. Numerous neo-Darwinian evolutionary accounts of the twentieth century have proposed that traits like bipedalism,
a large brain, language, tool use and other characteristics of hominins, must have evolved together while maintaining some sort of feedback mechanism that has “fine
tuned” or “gradually” adapted each characteristic feature to a changing environment.
Thus Pinker (1997) has argued that since the emergence
of bipedalism a few million years ago, and with the hands
freed, subsequent species ratchet upward, click by click,
in the features that distinguish us, like the size of the
brain and the sophistication of tools. Pinker’s interpretation of the fossil record also sees a gradual reduction
in the brow ridges as well as the in the teeth and jaw because “tools and technology have taken over from teeth”
(Pinker, 1997, 200).
The problematic nature of Pinker’s account of how the
evolution of humans has proceeded is suggested by the
paleontological and archealogical evidence. The first
stone tools appear around 4 million years after bipedal-

ism emerged, hardly a “click by click” scenario. Moreover, the brow ridges, which come in various configurations and sizes, did not gradually shrink and disappear. Neanderthals, who survived in Europe until
around 30,000 years ago, and the latest hominin found in
Indonesia, who existed 18,000 years ago, had large brow
ridges, just like the first australopithecines. Also, brain
size does not gradually increase, but shows only two or
three major transitions that appear suddenly in the fossil record.
Following the “gradualist” school, Jackendoff claims to
be able to decompose modern language into partially ordered steps that have evolved incrementally to be finally
integrated into the larger combinatorial system. These
modules are assumed to be innate, localized and part
of our genetic inheritance. He “assume[s] without justification that any increase in explicit expressive power
of the communication system is adaptive, whether for
cooperation in hunting, gathering, defense, or for social
communication such as gossip” (Jackendoff, 1999a).
Jackendoff’s intuition, that an increase in the expressive
power that language provides, would be an advantage,
is not disputed. Nor is his claim that the language faculty exhibits a degree of modularity such as a lexicon, a
computational component, semantics, morphology, the
phonological component, and phonetics (Jenkins, 2000).
But, as Bickerton points out, “there is simply not one
scintilla of evidence: simply a blind faith that, if evolution is gradual, and we are where we are, we must have
got here, far as it may seem, in a series of incremental
steps” (Bickerton, 2002, 104).
The self-proclaimed “unblushing adaptationist”, Daniel
Dennett, cannot understand that anyone, particularly
Chomsky, could believe that something like the “language organ” could be innate, but that is was not a
product of natural selection (Dennett, 1995). Chomsky
simply argues that we can concoct as many adaptationist stories as we like, but “it remains to explain how the
biological endowment developed; the problem is simply
displaced, not solved” (Chomsky, 1988, 166). It seems
to me that the best way to grapple with the issue is to
follow Deacon’s approach, where he argues that “knowing how something originated often is the best clue to
how it works” (Deacon, 1997, 23).
Accordingly, we should tackle the question of when modern human cognition and language arose by looking
at the archaeological and paleontological record. I argue that the saltationist approach to the evolution of
the human ancestral line matches closely with the paleontological evidence, whereas the neo-Darwinian approach, based on Mendelian genetics, is quite contradictory to that evidence. Schwartz (1999) points out that
Mendelian principles of inheritance show how natural selection can move a population toward a certain trait, but
it cannot produce anything new. If for example height
was being selected, then the average individual of the
following generation would be taller, but this cannot go
on indefinitely. The next generation will not exceed the
maximum height of the preceding generation.

1249

Evolution through Developmental
Change
Rather than evolving in gradual, incremental steps from
an ancestral primate, the hominin clade has arisen due
to the heterochronic2 variation in form during the early
stages of development producing the novelty that we see
in the first hominins as well as modern humans.
The affinity of the juvenile form of both chimpanzees and
ancestral hominins, as well as the likeness of some juvenile hominins and modern humans, shows that most of
the skeletal traits of the hominin line arose primarily due
to changes in developmental timing in the early stages
of ontogeny. Neoteny3 has been a major factor in the
evolution of ancestral hominins. It is interesting to note
that the first discoveries and classification of Australopithecus africanus by Dart in the first half of the twentieth
century, were rejected by many claiming that these remains were those of a juvenile gorilla (Wong, 2003).
Most of the traits that separate us from the apes, namely
bipedalism (with the associated modifications of the
spine, pelvis, femur and knee), skull and face shape, and
dentition, can be explained by the process of neoteny. I
can find little or no evidence to suppose that up until the
sudden appearance of modern humans around 120,000
years ago, all of our hominin ancestors, including Homo
erectus, Neanderthals and the predecessors of humans,
were little more than “grown up” juvenile chimpanzees
with little more cognitive ability of the same. The “final”
mutation, which seems to have occurred in an ancestral
species living in Africa, profoundly modified the neural
architecture of the human brain, which gave rise to the
sudden appearance of our modern symbolic thought and
language capacity.

Hominins and Juvenile Chimpanzees
Chimpanzees are born with the skull positioned on
the top of the spinal column, just like human infants.
The newborn chimpanzee is bipedal with a human-like
pelvis shape. The skull of the chimpanzee is also
similar to that of a human with a flat face, without
brow ridges, without cranial crests, same position of
orbits, thinness of bone and a high domed forehead.
The infant chimpanzee also has a small human-like jaw
and palate. All of these human-like features change
dramatically during the juvenile growth spurt of the
chimpanzee. Penin et al. (2002) have recently confirmed
the hypothesis for the neotenic emergence of the human
skull shape. Their results show that the adult skull in
humans reaches a size-related shape that is equivalent
to that of a juvenile chimpanzee but nevertheless grows
to a size similar to that of an adult chimpanzee.

2
Heterochrony is a process whereby developmental (Hox)
genes control the timing and onset/offset of the expression of
other tissue building genes.
3
The retention of the juvenile characteristics of one’s ancestor.

The first “Sudden Appearance”
The earliest fossil hominins dating to around 6-7 million years ago are found in Africa where they existed
up until 1.2 million years ago (Mirazón Lahr and Foley,
2004). The defining features of these australopithecines
were bipedalism, small stature (1-1.5 metres tall) and reduced sized canines. The australopithecines show a mosaic of ape-like and human-like features including tooth
size and shape, face shape, brow ridges, brain case size,
femur shape, pelvic size and shape and various configurations of foot bones that may mean full bipedalism or
some retention of the ability to retain an aboreal, climbing lifestyle.
The most plausible account for the emergence of the first
hominin is for a simple neotenous mutation that produced a chimpanzee/s that did not go through the normal juvenile growth spurt thereby retaining its bipedalism, skull shape and reduced canines. This creature interbred with the original chimpanzee group to produce
all of the variation that we now find in the fossil record
over a five million year time span. It is important to note
that these hominins retained chimpanzee-sized brains
throughout their approximately 5 million year history
(Mirazón Lahr and Foley, 2004). Importantly, there are
no stone tools associated with australopithecines4
The implications of this stasis for the evolution of
human-like cognition and language are quite profound.
It is generally agreed that a fundamental requirement for
the use of language is the capacity for symbolic thought.
Sterelny (2003) stresses the fact that we rely on the symbolic meaning in each of our utterances to be understood
by our audience. We need a rich theory of mind for
language to operate successfully. Despite many years
of experimentation with Great Apes, there is little evidence that they have rich ways of representing the minds
of others. We therefore have no reason to suppose that
the australopithecines had made any major cognitive advance over the Great Apes and were probably not capable of using language.
So, for up to 5 million years, the hominin clade appears
to have been simply bipedal apes. This conclusion is
difficult to reconcile with the notion that language has
evolved gradually and incrementally, as Jackendoff and
Pinker claim. The more compelling evidence from the
paleontological and archaeological record reveals an astonishing stasis for this great expanse of time.

Homo erectus
Around 2 million years ago, after around 5 million years
of stasis, H. erectus, a generally much larger hominin
than the australopithecines and the first toolmaker5 , first
appears in Africa. Shortly after their emergence they
migrated to most other accessible continents. The stone
4
The first crude stone tools, known as the Oldowan tradition, appear in the archeaological record 2.5 million years
ago and are attributed to Homo habilis, although there are
no stone tools directly associated with the fossil remains of
this hominin.
5
The first stone tool makers H. habilis, were hardly bigger
or more advanced in their body skeletons than the australopithecines.

1250

tools found with this species were effectively identical to
the first stone tools that appeared in the record 500,000
years earlier (Tattersall, 1997). This suggests that although this early H. erectus population was larger in
physical size and cranial capacity than H. habilis, it had
not developed any increase in cognitive ability.
Noble and Davidson (1997) have convincingly argued
that the the first stone tool technology, the Oldowan industry, shows little sign of any advance over the tool
making abilities demonstrated by modern apes. The
bonobo ‘Kanzi’, given some incentive like a food reward,
can easily make a cutting flake in order to cut the string
from a box containing a treat.
After extensive analysis of the fossil record of most of the
H. erectus remains covering Africa, China, Europe and
South East Asia, Rightmire (1990) has concluded that
this species had maintained a conservative morphology
throughout the Pleistocene. H. erectus features vary,
but these variations were not on a scale greater than
those found within contemporary modern human populations. These variations can be found within geographically widespread groups and cannot be placed within
a specific time-line of size or complexity. For example,
his work in Olduvai (Africa) has revealed a 1.25 million
year old cranium with a capacity of 1067 ml, whereas
a 730,000 year old fossil exhibits a brain size of only
700-800 ml. For Far East fossils, the story is the same.
Cranial capacity varies between 800 ml and 1250ml.
Despite the obvious increase in cranial capacity around
2 million years ago, Walker and Shipman (1996) argue
that any difference in brain size from H. habilis to H.
erectus was simply due to an increase in body size. H.
erectus had a body size slightly larger than most modern
humans, but nevertheless had only a brain the size of a
one year old human.
The remains of the latest hominins, which survived right
up until 18,000 years ago, have been recently found on
the island of Flores, Indonesia. Named Homo floresiensis (Brown et al., 2004), this one metre tall species
has more in common with australopithecines and early
African H. erectus than later fossils of Javan H. erectus.
It had a chimpanzee sized brain, a low brain-case with a
prominent brow ridge, and no chin. A similar find from
Dmanisi in Georgia (Gabunia et al., 2001) that dates to
1.8 million years ago, link these early hominins with the
small stature and brain size of H. habilis and Australopithecus. These fossils are associated with the primitive
tool technology that is first found in Africa dating to
2.5 million years ago. Importantly, these crude tools are
remarkedly similar to those associated with the small
hominins found recently on Flores. Once again we find
a stasis in hominin traits and technology that lasted for
well over 2.5 million years.
Although the postcranial anatomy of H. erectus is similar to that of H.sapiens, there are some important differences. H. erectus had 6 lumbar vertebrae, a configuration that is found in the first australopithecines and the
vertebral body surface is also more ape-like than that
of a human. The canal that carries the spinal cord is
much narrower, in fact only half the size of that of a

human. Humans have dramatically increased the gray
matter in the spinal cord, which takes up most of the
room in the newly enlarged spinal canal. This newly
evolved, more complex configuration, has given modern
humans a much greater control over posture, coordinated
bipedalism, fine motor control with the hands, and most
importantly, control of breathing (MacLarnon and Hewitt, 2004).
This enhancement in modern humans has important implications for the evolution of language. We need the fine
control over our abdominal muscles to control breathing as we speak. The fact that H. erectus had the
spinal column more like that of an ape than a human,
casts doubt on many of the abilities that are unquestionably attributed to this species, namely coordinated running and walking, fine motor control over the hands for
making stone tools, and breathing control necessary for
spoken language (Walker and Shipman, 1996). Pinker
and Jackendoff (2005) acknowledge that modern humans
have this enlarged region of the spinal cord, in comparison with pre-sapiens, yet they still maintain that this
anatomic feature was an adaptation for speech. This
claim is at odds with the fossil record, which does not
show this trait evolving ‘piecemeal’ or gradually to subserve language, but emerges very late in our evolutionary
history.
Pinker and Jackendoff appear to accept evidence that
the larynx was recently adapted for speech. MacLarnon
and Hewitt (2004) note that shape of the basicranium of
H. erectus indicates that the larynx and hyoid were both
situated in the same position as apes. However Pinker
and Jackendoff overlook this fact when claiming that the
descended larynx is part of a suite of vocal-tract modifications that were evolutionarily shaped to “subserve”
language. There is no gradual evolution of the morphology of the spinal column or the vocal tract that is being
“fine-tuned” to serve language. These modifications appear to have arisen only with the sudden appearance of
anatomically modern humans.
We should now test Pinker’s (1997) assertion that an
increase in the sophistication of stone tools is one of
the keys to understanding the gradual increase in human cognitive complexity. Around 1.4 million years
ago, a relatively standardized and symmetrical stone
tool was being made in Africa (Tattersall, 1997). This
tear-drop shaped acheulian hand-axe, known for its distinctive shape, and associated with H. erectus, remained
unchanged for one million years. It is found wherever
H. erectus roamed, which covered a distance of 10,000
miles from Africa to Japan. Bickerton (2002, 105) asks
the question, “is it possible to think of any sapiens innovation that has traveled for the best part of 10 thousand
miles without undergoing the slightest change?”. He
adds that “the mismatch between the fossil and archaeological records forms an acute embarrassment for those
who believe that human cognitive capacities, including
language, developed gradually” (Bickerton, 2002, 106).
Furthermore, Noble and Davidson (1997) have put forward convincing evidence that these so-called sophisticated hand-axes were actually the discarded remains of a

1251

production process that produced the prized single flakes
that had been struck from an original core. The resultant symmetry is merely the end of a process, which was
determined by the nature and size of the original material, and not the product a pre-determined shape of the
mind of the knapper.
Moreover recent experiments have shown that elaborate
stone tools can be produced without the use of language
at all (Tattersall, 2001). Groups of undergraduates were
divided into two groups, one half taught to make a stone
tool by verbal explanation, the other by silent example. The two groups showed no difference in efficiency
or speed of acquisition of the toolmaking skills.

Our Recent Ancestor?
Recent excavations of a 800,000 year old cave site in
Atapuerca, Spain, have uncovered the skull of a juvenile hominin, which has the face of a totally modern
human (Arsuaga et al., 1999). Arsuaga, argues that
this human-like face may explain how modern humans
emerged due to a mutation that caused the retention
of juvenile morphology (neoteny) of this ancient species,
which he has named Homo antecessor. In discussion with
Kunzig (1997), he argues that our modern face has not
evolved by natural selection, reducing the large prognathous face of our adult ancestors, but by a neotenous
mutation whereby a juvenile ancestor did not go through
a particular stage of development, which would produce
the ‘normal’ adult morphology of that species.
However, as Kunzig points out, this 800,000 fossil with
the face of a modern human, raises some interesting
questions relating to the nature of human evolution. The
tools found alongside H. antecessor were archaic for their
time, resembling the 2.5-2.6 Myr old Oldowan tradition
from Africa. It appears that this population had retained
the same tool technology for nearly two million years!
In addition, evidence of cannibalism of the young members of this hominin species seems at odds with any notion of an increase in complexity of social cooperation
that is often put forward as a driving force of human evolution. Although recent human groups have been known
to slaughter one another for ritual purposes, the victims
of H. antecessor had been dismembered and butchered
like all other animals. The remains of infants were found
along side those of other animal bones that were stripped
of anything edible in the same way. Bermudez de Castro et al. (1999) suggest that the site indicates gastronomic cannibalism rather than a survival strategy, and
they exclude any possibility of ritual intentionality. They
question whether gastronomic cannibalism could ever be
an evolutionarily successful strategy, especially when the
victims were infants and young individuals. We can witness today the same systematic killing of infants and juveniles, and cannibalism of infants of neighboring communities, among the wild chimpanzees at Gombe National Park (Wilson et al., 2004).
Pinker (1997) has argued the case for primate social organisation, which he believes promotes a need for better
information exchange and that this need provided the
pre-adaptation for hominins to move into a new “cogni-

tive niche”. This may be so, but it appears, at least to
my mind, that these hominins, even at this late stage in
evolution, simply did not have the cognitive architecture
that allowed them to move into this niche.
H. antecessor is thought to be the ancestor of both
modern humans6 and the Neanderthals, who are found
mainly in Europe from 200,000 years ago. There have
been many fossil finds of Neanderthals in Europe, but it
is interesting to note that old age for this species was only
40-50 years (Stringer and Gamble, 1993), which is the
same maximum life expectancy as extant chimpanzees.
Stringer and Gamble note that of the entire sample of
Neanderthals, fewer than 10 percent were aged over 35
at death, with most of the aged fossils showing the same
illnesses (e.g. arthritis) that we find in aged modern humans.
Although H. erectus did not have the capacity for fine
control over the production of speech sounds, it appears
that H. heidelbergensis may have evolved a similar configuration as that of modern humans. The capacity for
speech seems to be a recent phenomenon in hominin
evolution and may have been made possible due the
greater control over breathing (MacLarnon and Hewitt,
2004). Recent pre-modern humans seem to have developed larger thoracic vertebrae than H. erectus, which
may have enabled this greater control.
The problem nevertheless remains whether pre-modern
hominins, like H. heidelbergensis and the Neanderthals, had the fine neural control over their actions.
MacLarnon and Hewitt have analyzed the differences between the gray and white matter, which makes up the
soft tissue in the spinal cord. The gray matter, containing nerve cell bodies, is more abundant in humans
than other primates. This enlargement is directly related to the innervation of motor functions controlling
the thoracic and abdominal muscles implicated in the
fine control over breathing that is important for speech
(MacLarnon and Hewitt, 2004). We cannot say whether
pre-modern hominins had evolved a greater mass of
nerve cell bodies to support fine breathing control, however, other evidence from the configuration of the basicranium in these hominins indicates that the larynx was
still high in the throat, precluding the ability for articulate speech (MacLarnon and Hewitt, 2004).

of 60,000 years, but remained in Africa, explaining the
greater genetic diversity that is found there today. After
60,000 years, these modern peoples then dispersed to the
Near East, South East Asia and Australia, and then on
to Europe and the Far East.
Pearson’s genetic findings are matched by clear evidence
from the archaeological record, that most of what we
recognize as fully modern human intentional and symbolic behavior, arose suddenly in southern Africa, between 90,000 to 100,000 years ago (Mellars, 2005). New
forms of skin working technology appear along with
highly specialized geometric blades, used as insets in
multi-component hafted tools, together with intricately
shaped barbed bone points. High quality raw materials
had been deliberately transported from a distance of at
least 20 km. Many sites have an abundance of red ochre
showing signs of scraped surfaces indicating their use as
coloring pigments. Other large pieces of ochre have been
deliberately incised with repetitive geometrical patterns
from which we can infer some sort of symbolic or ceremonial activity (Mellars, 2005). Large amounts of red
ochre are also associated with ceremonial burial. We
find an abundance of carefully perforated shells, which
again had been imported from long distances. Their use
as personal ornaments is confirmed by unambiguous indications of elaborate ceremonial burials associated with
a range of perforated seashells (Mellars, 2005). We cannot say whether or not these first humans had language,
but we can be sure that they were engaging in symbolic
behaviour, making it highly likely that some form of language was at least possible.
It appears that the first modern human population remained very low, judging by the types of faunal assemblage found in caves that date to 90,000 years ago. Klein
(2000) has pointed out that wherever we find large ungulate and tortoise bones together with the larger specimens of marine shells, we can infer low population density that is not over-exploiting the available resources.
Nevertheless, we can surmise from the fossil and archaeological record, that at least one group of H. sapiens move
out of Africa, around 40,000-50,000 years ago, and completely replaced all other hominins living at that time
Tattersall (2001).

Conclusion

The Appearance of Modern Humans
The first appearance of anatomically modern humans
emerged in Africa by around 120,000 years ago (Stringer,
2003). The fossil record in Africa closely matches the latest genetic evidence for this recent emergence. Pearson
(2004) has pointed out that MtDNA and the X and Y
chromosomes in all modern humans show a very low diversity, especially compared to Apes. It appears that
an anatomically modern population emerged in Africa
and subsequently replaced all other hominin populations
living there at that time. Pearson suggests that these
first modern humans grew in population over a period
6
H. heidelbergensis may have been an intermediary population that emerged between 600,000 and 400,000 years ago
in Africa.

1252

I have proposed that the archaeological and paleontological record does not support theories that argue for
gradual change for the evolution of the hominin clade.
Rather, we see the “Sudden Appearance” of the first hominins around 6-7 million years ago due to a neotenous
mutation of an ancestral ape, followed by an astonishing
stasis in bodily form and brain size for at least 4 million
years when the first stone tools appear. We then find the
sudden appearance of H. erectus who again shows little
variability in either physiology or tool technology for 2.5
million years. It has been shown that any variability in
all of these ancestral hominins is no more than we find
today among modern humans. The final sudden appearance produced anatomically modern humans (H. sapiens), which emerged in Africa around 120,000 years ago

with the cognitive architecture to support an extraordinary array of symbolic behaviour not seen before in any
ancestral species. I therefore contend that arguments
belonging to Jackendoff and Pinker, that claim that our
mind and language faculty are highly modularised due
to the gradual accretion of functionally specific components, which have evolved gradually over evolutionary
time, are not tenable.

References
Arsuaga, J., Martinez, I., Lorenzo, C., and Gracia, A.
(1999). The human cranial remains from Gran Dolina
Lower Pleistocene site. Journal of Human Evolution,
37:431–457.
Bermudez de Castro, J., Carbonell, E., Caceres, I., Diez,
J., Fernandez-Jalvo, Y., Mosquera, M., Olle, A., Rodriguez, J., Rosas, A., Rosell, J., Sala, R., Verges, J.,
and Van der Made, J. (1999). The TD6 (Aurora stratum) hominid site. Final remarks and new questions.
Journal of Human Evolution, 37:695–700.
Bickerton, D. (2002). From Protolanguage to Language,
pages 103–120. In Crow (2002).
Brown, P., Sutikna, T., Morwood, M., Soejono, R., Jatmiko, Wayhu Saptomo, E., and Due., R. A. (2004). A
new small-bodied hominin from the late Pleistocene of
Flores, Indonesia. Nature, 431:1055–1061.
Chomsky, N. (1988). Language and Problems of Knowledge. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Crow, T. (2002). The Speciation of Modern Homo Sapiens. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Deacon, T. (1997). The Symbolic Species. London: Penguin.
Dennett, D. (1995). Darwin’s Dangerous Idea. London:
Penguin.
Gabunia, L., Antón, S., Lordkipanidze, D., Vekua, A.,
Justus, A., and Swisher, C. (2001). Dmanisi and dispersal. Evolutionary Anthropology, 10:158–170.
Groves, C. P. (1989). A Theory of Human and Primate
Evolution. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Hauser, M. D., Chomsky, N., and Fitch, W. T. (2002).
The Faculty of Language: What Is It, Who Has It,
and How Did It Evolve? Science, 298:1569–1579.
Jackendoff, R. (1999a). Possible stages in the evolution
of the language capacity. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
3:272–279.
Jackendoff, R. (1999b). Parallel constraint-based generative theories of language. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 3:393–400.
Jenkins, L. (2000). Biolinguistics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Klein, R. (2000). Archeology and the Evolution of Human Behavior. Evolutionary Anthropology, 9:17–36.
Kunzig, R. (1997). Atapuerca: The face of an ancestral
child. Discover, 18:88–100.
MacLarnon, A. and Hewitt, G. (2004). Increased Breathing Control: Another factor in the Evolution of Human Language. Evolutionary Anthropology, 13:181–
197.

1253

Mellars, P. (2005). The Impossible Coincidence. A
Single-Species Model for the Origins of Modern Human Behavior in Europe. Evolutionary Anthropology,
14:12–27.
Mirazón Lahr, M. and Foley, R. (2004). Palaeoanthropology: Human evolution writ small. Nature,
431:1043–1044.
Noble, W. and Davidson, I. (1997). Human Evolution,
Language and Mind. Cambridge: Cambridge UP.
Pearson, O. (2004). Has the Combination of Genetic and
Fossil Evidence Solved the Riddle of Modern Human
Origins? Evolutionary Anthropology, 13:145–159.
Penin, X., Berge, C., and Baylac, M. (2002). Ontogenetic
Study of the Skull in Modern Humans and the Common Chimpanzees: Neotenic Hypothesis Reconsidered
with a Tridimensional Procrustes Analysis. American
Journal of Physical Anthropology, 118:50–62.
Pinker, S. (1994). The Language Instinct. New York:
William Morrow & Co.
Pinker, S. (1997). How The Mind Works. Ringwood,
Vic.: Penguin.
Pinker, S. and Jackendoff, R. (2005). The faculty of
language: what’s special about it? Cognition, 95:201236.
Rightmire, G. (1990). The Evolution of Homo Erectus.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Schwartz, J. H. (1999). Sudden Origins: Fossils, Genes,
and the Emergence of Species. New York: John Wiley
& Sons.
Sterelny, K. (2003). Thought in a Hostile World. Malden,
MA.: Blackwell.
Stringer, C. and Gamble, C. (1993). In Search of the
Neanderthals: Solving the Puzzle of Human Origins.
London: Thames and Hudson.
Stringer, C. (2003). Out of Ethiopia. Nature, Vol
423:692–694.
Tattersall, I. (1997). Out of Africa Again...and Again?
Scientific American, April:60–67.
Tattersall, I. (2001). How we came to be HUMAN. Scientific American, December:56–63.
Walker, A. and Shipman, P. (1996). The Wisdom of the
Bones. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Wilson, M., Wallauer, W., and Pusey, A. (2004). New
cases of intergroup violence among chimpanzees in
Gombe National Park, Tanzania. International Journal of Primatology, 25:523–549.
Wong, K. (2003). An ancestor to call our own. Scientific
American, Vol 288:42–51.

