UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Vanishing Sex Difference in the Virtual Morris Water Task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7ws14954

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Griego, Jacqueline
Kabisch, Christiane
Muhl, Christian

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Vanishing Sex Difference in the Virtual Morris Water Task
Christian Mühl, Christiane Kabisch, Jacqueline Griego
Institute for Cognitive Science, University of Osnabrück
Osnabrück, 49069 Germany

Abstract
Sex differences are frequently, however, not consistently found
in the domain of spatial navigation in mammalian species.
Using a virtual Morris water task (VMWT) we tested the
hypothesis that differential use of proximal and distal cues
between males and females could account for previously
observed human differences. In Astur, Ortiz, and Sutherland
(1998) males had faster swim latencies to a hidden platform,
and smaller heading errors in the VMWT. We alternated blocks
of fixed-across blocks and fixed-within blocks platform
locations. Males found the hidden platform faster overall in
both conditions. However the interleaved blocks eliminated the
performance difference between the groups in the first trial of
both the stationary and nonstationary platform blocks,
indicating that females were less affected than males by
the change in the reliability of the cognitive map (O’ Keefe &
Nadel, 1978) of the stationary blocks for the interleaved
blocks. This is in line with studies indicating differential
preferences and abilities to use distal or geometric cues (e.g.,
Sandstrom, Kaufmann, & Heuttel, 1998). Therefore, the mixed
results seen in spatial navigation regarding sex differences are
due in part to the cue types available in a given task
environment.
Keywords: Sex difference; Virtual reality; Morris water task;
Spatial memory, Hippocampus, Spatial ability

Introduction
There are physical differences between human male and
female brains such as those seen in gross morphology and
cytoarchitecture (e.g., Toga & Thompson, 2003) that are the
result of hormone regulated (e.g., Williams & Meck, 1991)
and X- and Y-chromosome linked gene expression (e.g.,
Galfalvy et al., 2003). The significance of these manifest
differences in terms of cognition are still being explored and
debated. However, as we continue to define the functional
relationship between brain structure and cognition, sex
differences appear to be relevant parameters of the
relationship. As a result of appropriate ethical
considerations, much of the direct evidence in this area is
obtained in animal studies. Thus the link between human
and nonhuman animal studies is important to progress in
cognitive science. One contemporary development is the
comparison between the decades of results in spatial
navigation in rodents performing maze tasks with that of
human participants in virtual environments (Nadel et al.,
1998)
The recent development of virtual reality environments
makes possible the assessment of navigational abilities in
humans with similar settings and parameters as done with
1547

rodents. Furthermore, although studies with actual mazes
have been conducted (Bohbot et al., 1994; Kállai et al.,
1995), the use of virtual environments allows a tighter
control of the experimental conditions and better
measurement of performance: for example, regarding path
trajectories and speed. To this end, rodents are now also
subjects in virtual environment navigation tasks (e.g.,
Hölscher et al., 2005).
Investigations with human subjects in different kinds of
virtual mazes have produced similar results as seen in nonvirtual rodent studies, for example the acquisition of spatial
knowledge (Jacobs, Thomas, & Laurence, 1997), the
importance of distal cues (Jacobs et al., 1998), and the
crucial involvement of hippocampal structures (Astur et al.,
2002). Specific to the current study there is evidence for a
general performance advantage of males in navigational
ability in virtual reality mazes (Morris water maze: Astur et
al., 1998; Hebb-Williams maze: Shore et al., 2001) as it was
also shown for rodents (Perrot-Sinal et al., 1996; Roof,
1993; Williams & Meck, 1991).
As of yet there is not a large body of results regarding
sex differences in virtual maze navigation. Therefore, the
aim of the current study was twofold. First, we wanted to
replicate the general sex differences of shorter swimming
latencies and smaller heading errors for male navigators in a
different version of a virtual environment (i.e., Astur et al.,
1998; Sandstrom et al., 1998). The second was to
investigate the influence interleaved nonstationary platform
trials have on these sex differences in terms of differential
use of allocentric and egocentric representations. A
difference in the method used to construct representations of
the navigation space is assumed to possibly support the use
of different navigational strategies. For example, as seen in
Sandstrom et al. (1998) where males and females showed no
differences in navigation performance in environments with
both geometric (e.g., direction and distance) and landmark
cues; However, female performance was worse when there
were only geometric cues.
We chose for our purposes the Morris water maze
(Morris, 1981), the gold standard for assessing navigation in
rodents. In the Morris water task the subject has to find a
platform in a circular pool situated in a quadratic room. The
platform is hidden and there are no proximal cues within the
pool that could indicate the platform location. Around the
pool at the walls of the room, distal cues are arranged (Fig.
1). To perform successfully the subject has to encode the
platform location in relation to the distal cues, as proximal
cues are essentially missing.

Figure 1. A view from inside the pool of the VMWT
Astur et al. (1998) showed in various experiments a
reliable sex difference in the virtual Morris water task.
Individuals had to escape from a virtual pool by finding a
hidden platform over 20 trials after which a probe trial
without platform was to be performed. Across all these
experiments in which the position of the target did not
change, the subjects continually improved their
performance, that is, their swimming latency decreased.
Overall, males were faster in finding the hidden platform,
made smaller heading errors and showed a better spatial
strategy in the probe trials1 compared to females.
Importantly in a control task with a visible platform there
were no differences between male and female latencies to
find the platform or in swim speed. This indicates that the
sex difference was not the result of motivational, motor or
sensory differences regarding the computer program, rather
it could be traced back to navigational ability (Astur et al.,
1998).
A possible interpretation for the sex difference would be
that males and females rely on differential strategies that are
based on different representations when searching for the
platform. Two kinds of spatial representation, egocentric
and allocentric, are potentially useful in solving the Morris
water task. To navigate through the environment individuals
must initially rely on an egocentric representation. That is,
on a representation of distal cues in the environment relative
to the one’s own body. With continuous exposure to the
environment, it is possible to form relations between the
various cues. An allocentric representation, a cognitive map
containing information about the spatial relations between
diverse distal and geometric cues and the target position is
built and refined gradually, supporting the navigation
process (O’Keefe & Nadel, 1978). While an egocentric
representation can be used to re-establish the constellation
of distal cues relative to one’s own body in the moment the
platform was found, an allocentric representation makes it
possible to derive the platform location when cues and one’s
own position within the environment are known. This
distinction underlies the motivation for the task in our
experiment. That is, interleaving a stable platform condition
1

The term spatial strategy refers to the percentage of the path
length that the subject spent in the quadrant where the platform
was located in the practice trials. A successful spatial strategy
required the subject to spent more than 40% of the path length in
the target quadrant.
1548

with a nonstable platform condition in the same VMWT
environment should disrupt the ability to use a cognitive
map built across both types of blocks.
Saucier et al. (2002) presented evidence for a basic
difference in the way the sexes orient in and navigate
through the world, and that it may be related to the use of
differential representations. They contend that the difference
can be traced back to dimorphic capacity to use the two
types of cues. The preference for distal cue (landmarks) use,
or the relative lack of sensitivity towards geometric cues,
may cause the slower acquisition of cognitive maps (i.e.,
absolute reckoning representation) and a stronger reliance
on egocentric representations. Thus, males are more
effective in construction and use of an allocentric
representation of the environment relying on geometrical
and distal cues, while females initially rely instead on an
egocentric representation. This leads to an advantage of men
in spatial navigation tasks.
Additionally, Sandstrom et al. (1998) also demonstrated
that males and females differ in the kind of cues they use in
tasks of spatial navigation like the Morris water maze.
While men used distal and geometric cues (e.g., direction
and distance) to find a hidden platform, women were mostly
navigating with the help of distal cues.
In total, assuming egocentric representation to be mainly
supported by parietal cortex (Colby & Goldberg, 1999), and
allocentric representations by the hippocampus (Ekstrom et
al., 2003; O'Keefe & Nadel, 1978), differential patterns of
brain activations (Grön et al., 2000) indicate differential use
of representations. While performing a complex, threedimensional virtual reality maze, both males and females
showed, besides others, strong activations in the
hippocampus proper, the parahippocampal gyrus and
parietal regions. This indicates that both males and females
are performing on the basis of the same neural systems as
outlined above. However, compatible with the differential
cue use mentioned above and with the idea of different
representations preferentially used, females showed stronger
activations in a right parietal area and a right prefrontal area,
whereas men exhibited stronger activation in the left
hippocampus.
In order to investigate differential cue use we chose to
use interleaved nonstationary platform location blocks
within stationary platform location blocks. Subjects had to
find a hidden platform in a virtual version of the MWT.
While the platform location did not change over the
stationary platform blocks, it was randomly assigned to a
different location for each nonstationary platform block.
Stationary and nonstationary blocks differed also in the
distal cue design, with every-day cues (window, shelf,
picture, door) and abstract cues (4 abstract pictures)
randomly and evenly distributed over males and females.
We chose the nonstationary blocks to be without
predictable platform location over blocks but predictable
(stationary) within blocks to maximise uncertainty about the
platform location. However, this minimised the possibility
that individuals might conceptualize the nonstationary

platform blocks as totally random (i.e., in a trial to trial
randomisation). The former prevents subjects to learn one
general platform location for all interleaved blocks, but for
each block to learn a new location. The latter should ensure
that subjects still use some kind of navigation strategy other
than random navigation.

Methods
Participants
We tested 46 graduate and undergraduate students, 23
male students (M age = 23.3) and 23 female students (M age
= 23.7), from the human sciences department. All had
normal or corrected to normal vision. As compensation they
received course credits for their study or took part in a
lottery with the chance to win 50 €.

Equipment
We used an implementation of a virtual Morris water
task from Neuroinvestigations, Inc. Technical specifications
are available at: http://www.neuroinvestigations.com. The
experiments were done on an IBM-compatible computer
with a Pentium III 800MHz processor, 256 MB RAM, a 32
MB RAM ATI Graphics Card and an IBM-compatible
keyboard. The image was displayed on a 17” monitor with a
resolution of 1280 x 1024 (16 Mio. colors, 85 Hz refresh).

Design
The experiment consisted of 14 blocks, 7 of the
stationary platform condition and 7 of the nonstationary
platform condition, with 4 trials in each block. The blocks
of the two conditions were alternating, beginning with a
stationary platform condition block. In the stationary
platform condition the platform was tied to the same
location within the pool over all blocks, in the nonstationary
platform condition the location was randomly reassigned for
each block, as illustrated:
A_B.1_A_B.2_A_B.3_A_B.4_A_B.5_A_B.6_A_B.7
Within the blocks of both conditions the platform was
located at the same place over the 4 trials. However, the
starting position within the pool was randomly determined
for each trial.
The two platform conditions used different sets of distal
cues (abstract objects: colorful abstract pictures vs. every
day objects: window, bookshelf, poster, door). The cue sets
made it possible for the subject to discriminate between the
conditions,
though
not
informed
about
the
stationary/nonstationary platform design. The association of
the cue types with the condition type (abstract – stationary /
familiar – nonstationary vs. abstract – nonstationary /
familiar – stationary) was randomly and evenly distributed
over the subjects.
1549

Procedure
After reading an information sheet with general
instructions concerning the experiment, participants signed a
consent form. Then they were instructed to navigate in the
virtual 3D surrounding using the arrow keys (forward, right,
left) on the keyboard and to use the distal cues to orient.
They were told that after 60 seconds of search the platform
would appear and they were to swim to the location. It was
emphasised that they should use the 5 seconds remaining to
the next trial after the platform was discovered to turn and
orient in the room, as this information could be helpful in
the next trial. There was a 60° field of egocentric view of
the virtual space, which is approximately the same as the
human eye. Every 100 ms the position of the subject was
recorded in the form of {x,y} coordinates. The latency and
path length to locate the platform were determined from this
data. The heading error was determined after the subject
travelled a path length ¼ of the pool diameter, or if the
platform was found before this point immediately before the
subject stepped on the platform.

Results
A repeated measure 2 (Sex) by 28 (Trials) ANOVA with
the mean swimming latency of all stationary trials revealed
faster times for males (M = 14.81, SD = 13,95) than females
(M = 22.84, SD = 19,94), F(1, 44) = 10.19, p < .001 (Fig. 2).
Furthermore a significant difference was observed for
the main effect of trial, F(27,1188) = 7.29, p < .001. Mean
latencies were reduced from the first to the last trial, t(90) =
6.49, p < .001, reflecting learning over the blocks. There
was no interaction, p = .392.
In separate repeated ANOVAs, there were no significant
differences due to whether navigators were started in any
one of the Cue Type (abstract or concrete objects) by Block
Type (Stationary or Nonstationary), p = .600. There were
also no significant differences in Heading Error between
sexes, p = .310.
When we examined the latencies in all first trials of
stationary platform blocks, using repeated measure ANOVA
with the 7 first trials as repeating factor, we found no main
effect of Sex, F(1,44) = 3.02, p > .05. However, a main
effect of trial could be observed, F(6, 264) = 7.87, p < 0.01,
and again was shown to be caused by an decrease in latency
over the blocks, t(90) = 3.20, p = .002.
The finding of no significant sex difference in the
repeated measure ANOVA above was not due to a
shrunken sample size, as in an ANOVA for all second stable
trials, males were again significantly faster to find the
platform, F(1, 44) = 9.44, p < .01.
However, comparing the performance of the sexes in the
first trials of the stationary blocks we found an effect of the
interleaved nonstationary blocks. The interleaved blocks led
to a decrease in swimming latency in the first stationary trial
relative to the last trial of the preceding stationary block in
both sexes. This loss was larger for males than for females,
therefore the swim latencies between sexes were no longer
statistically different (Fig. 3).

Swimming latency in s

35

Male
Men

Examining a profile of performance across the four trials
shows no significant differences by sex for the first trial of
the nonstationary block t(44) = .839, p = .41, in addition to
the earlier result for the stationary blocks (Fig. 4). Also of
note there is no difference between males and females in the
second trial of the nonstationary block, indicating continued
disruption for males t(44) = 1.501, p = .14. The figure
includes SEM whiskers to allow for visual inspection of all
trial latencies, beyond those comparisons discussed.

Female
Women

30
25
20
15
10
5

Discussion

0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Block

Figure 2. Development of the performance over stationary
platform blocks expressed in swimming latency.

Fem ale

M ale

30

*

Swimming latency in s

25
20
15
10
5
0

A ll 4 trials

O n ly 1 st T ria ls

Figure 3. Mean latency to find the platform; left:
performance over all four trials in the stationary blocks
(* significant contrast); right: performance over just the
first trials of the stationary blocks. Nonsignificant, p = .09.

45

Male/Stationary

Swimming latency in s

40

Male/Non

35

Female/Stationary

30

Female/Non

25
20
15
10
5
0
1

2

3

4

Trials

Figure 4. A profile of sex differences and similarities in
performance across the four trials in each type of the block,
stationary and nonstationary, whiskers are SEM.
1550

As expected, a large sex difference in the time to find a
hidden platform was observed with males in general finding
the hidden platform faster than females. Viewing the
vanishing of the sex difference in this light suggests that the
use of differential navigational strategies causes the
different effects of the interleaved nonstationary blocks on
performance. Not only did individuals improve in
performance from first to last trial within stationary and
nonstationary blocks, but also over the stationary blocks
(Fig. 2 and Fig. 4).
While we took the vanishing sex difference in the first
stationary trials as an indicator that males were affected
relatively more than females by the change of condition,
there is a possible alternative interpretation. That is, both
males and females were affected to the same degree,
resembling a kind of initial resetting of spatial knowledge.
This implies that both would lose all their spatial knowledge
about the environment and be completely disoriented. This
would also be expressed as a vanishing of the sex difference
because the spatial knowledge of both groups would be
zero. However, this interpretation is unlikely because the
general learning curve over all first stable trials implies that
there is learning of spatial knowledge.
So if we assume that males and females are affected to
different degrees by the interleaved nonstationary blocks,
what is the cause? Assuming the stronger reliance of males
on allocentric representations, and of females on egocentric,
the effect could be explained by the characteristics of these
representations. For example, the general advantage of
males in simple tasks of spatial navigation might be a
disadvantage when environmental cues change in their
validity, as when the platform location changes in the
interleaved blocks. In this case the cognitive maps of the
two environments interfere with each other, possibly due to
an automatic process of generalisation based on similar
geometric cues of the two environments. Females, on the
other hand, would be less affected by the change of the
environment as the egocentric representation is based on the
use of clearly distinguishable distal cues, and therefore it is
not possible to confound the different environments.
One might question the ecological validity of the results,
criticising the fact that subjects only receive minimal
proprioceptory and vestibular inputs in virtual
environments. Although vestibular information plays a role
in spatial navigation, subjects receive optokinetic
information, as for example visual motion, in virtual

environments that may compensate the lack of other
information. Moreover, optokinetic information alone can
induce motion sickness and vertigo, which suggests that
optokinetic information is interacting with the vestibular
system (Astur et al., 1998; Hamilton, Driscoll &
Southerland, 2002). In our study both males and females
were deprived equally of input other than the optokinetic
one. It may be possible to imagine that females and males
make use of differential strategies, based on cue types other
than proximal and distal. In this case a differential
dependency on vestibular and/or proprioceptory input may
be the case, producing the sex difference. However, Waller,
Knapp and Hunt (2001) compared the performance of the
sexes in virtual environments and in real mazes, showing
that in both differences of navigational ability can be found.
This rejects the notion that the difference is merely caused
by a differential dependency on vestibular or proprioceptive
information.
Another point of criticism is different levels of
experience with computers or computer games that might
lead to the observed sex difference. Two counter arguments
address this problem: Again, the demonstration of sex
differences in real-world experiments rejects the idea of a
mere effect of experience with computers. Furthermore,
other studies using similar virtual environments showed that
sex was the better predictor for spatial ability compared to
computer experience (Astur et al., 1998; Shore et al., 2001).
To clarify if the vanishing sex difference is really caused
by the reliance on differential representations it would be
interesting to design a task employing interleaved
nonstationary blocks, that forces females to build up and
work with an allocentric representation. This could be done
by the manipulation of the cues necessary to orient, for
example removal of the distal cues and addition of
geometrical cues. If males and females are using allocentric
representations to navigate the Morris water task the overall
sex difference should still be found, maybe even enlarged
(Sandstrom et al., 1998), but more importantly also a sex
difference in the first trials of the stationary blocks.
Our results indicted that interleaved blocks of a
nonstationary platform condition have differential effects on
the performance of males and females in the Morris water
task. Though a significant overall advantage for male
navigators could be observed, the interleaved blocks
reduced this statistically reliable difference for the first trials
of the stationary blocks to a nonreliable difference. In
considering the relationship of this result to the rodent
literature a similar idea has been supported in rodent studies.
Kanit et al. (1998) trained rats to swim to a visible
platform. When the visible platform was moved to a new
location in a probe trial males swam to the location where
the platform had been whereas female rats swam to the new
location. This points to a strong reliance on the previously
established representation in males.

1551

Conclusion
The investigation of sex differences in human spatial
cognition has a long history and includes many components
of spatial ability. For example, males perform better than
females in mental rotation tasks (Tapley & Briden, 1977),
the Piagetan water level task (Goodrich et al., 1993), wayfinding (Lawton, 1994) and route learning (Galea &
Kimura, 1993). Females have better memory for object
location in static (e.g., Silverman & Eals, 1992) and
dynamic environments (Tottenham, Saucier, Elias, &
Gutwin, 2003).
Considering our data and those of others (cf. Astur et al.,
1998; Sandstrom et al, 1998) the current study contributes to
the spatial cognition literature the idea that the development
of sexually dimorphic neural substrates (e.g., Williams &
Meek, 1991) might result in different ways of processing
environmental input during navigation, as shown in humans:
for example, in patterns of effective connectivity derived
from imaging studies (Grön et al., 1998). The idea of
differential representation construction (i.e., egocentric and
allocentric) and cue use in navigation is of course not
incredibly novel. However, we point out the advantage of
being able to compare rodent and human performance in
similar paradigms and on similar parameters, which in turn
can be tied to the neural substrate data obtained across many
years of rodent brain data and finally, to functional imaging
studies.

References
Astur, R. S., Ortiz, M. L., & Sutherland, R. J. (1998). A
characterization of performance by men and women in a
virtual Morris water task: a large and reliable sex
difference. Behavioral Brain Research, 93, 185-190.
Astur, R. S., Taylor, L. B., Mamelak, A. N., Philpott, L. &
Sutherland, R. J. (2002). Humans with hippocampus
damage display severe spatial memory impairments in a
virtual Morris water task. Behavioral Brain Research,
132, 77-84
Bohbot, V., Jech, R., Ruzicka, E., Bures, J., & Nadel, L.
(1994). Comparison of rat and human spatial memory
performance. Society for Neuroscience Abstracts, 361,
Miami.
Colby, C. L., & Goldberg, M. E. (1999). Space and
attention in parietal cortex. Annual Review
Neuroscience, 22, 319-349.
Ekstrom, A. D., Kahana, M. J., Caplan, J. B., Fields, T. A.,
Isham, E. A., Newman, E. L., & Fried, I. (2003). The
cellular networks underlying human spatial navigation,
Nature, 425, 184-187.
Galea, L. A., & Kimura, D. (1993). Sex differences in routelearning. Personal & Individual Differences, 14, 53-65.
Galfalvy, H. C., Erraji-Benchekroun, L., Smyrniotopoulos,
P., Pavlidis, P., Ellis, S. P., Mann, J. J., Sibille, E.,
Arango, V. (2003). Sex genes for genomic analysis in
human brain: Internal controls for comparison of probe
level data extraction. BMC Bioinformatics, 4,

Goodrich, G. A., Damin, P. B., Ascione, F. R., &
Thompson, T. M. (1993). Gender differences in
Piagetian visual-spatial representation of verticality and
horizontality, Journal of Genetic Psychology, 154, 449458.
Grön, G., Wunderlich, A. P., Spitzer, M., Tomczak, R., &
Riepe, M. W. (2000), Brain activation during human
navigation: gender-different neural networks as substrate
of performance. Nature Neuroscience, 3, 404-408.
Hamilton, D. A., Driscoll, I., Sutherland, R. J. (2002).
Human place learning in a virtual Morris water task:
Some important constraints on the flexibility of place
navigation. Behavioural Brain Research, 129, 159-179.
Hebb, D. O., & Williams, K. A. (1946). A method of rating
animal intelligence. Journal of General Psychology, 34,
59-65.
Hölscher, C., Schnee, A., Dahmen, H., Setia, I., & Mallot,
H. A. (2005). Rats are able to navigate in virtual
environments. Journal of Experimental Biologym 208,
561-569.
Jacobs, W. J., Laurance, H. E., & Thomas, K.G. F. (1997).
Place learning in virtual space I: acquisition,
overshadowing, and transfer. Learning and Motivation.
28, 521-541.
Jacobs, W. J., Thomas, K. G. F., Laurance, H .E, & Nadel,
L. (1998). Place learning in virtual space II:
Topographical relations as one dimension of stimulus
control. Learning and Motivation, 29, 288-308.
Kállai, J., Kóczán, G., Szabó, I., Molnár, P., & Varga, J.
(1995). An experimental study to operationally define
and measure spatial orientation in panic agoraphobia
subjects, generalized anxiety and healthy control groups.
Behavioural and Cognitive Psychology, 23, 145-152.
Kanit, L., Taskiran D., Furedy, J. J., Kulai, B., McDonald,
R., Pogan, S. (1998). Nicotine interacts with sex in
affecting rat choice between
“lookout” and
“navigational” cognitive styles in the Morris water maze
place learning task. Brain Research Bulletin, 46,
441-445.
Lawton, C. A. (1994). Gender differences in way-finding
strategies: Relationships to spatial ability and spatial
anxiety. Sex Roles, 30, 765-779.
Morris, R. G. M. (1981). Spatial localization does not
require the presence of local cues. Learning and
Motivation, 12, 239-260.
Nadel, L., Thomas, K. G. F., Laurance, H. E., Skelton, R.,
Tal, T., and Jacobs, W. J. (1998). Human Place Learning
in a Computer Generated Arena. In: (Eds). C. Freksa, C.
Habel,
K.
Wender,
Spatial
Cognition.
An
Interdisciplinary Approach to Representing and
Processing Spatial Knowledge, Springer, Berlin.
O’Keefe, J., & Nadel, L. (1978). The Hippocampus as a
Cognitive Map, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Overman, W. H., Pate, B. J., Moore, K., & Peuster, A.
(1996). Ontogeny of place learning in children as
measured in the radial arm maze, Morris search task, and

1552

open field task. Behavioral Neuroscience, 110, 12051228.
Perrot-Sinal, T. S., Kostenuik, M. A., Ossenkopp, K. P., &
Kavaliers, M. (1996). Sex differences in performance in
the Morris water maze and the effects of initial
nonstationary hidden platform training. Behavioral
Neuroscience, 110, 1309-1320.
Roof, R. L. (1993). Neonatal exogenous testosterone
modifies sex differences in radial arm and Morris water
maze performanze in prepubescent and adult rats.
Behavioural Brain Research, 53, 1-10.
Sandstrom, N.J., Kaufman, J., & Huettel, S. A. (1998).
Differential cue use by males and females in a virtual
environment navigation task. Cognitive Brain Research,
6, 351-360.
Saucier D. M., Green S. M., Leason J., MacFadden A.,
Bell S., & Elias L. J. (2002). Are sex differences in
navigation caused by sexually dimorphic strategies or by
differences in the ability to use the strategies?
Behavioral Neuroscience, 116, 403-10.
Shore, D. I., Stanford, L., Klein, R. M., & Brown, R. E.
(2001). Of mice and men: Virtual Hebb-Williams mazes
permit comparison of spatial learning across species.
Cognitive, Affective & Behavioral Neuroscience, 1, 8389.
Silverman, I., & Eals, M. (1992). Sex differences in spatial
abilities. In The Adapted Mind: Evolutionary Psychology
and the Generation of Culture, Eds. J. H. Barkow, L.
Comides, & J, Tooby. Oxford University Press: Oxford.
Toga, A. W., & Thompson, P. M. (2003). Mapping Brain
Asymmentry. Nature Reviews: Neuroscience, 4, 37-48.
Tapley, S. M., & Briden, M. P. (1977). An investigation of
sex differences in spatial ability: mental rotation of
three-dimensional objects. Canadian Journal of
Psychology, 31, 122-130.
Tottenham, L. S., Saucier, D., Elias, L., Gutwin, C. (2003).
Female advantage for spatial location memory in both
static and dynamic enviroments.
Waller, D., Knapp, D., & Hunt, E. (2001). Spatial
representations of virtual mazes: The role of visual
fidelity and individual differences. Human Factors, 43,
147 - 158.
Ward, S. L., Newcome, N., & Overton, W. F. (1986).
Turn left at the church, or three miles north: A
study of direction giving and sex differences.
Environment and Behavior., 18, 192-266.
Williams, C. L., & Meck, W. H. (1991). The organizational
effects of gonadal steroids on sexually dimorphic spatial
ability. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 16, 155-176.

Acknowledgements
We wish to thank Ute Kreitz, Jens Kunkemueller,
Jiayong Liu, Frank Schumann, Saskia Nagel, Nicolas
Neubauer, Oleksandr Kolomiyets and Stan James for help
with data collection and useful discussions. Furthermore we
would like to thank Derek A. Hamilton for his ideas
regarding the experiment.

