UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A "Visual" Conflict Hypothesis for Global-Local Visual Deficits in Williams Syndrome:
Simulations and Data

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7qm3c44k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Abreu, Ana Maria
Annaz, Dagmara
de Schonen, Scania
et al.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A «Visual Conflict» Hypothesis for Global-Local Visual Deficits
in Williams Syndrome: Simulations and Data
Ana Maria Abreu (ana.abreu@etu.upmc.fr)

Robert M. French (robert.french@u-bourgogne.fr)

LCD-CNRS U. Paris 5, France and
SGDP Centre, Kings College London, UK

LEAD-CNRS, U. de Bourgogne, Dijon, France and
Psychology Dept., U. of Liege, 4000 Liege, Belgium

Dagmara Annaz and Michael Thomas ({m.thomas, d.annaz}@bbk.ac.uk)
Psychology Dept., Birkbeck College, Malet Street, London, WC1E 7HX, UK

Scania de Schonen (schonen@psycho.univ-paris5.fr)
LCD-CNRS U. Paris 5, France and
Neuropediatrics and Metabolic Disorders Dept., Robert Debré Hospital, Paris, France
deficit. However, it remains unclear the extent to which the
primary impact of the deficit lies in perception or
construction (e.g., Pani et al., 1999; Rossen et al., 1996).
Farran, Jarrold, and Gathercole (2003) have recently argued
that individuals with WS only have a local bias in their
drawing and not in their identification. Atkinson et al.
(2003) have suggested that construction impairments stem
from frontal control processes that are associated with
spatially directed responses.
Vicari et al. (2003) demonstrated that in children with
WS, form information is maintained relatively intact in
Short Term Memory (STM) whereas location information is
not processed correctly. Since reproduction is a more
complex task that depends on, at the very least, integrating
both form and location information, it is possible that
children with WS may be able to retain a global image in
visual working memory, leading to relatively good
performance on image-recognition tasks, but express a local
bias when it comes to planning the drawing of individual
elements in a copying task.
In exploring the underlying causes of the visuospatial
deficit in WS, a central difficulty is the vague specification
of the local bias hypothesis. What is a sensible formalization
of an image recognition or reproduction task; how might
one encode sensitivity to local versus global levels of
organization in a sequential task, either of saccading the
elements of a display or reproducing elements of that
display in a particular organization; what parameter would
be sufficient to mediate attention to global or local
organization, that might operate in the typically developing
system but explain anomalous behavior in the atypical
system? Our first step in this paper is to turn to
computational modeling to formalize the hypothesis of an
inability to locally disengage, and establish that an account
of this nature is sufficient to demonstrate the behavior
observed in WS visuospatial construction skills.

Abstract
Individuals
with
Williams
Syndrome
demonstrate
impairments in visuospatial cognition. This has been ascribed
to a local processing bias. More specifically, it has been
proposed that the deficit arises from a problem in disengaging
attention from local features. We present preliminary data
from an integrated empirical and computational exploration of
this phenomenon. Using a connectionist model, we first
clarify and formalize the proposal that visuospatial deficits
arise from an inability to locally disengage. We then introduce
two empirical studies using Navon-style stimuli. The first
explored sensitivity to local vs. global features in a perception
task, evaluating the effect of a manipulation that raised the
salience of global organization. Thirteen children with WS
exhibited the same sensitivity to this manipulation as CAmatched controls, suggesting no local bias in perception. The
second study focused on image reproduction and
demonstrated that in contrast to controls, the children with
WS were distracted in their drawings by having the target in
front of them rather than drawing from memory. We discuss
the results in terms of an inability to disengage during the
planning stage of reproduction due to over-focusing on local
elements of the current visual stimulus.

Introduction
Williams Syndrome (WS) is a rare genetic disorder
characterized in part by disorders in visual perception
(Atkinson et al., 2001). One particular WS visual deficit
involves preferential perception of the component parts of
global forms, rather than the global forms themselves. A
possible explanation of this global-local perceptual deficit is
the local-bias hypothesis (e.g., Bihrle et al., 1989), whereby
individuals with WS tend to focus on local details and fail to
adequately process global visual forms. Fayasse and Thibaut
(2002) found that a greater number of local components
actually impairs WS individuals’ performance compared to
TD children. They further hypothesized that this difficulty
might stem from an inability to disengage attention from
local features. Brown et al. (2003) found deficits in the
saccade planning of toddlers with WS and similarly
interpreted these in terms of an attention disengagement

The SRN simulation
For consistency with previous empirical work in this area,
we focused on recognition and reproduction of Navon-type

45

6 bits (3 bits per coordinate). The network can be viewed as
a standard SRN designed to learn the sequence of Spositions on the H, and at the same time associate each
position with the letter found there (in this case, an S).
Training phase. There were 56 inputs and a bias node, 50
hidden units, and 78 outputs. The learning rate was 0.01,
with a momentum of 0.9, and a convergence criterion of 0.2.
The model was exposed to the target for 1000 learning
cycles. The local-attention parameter represented the
probability that the network would continue to process the
same location on the next update cycle, as opposed to
shifting to another part of the global figure, either its
canonical successor (see Fig. 1) or to another randomly
chosen location on the H. To simulate the performance of
typically developing children, the local-attention parameter
was set to p=0.2. In line with the local bias hypothesis, to
simulate an atypical system, this probability was set to
p=0.8, implementing a relative failure to disengage from
local elements. Reproduction phase. During testing of the
trained network, an initial location was input to the model
and it was then left to produce the sequence it had learned
while studying the Navon H.

geometrical stimuli (Navon, 1977). These are figures in
which a large letter (e.g., the letter H) is made up of smaller
letter’s (such as Ss), so that the overall figure has both a
global (H) and local (S) level of organization.
In order to capture the task of simultaneously representing
these two levels of organization, we used a simple recurrent
network (SRN) encoding “what” and “where” information
on object location (Elman, 1990; Rueckl, Cave & Kosslyn,
1989). The model was presented with a complex figure and
sequentially encoded both the position and identity of each
local element. The model was free to alter which position it
was processing and by scanning the Navon figure, the
model could therefore encode global organization in the
form of a sequence. Figure 1 depicts a canonical scan order
for processing an H made of Ss, although the model was
free to saccade anywhere on the global figure at any time.
To correctly reproduce the global H, the model had to learn:
(i) a sequence of locations that make up the global H and, at
the same time, (ii) the shape of the component S’s
associated with each location comprising the H.
Most importantly, the model included a local-attention
parameter. When processing a particular location, there was
a certain probability that for the next weight-change cycle it
would remain at that location, as opposed to moving to the
next sequential location or saccading to another part of the
global figure. The aim of the simulation was modest. Using
the Navon figure in Figure 1, we explored how the ability of
the model to encode this stimulus would be disrupted by the
local attention parameter, when this parameter assumed a
single setting throughout training – could one setting of the
parameter produce image-reproduction behavior observed in
typically developing children whilst another setting,
corresponding to a reduced propensity to disengage, would
generate the WS pattern? Our evaluation of the model’s
performance was qualitative, assessed against the drawings
collected by Fayasse and Thibaut (2002) (Fig. 2).

OBJk+1(where)

copy

Contextk-1

OBJk(what)

Hiddenk

OBJk(where)

Figure 3. A simple “what-where” recurrent network model
for scanning the Navon H
Results
We begin with the simulation of typical development.
When the local-attention parameter value was low, the
model qualitatively replicated the correctly drawn Navon
figure.. Both local and global levels of organization were
well formed. A representative output of the model is shown
in Figure 4 (far left panel).
By contrast, a higher setting of the local-attention
parameter disrupted the model’s ability to learn the overall
sequence of locations that would allow it to reproduce the
global pattern, shown in Figure 4 (center and far right
panel). On the whole, the local elements are well formed,
while the global organization is impoverished. However,
individual elements also exhibit anomalies since the system
has had a reduced opportunity to encode the elements in
certain positions and must rely on generalization from other
positions.

Figure 1. The prototypical Navon H, with the canonical
scanning order indicated

Figure 2. : Direct copying of the Navon H by a WS child
(Fayasse & Thibaut, 2002).
Simulation details
Architecture. The what-where simple recurrent network
model is shown in Figure 3. The local S’s were coded over
72 bits (i.e., 12 locations on a 7x5 grid. The x and y
locations of the S’s on the global H were binary-coded with

Discussion
One specific proposal of the local bias hypothesis for
visuospatial processing in WS is that these individuals have

46

the elements of the global figure rotate in unison around the
circumference of the global figure, (iv) where the entire
global figure itself moved, and finally, (v) where each of the
component elements of a global figure was jiggled
randomly.

a difficulty disengaging from local elements. Under a
reasonable implementation of this proposal, we have
demonstrated that a single parameter varying the probability
of shifting attentional locations – was sufficient to modulate
between typical and atypical patterns of behavior.

Participants
Our studies involved a group of children with WS (13
children, mean age: 8.8, SD: 2.24, range: 5.7-12.1 year) and
a chronological-age matched group of typically developing
(TD) children (22 children, mean age: 7.8, SD: 2.74, range:
4.0-12.5 years). Non-verbal ability was assessed using the
Raven Colored Progressive Matrices (CPM) (Raven et al.,
1998), for which the group mean scores were 16 and 24 for
WS and control groups, respectively. The children with WS
were recruited through the Williams Syndrome Foundation
UK and all had tested positive for elastin deletion.
(i)
(ii)
(iii)

Figure 4. SRN performance on the Navon-H encoding task
with a low local-attention value (p=0.2) (far left) simulating
the performance of a typically developing system and
(center and right) with a high local-attention value (p=0.8)
corresponding to the developmentally disordered system
With a high value of the local-attention parameter, the
SRN failed to correctly encode either level of organization.
This demonstration of the viability of the inability-tolocally-disengage hypothesis remains in need of an
explanation of why this particular parameter should be
atypical in WS. This is a point to which we shall return.
First, we focus on predictions of the model. Specifically,
if failure to encode the global level of organization stems
from an inability to scan the full set of local elements, cues
to the global organization should facilitate this process. We
therefore introduce two studies in which cues to global
organization were manipulated, one examining recognition,
the second reproduction. In the recognition study, animation
was used to increase the salience of global form. In the
reproduction study, copying was done either in the presence
or absence of the target. Given Vicari’s suggestion that
global form is retained in visual STM, removal of the target
may increase the salience of this level of organization. In
both cases, should the core problem revolve around a failure
to encode the global level because of attentional difficulties
(rather than some more structural problem forming the
representations per se), we should expect an increase in
global level performance.

(iv)

(v)

Figure 5. Various means of disengaging attention from
individual local elements using movement
Experimental Procedure
Both groups of children were tested with the static and
moving versions of the geometric Navon-type stimuli. The
images were shown to the children for 900ms and then
disappeared from the screen. The children were then asked
(forced-choice detection) to chose, using a four-key answer
pad, the image that best matched what they had just seen.
For example, if the target image were a global triangle
made of small circles, they would have to choose from a
large triangle, a small triangle, a large circle and a small
circle, not necessarily in this order (Figure 7). The choice of
either triangle, large or small, would constitute a “global”
answer, while the selection of either circle would be a
“local” answer.

Study 1: Manipulating global salience in a
recognition task: Static vs. Moving stimuli
In this study, participants were shown geometric Navontype stimuli (e.g., squares, triangles and circles made up of
the squares, triangles, circles, with the constraint that no
figure is composed of smaller copies of itself). For each
stimulus, participants were given a forced-choice selection
of responding to the local elements or the global
organization. To manipulate the salience of the global level
of organization, various types of animation were used.
The five classes of stimuli (Fig. 5) were, in order: (i)
where there was no movement of the component local
elements; (ii) where a small colored contiguous group of
local elements moved around the global figure; (iii) where

Figure 6. After seeing a global triangle made from circles,
the participants must chose from the four objects above
Results
For reasons of space, we report on only the results of two
of the above conditions – namely, the baseline condition in
which there is no movement of the component local
elements and the second condition in which a colored

47

compared to TD children. These results are intriguing in
light of seemingly contradictory findings of global-local
perception difficulties in individuals with WS (Bihrle et al.,
1994; Fayasse & Thibaut, 2002). However, these studies
differ in two crucial respects: they involved reproducing the
target rather than recognition, and they used a target that
was present at all times during copying. In our second study,
we switched therefore to reproduction, and explored
whether the presence of the target produced differential
effects in the performance of the children with WS and the
TD group.

segment moved around the circumference of the global
figure (Fig. 5(i) and (ii)).
Figure 7 depicts the response preference for the geometric
Navon stimuli. These results are notable for two things.
First, the use of motion cues to increase global salience did
not have an effect on preferences (p>.5). Second, the WS
group was not significantly different from the CA-matched
control group (F(1,33)=.11, p=.74). Given the visuospatial
deficits typically reported for the disorder, this is a rather
surprising finding and indicates no evidence of a recognition
deficit for these stimuli.

% global

100
80
60

movementenhanced

40

static

Study 2: Manipulating global salience in a
reproduction task: Deferred vs. Direct copying
In this study, participants were required to copy a
geometrical Navon-type figure. There were two conditions,
one in which the figure remained present during copying
(direct-copying condition) and the other in which the target
figure was shown and masked, requiring the child to copy
the figure from memory (deferred-copying condition).
Importantly, in the direct-copying condition, the target is
available to guide the planning stages in the recreation of
the figure.

20
0
WS

TD
Children

Figure 7. Comparison of TD and children with WS in
recognizing the global form of movement-enhanced and
static stimuli

Participants
The participants were the same as in the previous study.

Figure 8 (below) shows the reaction times for this global
figure-recognition task for the two groups. Given the
learning disability usually found in WS and evidenced by
their lower scores on the CPM, it was not surprising to find
slower RTs in the WS group compared to the TD group
(F(1,28)=6.55, p=.016, η2=.23). However, for the response
times, our manipulation of global salience revealed a clear
effect (F(1,28)=4.67, p=.039, η2=.17) and importantly, the
manipulation was equally effective in speeding the
responses of both groups (interaction of stimulus type x
group: F(1,28) = 2.47; p=.130).

Experimental Procedure
Individual static Navon-type geometric stimuli, as described
above, were drawn by the experimenter for the child, who
was then asked to reproduce the image. In one condition, the
image was shown until the child wished to begin the task
and was then masked. The child was then asked to
reproduce it from memory (without delay). In the other
condition, the target remained visible for the child to refer to
during copying.

RT (ms)

4000
3000

movementenhanced

2000

static

1000

WS.1
9y9m

0

WS

TD

WS.2
10y8m

Children

Figure. 8. A comparison of global-answer RTs for TD and
WS with movement-enhanced stimuli versus static stimuli

Figure 9. Representative examples of drawings by two
children with WS: direct-copying versus deferred-copying

Discussion
Although children with WS were significantly slower at
recognizing the global form of the target, they showed no
significant difference in preference for the global form

The criteria used in rating the drawings were the number of
local elements drawn, the shape of the local elements,
respect for configural relations between the individual
components to produce a recognizable global shape, and the

48

components, they cannot reproduce them at their correct
locations (Vicari et al., 2003);
iii) Children with WS might have deficits in global-local
feature binding, as indicated by deficits in 40Hz gamma
oscillations (Grice et al., 2001; see Singer, 1995; Gray et
al., 1989).

quality of the overall global form. A 1-to-5 rating scale
based on these criteria was used to score the drawings.
Results
The WS and TD groups demonstrated both qualitative and
quantitative differences in their copying performance in the
direct-copying versus deferred-copying task. Figure 9
depicts a comparison of two representative drawings, while
Figure 10 plots the quantitative ratings scores. The most
striking observation is that children in the WS group
performed better when drawing from memory alone,
without the physical presence of the target image to refer to
during copying. For the ratings scores in Fig. 10, both main
effects and the interaction were significant: for the Copying
delay (direct-copying vs. deferred-copying): F(1,32) =22.50,
p<0.001, η2=.70; for participant group (WS vs. TD):
F(1,32)=19.70, p<0.001, η2=.62; interaction of task x
group: F(1,32)=11.30, p=0.020, η2=.26. An analysis of the
simple effect within the TD group revealed no significant
performance difference between the direct- copying and the
deferred-copying task. Some of the children did not
complete the drawing test.

The continual reintroduction of local visual features from
the physically-present image impedes the system from
effectively settling on a binding between the local and
global features in memory. While these data are not
consistent with Vicari et al.’s (1996) findings for the Rey
Figure test, Vicari et al. used a considerably longer delay
before reproduction (10min). This would have engaged LT
memory and might be the cause of the different results.
In short, a “gestalt” perception of a figure held in memory
might be easier for children with WS to reproduce because
there is less visual interference created by the physical
presence of local components of the original image.

General Discussion and Future Work
A number of experiments that are part of the research
program presented here still remain to be done. These
involve direct copying of movement-enhanced stimuli and
recognition of stimuli (both movement-enhanced and static)
while the target stimuli remains present during the
recognition task. The experimental conditions that remain to
be explored are shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Experiments still to be done (marked with a “?”)

Figure 10. Drawing reproduction quality. The WS group
performs the copying task significantly better in the
Deferred Copy condition than in the Direct Copy condition,
while the TD group shows no significant difference

Target
present
Target
absent

Discussion: The “visual conflict” hypothesis
We propose a “visual conflict” hypothesis to explain these
results. We suggest that during a direct-copying task, the
fact that children with WS continually refer to the local
elements of the physically-present target inhibits their
ability to reproduce its global form. We believe that three
factors may be involved in their poorer performance in the
copying task when the target remains present. These are:
i) Their frequently referring to the physically-present
image combined with their over-focusing on its local
elements produces a refreshing of these local
components in memory, thus causing a conflict with the
global image held in memory. (We know this global
image exists in memory because of the good
performance of children with WS on recognition tasks);
ii) Their difficulties in retaining location information mean
that, even if they ultimately perceive all of the local

Reproduction
(copying)
Movement
enhanced
Static
?
Large
deficit
?
Average
deficit

Recognition
Movement
enhanced
?
No deficit

Static
?
No
deficit

Conclusions
We have presented a series of initial results and
computational simulations that are part of a larger research
program to better understand visuo-spatial processing
deficits in children with WS. A what-where SRN
connectionist
model of their image-reproduction
performance was presented. We consider this to be
preliminary work that shows that under a reasonable
implementation, the inability-to-locally-disengage would
hurt a systems ability to simultaneously encode local and
global levels of organization. More than anything else, this
simple model represents a dialog between computational
modeling and empirical studies. The goal of the model
presented here is to force specification of a vague
hypothesis (inability-to-locally-disengage) and establish the
viability of this hypothesis. We do this by showing that the
model can capture the figure-production performance of TD

49

& Karmiloff-Smith, A. (2003). Spatial representation and
attention in toddlers with Williams syndrome and Down
syndrome. Neuropsychologia, 41, 1037-1046.
Elman, J. (1990) Finding structure in time. Cognitive Science,
14, 179-211.
Farran, E.K., Jarrold, C., & Gathercole, S.E. (2001). Block
design performance in Williams syndrome phenotype: A
problem with mental imagery. Journal of Child Psychology
and Psychiatry, 42(6), 719-728.
Farran, E.K., Jarrold, C., & Gathercole, S.E. (2003). Divided
attention, selective attention and drawing: Processing
preferences in Williams syndrome are dependent on the
task administered. Neuropsychologia, 41, 676-687.
Fayasse, M., & Thibaut, J.P. (2002). Local and global
processing by persons with Williams syndrome: The case
of visuo-constructive tasks. Journal of Cognitive Education
and Psychology, 2(3), 245-266.
Gray, C.M., König, P., Engel, A.K. and Singer, W. (1989).
Oscillatory responses in cat visual cortex exhibit intercolumnar synchronization which reflects global stimulus
properties. Nature, 338, 334-337.
Grice, S.J., Spratling, M.W., Karmiloff-Smith, A. Halit, H.,
Csibra, G., de Haan, M., & Johnson, M.H. (2001).
Disordered visual processing and oscillatory brain activity
in autism and Williams syndrome. NeuroReport, 12(12),
2697-2700.
Navon, D. (1977). Forest before trees: The precedence of
global features in visual perception. Cognitive Psychology,
9, 353-383.
Pani, J.R., Mervis, C.B., Robinson, B.F. (1999). Global
spatial organization by individuals with Williams
syndrome. Psychological Science, 10, 453-458.
Raven, J., Raven, J.C., & Court, J.H. (1998). Manual for
Raven’s progressive matrices and vocabulary scales.
Section 2. Colored progressive matrices. Oxford: Oxford
Psychologists Press Ltd.
Rossen, R., et al., (1996). Interaction between language and
cognition: Evidence from Williams syndrome. In J.
Beitchman et al., Language learning and behavior disorders
(pp. 367-392). CUP: New York.
Rueckl, J.G. Cave, K.R. & Kosslyn, S.M. (1989). Why are
“What” and “Where” processed by separate cortical visual
systems? A Computational Investigation. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 1, 171-186.
Singer, W. (1995). Synchronization of neuronal response as a
putative binding mechanism. In M. A. Arbib (Ed.), The
handbook of brain theory and neural networks. Cambridge
Ma.: MIT Press.
Vicari, S., Brizzolara, D., Carlesimo, G.A., Pezzini, G., &
Volterra, V. (1996). Memory abilities in children with
Williams syndrome. Cortex, 32, 503-514.
Vicari, S., Bellucci, S., & Carlesimo, G.A. (2003). Visual and
spatial working memory dissociation: Evidence from
Williams syndrome. Developmental Medicine and Child
Neurology, 45, 269-273.

children, and then, by manipulating a single attentional
focus parameter; it can also capture, at least qualitatively,
the figure-production performance of children with WS. The
fact that the current model is able to do this helps to
establish the viability of the disengagement hypothesis. At
least one clear prediction derives from the present model —
namely, that by artificially provoking local disengagement,
reproduction of the target by children with WS should
improve. Future work will be designed to determine to what
extent a model of this type can capture children’s deferredcopy/direct-copy performances.
Given the difference in reproduction and recognition
tasks, we also explored WS performance on recognition
tasks. To this end, we developed and used a set of novel
movement-enhanced stimuli designed to break the putative
over-focusing by children with WS on local elements of
global figures. Our results show that the performance of the
WS group on these tasks did not differ significantly from
that of TD children. This is an unusual finding when
exploring these children’s visuo-spatial capabilities. Finally,
we present empirical results showing that, in imagereproduction tasks, the performance of individuals with WS
is better if the target image does not remain present during
figure reproduction, whereas no significant difference was
found in chronologically age-matched controls. We suggest
a “visual conflict” hypothesis to explain these data. We
conclude with a number of future directions in order to
complete this program of research.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by European Commission
Grant HPRN-CT-1999-00065 to the second author, by a
POCTI Framework grant SFRH/BD/6020/2001 from the
Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia to the first author,
and by UK Medical Research Council Career Establishment
Grant G0300188 to the fourth author (MT). We would also
like to thank the British Williams Syndrome Foundation for
their invaluable support. And finally, thanks to Maud
Jacquet and Christophe Labiouse for integrating the
movement-enhanced stimuli into E-prime.

References
Atkinson, J., Anker, S., Braddick, O., Nokes, L., Mason, A.,
& Braddick, F. (2001). Visual and visuospatial
development in young children with Williams syndrome.
Dev. Medicine & Child Neurology, 43: 330-337.
Atkinson, J., Braddick, O., Anker, S., Curran, W., Andrew,
R., Wattam-Bell, J. & Braddick, F. (2003). Neurobiological
models of visuospatial cognition in children with Williams
syndrome: measures of dorsal-stream and frontal function.
Developmental Neuropsychology, 23, 139-172.
Bihrle, A.M., Bellugi, U., Delis, D., & Marks, S. (1989).
Seeing either the forest or the trees: Dissociation in
visuospatial processing. Brain Cognition, 11(1), 37-49.
Brown, J., Johnson, M., Paterson, S., Gilmore, R., Longhi, E.,

50

