UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Access to Phonological and Gender Information during Visual Word Recognition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5h8757cr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Chevaux, Florelle
Franck, Julie
Frauenfelder, Ulrich
et al.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Access to Phonological and Gender Information during Visual Word Recognition
Florelle Chevaux (florelle.chevaux@etu.univ-lyon2.fr)
Laboratoire Dynamique Du Langage
14 Avenue Berthelot, 69363 Lyon, France

Julie Franck (Julie.Franck@pse.unige.ch)
Laboratoire de psycholinguistique expérimentale, Université de Genève
40 Boulevard du Pont d'Arve, 1205 Genève, Suisse

Fanny Meunier (fanny.meunier@univ-lyon2.fr)
Laboratoire Dynamique Du Langage
14 Avenue Berthelot, 69363 Lyon, France

Ulrich Frauenfelder (Ulrich.Frauenfelder@pse.unige.ch)
Laboratoire de psycholinguistique expérimentale, Université de Genève
40 Boulevard du Pont d'Arve, 1205 Genève, Suisse

evidence for the time course of these events was provided
in the field of word recognition. Although latest studies
argued that both grammatical gender (see Friederici &
Jacobsen, 1999 for a review) and phonological
information (Coltheart & Rastle, 1994) become activated
in the course of this process, there is, however, a debate
whether the activated information is selected in any case
or only if needed.
The question addresses in the present study concerns the
time course of the various processes involved in the
treatment of gender, and more precisely, the aim was to
determine whether the sequential timing of gender and
wordform encoding found in production tasks was
reversed in comprehension tasks. To investigate the time
course of events involved in gender categorization we
used a grammatical property of words stored in the mental
lexicon which is their grammatical gender.
French nouns are always marked for gender, either
masculine or feminine (Corbett, 1991). Depending on the
language, other word classes (i.e. closed-class), such as
determiners, could also include gender marks. Selection
of these items in the mental lexicon is based on variable
information, i.e., according to noun’s properties they have
to agree with. For instance, in French the forms of
possessive articles vary according to grammatical gender
of words, but also according to phonological features:
nouns with consonant as initial letter are preceded by mon
if they are masculine (e.g. mon fauteuil [my armchair]),
and by ma (e.g. ma table [my table]) if they are feminine.
In contrast, when the first phoneme is a vowel, regardless
of the gender, determiners are associated with the form
mon (e.g. mon étoile (fem) [my star]; mon arbre (masc)
[my tree]). However, it is not a general and universal rule.
If one considers indefinite articles, then the form used is
based only on gender information: Masculine words are

Abstract
Alario and Caramazza (2002) have suggested that during
noun production, gender and phonological information are
both involved in determiner selection, although they act
independently. They also suggested that this process occurs
later in French than in other languages like German and
Dutch. One possible reason is that in French, some
determiner forms depend on the initial phoneme of the
noun (e.g., the feminine possessive determiner), while
others do not (e.g., the indefinite article). The aim of our
study was to track the time course of these factors during
word comprehension. A lexical decision task and three
gender decision experiments (selection of the indefinite
article, the possessive determiner or Masculine/Feminine
categorization) were conducted. We observed that all
gender decision tasks were sensitive to the initial phoneme,
whereas a gender effect was only found for categorization
possessive articles. The results support the hypothesis that
determiners are selected late in comprehension, as in
production.
Keywords: Visual Word recognition, phonological access,
gender access,

Introduction
Word production and recognition are higly complex tasks,
involving the rapid coordination of visual, phonological,
semantic and syntactic processes. Many studies were
interested, in the last decades, to the temporal integration
to phonological and gender cues during language
production. They suggested that access to syntactic
gender information was likely to be quicker than access to
information
concerning
the
phonological
and
orthographical form of the word (Caramazza & Miozzo,
1997; Levelt & al, 1991, 1999; Schmitt, RodriguezFornells, Kutas & Münte, 2001; Van Turennout, Hagoort
& Brown, 1997, 1998). By contrast, very little empirical
441

phonological information are both involved in selection of
articles, although they act independently; and second, that
the selection of a valid article is not an early process in
French. The production effects reflect a property of the
language which imposes a reversed order of the usually
accepted syntax-phonology sequential processing.
The question address in this study is whether this pattern
of results will differ in visual word comprehension area.
In this article, we report the results of one lexical
decision task that was designed to act as baseline for three
Gender Decision tasks. In these experiments, subjects had
to categorize nouns according to their gender with or
without determiners. The different articles used were
indefinites (either un or une) and possessives (either mon
or ma). In the last experiment participants had to
categorize words on the basis of masculine or feminine.
We used this task to evaluate whether grammatical gender
and information concerning the phonological and
orthographical forms of words affect gender judgment
latencies.

preceded by un (e.g. un arbre [a tree]; un fauteuil [an
armchair]) whereas feminine words are following by une
(e.g. une étoile [a star]; une table [a table]). In contrast,
Dutch crucially differs from French since the variability
only depends on grammatical gender: Neutral gender
words are associated with the indefinite article form het,
and common gender words, either masculine or feminine,
are following by de. Finally, the selection can be based
just on phonological cues, as definite articles in English,
where words having a consonant for first letter are
preceded by a, whereas those having a vowel as first
phoneme are associated with an. This case illustrates that
the variability in determiners form does not depend on
gender, but that it is assumed to reflect some process of
phonological adaptation.
These examples underlie the fact that the selection of
items which belong to the closed class requires a
combination of several types of features at different levels
of the word process: encoding of gender information and
phonological cues of the subsequent words. This property
was used in a previous study, conducted in production in
French, by Alario and Caramazza (2002). In their first
experiment, the authors used a picture-word interference
naming task. Participants were required to name pictures
of inanimate objects with consonant as first phoneme,
with the congruent definite article (e.g. "la table" [the
table]), while ignoring presented distractor words. Three
different distractor words were used: (1) words with the
same gender but phonologically unrelated; (2) words
different in gender and phonologically unrelated; (3)
words phonologically related but opposite in gender to the
name. Under such conditions, naming latencies were not
affected by gender, whereas response times were reduced
when target words and distractors were phonologically
related. From the presence of a phonological effect, the
authors concluded that the selection of an article occurred
only when grammatical properties and the phonological
contents were entirely specified. In their second and third
experiments, subjects had to name pictures with two kinds
of NPs: Possessive article NPs ("mon étoile" [my star]),
and possessive-pre nominal adjective NPs ("ma nouvelle
étoile" [my new star]. Results reported that each type of
information independently activates the form of congruent
article. Consonant initial pictures were named more
quickly with a valid possessive article when the gender of
the noun was feminine than when it was masculine. On
the other hand, for vowel initial pictures, the effect
obtained was more as expected and showed that
masculine words significantly took less time to be named
than feminine words. Finally, when subjects had to insert
an adjective between the article and the noun reported
results were similar to those obtained for vowel onsets.
The time necessary to name the targets increased when
the corresponding nouns and the adjectives did not both
begin by the same phoneme.
Two relevant conclusions were drawn from these results
by Alario and Caramazza (2002): First that gender and

Experiment 1
This first experiment was designed to be used as a
baseline for categorisation experiments. In order to be
able to interpret categorization times, we first wanted to
be sure that lexical access for our experimental words
were comparable. We thus ran a visual lexical decision
task experiment. We presented participants with strings of
letters corresponding to words or pseudo-words and they
had to decide whether they were real words or not. Two
mains factors were manipulated in order to create four
conditions: The first one, was the gender of nouns
(experimental words were either masculine or feminine),
and the second one was the nature of the first phoneme
(the first letter was either a vowel or a consonant). If the
time necessary to recognize a target as a word varies
according to conditions, then further categorization times
would need to be weighted by lexical reaction times.

Method
Participants Twenty-five French native speakers took
part in this experiment. They were between 18 and 31
years old.
Stimuli The experimental items were 64 inanimate
singular French nouns (40 feminine and 40 masculine)
selected from LEXIQUE database developed by New,
Pallier, Ferrand and Matos (2001). A set of 64 pseudoword fillers orthographically and phonotactically correct
were constructed. Half of the experimental words and
pseudowords started with vowel phonemes /a/, /é/, and the
other half with consonant phonemes /b/ or /p/. Each
phoneme was represented equally in the target sets. All
selected experimental items corresponded to bi or
trisyllabic words (mean: 2.4), with an average length of
6.8 letters (range: 5-9 letters). The mean frequency of
occurrence per million word forms (according to
442

FRANTEXT) was 15.1 for vowel-onset words and 12.3
for consonant-onset ones. Overall words in each condition
were matched for word frequency, number of syllables,
and word length.

started with a vowel and the other ones with a consonant.
In these conditions, participants could not have used a
strategy such as 'if the first letter is a vowel, it is a word'
which could constitute a valid explanation of our results.
On the other hand, this inconsistency could be due to an
abnormal increase of words-initial vowels proportion in
our experimental items set combined with the task
demand. List-context effect hypothesis had received a lot
of support in the literature. For example, Gordon (1983)
demonstrated that the manipulation of proportion of high
frequency words compared to low frequency experimental
items modulated the word frequency effect during lexical
decision tasks. More recently, Andrews (1997) had argued
that if discrepancies were shown in orthographic
neighbourhood size effect studies, then it could be due to
the presence of unusual stimuli. A corpus analysis will be
necessary to determine whether the distribution of both
kinds of onset-words is symmetric or not in the mental
lexicon. An atypical proportion of vowel onset words in
ours experimental lists compared to the one observed in
the vocabulary could have render easier the identification
of nouns beginning with a vowel. Whatever the
explanation is, we mainly used the lexical decision task
results as a baseline for the following three experiments.

Procedure Visual targets were displayed in the centre of
a PC screen and presented using DMDX software (Forster
& Forster; 2003). On each trial, a fixation cross was
presented (750ms) immediately replaced by a blank
screen (750ms) and then the item appeared. It remained
on the screen until response or when a deadline of 2500
was reached without overt response. Participants were
asked to decide whether the presented string of letters was
a word or not.

Results & Discussion
The data of two subjects were not taken into account in
the analyses due to technical problems. Reaction times
slower than 1500ms and faster than 300ms were removed
and counted as outliers. The final error rate being low
(3.4%), it was not analysed.
In this serie of analyses, mean reaction times were
entered into ANOVA by subjects with the first phoneme
(Vowel vs. Consonant) and the target gender (Masculine
vs. Feminine) as within factors. Pseudo words reaction
times were not included. Results obtained are summarized
in Table 1.

Experiment 2
The basic idea behind these experiments was to
investigate whether grammatical decision task could be
affected by grammatical and/or by information carried by
nouns form, in other words whether French articles are
selected early or not during visual word recognition
processes in French.

Table 1: Mean Lexical decision Latencies (in ms) and
standard deviations on words (SD) for Experiment 1.

Feminine
Masculine
Means

vowel
613 (98)
611 (79)
612

Consonant
633 (107)
621 (98)
627

Means
623
616
619

Method
Participants Seventy-three participants were recruited
from the University of Lyon. None of them had
participated in experiment 1. There were 24 students in
Experiment 2A, 25 in Experiment 2B, and 24 in
Experiment 2C.

The analysis of variance revealed that the first phoneme
affects the lexical access of nouns [F(1,22)=4.9, p=.0375]:
Subjects were faster for nouns with vowel as initial letter
than for targets with consonant as first phoneme. The
main effect of Gender and the interaction between the two
variables were not significant [both F's<1].
This first experiment was set up to be used as baseline
for further categorization task experiments. Indeed a
difference in lexical decision times is observed depending
on the first phoneme. For further categorization task
results we will correct reaction times by mean lexical
decision latencies.
Why do we observe differences in lexical decision times
while items were matched on frequency, number of
syllables, and word length? Moreover what is surprising is
that words starting with a vowel take less time to be
recognized than words starting with consonant letters.
This effect is reversed compared to the one observed in
gender monitoring (Desrochers & Al 1989, 1995; Taft &
Meunier, 1998). On the one hand, the advantage for the
vowel onset words could not be explain by the
distribution of pseudoword first letters since half of them

Stimuli The 64 experimental items were the same to those
used in Experiment 1.
Procedure The same procedure was used as in
Experiment 1 in three different gender decision tasks. In
Experiment 2A, participants were asked to decide whether
targets could be preceded either by the masculine
indefinite article (un) or by the feminine indefinite article
(une). In Experiment 2B, for each item, subjects had to
indicate whether targets could be preceded either by the
masculine form of the possessive (mon) or by the
feminine form (ma). In Experiment 2C, they had to decide
whether targets were either masculine or feminine.

443

data (Chapman, Chapman, Curran, & Miller, 1994). We
have used a relative measure to determine a ratio:
RT in condition X- Mean Baseline RTs in condition X
Mean Baseline latencies in condition X

Results & Discussion
Because of faulty equipment or because of more than 10%
erroneous answers, the data from 3 participants in
Experiment 2A, 2 in Experiment 2B and 3 in Experiment
2C were rejected from the analysis. We coded as outliers
and excluded those trials in which responses latencies
were more than 1500ms or less than 300ms. In these three
tasks, average percentages of errors being lower than 4%,
they were not analysed. However, these weak percentages
indicate that the tasks were easily executed by French
speakers.
For each Experiment, average response latencies were
corrected by the baseline, i.e., mean RTs lexical decision

U

Weighted values were analyzed in a repeated measure
ANOVA by subjects (F). Comparisons implicated Target
Gender (feminine vs. masculine), nature of the first
Phoneme (vowel vs. consonant), and the kind of Task
(Un/Une, Mon/Ma and Masc./Fem.). Results obtained for
the Phoneme effect are reported in Table 2, and an
overview of the Gender data is provided in Table 3.

Table 2: Summary of corrected mean Reaction Times and Difference Scores across three Gender Decision Tasks for the first
Phoneme.
Experiment 2A
Experiment 2B
(Indefinite Article)
(Possessive Article)
Vowel
Consonant
Vowel
Consonant
Means corrected
.100
.085
.164
.108
Difference Scores
.015*
.056**
Note
*p<.05
**p<.001
U

U

U

Experiment 2C
(Gender Categorization)
Vowel
Consonant
.302
.245
.057**

U

Experiment 2A In analyses of response latencies when
subjects were asked to categorize items by the valid
indefinite article, we only found a significant effect of
first Phoneme [F (1,20)=4.212, p=.05]. Nouns with
consonant in initial position were processed faster than
those with vowel as first letter. The main effect of Gender
and the interaction of the two factors were not significant
[both F's<1].
The results of Experiment 2A demonstrate that
participants perform better the gender categorization
when nouns have a consonant as first phoneme than when
they are initiated by a vowel. Phonological information
plays a role during gender classification even if the form
of the determiner does not depend on it.

Experiment 2C For categorization according to one of
the two possible gender labels (masculine vs. feminine),
we only found a significant first Phoneme effect [F
(1,20)=15.981, p=.0007]; with faster responses for words
initiated by a consonant than by a vowel. The Gender
effect did not appear significant, as the interaction
between the two variables.
The results of Experiment 2C reveal that consonant
initiated nouns were process faster than for nouns initiated
by a vowel. Phonological information is used in
determining gender during gender monitoring task.
Task effect Mean reaction times were entered into
ANOVA by items (F2) with nature of Task (3 levels) as
independent variable. The results showed a significant
main effect [F2 (2,126)=110.194, p<.0001]. Participants
were faster to execute a categorization by the indefinite
article (677ms, 53 SD) than by the possessive one
(705ms, 57 SD); and on average, these two tasks were
also done faster than the masculine-feminine distinction
(788ms, 71 SD).
Reaction time latencies vary according to the task. The
significant effect observed in this study is similar in
direction to the one found by Desrochers, Paivio and
Desrochers (1989). They obtained 200ms faster responses
in a gender decision with Un/Une than with
Masculine/Feminine. RTs needed for the execution of a
given task depend on the level of complexity required for
the processing.

Experiment 2B When participants had to make a
decision according to the valid possessive article, analyses
of RTs showed a significant effect of Phoneme [F
(1,22)=9.467, p=.0055]. Moreover, response latencies
were faster to masculine words than to feminine one [F
(1,22)=19.950, p=.0002]. The interaction was not
significant.
Experiment 2B shows, on the one hand that when
feminine nouns are present, responses latencies increase
compared to those obtained with masculine targets. On
the other hand, a vowel as first phoneme slow noun
categorization latencies compared to reaction times to
consonant initiated words. These results point out the fact
that the selection of the valid possessive form involves the
combination of phonological and gender sources of
information.

444

Table 3: Summary of corrected mean Reaction Times and Difference Scores across three Gender Decision Tasks for Gender
of nouns.
Experiment 2A
Experiment 2B
Experiment 2C
(Indefinite Article)
(Possessive Article)
(Gender Categorization)
Feminine
Masculine
Feminine
Masculine
Feminine
Masculine
Means corrected
.09
.096
.174
.098
.273
.274
Difference Scores
.006
.076**
-.001
Note
*p<.05
**p<.001
making stage requires the prior integration of information
coming from earliest processing stages. Thus, concerning
General Discussion
the lack of interaction between gender and phonological
The goal of this study was to determine whether
information, one possible interpretation is that the two
phonological cues and gender information could influence
signals act independently on categorization processes.
mechanisms implicated in categorization tasks. In this
Nevertheless, an alternative explanation to the lack of
line, three main results had to be pointed up: (1) All
interaction could be proposed. Indeed, our experimental
gender decision tasks showed a strong effect of
material included an asymmetry between the number of
phonological cues whereas (2) a gender effect was only
answers requiring ma and the answers involving mon
found during categorization according to possessive
(75% of the data). This disproportion might have crushed
articles; and finally (3) variations of mean reaction times
the possible interaction between phonological and gender
were observed depending on task.
target effects, i.e. either faster reaction times in the case of
Concerning phonological cues processes, the results of
words-initial consonants preceded by the feminine
Experiments 2 showed a strong phoneme effect. The
possessive form ma, or slower latencies for feminine
observation according to which the words beginning with
words with a vowel as first phoneme (e.g. mon étoile). In
a vowel are treated more slowly than those starting with a
order to check this assumption, it would be necessary to
consonant, during gender categorization regardless of the
reproduce the gender decision task according to
labels, is also in line with the traditional view (Desrochers
possessives, by including a greater proportion of feminine
& Al 1989, 1995; Taft & Meunier, 1998). In conclusion,
items beginning with a consonant in order to obtain an
we could argue that the access to determiners linked to a
equivalent number of mon and ma answers, and verify
noun was performed in a such way that it was influenced
whether the pattern of results would differ or not.
by phonological cues situated at the beginning of nouns.
Increasing the ratio of ma answers could affect the
Across experiments, the pattern of results also suggests
magnitude of effects by increasing the focus of attention
that if gender information is not used to facilitate lexical
on consonant-onset feminine words.
access, it seems to play a role during categorization
Another point must be highlighted from the results of
processes. More specifically, a gender effect was found
Experiment
2. A robust and strong task effect was found
when participants had to decide whether a noun could be
between
the
three gender-monitoring experiments.
preceded either by the feminine or by the masculine form
According
to
this
effect, saying that a word is masculine
of possessive articles; but not in both gender monitoring
takes
more
time
when
it is preceded by un or mon, and the
tasks with indefinites and masculine/feminine as labels.
time necessary to classify a word with an indefinite article
By itself this result implies that article representations can
is generally shorter than with a possessive determiner.
acquire activation from multiple sources, i.e., syntactic
The RTs difference implies that the level of complexity
and phonological. However, the gender activated
vary according to the required processing. This suggests
information is selected only if needed, whereas the
that articles will be stored as labels with words in the
phonological one drives selection of determiners in any
mental lexicon. On the basis of the assumption that the
cases. Results obtained with possessives articles show that
identification of gender rests on the activation of noun's
the selection of articles is delayed until gender
related data, it is possible to say that the lexical
information is available only when it is necessary, and
representations likely to be activated after noun
that the selection of this kind of articles is a relatively late
recognition are the words which generally covary with
process during visual word recognition.
their gender. Moreover, it could be argued that the
As it was said previously, in Experiment 2B, during
facilitation effect depends on the frequency appearance
which subjects had to decide by which form of possessive
for the two items co-occurrence in French language. This
articles nouns could be preceded, we obtained an effect of
claim
is supported by the result according to which
first phoneme and an effect of gender, but no interaction.
reaction
time latencies increased when subjects had to
At this point, it is interesting to underlie two main
categorize
words with Masculine/Feminine labels
assumptions: First that during gender categorization with
compared to those obtained with Un/Une. It should also
possessive articles as labels, there are multiple sources of
be noted that if the time latencies vary according to the
information available, and secondly that the decision
U

U

U

U

445

production, and reflects a property of the language.
However an intriguing point is that the initial phoneme
effect plays a role across the board, even when the
determiner form does not depend on the initial phoneme;
whereas a gender effect is only found in the task
involving the processing of a determiner form that is
sensitive to the initial phoneme: the possessive
determiner. More research will be required to determine
the exact mechanism underlying these observations and to
examine if phonological and gender information act
independently in articles selection or not.

required task, results do not bring back any interaction
with the syntactic and phonological cues. This
observation implies that the effect of task (indefinite
article, possessives and masculine vs. feminine) is located
at the level of the answer production.

Conclusion
In summary, taken together, results of the four
comprehension
experiments
suggest
that
both
phonological and gender information are implicated
during gender identification and that noun's wordform is
retrieved first. This observation maps results obtained in

Forster, J. C., & Forster, K. I (2003). DMDX: a Windows
display program with millisecond accuracy. Behavior
Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 35,
116–124.
Friederici, A. D., & Jacobsen, T. (1999). Processing
Grammatical Gender During Language Comprehension.
Journal of psycholinguistic Research, 28(5), 467-483.
Gordon, B. (1983). Lexical access and lexical decision:
Mechanisms of frequency sensitivity. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 22, 24-44.
Levelt, W.J.M., Roelofs, A., & Meyer, A.S. (1999). A
theory of lexical access in speech production.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22(1), 1-76.
Levelt, W. J. M., Schriefers, H., Vorberg, D., Meyer, A.
S., Pechmann, T., & Havinga, J. (1991). The time
course of lexical access during speech production: A
study of picture naming. Psychological Review, 98.
122-142.
Lukatela, G., Lukatela, K., & Turvey, M.T. (1993).
Further evidence for phonological constraints on visual
lexical access: TOWED primes FROG. Perception and
Psychophysics, 53, 461-466.
Lukatela, G. & Turvey, M.T. (1990). Phonemic similarity
effects and prelexical phonology. Memory and
Cognition. 18, 128-152.
New, B., Pallier, C., Ferrand, L., Matos R. (2001) Une
base de données lexicales du français contemporain sur
internet : LEXIQUE. L'Année Psychologique, 101, 447462.
Schmitt, B.M., Rodriguez-Fornells, A., K., Kutas, M,. &
Münte, T.F. (2001). Electrophysiological estimates of
semantic and syntactic information access during tacit
picture naming and listening words. Neuroscience
Research, 41. 293-298.
Taft, M., & Meunier, F. (1998). Lexical representation of
gender: A quasiregular domain. Journal of
Psycholinguistic research, 27 (1) , 23-45.
Van Turennout, M.I., Hagoort, P., & Brown, C.M.
(1997).Electrophysiological evidence on time course on
semantic and phonological processes in speech
production. Journal of experimental psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 23, 787-806.
Van Turennout, M.I., Hagoort, P., & Brown, C.M. (1998).
Brain activity during speaking: From syntax to
phonology in 40 milliseconds. Science, 280 (5363),
572-574.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by EURODOC grant
to Florelle Chevaux, and by EMERGENCE grant to fanny
Meunier from the Région Rhône-Alpes.

References
Alario, F-X & Caramazza, A. (2002). The production of
determiners: Evidence from French. Cognition, 82, 179223.
Andrews, S. (1997). The effect of orthographic similarity
on lexical retrieval: Resolving neighbourhood conflicts.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 4(4), 439-461.
Caramazza, A. & Miozzo, M. (1997). The relation
between syntactic and phonological knowledge in
lexical access: evidence from the tip-of-the-tongue
phenomenon. Cognition, 64, 3109-343.
Chapman, L. J., Chapman, J. P., Curran, T. E., & Miller,
M. B. (1994). Do children and elderly show heighten
semantic priming? How to answer the question.
Developmental Review, 14, 193-204.
Coltheart, M. & Rastle, K. (1994). Serial processing in
reading aloud: Evidence for dual-route models of
reading. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 20, 1197-1211.
Corbett, G. (1991). Gender, Cambridge textbooks in
linguistics. Cambridge: University Press.
Desrochers, A., et Brabant, M. (1995). Interaction entre
facteurs phonologiques et sémantiques dans une
épreuve de catégorisation lexicale. Revue canadienne
de psychologie expérimentale, 49, 240-262.
Desrochers, A., Paivio, A., & Desrochers, S. (1989).
L’effet de la fréquence d’usage des noms inanimés et de
la valeur prédictive de leur terminaison sur
l’identification du genre grammatical. Revue
canadienne de psychologie, 43, 62-73.
Ferrand, L., & Grainger, J. (1992). Phonology and
orthography in visual word recognition: evidence from
masked nonword priming. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 33A, 325-350.
Ferrand, L., & Grainger, J. (1993). The time-course of
orthographic and phonological code activation in the
early phases of visual word recognition. Bulletin of the
Psychonomic Society, 31, 119-122.

446

