UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
An Investigation into Adaptive Shifting in Knowledge Transfer

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5k67c5xf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Nuckles, Matthias
Renkl, Alexander
Wittwer, Jorg

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

An Investigation into Adaptive Shifting in Knowledge Transfer
Timothy J. Nokes (tnokes@uiuc.edu)
Beckman Institute
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801 U.S.A.

Abstract
Participants were trained on three knowledge types -exemplars, tactics, and constraints -- and then thought aloud
while solving a series of transfer problems. Results show that
participants shift between the transfer mechanisms of analogy,
knowledge compilation, and constraint violation depending on
their prior knowledge and the characteristics of the transfer
tasks.

Introduction
A central goal of cognitive science is to develop a general
theory of transfer to explain how people use and apply their
prior knowledge to solve new problems. To construct such a
theory scientists need to identify and articulate the cognitive
processes involved in the access, retrieval, and application of
prior knowledge to new situations. Previous work has taken
a ‘divide and conquer’ approach to attaining this goal.
Researchers have pursued separate lines of inquiry by
investigating the cognitive processes of transfer for particular
learning and problem solving scenarios. This work has led to
the development of several specialized theories of transfer
including analogical transfer (Gentner, 1983), knowledge
compilation (Anderson, 1983), constraint violation (Ohlsson,
1996), and transfer appropriate processing (Morris,
Bransford, & Franks, 1977), among others.
Although this research has contributed to our
understanding of particular kinds of transfer, it has done little
to address how these transfer processes interact and relate to
one another. A complementary research strategy is theory
unification. If our ultimate goal is to develop a general
theory of transfer we need to articulate how the local theories
‘fit together’ within a larger cognitive framework (Newell,
1990). If each theory postulates a particular kind of transfer
mechanism, then those mechanisms must eventually be
realized within one and the same cognitive system.
The purpose of the current work is to take the first steps
towards this goal by synthesizing across previous theories of
transfer in an effort to elucidate how a subgroup of transfer
mechanisms relate to and interact with one another. Building
upon previous work, I investigate whether people are capable
of dynamic shifting between multiple mechanisms of transfer
depending on their prior knowledge and the characteristics of
the transfer tasks.

Theories of Transfer
The three theories of transfer investigated in the current work
are analogy, knowledge compilation, and constraint
1660

violation. These theories are of particular interest because
each proposes a computationally well-defined transfer
mechanism that operates on different types of knowledge
structures. In this section I briefly review each theory and
describe their scope of application.
Analogical transfer consists of three main parts:
retrieving a prior analogue from memory, aligning and
mapping the analogue to a target, and then drawing an
inference from that mapping to the target scenario (Gentner,
Holyoak, & Kokinov, 2001). Analogical transfer operates on
exemplar knowledge that is typically assumed to be a
declarative representation, but it can also include procedural
attachments (Chen, 2002). Prior empirical work has shown
that analogical retrieval is facilitated by surface feature
similarity to the target scenario (Catrambone, 2002) whereas
alignment and mapping is facilitated by structural similarity
(Gentner, Ratterman, & Forbus, 1993). These results suggest
that analogy is triggered by tasks that are similar on the
surface and share the same relational structure.
Knowledge compilation is a method by which prior
declarative knowledge (instructions, tactics, or facts) can be
used to solve novel problems and perform new tasks. It can
be viewed as a translation device that translates prior
declarative knowledge into a set of procedures and actions
for performing a particular task or solving a specific
problem. Knowledge compilation operates through the
deliberate and explicit, step-by-step interpretation of a
declarative statement that generates new procedures
(production rules) as a side effect. Those rules are later
optimized via rule composition, and the result is a procedural
representation of the declarative knowledge given a
particular goal (Anderson, 1983; Taatgen & Anderson,
2002). Previous work has shown that declarative knowledge
can apply to a variety of different tasks but is costly in terms
of the time required to proceduralize that knowledge to the
current problem context (Nokes & Ohlsson, in press).
Constraint violation is a three-part process that involves
a generate-evaluate-revise transfer cycle in which a learner
uses prior knowledge of the domain constraints to evaluate
and correct her or his task performance (Ohlsson, 1996).
According to the theory the learner generates an initial
solution based on general problem solving strategies and
then evaluates that solution with respect to her or his prior
knowledge of the constraints. If a constraint is violated, the
learner attempts to revise the faulty procedure(s) and
generate a new solution. This process is repeated until a
correct solution is found that satisfies all of the constraints.
Transfer is the process by which the learner uses her or his

prior constraint knowledge to identify and remedy the errors
generated while performing new tasks. The theory postulates
that constraint knowledge applies to a wide variety of tasks
but is costly in that it requires multiple iterations of error
correction to obtain a correct solution.
A large amount of work has been dedicated to these
independent lines of transfer research. Some recent attempts
have also been made to synthesize these approaches into a
more unified theory of transfer. For instance, in a prior study
designed to systematically manipulate individuals’ prior
knowledge to examine each mechanism across a variety of
transfer tasks, Nokes (2004) found that the mechanism
triggered depended on the learner’s prior knowledge and the
processing demands of the transfer task. In this study,
participants were first trained in one of the three knowledge
types associated with each of the transfer mechanisms (i.e.,
exemplars for analogy, tactics for knowledge compilation,
and constraints for constraint violation). Then each group
solved a common set of transfer problems. Participants in
each training group exhibited behavioral patterns of
performance that were consistent with those predicted by
each of the transfer theories.
Although the Nokes (2004) study provided strong
evidence that distinct multiple mechanisms exist, how these
mechanisms interact remains uncertain. In order to test the
interaction of multiple mechanisms, the person under
examination needs to have all three types of prior
knowledge. The central question addressed in the current
work is whether people trained on all three types of
knowledge are capable of adaptive shifting between transfer
mechanisms depending on the characteristics of the transfer
problems. Of particular interest is whether people will use
the optimal mechanism of transfer for a given transfer
problem. The optimal transfer mechanism is defined as the
mechanism that can be applied to the given transfer task to
produce a correct solution with the least amount of cognitive
effort. I predict that a person will use analogy if the transfer
task has surface and deep structure similarity to one’s prior
exemplar knowledge (even when knowledge compilation
and constraint violation could also be used to solve the
problem). If the transfer task does not trigger analogical
retrieval (i.e., it has different surface features), it is predicted
that a person will then use knowledge compilation of tactics
to solve the problem (even when constraint violation could
also be used to derive a correct solution). Finally, if the
transfer task triggers neither exemplar knowledge or tactics
application (i.e., no surface similarity exists and the tactics
are not relevant) people are expected to use constraint
violation to solve the problem.

Experiment
To test these hypotheses I implemented a within-subjects
design where each participant was trained on all three types
of knowledge structures and then solved three transfer
problems. The training and transfer materials were the same
as those used in Nokes (2004). The training materials
consisted of exemplar problems, tactical problem solving
1661

instructions, and instruction in the domain constraints. The
transfer tasks were three sequence extrapolation problems
(Thurstone & Thurstone, 1941).
The three transfer problems were each designed with
specific task characteristics to trigger an optimal transfer
mechanism. The first transfer problem had a similar surface
and deep structure to the exemplar problems. The tactics and
constraints could also be applied to solve this problem. The
second transfer problem had an open-ended structure and
there were multiple plausible solutions depending on the
interpretation of the given pattern. The problem had
misaligned surface and deep structure as compared to the
exemplar problems. If the surface features were used one
solution was expected whereas if the deep structure was used
a second solution was expected. The tactics could also be
applied to this problem and were biased to this second
solution. In addition, the constraints could be used to solve
the problem and did not provide an a priori bias to any one of
the possible solutions. The third transfer problem had neither
surface nor structural similarity to the exemplar problems.
The tactics were also not directly applicable. However, the
constraints could be used to derive a correct solution.
In addition a no-training control group was tested on the
three transfer problems to provide a measure of baseline
performance.

Predictions
Specific predictions were derived for each transfer problem.
Transfer Problem 1. Participants are expected to use
analogy to solve this problem because the surface and deep
structure are similar to the exemplar problem. Participants
should show a preference for analogy over tactics and
knowledge compilation because analogical transfer should
require less adaptation of the prior knowledge structure. In
particular, if participants use analogy they will have
knowledge of both the declarative pattern as well as the
procedures for extrapolating that pattern. In contrast, if
participants use tactics they must figure out the pattern as
well as the action implications for extrapolating that pattern,
two tasks that require substantial cognitive processing.
Similarly, the participants are not expected to use constraint
violation because the generate-evaluate-revise process
requires multiple iterations and substantial processing time.
It is predicted that the training participants will show high
accuracy and fast solution times as compared to the notraining group, reflecting transfer of both declarative and
procedural knowledge. In addition, training participants’ are
expected to make explicit statements of analogy while
solving the problem.
Transfer Problem 2. Participants are expected to use
tactics and knowledge compilation to solve this problem
because the surface and deep structure features are
misaligned with those from the exemplar problems. Without
proper alignment between the surface and structural elements
analogical retrieval may not occur, and mapping would
require substantial adaptation of the prior knowledge
structure. Participants should prefer tactics and knowledge
compilation to constraint violation because the tactics are

directly applicable to the features of the problem and offer a
more direct route to pattern identification. In contrast, the
constraint violation process requires several iterations of
general problem solving, constraint checking, and error
correction -- a time intensive process that can only indirectly
lead to a correct solution. It is predicted that participants will
show high accuracy and long solution times, reflecting
knowledge compilation processes. Participants are also
expected to show a bias for using the tactics relevant
solution. In addition, participants’ verbal protocols should
exhibit application of the tactics.
Transfer Problem 3. Participants are expected to use
constraint violation to solve this problem because it does not
have surface or structural similarity to the exemplar
problems, nor do any of the tactics directly apply. It is
possible however, that participants may initially try these
strategies to solve this problem, although it is predicted that
they will run into an impasse that will motivate a switch to
constraint violation. It is expected that participants will show
high accuracy and long solution times, reflecting multiple
iterations of constraint violation. In addition, participants’
verbal protocols are expected to exhibit statements of
constraint application and error correction.

Methods
Participants
Forty-eight undergraduate students from the University of
Illinois at Chicago’s subject pool participated in return for
partial course credit.

Materials
Training materials. The training materials consisted of three
parts: exemplars, tactics, and constraints (see Table 1 for
examples of each). Exemplar materials consisted of four
exemplar problem isomorphs. Each problem had similar
surface features and the same deep structure as one another.
The tactics materials included a 10 page tactics tutorial, a
tactics summary sheet, and several blank recall sheets. The
constraints training materials consisted of a 5 page
constraints tutorial, constraint summary sheet, blank recall
sheet, and letter string violation worksheet.

The presentation of the training materials was
counterbalanced, producing 6 versions of training. There was
also a final review section that consisted of the summary
materials from each of the training sections.
Transfer Materials. The transfer tasks were three
extrapolations problems. See Table 2 for each transfer
problem and its solution(s). The first extrapolation problem
had a periodicity of three letters. It had similar surface and
deep pattern structure to the exemplar problems. The tactics
and constraints knowledge could also be applied to solve this
problem. Subjects were asked to continue the solution to six
positions.
The second extrapolation problem also had a periodicity
of three letters. However, there were six plausible solutions
dependent on how the subject interpreted the given sequence.
There were two primary solutions of interest. If the letters
are parsed into cross period relations of forward-1 and
backward-1, similar to the exemplar surface features,
solution 1 will be derived. Alternatively, if the given string is
parsed as cross period relations of mirror-flip-alphabet and
backward-1, similar to the deep relations of the exemplar
and tactic number 2, solution 2 will be derived. Subjects
were asked to continue the solution to nine positions.
The third problem had a periodicity of two letters and
had neither surface nor deep structure similarity to the
exemplar problems. In addition, there was no pattern finding
tactic that directly applied to this problem. However, a
unique solution could be derived by constraint violation. The
pattern consists of pairs of letters incrementally increasing
through the alphabet, each pair skipping an additional letter
as the pattern progresses.
Table 2. Test problems and their solutions.
Problem
Type

Given letter sequence
& the correct extrapolation

Transfer 1: R S F S R E S T D T S C . . .
Solution  T U B U T A
Transfer 2: B C P X Y O C D N . . .
Solution 1  Y Z M D E L Z A K
Solution 2  W X M D E L V W K
Transfer 3: B A C B E D H G . . .
Solution  L K Q P

Table 1. Example material from each section of training.
Section
Exemplars

Examples
(1) L M Z M L Y M N X . . .
(2) E F S F E R F G Q . . .

Tactics

(1) look for mirror flips or periods to break
apart the pattern
(2) letters far apart in the alphabet may
signal a mirror-flip alphabet relation

Constraints

(1) all completed letter strings must be
divisible into six groups of letters
(2) the number of letters in each similar group
must be the same

Transfer problems were presented on a Macintosh
computer with a 17’’ color monitor, standard keyboard and
mouse. Problems were presented in black 30 pt font in the
center of the screen. The transfer portion of the experiment
was designed and presented using PsyScope software
(Cohen, MacWhinney, Flatt, & Provost, 1993).

1662

Design
A within-subjects design was used with participants
randomly assigned to one of the six training orders (n = 38).
In addition, a no-training control group was used as a

comparison of baseline performance (n = 10). All
participants received the same set of transfer problems in one
of two transfer orders. Half of the participants received order
1 (problems: 1-2-3) and other half received order 2
(problems: 3-2-1). Participants were trained and tested
individually.

Procedure
Training Phase. Participants were given initial instructions
and an overview of the experiment. The training phase was
divided into three sections: exemplars, tactics, and
constraints. Participants were given a brief break between
any of the sections if they so desired.
Exemplar Section. Participants were given initial
instructions and three minutes to solve the first training
problem. After three minutes they received feedback on each
position of their solution. If the participant extrapolated any
position of the solution incorrectly they were given another
instance of the same problem and three minutes to solve it.
This cycle continued until the practice problem was solved
correctly or the participant made four attempts to solve that
problem. After the first problem this same procedure was
continued for the remaining three exemplars.
Tactics Section. Participants first read the tactics
tutorial. Next they were given three minutes to memorize a
summary sheet of the five tactics. They were then asked to
perform a simple distractor task (i.e., three arithmetic
problems) after which they were asked to recall and write
down all of the tactics. The experimenter assessed their
recall performance for each tactic. If they omitted or
incorrectly recalled any of the tactics, they were given an
additional two minutes to study the tactics summary sheet.
After the second memorization phase they were given
another distractor task followed by a blank recall sheet. This
cycle was continued until the subject recalled all five tactics.
After subjects correctly recalled all of the tactics they were
asked to explain each tactic to the experimenter. If a subject
gave an incorrect explanation the experimenter provided the
correct one.
Constraints Section. Participants first read the
constraints tutorial. Next they were given three minutes to
memorize a summary sheet of the four constraints. They
were then asked to solve an unrelated distractor task. Next
participants were asked to recall the constraints and were
given feedback on their recall performance. If they omitted
or incorrectly recalled any of the constraints, they were given
two additional minutes to study the constraints summary
sheet. After the second memorization phase they were given
another distractor task followed by a blank recall sheet. This
cycle continued until they recalled all four constraints. After
correctly recalling the constraints subjects were asked to
explain each constraint to the experimenter. If a subject gave
an incorrect explanation the experimenter provided the
correct one. Participants were then given the string violation
worksheet. After completing the worksheet the experimenter
gave them feedback on their performance.

1663

Training Review. After completing all three sections
there was a one-minute break followed by a three-minute
review of the summary materials from each section.
Transfer Phase. Participants were instructed to think
aloud while they solved letter extrapolation problems on the
computer. They were told that the given string of each letter
problem would be presented on the left side of the computer
screen and that there would be an empty box for each letter
they were to fill in. To fill in a box they were told to click the
mouse on the box and press the appropriate letter. The
subjects were told that they could fill in the solution
positions in any order they chose. After all solution positions
were filled and they had finished solving the problem
subjects were told to click the mouse on the “Finished” field.
Participants were informed that the training could help them
solve the problems. They were presented with each
extrapolation problem one at a time and were given 8
minutes to solve each one.

Results and Discussion
Training Performance
Participants were trained to criterion for each section of the
learning phase. The criterion measure for the exemplar
section was solving at least two of the training problems
correctly. The criterion measure for the tactics and
constraints sections was complete recall of the tactics and
constraints respectively. All but two subjects passed the
criteria. These subjects were excluded from further analysis
leaving thirty-six (n = 36) subjects in the training group.
The training criterion provides evidence that each
subject acquired all three of the knowledge structures from
the training phase. In the next section I examine whether
these subjects could transfer this knowledge to the problem
solving tasks.

Transfer Performance
Multiple measures of problem solving performance were
used to assess transfer of training including accuracy,
solution type, solution times, and subjects’ verbal protocols.
Initial analyses revealed no effect or interactions for training
or test order and all subsequent analyses collapsed across
these groups.
Accuracy Performance. To assess overall transfer
performance participants’ accuracy scores were examined
for each group. The accuracy score was the proportion of
solution positions correctly extrapolated for a given transfer
problem. Each groups mean accuracy scores and standard
errors for each transfer problem are presented in Table 3.
Table 3. Mean proportion of solution positions correctly
extrapolated for each transfer problem.
Condition

Transfer1

Transfer2

Transfer3

Training
No-training

.86 (.05)
.63 (.10)

.85 (.03)
.84 (.06)

.22 (.06)
0

A 2 (training) x 3 (problem) mixed analysis of variance
(ANOVA) revealed a main effect for transfer problem, F (2,
88) = 61.27, p < .05, indicating that overall accuracy differed
across the transfer problems. There was also a main effect of
training, F (1, 44) = 7.04, p < .05, indicating that the training
group had an overall higher accuracy than the no-training
group. In addition, there was no interaction of problem by
training, F (2, 88) = 1.58, ns. Follow-up comparisons for the
effect of transfer problem revealed that overall performance
was much better on problems 1 and 2 than on problem 3, F
(1, 45) = 99.45, p < .05, and F (1, 45) = 123.25, p < .05,
respectively.
These results show that the knowledge acquired from
training facilitated problem solving performance. In
particular the training participants showed mean accuracy
advantages over the control group on transfer problems 1 and
3. Although the interaction was not significant the training
and no-training groups showed similar accuracy scores on
transfer problem 2. One plausible explanation for the control
group’s high mean accuracy is that problem 2 had multiple
possible solutions and therefore participants were more
likely to generate a correct solution. This hypothesis is
further explored in the next section where I examine the
types of solution used to solve this problem. In addition, the
fact that both the training and no-training groups performed
worse on transfer problem 3 suggests that this problem was
particularly difficult to solve.
Solution Type for Transfer Problem 2. In addition to
accuracy performance, further support for knowledge
transfer can be assessed via the types of solutions
participants used on problem 2. The proportion of subjects to
use each solution type is presented in Table 4.
Table 4. The proportion of subjects to use each solution type.
Solution Type
Condition

Solution
1

Solution
2

Other
Correct

Unclassified

Training
No-training

19%
40%

53*%
0%

17%
40%

11%
20%

Chi-square tests show that the groups significantly
differed in the number of subjects to use a particular solution
type, 2 (3, N = 46) = 9.10, p < .05. Of particular interest is
that more training subjects used solution 2 than those given
no training, 2 (1, N = 46) = 8.99, p < .01. In contrast, there
was no difference between training and no-training groups to
use solution 1, 2 (1, N = 46) = 1.81, ns.
These results show that although the training and notraining groups had similar mean accuracy scores they used
different kinds of solutions to solve the problem. As
predicted, subjects given training showed a preference for
the tactics relevant solution. These results are also consistent
with those obtained in the Nokes (2004) study that showed
when participants were trained on tactics alone they showed
a bias to use solution 2 whereas participants trained on
exemplars alone showed a bias to use solution 1.
1664

Solution Time. The solution times were used to assess
the amount of cognitive processing required to solve the
transfer problems. Because participants were given 8
minutes to solve each problem their solution times varied
between 0 and 480 seconds. The training and no-training
group’s mean solution times and standard errors on each
transfer problem are presented in Table 5.
Table 5. Mean solution times and standard errors for each
transfer problem.
Condition

Transfer1

Transfer2

Transfer3

Training
No-training

121* (15)
223 (53)

221 (19)
204 (34)

299 (26)
312 (33)

A 2 (training) x 3 (problem) mixed ANOVA was
conducted to investigate the effect of training on solution
times across transfer problems. The analysis revealed a main
effect for transfer problem, F (2, 88) = 12.12, p < .05,
indicating that overall solution times differed across the
transfer problems. There was no main effect for training, F
(1, 44) = 1.05, ns. However, there was a marginally
significant interaction of training by problem, F (2, 88) =
2.47, p = .09. Follow-up analysis for the interaction shows an
effect of training for problem 1, F (1, 44) = 6.45, p < .05, but
not problems 2 and 3, F (1, 44) = .17, ns and F (1, 44) = .06,
ns respectively.
The training participants had much faster solution times
than the no-training group on transfer problem 1 but not on
problems 2 and 3. This result suggests that the training
participants used analogy and transferred procedural
knowledge from exemplar training to transfer problem 1.
Verbal Protocols. A summary measure for the number
of subjects to have protocol evidence implicating the use of
each transfer mechanism was assessed across the three
transfer problems. To assess whether or not each participant
used a particular mechanism, the number of statements they
generated for each mechanism was assessed (i.e., the
statements implicating use of analogy, tactics, or constraints
application). If a participant’s score for a particular transfer
mechanism was above the average score of the no-training
group she or he was classified as showing evidence for using
that mechanism. Comparing training participants’ scores to
the average of the no-training group separates the effects
from training from those expected from normal problem
solving. The number of subjects classified as showing
evidence for each transfer mechanism across the problems is
presented in Table 6.
Table 6. The number of training participants to show
protocol evidence for each mechanism.
Transfer
Problem
Transfer 1
Transfer 2
Transfer 3

Analogy
4*
1
0

Transfer Strategy
Tactics
Constraint
15
7
21*
13
14
17*

The results show that the number of subjects to have
protocol evidence for the various transfer mechanisms
shifted across the transfer problems. In particular, there was
a relative shift for more participants to use the predicted
mechanism across the three transfer problems. These results
also indicate that there was substantial individual differences
in strategy use with some subjects using multiple
mechanisms and others using non-optimal transfer
mechanisms for a given transfer problem. In addition,
although participants’ short solution times on problem 1
suggested that they used analogy and exemplar knowledge to
solve this problem very few of these subjects made explicit
analogies. One plausible explanation for the lack of protocol
evidence is that analogical transfer in this scenario may have
been primarily an implicit process (as suggested by the
procedural transfer). This interpretation is consistent with
other recent accounts of analogy as fast mapping between a
source and target knowledge structure (Day & Gentner,
2003).
Summary. Participants showed high accuracy, fast
solution times, and protocol evidence for using verbal
analogies as well as tactics and some constraint application
on problem 1. These results provide converging evidence
that participants primarily used analogical transfer of
exemplar procedures to solve this problem coupled with
some tactics and constraint application. On problem 2
participants showed high accuracy, long solution times, a
bias towards generating the tactics relevant solution, and
protocol evidence for tactics and constraint application
suggesting they primarily used tactics and knowledge
compilation to solve this problem coupled with some
constraint application. On transfer problem 3 participants
showed moderate accuracy, long solution times, and protocol
evidence for constraints and tactics application suggesting
that participants primarily used constraint violation to solve
this problem coupled with tactics application.

Conclusion
The results from this experiment provide converging
evidence for the hypothesis that people shift between
multiple mechanisms of transfer depending on their prior
knowledge and characteristics of the transfer tasks. In
particular, the results demonstrate that participants: (1) show
a relative shift to using analogy and exemplar knowledge to
solve the transfer tasks that have similar surface and deep
structure matches to their exemplar knowledge, (2) show a
relative shift to using tactics and knowledge compilation
when their exemplar knowledge is no longer accessible
(even though there may be deep structural similarity), and
(3) show a relative shift to using constraints violation when
they encounter a problem that does not prompt exemplar
knowledge and tactics are no longer relevant. In addition,
substantial individual differences were observed in
participants’ verbal protocols suggesting that some
participants used multiple mechanisms for a given problem.
This work takes the first steps towards elucidating how
these mechanisms interact, and in determining the conditions
1665

under which each mechanism is triggered. Science
progresses through both theory specialization as well as
attempts unify those theories within a common framework.
Future work should focus on developing a formal model that
incorporates each transfer mechanism into one and the same
cognitive architecture.

References
Anderson, J. R. (1983). The architecture of cognition.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Catrambone, R. (2002). The effects of surface and structural
feature matches on the access of story analogs. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 28, 318-334.
Chen, Z. (2002). Analogical problem solving: A hierarchical
analysis of procedural similarity. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 28, 81-98.
Cohen, J.D., MacWhinney B., Flatt M., & Provost J. (1993).
PsyScope: A new graphic interactive environment for
designing psychology experiments. Behavioral Research
Methods, Instruments, and Computers, 25, 257-271.
Day, S. B., & Gentner, D. (2003). Analogical inference in
automatic interpretation. Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy, Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gentner, D., Holyoak, K. J., & Kokinov, B. N., (Eds.),
(2001). The analogical mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gentner, D., Rattermann M. J., & Forbus, K. D. (1993). The
roles of similarity in transfer: Separating retrievability
from inferential soundness. Cognitive Psychology, 25,
524-575.
Morris, C. P., Bransford, J. D., & Franks, J. J. (1977). Levels
of processing versus transfer appropriate processing.
Journal of Verbal Learning &Verbal Behavior, 16, 519533.
Newell, A. (1990). Unified theories of cognition. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Nokes, T. J. (2004). Testing three theories of knowledge
transfer. Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Nokes, T. J., & Ohlsson, S. (in press). Comparing multiple
paths to mastery: What is learned? Cognitive Science.
Ohlsson, S. (1996). Learning from performance errors.
Psychological Review, 103, 241-262.
Taatgen, N. A., & Anderson, J. R. (2002). Why do children
learn to say “broke”? A model of learning the past tense
without feedback. Cognition, 86, 123-155.
Thurstone, L. & Thurstone, T. (1941). Factorial studies in
intelligence. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

