UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Any Words in the Brain's Language? Does Mind Really Work that Way?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2fz0w91x

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
Cherigovskaya, Tatiana V.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Any Words in the Brain’s Language?
Does Mind Really Work That Way?
Tatiana V. Chernigovskaya (Tatiana@TC3839.spb.edu)
Department of General Linguistics, St. Petersburg State University
University Emb.11, 199034 St. Petersburg, RUSSIA

Abstract

words - phrases - discourse) structure, productivity
governed by the linguistic rules, differences in the
superficial order of constituents, the use of null elements,
the use of sub-categorical argument structure for verbs,
mechanisms for expansion of utterances, embedding, etc.
At the same time, researchers are divided into the socalled oralists claiming that our language has appeared
from the acoustic communication of higher primates and
into the manualists thinking that the gesture language was
the first to appear and already on its cognitive base the
vocal language appeared later developing to the form that
exists at present on Earth in more than 6000 variants.
Jackendoff discussing Universal Grammar as a set of
attractors causing the Human capacity to learn any
language on the basis of the assumption that ‘everything
is already there, and the learner has only to set the options
to suit the environment’, argues and that ‘it is hard to
imagine all this structure emerging in the brain prior to
experience, much less being coded genetically...
Moreover, inheritance is not absolute: it tolerates partial
violations, for instance in irregular verbs and idioms’
(2002, p.190-191). The debates based on experiments
with L1 and L2 acquisition, with normal adults and
children and on clinical observations continue and
become more and more technical, and not just theoretical.
However, a novel and much more flexible view has
appeared from the unexpected address (Hauser, Chomsky
and Fitch, 2002) and it argues that distinction should be
made between the faculty of language in the broad sense
(FLB) and in the narrow sense (FLN): FLB includes a
sensory-motor system, a conceptual-intentional system,
and the internal computational mechanisms, providing the
capacity to generate an infinite range of expressions from
a finite set of elements. Most of FLB is shared with other
species. FLN only includes recursion and is the only
uniquely human component of the faculty of language...
Human system of recursion operates with broader range
of elements than in other animals and we can apply it to
all cognitive tasks.
All these features are traditionally believed to be
subserved by the speech zones of the left cerebral
hemisphere. While the right hemisphere is responsible for
a large part of the lexicon, global/Gestalt recognition, for
revealing the relevant components of a situation (or a
scene), for relatively higher speed of decision making,
classification of colors and odors, orientation in space and
time, evaluation of gestures, face expressions and verbal
prosody, metaphoric thinking, etc. (Chernigovskaya,
1994,1999).

The paper discusses specificity of linguistic competence,
brain imaging data, mental lexicon in language acquisition
and pathology. Connectionist and modular approaches are
observed in the context of origins of language and in the
cognitive framework.

Introduction
Nobody doubts that language is a set of conventions,
some of them more or less explicit, some hidden within
the brain in the form of the algorithms that we hope to
reveal. Chomsky and his followers hold that generative
rules go all the way down, and that they are universal and
genetically based. It is evident that there is something that
we store in the brain and something that we compute.
However, what do we store: lexemes (tens of thousands)
or concepts? In what form and by what means
interconnected? And rules too, at least some of them,
hundreds of such, not consciously operated and not
reflected - in case of the native language.
It is evident, that languages differ in the way they code
semantic or functional relations. The notion that all
languages are somehow equal in complexity and
expressiveness is often thought to be scientific truth.
However, language diversity becomes evident and
realized by the majority of brain and language scholars.

Language Origins and Specificity
Origins of language is the problem that until recently
both linguists and representatives of other anthropological
sciences were feared to consider, as, strictly speaking, the
answer to the question as to how and when the human
language appeared can be based only on reconstructions.
Chomsky and Bickerton consider the “grammatical
explosion” a result of macromutation, whereas Pinker —
a result of natural selection of small mutations, i.e., of
much slower process (Bickerton, 1990; Bloom, 2002;
Chomsky, 2002; Fodor 2001; Pinker, Bloom,1990). The
scientific community is divided into two camps - those
who think the human language to be although very
complex, but nevertheless a successor of communicative
systems of the nearest biological ancestors and those who
adhere to the unique system that performs not only
communicative, but also peculiar thinking function and
has a structure completely lacking in any other biological
codes: ‘digital’ and hierarchical (phonemes - morphemes 430

Localizationistic and Holistic Approaches:
Brain Imaging Data
However, functional brain imaging and clinical data
show that localization problem is not as clear any longer:
not only we do not reveal any neuronal basis for the
‘language module’, but we have to accept that in any
complex activity to say nothing of language we see
numerous brain regions involved. Neuroanatomical basis
for syntactic parsing, as an example, is believed to include
the left perisylvian associative cortex, with some possible
contribution of the homologous contralateral cortex, as
suggested by brain lesion studies (Caplan et al., 1996;
Grodzinsky, 1995;). The activation level of Broca’s area
correlated with syntactic complexity in some PET studies
for both visual (Just et al., 1996) and auditory (Caplan et
al., 1999) sentence presentation. Just et al. (1996) also
reported an increase in rCBF in both Broca’s and
Wernicke’s areas, as well as in the homologous regions of
the right hemisphere. Other fMRI studies of natural and
pseudo-word sentence comprehension suggested a
substantial functional overlap of the brain structures
involved in semantic and syntactic language functions
within the left perisylvian region, including the inferior
frontal, superior and middle temporal gyri (Röder et al.,
2002). Humphries et al. (2001) found bilateral activations
in the anterior temporal cortex well as in the left posterio
temporal area during speech processing, but not during
listening to environmental sounds. Friederici et al. (2000,
2002) also showed that syntactic processing of speech
influences bilaterally the anterior temporal cortex
activation, as well as Wernicke’s area activation, with an
additional activation in the left frontal operculum when
syntactically plausible non-word pseudosentences were
processed. According to the other fMRI study (Homae et
al., 2002), activation in the left inferior frontal gyrus,
relevant to sentence processing, appears to be sensory
modality independent. Studies of the prosodic processing
have suggested the involvement of either the right or both
hemispheres (Kotz et al., 2003). These structures,
therefore, might be a part of the syntactic analysis
network, being involved into pause segmenting and pitch
processing. Artificial grammatical violations also
activates Broca’s region as shown by Petersson et. al.
(2004). in event-related brain imaging, among other
issues, discussing differences between human and animal
learning to be relevant to the narrow faculty of language
(Hauser et al., 2002). Similarities between language and
music processing and it’s localization is currently widely
discussed (Hauser & McDermott, 2003).
One of the prosodic cues, important for segmenting
spoken phrases is a position of the semantic pause.
Therefore, the present study was planned to investigate
the brain mechanisms of such prosodic segmentation in
spoken samples. PET technique was used to see the brain
areas recruited in this mechanism. Subjects were adult
volunteers native speakers of Russian instructed to
appreciate the meaning of auditory presented phrases that
critically depended on the position of a segmenting pause.

The data revealed activation areas in the right
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and in the right cerebellum.
These structures, therefore, might be a part of the
syntactic analysis network, being involved into pause
segmenting and pitch processing.
Comparisons in both directions between the
“segmented, passive” and the “non-segmented, passive”
conditions when a subject was instructed to press the
button with a distracting task while listening to not
segmented or segmented phrases did not demonstrate any
significant difference in brain activation. The “segmented,
active” condition elicited significantly higher activation,
than the “non-segmented, active” in the right dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) with its peak approximately on
the junction of Brodman’s areas (BAs) 44, 45, 9. Another
activation was found in the medial posterior part of the
right cerebellum. Areas of CBF decrease in the
“segmented, active” condition in relation to the “nonsegmented, active” condition were found in the deep
posterior Sylvian cortex bilaterally close to primary
auditory cortex with extension to BA 40 on the left side.
The present study demonstrates that the right posterior
prefrontal cortex and the right medial cerebella area
participate in the brain network of the spoken speech
syntactic parsing, being involved in the segmenting pause
and pitch processing.
Though the right frontal cortex does not seem to play a
crucial role in the syntactic analysis, we suppose, that the
involvement of the right DLPFC might take place while
perceiving prosodic cues..
The problem of cerebral lateralization of prosody
perception remains far from being solved: though
primarily believed to be totally subserved by the RH
neural systems (e.g., Blumstein, Cooper, 1974), later on it
was shown that such RH prevalence is more evident only
for emotional prosody while the LH was shown to be
involved in linguistic prosody (Pell, Baum, 1997). Further
studies revealed that some aspects of the linguistic

431

Are the rules shaping the conjugational pattern
for a particular verb class applied in a set, or they
may be disassociated in verbal processing?
Our experimental data show that the complexity of
paradigm factor overrides the frequency factor and that
the overall pattern of responses suggests that the subjects
favor the isolated ‘default’ rule. Overall, the results
suggest that conjugational patterns for different verb
classes consist of discrete “rules,” and are not necessarily
applied as one bloc. The type frequencies of the verb
classes influenced verbal processing. Thus, high
frequency conjugational patterns were more readily
generalized to other classes. Also, the morphological cues
worked better in the processing of high frequency classes.
However, in the task, which required generating forms of
nonce verbs, the complexity of paradigm overrode the
frequency factor.
It is demonstrated that the paradigm is acquired
gradually by children with normal language development
and in a different manner with individual patterns in SLI
and adult aphasic agrammatic patients. The roles of rules
and frequency factors and cross-linguistic aspects should
be discussed in comparing the results from languages of
different structural types: individual language specificity
is now evident to make the picture much more complex
than it used to be predicted; there are stages and hierarchy
in verbal paradigm acquisition by young children with
normal language development, and SLI children develop
language more slowly and in a different way (cf.
Chernigovskaya, Gor, 2000; Gor, Chernigovskaya, 2001,
2004). Neither one-system nor dual- system approach is
adequate for explaining mental lexicon structure and
functioning in all the categories if subjects at least in
languages with developed morphology.
It should again be stressed that experimental research
should not underestimate a large set of factors, among
them not only language diversity, prohibiting to
extrapolate the data in one or close languages to human
linguistic capacity in general, but also the possibility of
using different algorithms of processing, e.g. templates
and Gestalts of different kinds in one procedure or task
and sequential in the other; difference in cognitive styles
and psychophysiological profiles; fuzziness of a 'norm';
multi-factorial basis of behavior both in life and in an
experiment (memory, attention, emotions, associations,
parallel processing of all kinds, etc.); nonstability of
behavior, caused by exo- and endogenic (neurochemical)
fluctuations etc. So, the puzzle of localization is far form
being solved.

prosody are more related to the LH and some - to the RH
(Chernigovskaya, 1994, Chernigovskaya et al., 1995)
The earlier studies associated the right posterior inferior
frontal gyrus activation with pitch perception and the right
cerebellum activation with verbal fluency and semantic
prediction. Thus, this localization reflects the perception
of pitch boundaries of the semantic pause and the right
cerebellum activation is due to the semantic disruption in
sentences, caused by the pause. The left perisylvanian
cortex, earlier reported to be involved in visual syntactic
processing, in our study was considerably more activated
in control conditions rather than in the test ones.
Dependence of brain activation on different presentation
modalities supports the idea of syntactic processing being
not strictly localized in the brain (Strelnikov, Vorobjov,
Rudas, Chernigovskaya, Medvedev, 2004).

Mental Lexicon: Modularity vs.
Connectionism?
Research of mental lexicon organization gives platform
for the discussion between the two competing parties –
modular-approach advocates vs. connectionists. Some
argue that mental lexicon structure is based on declarative
memory, and the mental grammar - on rules using
procedural memory (Ullman, 2004): the first – advocates
of the dual processing approach (Pinker, Prince,1994) claim that irregulars are lexically represented while
regulars are derived by a rule to form a complex surface
word. Single, or parallel distributed processing, proposed
by connectionists (Bybee, 1995), claims that memory is
not a list but is partly associative, where features are
linked to features, so we also see rules but different from
symbolic and more complex and covering all kinds of
processing both regular and not.
Our study explores the processing of verbal morphology
in Russian, a language with numerous verb classes, which
vary in size, and numerous conjugational patterns. It
assumes that since Russian verb classes differ ‘gradually’
in ‘regularity’ and size, a sharp division into regular and
irregular processing could hardly be expected. It focuses
on the role of morphological cues and explores the
hypothesis that the complexity of paradigm plays a role in
native processing. The complexity of paradigm is
understood as the number and type of rules shaping the
conjugational pattern of individual verb classes.
The study addressed the following issues:
What is the default pattern for Russian? Which
conjugational patterns are more likely to be
generalized to other verb classes?
Are generalizations influenced by type
frequencies of the verbal classes involved and/or
by the complexity of paradigm factor?
What is the role of morphological cues in verbal
processing?

Discussion
As long ago as in 1949, Donald Hebb (however, the
idea decades before discussed by A. Ukhtomsky and P.
Anokhin), proposed a model that reconciled the
localizationistic and holistic approaches of cerebral
control of the higher cognitive functions, specifically of
the verbal ones. According to this model, cell assemblies
in the brain cortex can be arranged in neurobiological
432

Acknowledgements

groups to form cognitive units of the type of words or
Gestalts of different kind, for instance, of visual images.
Such point of view differs fundamentally from the
localizationistic approach, as it implies that neurons from
different cortex areas can be simultaneously united into
the single functional block. It also differs from the holistic
approach, as it denies determination of everything
everywhere, but emphasized principal dynamics of the
mechanism and a constant reorganization of the entire
pattern depending on the cognitive task. This means that
we deal with a finely tuned orchestra, in which location of
conductor is unknown and unstable and possibly is not
occupied at all, as the orchestra is self-organized with
taking into account many factors and is tuned to the
dominant.
When discussing constant debates of nativists and
adepts of the primacy of learning, it is worth recollecting
that all biological systems are characterized by the
capability for self-regulation and among those of the selfregulation in ontogenesis there should be noted three main
factors: (i) development according to genetic program; (ii)
development depending on the role of environment (for
instance, the negative result of sensory deprivation leads
to brain underdevelopment, the absence of adequate
verbal surrounding — to the lack of language
development , etc.; (iii) the own conscious self-regulation
is the property that increases with a rise of the range of
biological objects on the evolutionary ladder as a result of
the increasing role of individual, rather than group
behavior. The sign of evolution is a rise of independence
of the environment. Astonishingly, some general
principles of evolution (as we understand them nowadays)
reflect such different processes as evolution of living
creatures and of natural and artificial languages. Karl
Pribram notes that the organism external behavior is
determined by a complexly organized mechanism formed
by competent structures, whose functions depend on
experience in a given environment. In theories of
learning, by competence the sum of knowledge is
understood, which determines limits of success of
performance of a task. If the competence, including the
genetic one, is equal to zero, no incentives are able to
cause performance of a given task.
Of course, the hierarchy of syntax is necessary for such
a complex, self-organizing system as language, in the
same way as the hierarchy and dynamics of neuronal
patterns are necessary for such a most complex system as
the brain. The adept of the idea of macromutation and,
therefore, actually an anti-Darwinist Chomsky and his
opponents Pinker and Bloom insisting on the natural
selection that has led to formation of the language
capacity could have to be conciliated in the same way as
Hebb’s model gives a possibility of conciliation of the
modular and holistic paradigms. Is it worth adhering to
centrism of syntax, if we live in the world of concepts? Is
it worth keeping to be as before in captivity of the binary
way of thinking, with necessity of choosing between polar
viewpoints: mutation or selection, modularity or neuronal
network?

The research was supported by grants No. 03-06-80068
from Russian Foundation for Basic Research and No. 0404-00083а from Russian Scientific Foundation for
Research in Humanities. I thank the staff of the PET
laboratory of IHB RAS for their cooperation

References
Bickerton, D. (1990). Language and Species, Chicago
Bloom, P. (2002). How Children Learn the Meanings of
Words, MBybee, J. L. (1995). Regular morphology and
the lexicon. Language and Cognitive Processes 10: 425455.
Caplan, D., Hildebrandt, N., Makris, N. (1996). Location
of lesions in stroke patients with deficits in syntactic
processing in sentence comprehension. Brain, 119(3),
933-949.
Caplan, D., Alpert, N., Waters, G. (1999). PET Studies of
Syntactic Processing with Auditory Sentence
Presentation. NeuroImage, 9(3), 343-351
Chernigovskaya, T. (1994). Cerebral Lateralization for
Cognitive and Linguistic Abilities: Neuropsychological
and Cultural Aspects, Studies in Language Origins, J.
Wind, A. Jonker, Eds., Amsterdam, Philadelphia, Ill.,
pp. 56-76.
Chernigovskaya T.V., Svetozarova N.D., Tokareva T.I.
(1995). Hemispheric contributions to processing
affective and linguistic prosody. Paper presented at the
XIII International Congress of Phonetic Sciences,
Stockholm, pp. 494-497
Chernigovskaya, T. (1999). Neurosemiotic Approach to
Cognitive Functions, J. Intern. Assoc. Semiot. Studies.
Semiotica, vol. ¼, pp. 227-237.
Chernigovskaya, T., and Gor, K. (2000).The Complexity
of Paradigm and Input Frequencies in Native and
Second Language Verbal Processing: Evidence from
Russian, Language and Language Behavior, pp. 20-37.
Chomsky, N. (2002). New Horizons in the Study of
Language and Mind, Cambridge Univ. Press,
Fodor, J. (2001). The Mind Doesn’t Work That Way: The
Scope and Limits of Computational Psychology.
Friederici, A.D. (2002). Towards a neural basis of
auditory sentence processing. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 6(2), 78-84.
Friederici, A.D., Meyer, M., von Cramon, D.Y. (2000).
Auditory Language Comprehension: An Event-Related
fMRI Study on the Processing of Syntactic and Lexical
Information. Brain and Language, 74(2), 289-300
Gor, K., and Chernigovskaya, T. (2001). Rules in the
Processing of Russian Verbal Morphology, Current
Issues in Formal Slavic Linguistics, G. Zybatow, U.
Junghanns, G. Mehlhorn, L. Szucsich, Frankfurt-amMain, etc., Lang, pp. 528-536.
Gor K., T. Chernigovskaya. (2004). Formal Instruction
and the Acquisition of Verbal Morphology // In: (Alex
433

Kotz, S.A., Meyer, M., Alter, K., Besson, M., von
Cramon, D.Y., Friederici A. D. (2003). On the
lateralization of emotional prosody: An event-related
functional MR investigation. Brain and Language,
86(3), 366-376.
Pell, M. D., Baum, S. R. (1997). Unilateral brain damage,
prosodic comprehension deficits, and the acoustic cues
to prosody. Brain Lang, 57(2), 195-214.
Petersson, K.M., Ch. Forksrtam, M. Ingvar. (2004).
Artificial syntactic violation acrivate Broca’s region.
Cognitive Science, 28, 383-407
Pinker, S., and Bloom, P., (1990) Natural Language and
Natural Selection, Behav. Brain Sci., vol. 13, pp. 707784.
Pinker, S., and Prince, A. (1994). Regular and irregular
morphology and the psychological status of rules of
grammar. In: Lima, S. D., Corrigan, R. L., and Iverson,
G. K. (eds.), The reality of linguistic rules, 353-388.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Röder B., Stock O., Neville, H., Bien, S., Rösler, F.
(2002). Brain Activation Modulated by the
Comprehension of Normal and Pseudo-word Sentences
of Different Processing Demands: A FMRI Study.
NeuroImage, 15(4), 1003-1014.
Strelnikov K.S., V.A. Vorovjov, M.S. Rudas,
T.V.Chernigovskaya, S.V. Medvedev. (2004). A PET
study of the Brain Mechanisms Underlying Perception
of Phrases with Synragmatic Splitting.//Human
Physiology, vol.30,No.3, pp.255-261
Ullman, M.T. (2004). Contributions of memory circuits to
language: the declarative/procedural model. Cognition,
92(1-2), 231-270.

Housen and Michel Pierrard eds.) Investigation in
Instructed Second Language Acquisition . Mouton de
Gruyter, Berlin, New York, pp.103-139
Grodzinsky, Y. (1995). A Restrictive Theory of
Agrammatic Comprehension. Brain and Language,
50(1), 27-51
Hauser, M. D., N. Chomsky, W.T. Fitch. (2002). The
Faculty of Language: What Is it, Who has it,
and How Did It Evolve? Science, vol. 298, 22
November
Hauser, M.D., McDermott, J. (2003). The evolution of the
music faculty: A comparative perspective. Nature
Neuroscience, 6, 663-668.
Hebb, D.O. (1949). The Organization of Behavior. A
Neurophysiological Theory, Wiley.
Homae, F., Hashimoto, R., Nakajima, K., Miyashia, Y.,
Sakai, K. L. (2002). From Perception to Sentence
Comprehension: The Convergence of Auditory and
Visual Information of Language in the Left Inferior
Frontal Cortex. NeuroImage, 16(4), 883-900.
Humphries, C., Willard, K., Buchsbaum, B., Hickok, G.
(2001). Role of anterior temporal cortex in auditory
sentence comprehension: An fMRI study. Neuroreport:
For Rapid Communication of Neuroscience Research,
12(8), 1749-1752.
Jackendoff, R. (2002). Foundations of Language. Brain,
Meaning, Grammar, Evolution, Oxford Univ. Press
Just, M.A., Carpenter, P. A., Keller, T. A., Eddy, W. F.,
Thulborn K.R. (1996). Brain activation modulated by
sentence comprehension. Science, 274(5284), 114-116.

434

