UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Are Concepts Public?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3400n4td

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Langley, Pat
Rogers, Seth

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Are Concepts Public?
Elisabetta Lalumera (lalumera@dsc.unibo.it)
Dipartimento di discipline della comunicazione
via Azzo Gardino 23, 40131 Bologna - ITALY

communication enhances and secures publicity of concepts
more than it requires it, at least according to one sense of
‘publicity’. Under this hypothesis, the publicity-argument
schema can be partially reversed, as publicity is a
consequence of linguistic communication rather than a
precondition for it. Given that concepts are already public to
some extent, their role in psychological generalizations can be
explained, without succumbing to the strictures of Atomism.

Abstract
Jerry Fodor has argued that concepts ought to be public in order
to figure in psychological explanations and in accounts of
linguistic communication, and that no theory of concepts as
structured abilities of categorization can account for publicity.
Recently Andy Clark and Jesse Prinz opposed this latter claim,
and suggested that the publicity constraint is less demanding
than Fodor thinks. In this paper I support Clark and Prinz’s
position through disambiguating the publicity constraint, and
arguing that linguistic communication enhances concept
publicity rather than requiring it.
Keywords:
Concepts;
communication.

publicity;

Fodor’s Publicity Arguments

categorization;

Two Roles for Concepts
Cognitive scientists and philosophers generally agree on
assigning two main roles to the notion of concept, namely,
concepts figure in psychological explanations of intentional
action, and they are involved in accounts of linguistic
meaning. In the last two decades Jerry Fodor has provided
various versions of an argument for the thesis that concepts
ought to be public in order to have a psychological role and a
linguistic role. His further claim is that the publicity
constraint would rule out most contemporary accounts of
concepts; in particular it would rule out any theory that
describes concepts as structured abilities employed in
categorization1. The opposite thesis has been recently put
forward, in particular by Andy Clark and Jesse Prinz, who
claim that non-atomistic theories can adequately cope with
both the psychological and the linguistic role of concepts, as
the publicity constraint is far less demanding than Fodor
maintains2. In this paper I support Clark and Prinz’s position,
but I will claim that their arguments are insufficient, and more
has to be said about how and why the psychological and
linguistic role of concepts can be compatible with the idea
that concepts are structured categorization abilities that may
vary across different individuals. I will start with running
through the standard formulation of the publicity argument,
and identifying three different senses in which concepts can
be said to be public. Equipped with that distinction, I will
then recap Clark and Prinz’s objections to Fodor, and say
why they are insufficient in order to defend SAC theories. In
the rest of the paper I will point to the fact that linguistic
1
‘SAC theories’ from now on. I mean the acronym to stand for
some varieties of inferentialism on the philosophical side, and
theory-theory, prototype theory, exemplar theory on the
psychological side See Fodor and Lepore 1982, pp. 18-19; Fodor
1998, pp. 27-29; Fodor 2004a;
2
Clark and Prinz 2004.

Here’s a condensed version of Fodor’s publicity arguments:
‘If everybody else’s concept WATER is different from mine,
then it is literally true that only I have ever wanted a drink of
water, and that the intentional generalization ‘Thirsty people
seek water’ applies only to me. (And, of course, only I can
state that generalization; words express concepts, so if your
WATER concept is different from mine, ‘Thirsty people seek
water’ means something different when you say it and when I
do3)’.
The first paragraph of the quotation is about publicity and the
psychological role of concepts. Intentional or commonsense
psychology aims at explaining and predicting people’s
behavior in terms of their beliefs, desires, hopes, and so on.
Its method consists in redescribing a particular action or state
of an individual (like my seeking water, or my mental state of
wanting to have water) as a case of a law-like generalization
about the relationship between people’s beliefs, and their
desires or needs (like ‘Thirsty people seek water’, or ‘Thirsty
people who know that water quenches thirst want water’). In
order to have generalizations about propositional attitudes, it
ought to be possible that different individuals have the same
belief or desire. Therefore, it ought to be possible that
concepts as components of attitudes are public. In short, no
intentional psychology without publicity of concepts.
The second part of Fodor’s quotation above connects
publicity with the linguistic role of concepts. Words express
concepts, and they mean the same to different people only
given that different people can share concepts. Therefore, it
must be the case that concepts that words express are public.
No linguistic communication without publicity of concepts.
Fodor employs the publicity arguments as justifications for
the first premise of an argument against SAC theories, with
three simple steps:
1. Concepts must be public.
2. According to SAC theories concepts can’t be public
3. SAC theories are not adequate.

1231

3

Fodor (1998), p. 29.

Premise 2 is supported by the following line of
thought. According to SAC theories concepts represent our
knowledge of the kinds of things in the world; they allow us
to identify a new object we may meet, like a dog or a fountain
pen, and they allow us to infer unseen properties of the object,
such as its likely behavior or function. Whatever its format
may be (a prototypical image, memories from perception, a
set of beliefs, or a ‘mixed bag’) knowledge of the world
employed in categorization is likely to vary across
individuals4. Both in recognizing things as dogs (category
identification) and in recollecting dog-examples and their
properties (category production) I will use different pieces of
information than you would, as my acquaintance of dogs, my
experiences and theoretical knowledge of them is different
from yours. This, according to Fodor, suffices for concluding
that SAC theories cannot guarantee publicity of concepts.
Given that most psychological and philosophical theories are
SAC theories, Fodor’s argument, together with the publicity
arguments, is intended to make a clean sweep of the
contemporary debate on concepts.

Senses of ‘Public’

us associates to such concepts partially overlap. In a third
sense, publicity of concepts can be taken in the weakest form,
as identity of referent only. According to this latter sense, we
share concepts as long as we have concepts of the same kinds
of things, or better, in a broadly teleological perspective, we
are equipped with representational and categorization devices
aimed at keeping track of the same range of objects and
properties. Publicity as mere coreferentiality or functional
identity rests on the assumption that humans as cognitive
agents are in contact with the same world, from which they
tend to select out the same saliencies and regularities.
Sketchy as it might be, the above characterization of the three
different senses of ‘publicity’ would suffice for suggesting
that the cogency of the publicity arguments, and of Fodor’s
argument against SAC theories, crucially depends on which
of the three senses is involved. In fact, Fodor’s quotation in
the last section shows that ‘publicity’ is intended in the first
sense, namely as identity of both referent and cognitive
content across different subjects – according to Fodor,
differences among concepts of different people would spoil
publicity. Once we have granted Fodor that concepts are
public only if they are identical in referent and cognitive
content across different individuals, his argument against
SAC theories runs smooth, as no SAC theory can guarantee
that two different individuals associate exactly the same
categorization abilities when dealing cognitively with a
certain kind of things.
On the contrary, Fodor’s argument against SAC theories
doesn’t work if ‘publicity’ of contents is taken in the second
or in the third sense, that is, as identity of referent and
similarity of cognitive content, or as mere coreferentiality.
Let’s focus on the second sense here. In such a case, it is no
more obvious that SAC theories can’t allow for the possibility
that you and I employ similar categorization abilities in order
to recognize – say - dogs, and to conjure up their properties
when not perceptually available. After all, it is intuitively
plausible that you and I share some piece of information
about dogs, which we both make use of in our categorization
tasks. Such similarity in cognitive content may show up in a
variety of situations, for example, we are both likely to run
away from a large growling dog, and we won’t feed a hungry
dog with a stick of celery.
To the suggestion that publicity of concepts may be intended
as similarity in cognitive content, Fodor opposes a
straightforward argument for the claim that concept similarity
presupposes concept identity. The argument runs as follows.
Similarity between coreferential concepts of any couple of
different individuals is a weighted function of the
propositions about the referent that they both believe.
Concepts that compose such shared beliefs are either identical
in the two individuals, or just similar. If they are identical,
then concept similarity presupposes concept identity. If they
are just similar, the supporter of publicity as similarity of
cognitive content is in need of a further argument5.

What is for concepts to be public? The very central notion of
this debate stands in need of clarification. I will start with a
preliminary assumption. Concepts represent objects or kinds
of things, but we can have more than one concept for each
object or kind of things. Thus, Venus is a unique planet but
one could have two distinct representations of it – for
example, the concept of the morning star and the concept of
the evening star - and eventually learn, through reading her
Frege, that the morning star is the evening star. This fact
explains why we are prone to take some identities as
discoveries. I will assume that each concept has an intentional
content, or a referent, and a cognitive content, intended as
whatever may differentiate two concepts of the same object or
kind of things. This assumption is hardly controversial given
this minimal characterization of cognitive content, which
allows for a broad range of different positions, from the idea
that a concept encodes all our information about a certain
kind of things, to the view that different representations of the
same property differ at most in syntactic traits.
Now, the publicity of concepts can be intended (at least) in
three different senses. In the first and strongest sense,
concepts are public if different individuals (or different timeslices of the same individual) have concepts with the same
referent and the same cognitive content. Identity of referent
and cognitive content makes concept-sharing quite trivial.
Secondly, publicity can be intended as sameness of reference
and similarity in cognitive content. The idea, here, is that
everyone has her own concept of, say, ducks or Modernism,
but the sets of information and categorization abilities each of
4
Only real definitions (in Locke’s sense) wouldn’t vary across
individuals. Such an option, however, is precluded to Fodor, who
follows Quine in holding that it is impossible to pick up defining
beliefs about some kind of things from non-defining ones. For the
opposite view, and a defence of publicity via definitionalism, see
Rey (1983).

1232

5

Fodor (1998), pp. 30-32,; Fodor and Lepore (1992), pp. 18-19.

Publicity Does Not Require Identity
The above argument can be defeated by denying its main
premise. Similarity between coreferential concepts of
different people need not be a function of the beliefs they
share. The reason is that for a SAC theorist concepts need not
be individuated in terms of beliefs, that is, in terms of other
conceptual contents. To say that concepts are structured
abilities employed in categorization is not yet to say that
concepts are always composed of other concepts. There is no
requirement that thinkers conceptualize the resources they
employ in categorization. Sorting can be (and in fact is
generally) thought of in non-intentional terms, as coming on
top of nonconceptual abilities of discrimination. Even an
inferentialist, who holds that each concept is implicitly
defined by a set of basic inferences involving it, would grant
that some of those inferences crucially involve nonconceptual
contents, like perceptual modes of presentations of objects
and properties6. In general, a SAC theorist would explain
similarity of cognitive content as a function of shared
nonconceptual components in the structure of coreferential
concepts of different individuals – features, prototypical
images, exemplars, percepts stored in memory. Neither of
these routes to concept similarity, however problematic they
might reveal in themselves, presupposes concept identity.
Pace Fodor, then, publicity as concept identity is not the only
viable sense of the notion.
So far I have pointed out that the publicity arguments and the
argument against SAC theories contain a fallacy. In the terms
I have introduced, the fallacy consists in assuming a strong
sense of publicity as identity, which is unsupported by a
convincing argument. Once the fallacy is spotted, Fodor’s
arguments invite a commonsense reply. I quote from Clark
and Prinz:
‘…we have quantifiable similarity of concepts, because we
can talk about two people representing a cat using some of the
same features…why should we insist that concepts are
shareable in a strong sense? We need to explain coordinated
behavior. For example, we need to explain why people point
to the same object, when they use the word ‘mule’. We need
to explain why people go to chiropractors when their backs
hurt…None of these similarities require perfect identity of
concepts7’.
Clark and Prinz’s reply to Fodor is that publicity as similarity
of cognitive content suffices for explaining the psychological
role of concepts. Intentional psychology taken as the
explanation of rational, goal-directed behavior is allowed to
generalize over different people’s beliefs, granted that the
representational structures we imply in categorization - i.e.,
our concepts - are functionally identical and cognitively
similar, in the sense outlined above.
The question now is, can that be granted? How can a
SAC theorist support the claim that people in fact have
similar concepts? Notice that the question doesn’t arise for an
atomistic informational semantics, like Fodor’s. On that view,
6
7

See Peacocke (1992).
Clark and Prinz (2004), p. 61-2.

concepts have no structure, and they are individuated only by
what they refer to, so to possess a concept for dogs is ipso
facto to have the same concept of dogs that everybody else
has8. Neither the question arises for a definitionalist, who
holds that some specific subset of categorization abilities –
namely, a definition – is constitutive of having a concept for a
certain object or property. According to Definitionalism,
people’s concepts of a given kind are trivially similar because
they all include the definition of that kind9. Nevertheless, the
problem of explaining publicity as similarity is open for the
great majority of SAC theories. Clark and Prinz’s position is
intuitively plausible – we find it plausible that individuals that
interact in socially complex activities like we are, come to
develop similar categorization procedures for most concepts.
Still, such a position stands in need of a supporting argument,
as Fodor remarks10. The rest of this paper will be devoted to
my attempt at filling the gap.

Reshaping the Publicity Arguments
Prinz and Clark’s remarks against Fodor’s conclusion may be
developed in a more complete position featuring the
following three theses:
1. Concepts, or at least many of them, are public in the
minimal or functional sense; people share concepts because
they tend to be equipped with, or form concepts of the same
kinds of things.
2. For communication to be possible, concepts have to be
public in the functional sense.
3. The use of concepts in interpersonal communication
explains in most cases how coreferential concepts of different
individuals come to have similar cognitive contents.
With thesis 1, publicity of concepts becomes a datum
to start with, and not a requirement to conform to, provided
that it is intended as mere functional identity. Functional
identity places no special constraints on what concepts have
to be like, as virtually any theory could allow for the
possibility that different individuals have functionally
identical concepts. In particular, it is compatible with a SAC
theory. According to thesis 2, different people can
communicate provided that they have concepts of the same
things. Publicity of concepts is acknowledged to be necessary
for communication; contra Fodor, however, the weaker, and
merely functional sense of publicity is sufficient. Thesis 3
claims that the role of concepts in linguistic communication
explains why concepts can have a role in psychological
explanations. In communication we exchange information
about the things we refer to, and thereby we develop similar
cognitive contents for our concepts of those things. Prinz and
Clark’s problem – that of providing support for the claim that
different individuals have similar cognitive contents – is
approached here by taking the role of concepts in
communication as an explanans, rather than as an
explanandum. Having identified and isolated the three
8
Syntactic modes of presentation excluded, see Fodor (1998),
chapter 1.
9
See fn. 5 above.
10
Fodor (2004b), pp. 102-104.

1233

different senses of ‘public’ in the previous sections, the
dialectic of Fodor’s publicity arguments cannot be preserved,
but comes out as significantly altered.
Let’s see the two theses in more detail. According to
thesis 1, different people can be said to share a concept as far
as they are cognitively locked onto the same property or
individual (as a current philosophical jargon would express
it). If you and I both had a cognitive encounter with the Eiffel
Tower, we share the concept EIFFEL TOWER - we can think
about that building, store information about it, recollect its
appearance in memory, and in many cases we are able to tell
whether a given object is the Eiffel tower or not. Having a
concept of the Eiffel tower is nothing more than possessing
some means of keeping track of the Eiffel tower in the world,
and of representing it in thought, no matter which ones. In this
sense, it is highly plausible that we share many concepts.
Similarity of our perceptual apparatuses, and the
corresponding representational advantage of some features of
the environment over others, would already suffice for
granting us a wide basis of shared concepts in the minimal
sense intended here (take concepts of colors, basic shapes,
medium-size animals and artifacts, etc.). In order to demystify
publicity of concepts, however, I need not go through
specifying how many or which concepts people actually
share, as that would more appropriately be the topic of a
research programme in psychology. Thesis 1 just amounts to
claiming that being cognitively directed to the same worldfeature counts as having concepts in common. This is
perfectly plausible if we consider concepts as structured
abilities of categorization. Categorization occurs when the
same kind of input is associated with a certain cognitive
output, no matter how such an association is accomplished.
Thus, for example, categorization as the Eiffel tower (i.e.
tokening of the concept EIFFEL TOWER) occurs whenever a
cognitive system appropriately responds to the presence of
the Eiffel tower, no matter what amount of information or
structured knowledge mediates such a response. As Millikan
(2000) puts it, concepts are structured abilities of
categorization typed by their ends, not by their means.
As long as we accept that different individuals, with
different background knowledge and beliefs, can have
functionally identical concepts, we have as much publicity as
it is needed for linguistic communication to start, as it is
claimed in thesis 2. In a linguistic exchange, when speaker
and hearer use the word ‘Eiffel tower’ they may well
associate different images and information to the
corresponding concept, but still they can point to the same
object. The hearer can grasp the speaker’s referent if she is
equipped with a cognitive means of identifying and
representing that very object, namely, if she has a functionally
identical concept – the minimal condition for understanding
what someone else is saying, is knowing what she is talking
about11. Again, this minimal publicity requirement places no
special demand on the form of a theory of concepts; in
particular it makes no case against SAC theories. Surely
communication would run smoother between people with
11

Prinz 2003, 15.

strongly identical concepts in Fodor’s sense (if there are any);
this, however, does not suffice for the conclusion that
publicity as strong identity is necessary for linguistic
communication, as Fodor’s publicity argument was meant to
conclude.

Communication and Similarity of Content
In fact, as we move from philosophical settings and
logical possibilities to everyday contexts, a situation in which
speaker and hearer can count only on sameness of reference
of their concepts is quite hard to find. Usually people do have
similar concepts - as in Clark and Prinz’s suggestion quoted
above – namely, concepts with shared (conceptual or
nonconceptual) features. Thesis 3 claims that linguistic
communication explains why different individuals come to
have similar concepts, rather than requiring concept
similarity. Linguistic communication shapes and modifies our
concepts so that concept similarity is greatly enhanced, and
learning a first language plays a fundamental part in this
process. People do not associate words to concepts randomly;
instead, they learn through training and communicative
attempts which concept go with which words. Starting from
early childhood we gain and transmit information about the
objects we are cognitively directed to by means of language,
engendering a social process of converging on concept’s
cognitive contents:
‘the result of that process is that different people within
a community relate words to very similar concepts. Even
though my concept of dog is an internal mental representation
, it has been shaped to be the concept for the word “dog” by
many years’ interaction with other English speakers’12.
The converging process on concepts’ cognitive content is
particularly evident for those concepts that can be acquired
through language only, like ELECTION, POETRY, or
13
MORTGAGE . In such cases our concept’s cognitive content
develops from the socially received meaning of the
corresponding word, and therefore cannot but be similar to
that of our fellow speakers. In particular, philosophers like
Putnam and Burge argued that speakers are usually disposed
to uniform their concepts to the concepts of those they
recognize as experts in a certain branch of knowledge
(Putnam 1975; Burge 1989). The point can be extended to a
wider range of concepts given that many of them, though not
strictly language-dependent, have been acquired by children
or adults without perceptually encountering the individuals or
properties they refer to, but only by hearing about them (e.g.
the concepts of Napoleon or Carthago, the concept of an
atomic bomb, etc.)14. In all such cases, different individuals

12

Murphy 2002, 392. See also Clark 1996 for a similar point.
I do not mean to defend any position in the debate as to whether
the conceptual system is parasitic on the faculty of language, nor
am I endorsing the view that languageless creatures lack concepts.
The more modest point advanced above is that there are some
concepts whose acquisition depends on mastering a complex
notational system.
14
Millikan 2000, 84.

1234

13

come to have similar cognitive contents precisely because
concepts are what they express through language.
There is at least one limitation to the above line of thought. It
is not perfectly neutral, because it presupposes the idea that
concepts can be learned, or at least, that they can be modified
and developed through experience – specifically, through
experience mediated by language. This is a concession to
Empiricism, which conflates with strong nativist views about
concept formation. It might be possible, however, that a
nativist develop a different story of how language favors
intersubjective convergence of cognitive content.

Conclusion
To sum up. As Fodor appropriately points out, the role of
concepts in communication and in psychological explanations
of intentional action is closely connected with the question
whether different individuals can share concepts, or in other
words, whether concepts are public. As it has been gradually
cleared up, however, ‘publicity’ is an ambiguous term
expressing at least three concepts in the present context,
namely strong identity, similarity, and functional identity.
Fodor concludes that conceptual atomism scores over SAC
theories because it can allow for the possibility that different
individuals have strongly identical concepts. According to the
view I have been defending, on the contrary, functional
identity is sufficient for accounting for the role of concepts in
communication. Nonetheless, concepts have to be similar
across different individuals for psychological generalizations
to be feasible. While Prinz and Clark seem to take for granted
that SAC theories can account for concept similarity, I have
suggested that what favors publicity as similarity across
different individuals is precisely the role of concepts in
communication. The fact that we employ concepts in
communication does not go as far as granting that we have
similar concepts, but it goes quite a long way towards
explaining why it is likely that we do. This move can help
bridging the gap between Prinz and Clark’s suggestion that
SAC theories can adequately account for publicity as
similarity, and Fodor’s request of a supporting argument. The
result is that the apparent burden of Fodor’s publicity
arguments is significantly reduced, and the publicity of
concepts ceases to be an exclusive achievement of atomistic
theories.

Acknowledgments
Many thanks for helpful comments to the participants of the
weekly research seminar organized in Bologna by Paolo
Leonardi, and to two anonymous reviewers of this
conference.

References
Burge, T. (1989) Individualism and the mental. In P. French,
T. Uehling and H. Wettstein (eds.). Studies in
Metaphysics: Midwest Studies in Philosophy, IV,
Minneapolis, University of Minnesota Press.
Clark, A. and Prinz, J. (2004) Putting Concepts to Work:
Some Thoughts for the Twentyfirst Century. Mind and
Language vol. 19, n°1.
Clark, H. (1996) Using Language, Cambridge (Mass.): MIT
Press.
Fodor, J. (1998) Concepts. Where Cognitive Science Went
Wrong. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- (2004A) Having Concepts: a Brief Refutation of the
Twentieth Century. Mind and Language vol. 19, n°1.
- (2004B) “Reply to Commentators” Mind and Language vol.
19, n°1.
Fodor, J. and Lepore, E. (1992) Holism. A Shopper’s Guide.
Oxford: Blackwell.
Millikan, R. (2000). On Clear and Confused Ideas. An Essay
on Substance Concepts. Cambridge (UK): Cambridge
University Press.
Murphy, G. (2002). The Big Book of Concepts. Cambridge
(Mass.), MIT Press.
Peacocke,C. (1992). A Study of Concepts. Cambridge
(Mass.), MIT Press.
Prinz, J. 2003 Furnishing the Mind. Concepts and Their
Perceptual Basis. Cambridge (Mass.): MIT Press.
Putnam, H. (1975). The Meaning of “Meaning”..In K.
Gunderson (ed.), Language, Mind and Knowledge.
Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science vol. 7,
Minneapolis: Univ. of Minnesota Press.

1235

