UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Body-in-Motion: Broadening the Social Mind

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6w81w3r7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
Liu, His-wen Daniel

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Body-in-Motion: Broadening the Social Mind
Jessica Lindblom (jessica.lindblom@his.se)
School of Humanities and Informatics, University of Skövde,
P.O. 408, 541 28 Skövde, SWEDEN

Tom Ziemke (tom.ziemke@his.se)
School of Humanities and Informatics, University of Skövde,
P.O. 408, 541 28 Skövde, SWEDEN

Abstract
Embodiment has become an important concept in many areas
of cognitive science during the past two decades, but yet there
is no common understanding of what actually constitutes
embodied cognition. Much focus has been on what kind of
‘bodily realization’ is necessary for embodied cognition, but
crucial factors such as the role of social interaction and the
body-in-motion have still not received much attention. Based
on empirical evidence from child development, we emphasize
the experience of self-produced locomotion behavior as a
crucial driving force to the emergence of the so-called “ninemonth revolution” in human infants. We argue that the
intertwining of social scaffolding and self-produced
locomotion behavior is fundamental to the development of
joint attention activities and a ‘self’ in the human child.

However, the crucial aspect of the body-in-motion has not
received enough attention, although research in
anthropology has shown the relevance of locomotion
experience for human cognition (e.g., Farnell, 1995, 1999;
Sheets-Johnstone, 1999). Farnell (1995), for instance, points
out that besides treating cognizers as embodied agents, we
have to recognize that this embodied agent actually moves.
In addition, the subjective tactile-kinesthetic experiences of
one’s body are the bedrock of thinking, according to Sheets Johnstone (1999). That means, the body is not a bridge
connecting the subjective and the objective body, the real
issue of embodiment is not the “packaging”, since she
stresses that self-experienced bodily understanding is the
elemental and unsurpassable unity of embodied actions
(Sheets-Johnstone, 1999). For that reason, current theories
of embodied cognition have to pay more attention to the role
and relevance of the “body-in-motion” for cognition.
Secondly, the focus in most theories of embodiment has
been on the relation between the individual body and
individual cognitive processes, but the view of the mind as
first and foremost social has largely been neglected (cf.
Vygotsky, 1978). Current theories of embodied cognition
and artificial intelligence (AI) only peripherally address the
role of embodiment in social interactions (Lindblom &
Ziemke, 2003, 2005a), although almost two thirds of the
meaning in a social situation is considered to be received
from so-called nonverbal signs (Burgoon, Buller &
Woodall, 1996). Albeit the interest in social interaction has
grown and has received increased attention, the role of the
body in social interaction and social cognition is far from
being well understood. Empirical evidence from social
psychology has shown how social thought and judgments
can be affected by bodily states, actions and motivations
(cf., e.g., Barsalou et al., 2003; Niedenthal et al., in press),
and these findings suggest that the body might be used as a
mediator or resonance mechanism in the process of
perceiving others, but its function is still poorly understood
(cf., e.g., Dautenhahn, 1997; Gallese & Goldman, 1998;
Gallese, Keysers & Rizzolatti, 2004; Jacob & Jeannerod,
2005).
Turning our attention to theories of cultural and social
cognition, on the other hand, they still mainly tend to
overlook the bodily aspects of social in teraction (Rogoff,
2003; Tomasello, 1999). Varela (1992) argues that “[s]ocial
scientists are body-dead because they are conceptually
brain-dead to signifying acts within the semiotics of body

Keywords: embodiment; social scaffolding; body-in-motion;
nine-month revolution; self-produced locomotion behavior

Introduction
Theories of embodied cognition offer a radical shift in
explanations of cognition, and can be viewed as a
Copernican revolution against standard computationalist
cognitive science. Cognitivists claim that cognition takes
place inside the skull in form of abstract symbol
manipulation and that the body only serves as an input and
output device, i.e. a physical interface between internal
program (cognitive processes) and external world. In
contrast, the embodied approach stresses that our cognitive
processes depend on experiences that come from having a
body with particular sensorimotor capabilities that interact
with the surrounding world. Despite nearly two decades of
research under the banners of embodiment and embodied
cognition, there is yet no common understanding of what
actually constitutes embodied cognition, or what kind of
body it might require (e.g., Anderson, 2003; Chrisley &
Ziemke, 2003; Clark, 1999; Dautenhahn, Ogden & Quick,
2002; Riegler, 2002; Núñez, 1999; Wilson, 2002, Ziemke,
2001, 2003). The lack of agreement has resulted in some
oversimplifications of the role of the body in cognition.
Firstly, the discussion has mostly focused on the “static”
body, i.e. what kind of physical or software realization of
the body is necessary for cognition. The forms of the body
range from quite basic shapes that interact with the
environment to more organism-like bodily forms like
humanoid robots (Brooks et al., 1998; Ziemke, 2001, 2003).

1284

movements”. One reason for the absence of the body in the
social sciences is the anxiety of slipping into biological
determinism. Social sciences, therefore commonly view
mind as superior to and independent of the body. However,
this line of argument is quite ironical, since it actually
encourages biological determinism, by stressing the
dichotomy between mind and body (Farnell, 1999). It
should be noted that taking a social embodiment approach,
is not the same as relapsing into biological reductionism,
since the supposed opposition between socio-cultural and
biological aspects is misleading (Segerstråle & Molnar,
1997). Ingold (2000), for instance, points out that instead of
talking of embodiment, the term “enmindment” could be
used. He emphasizes that body and mind are not two
separate things, other than two ways of describing the same
process, i.e. the activity of the human organism in its
physical and social environment.
Taken together, questions that need to be addressed in
current theories of embodied cognition are, for instance,
how humans use the body in social interaction, and what
role and relevance does bodily movement have? Moreover,
how does the body affect social interactions, which social
processes are affected, and what functional roles does the
body serve in social cognitive processes ?
This paper aims to complement the present notions of
embodiment, emphasizing that the body-in-motion appears
to be crucially relevant to the emergence of the capacity for
joint attention in the human child, which is a central
building block of human social interaction. The point we
want to make is that the onset of self-produced locomotion
behavior and the emergence of joint attention activities take
place at the same time. We suggest that this is not at all a
coincidence, since the sensorimotor and social dynamics of
bodily experience function as a crucial driving force in
cognitive development.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. The next
section emphasizes the role of socio-cultural factors for the
development of human cognition, primarily following the
Tomasello’s (1999) lines of argument. Next, we discuss
different theoretical standpoints that stress the crucial
relevance of the “body-in-motion” and social scaffolding for
cognition. Then we present some empirical evidence that
stresses the importance of self-produced locomotor behavior
for the onset of joint-attention abilities in the human infant.
The paper ends with a discussion and conclusions.

Cultural Cognition and the “Nine -Month
Revolution”

during breast-feeding does not occur in other primates.
Moreover, human infants show a wide range of facial
expressions, rhythmical stereotypes, and complex face-toface interaction patterns between the infant and the
caregiver that are absent in chimpanzees and gorillas
(Hendriks-Jansen, 1996). That means, human infants are
“ultra” social already from birth, in ways that other primates
are not, and the role of these social interaction patterns is
supposed to “hijack” the caregivers attention to create a
‘social glue’ between the infant and caregiver during the
infant’s development. However, these early uniquely social
bonding behaviors alone cannot explain why humans so
strongly are able to “identify” with others. There has to be
something more. Tomasello (1999) suggests that humans
are also able to understand other persons as intentional
agents like themselves, i.e. “animate beings who have goals
and who make active choices among behavioral means for
attaining those goals, including active choices about what to
pay attention to in pursuing those goals ” (ibid., p. 68). This
understanding emerges when human infants begin to
participate in various joint attention activities (Tomasello,
1999).
It has been noted that Euro-American children begin to
participate in social discourse from about the age of nine
months at which point they make their first attempts to share
attention with other people, as well as imitatively learn from
and through social interactions with them. The range of new
social behaviors that emerge at this point in infant
development indicate a drastic change in the way the child
begins to understand the surrounding (physical and) social
world – the so-called “nine-month revolution”. Before that
time, the interaction behaviors of human children are mostly
dyadic, i.e. two-way interactions between the child and the
caretaker. Then by the age of nine months, a set of triadic
behaviors emerges, involving a coordinated interaction
between child, objects, and other people. As a result, a
referential triangle of ‘shared attention’ develops in the
child, between another person and the object or event to
which they focus their attention. Tomasello (1999)
emphasizes that these new triadic behaviors are the result of
the unique human social-cognitive adaptation to identify
and understand others as intentional agents. He claims that it
is this particular ability, and not any specialized biological
adaptations explicitly, that is responsible for many, if not
all, of the most unique and essential cognitive functions and
processes of human being. The question is – Why does this
revolution of joint attention behaviors occur at the age of
nine months?
Tomasello (1999) suggests that the relation between self
understanding and the similar understanding of others as
intentional agents explains the nine-month social-cognitive
revolution, since “the hypothesis is that as this new
experience of self-agency emerges, a new understanding of
others emerges as a direct result” (ibid., p. 70). However,
while Tomasello nicely sorts out what happens around nine
months of age, but this ‘explanation’ is questionable
because it appears that the child actually flicks a ‘magic

The ability to engage in social interaction is a central
building block of social life and cognition, and thus one of
the foundations for human culture.
Humans ”identify” with their conspecifics more deeply
than other primates and the human child has a biologically
inherited capacity for living culturally (cf. Rogoff, 2003;
Tomasello, 1999). Human infants early display a large
number of activity patterns that appear to be species-unique.
For instance, the typical rhythm of “burst-pause-burst”

1285

switch’ at the age of nine month and he does not explain
why this shift in understanding actually occurs. He admits
that the personal experiences necessary for this
understanding remain unclear, and this ra ises another related
question – How does this link between self and others
emerge?
Tomasello emphasizes that in coming to understand
others as intentional agents around the age of nine months,
another crucial factor enters the scene – the ability to more
or less simulate the other person’s intentional actions by
analogy to one’s own actions, and as a result, the self
becomes intentional. Tomasello stresses that there is no
need for the child to be able to conceptualize before
simulating, since it is enough to perceive the other person’s
intentional actions via an analogy to the self.
Roughly speaking, simulating the other individual’s point
of view is adopted by matching the other person’s mental
states with a resonance state of one’s own, putting oneself in
another person’s ‘shoes’ by simulating the behavior of
another individual ‘off-line’, in order to predict or determine
the behavior of the other agent. Gallese et al. (2002, p. 459)
suggested “that the capacity to empathize with others – may
rely on a series of matching mechanisms that we just have
started to uncover”. Such a mechanism may rely on, or be a
part of special kinds of visio-motor neurons in the premotor
cortex in monkeys, so-called mirror neurons (cf., e.g.,
Gallese & Goldman, 1998; Rizzolatti et al., 2002). These
neurons are able to respond, for example, both to particular
performed hand actions, and when observing the same
action while it is performed by other conspecifics (Gallese
& Goldman, 1998). For that reason, mirror neurons are
supposed to constitute a cortical system, which is able to fit
observation and execution of goal-related motor actions.
Empirical evidence indicates that such a system actually is
present in human beings as well, and the functional role of
this matching system might be a part of, or a precursor to, a
general mind-reading capability. Recent empirical results
indicate that mirror neuron activity also correlates with
action understanding as well as experiential understanding
of others’ emotions (Gallese, Keysers & Rizzolatti, 2004;
see also Jacob & Jeannerod (2005) for a critique of motor
theories of simulation).
However, the idea of simulating the other person’s view
for understanding that other people also have intentions
results in the question – How does the child create and
distinguish between one’s own first-hand experience and
those third-hand experiences performed by others? This is
an underestimated problem in theories of simulation
theories that has not received enough attention, despite the
fact that the ability to shift between first-hand and thirdhand perspectives is an essential aspect of social cognition
(Jacob & Jeannerod, 2005).
The ‘explanation’ offered by Tomasello (1999) is that the
time when the child starts to understand that other persons
have intentions and goals like themselves, is a result of our
species “ultra” social ability. On the contrary, we suggest
that neither our “ultra” social ability nor simulation theories

alone are able to explain how this intentional understanding
emerges in the child. Instead, we argue that self-experienced
locomotion behavior is another missing piece in the puzzle
for the emergence of the social understanding of the self. In
the following sections we elaborate this hypothesis in more
detail.

“Body-in-Motion” and Social Scaffolding

1286

Trevarthen (1977, in Hendriks-Jansen, 1996) pointed out
that one reason for the neglect of the moving body in
psychological research was that the actual movement
patterns of humans were as difficult to observe before the
invention of cinephotography as were the planets before the
development of the telescope. Psychology therefore became
more of a static science of perception, cognition and action
than a science of dynamic interactions. On the other hand,
when researchers actually pay attention to embodied
movement, it often appears that the moving body has lost its
mind (Farnell, 1995). However, a shift in the study of
human body movements has occurred more recently, from a
distal observer’s description of behavior to the stance of
viewing body movements as dynamically embodied actions
(Farnell, 1995, 1999).
The French philosopher Merleau-Ponty (1908-1961)
strongly stressed that the mind was essentially embodied
and interacted with the world, arguing that bodies are deeply
‘cognitive’ in themselves (cf. Dreyfus, 1992; Loren &
Dietrich, 1997; Priest, 1998). On the other hand, SheetsJohnstone (2003) emphasizes that although Merleau-Ponty
is viewed as the “knight of the Body”, he overlooked the
deeply engrained role of self-experienced movement in
embodied beings. She claims that the core of being is the
relation between the body and movement, emphasizing that
“consciousness does not arise in matter, it arises in organic
forms, forms that are animate” (ibid. p. 43). The human
infant is not born inanimate, but already moving, and has to
catch herself in the tactile-kinesthetic apprenticeship of her
own body. That means, there is a need to discover how we
actually “put ourselves together” (Sheets-Johnstone, 2003).
On the other hand, what both Merleau-Ponty and Sheets Johnstone overlook, in our opinion, is the first and foremost
social nature of the human mind, and therefore the
apprenticeship of body-in-motion is not an individual
enterprise. Embodiment is more than the organism or the
“packaging”, more than the experience of doing - there is
the movement itself, which is more than just manipulating
limbs, since ”the body is both a means and the end of
communicational intentions” (Varela, 1994, p. 168), and
this primacy of the body-in-motion entails both language
and gesture.
Varela (1994) suggests that a reliable theory of
embodiment has to acknowledge the dynamic nature of
human action, including the person that enacts the body, all
kinds of physical and social actions, as well as meaning
accomplished through actions. The main idea is that neither
bodies nor minds themselves have intentions; it is only
persons, a “self” or an intentional agent, in Tomasello’s

vocabulary, that have intentions. The point Varela wants to
make is that the “enactment” of the body is a social act, and
in order to direct oneself, you have to consider how others
will act and react in response to your own actions.
How then does a movement become transformed into an
intention or an embodied action? So-called “objective”
descriptions of observed bodily movements exist, but they
are un-convincing since they do not consider the nonobservable social situation at hand, which actually is what
adds the meaning to the visible embodied actions. By using
the term ‘action’ instead of ‘movement’ Farnell (1995)
highlights that socially embodied actions are a set of
movements that have agency, meaning or intentions for the
actual person or agent in view of the fact that “bodies do not
move and minds do not think – people just do” (Farnell,
1995, p. 14).
The role of social interactions for the transformation of
bodily movements into intended actions was illustrated
already by Vygotsky in the mid-1930s, when he explained
the essential role of social interactions for the development
of pointing in the child (Vygotsky, 1978). Initially, it is only
a simple and incomplete grasping movement directed
towards a desired object, and is only constituted b y the
child’s bodily movements, and nothing more. When the
caretaker assists the child, the meaning of the situation itself
changes. The child’s ‘failed’ reaching attempt provokes a
reaction, not from the desired object, but from another
person. The individual gesture ‘in itself’ becomes a gesture
‘for-others’. The caretaker interprets the child’s reaching
movement as a kind of pointing gesture, resulting in a
socially meaningful communicative act, whereas the child at
the moment is not aware of its communication ability. After
a while, however, the child becomes aware of the
communicative function of the performed movements, and
then begins using referential gestures towards other people,
rather than to the object of interest that was the child’s
primary focus initially. For that reason, “the grasping
movement changes to the act of pointing” (ibid. p 56).
Kozulin (1986) pointed out that it is essential to note that
the child herself is the last person who ‘consciously’ grasps
the ‘new’ meaning of this pointing gesture.
That means, the social surrounding functions as a social
scaffold for the development of pointing, where the initial
quite simple bodily movement becomes an intentional
action. Thus, our embodiment constrains while cultural
customs affect, but do not determine, the organization of
social interactions (Farnell, 1999).

Self-Produced Locomotion Behavior

locomote voluntarily, i.e. crawling and creeping, these
behaviors produce a wide range of changing experiences in
the infant’s social and emotional development (Campos et
al., 2000). The role and relevance of this new social
interaction situation should not be disregarded. It becomes
necessary for the child to adapt to the new situation, paying
close attention, both to their environment as well as to their
self-produced movement with respect to the environment.
As a result, some pervasive consequences occur, which in
turn, affect the physical and social world around the child,
in particular the interaction between the child and its
surroundings (Campos et al., 2000). Campos et al. (2000)
use an analogy based on a French saying, which states that
“when the finger points at the moon – the idiot looks at the
finger”. On the whole, the empirical data they present
suggests that children without self-produced locomotion
experience perform like the ‘idiot’ in the French saying,
whereas children with locomotion experience are able to
follow, to various degrees , referential gestures towards a
distal target (Campos et al., 2000). Hence, their proposal is
that crawling is the cradle of “social referencing
phenomenon”, since it is mainly after the child starts to
crawl that she receives social signals that have an obvious
distal referent. When the child begins to locomote there is a
sudden increase of the behavioral pattern of checking back
and forth to the caregiver. This behavior is a crucial feature
of the “information-seeking” aspect of social referencing,
which makes it possible for the child to understand how the
regulation of social interaction is affected by distal
communication.
Hence, it is via these regulations of interaction that the
child develops a shared meaning with its caregiver, and at
around nine months the child is able to respond to gestural
communication when the target is absent from its own
visual field. That means, at that point in time the child is
able to differentiate between its own visual field and the
gesturer’s visual field. In other words, the child displays a
beginning for perspective taking. This social ability then
develops further and encompasses communicational signs
from others, which make it possible for the child to grasp
that other people also have intentions. For example,
creeping and crawling infants appear both to be more
attentive and actively search for communicative signals
from the experimenter while performing Piaget’s wellknown “A-not-B-task” (Campos et al., 2000). Empirical
research shows that infants with locomotion experience
perform better on tasks assessing the tendency to follow
referential gestural communication than pre-locomotor
children (i.e. gaze-following, head-turn, and pointing).
Similar results were shown in studies on Chinese children
(they begin to locomote at a later time than Euro American
children due to cultural factors) and infants with motor
disabilities (Campos et al., 2000).
In sum, empirical evidence show that there is a significant
developmental change in referentia l gestural communication
around the age of nine months, and that self-produced
locomotion experience is involved in that particular shift.

The experience of self-produced locomotion behavior is a
rather neglected factor, despite the fact that research has
shown its significance in the child’s social as well as
emotional development. It should be stressed that
locomotion is not necessarily a causal factor in itself.
Instead, the child’s cognitive and emotional changes emerge
from the experiences that result from the child’s own
locomotion behavior. When the human child starts to

1287

Discussion and Conclusions
This paper extends current theories of embodied cognition
by including the role and relevance of the body--in-motion
for broadening the social mind. Crucial to the embodiment
of cognition, according to this account, is perhaps not so
much the physical realization of the static body, or its
interactions with the environment as such. Instead, we stress
the elementary and intertwined relation between the
experiences of one’s own moving body and its interplay
with the physical and social environment. The following
argument is our preliminary answer to the questions raised
above: Why does the nine-month revolution actually take
place at around that age, and How does the child create and
distinguish between first-hand experiences and third-hand
experiences?
The guiding issue here is the role and relevance of selfproduced locomotion behavior for the emergence of the
“nine-month revolution”, the point in time when the child
begins to understand that others are intentional beings as
themselves. Hence, that point in development when children
begin to understand themselves and others as intentional
agents, around nine months of age (in European-American
children), ‘coincides’ with the onset of self-produced
locomotor behavior. We suggest that this is in fact no
coincidence at all. Instead, it is primarily through the
experience of self-produced locomotion and the subsequent
experience of literally perceiving the (physical and social)
world and acting upon it from different perspectives,
depending on one’s own embodied action, that infants
develop the capacity of understanding others as having
different perspectives and own intentions. That means,
when children begin to locomote by themselves, they
acquire an individual experience of the surrounding world
through their own actions and perceptions. As a result, the
child distinguishes between itself and the surrounding
world, a distinction from which a primitive “self” emerges.
Consequently, when the child can put itself in another
person’s physical situation, the child becomes able to relate
both to the other person’s perspective and its own situation.
This perspective-taking is grounded in the experiences of
self-produced locomotion behavior, which might be a
fundamental aspect for distinguishing between first-hand
and third-hand experiences. This emerging understanding is
bootstrapped through socially scaffolded bodily experience,
which gives the child access to the actual meaning of the
social-communicative
situation.
Subsequently,
that
understanding of perspective-taking might be used during
embodied simulations, making it possible for the child to
simu late “off-line” what it would be like to be in the other
person’s situation, based on its own self-produced
locomotor experience. In that sense, the sensorimotor and
social dynamics of bodily experience function as a crucial
driving force in cognitive development
We therefore suggest that the experience of self-produced
locomotion behavior needs to be addressed more in current
research on embodied cognition and artificial intelligence
(AI). We elsewhere discuss (Lindblom & Ziemke, 2005b)

the implications of the social dynamics of bodily experience
for android science, which is an approach that designs
‘human-like’ robot bodies in attempts to construct ‘humanlike’ AI.
In addition, it should be noted, for instance, that empirical
results show that perceiving moving (non-animate)
geometrical stimuli prompts humans to ascribe emotions
and social intentions to these stimuli. That means, moving
non-animate objects in fact trigger an illusion of social
interactions directed by social intentions (cf. Jacob &
Jeannerod, 2005).
Furthermore, the communicative function of touch is one
of the least researched areas in infant development, although
there are indications for its importance in the child’s
cognitive and social development (cf. Hertenstein, 2002).
Perhaps touch is another crucial communicational aspect in
the “ultra” social interaction patterns between infant and
caregiver, making the foundation for the emerging “social
glue” between them. There are many more theoretical as
well as empirical aspects to address, but space limitations do
not allow for an in-depth discussion here.
Another question is if there are other fundamental
milestones earlier or later in children’s life that, like the
onset of self-produced locomotion behavior, have major
fundamental consequences? Language acquisition, for
instance, might be such an important occasion. It has been
noted that gesture and speech are deeply intertwined and
language production itself is based in quite complicated
muscular movements (cf. Goldin-Meadow, 2003; Iverson &
Thelen, 1999; McNeill, 1992). There is converging
empirical evidence that gesture and speech originate in
hand-mouth associations early in infant development. In
other words, the systems of hand and mouth movements are
not two separate systems; rather they should be viewed as
intimately linked in language production. From an
embodied cognition point of view, Iverson and Thelen
(1999) suggest that this integrated communicative “speechlanguage-gesture” system is a convincing proposition for a
sensorimotor origin of thought and cognition.
To summarize, this paper has argued that our cognition is
firmly grounded in our moving bodies. If current theories of
embodied cognition are to move beyond the present bounds
of the static realization of embodiment, they need to address
the crucial impact of the body in socially scaffolded motion.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Tarja Susi and Henrik
Svensson for discussion and helpful comments.

References

1288

Anderson, M. L. (2003). Embodied cognition: a field guide.
Artificial Intelligence, 149, 91-130.
Barsalou, L. W., Niedenthal, P. M., Barbey, A. K., &
Ruppert, J. A. (2003). Social embodiment. In B. H. Ross
(Ed.) The Psychology of Learning and Motivation. New
York: Academic Press.

Brooks, R., Breazeal, C., Marjanovic, M., Scassellati, B. &
Wiliamson, M. (1998). The Cog project. Building a
humanoid robot. In C. Nehaniv (Ed.) Computation for
metaphors, analogy, and agents . New York. Springer.
Burgoon, J. K., Buller, D. B. & Woodall, W. G. (1996)
Nonverbal communication: the unspoken dialogue. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Campos, J. J., Anderson, D. I., Barbu-Roth, M. A.,
Hubbard, E. M., Hertenstein, M. J., & Witherington, D.
(2000). Travel broadens the mind. Infancy, 1(2), 149-219.
Chrisley, R. & Ziemke, T. (2003). Embodiment. In
Encyclopedia of cognitive science. London: Macmillian.
Clark, A. (1999). An embodied cognitive science? Trends in
Cognitive Science, 3(9), 345-351.
Crease, R. P. (2003). Exploring animate form: a review
essay. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 2, 69-83.
Dautenhahn, K. (1997). I could be you – the
phenomenological dimension of social understanding.
Cybernetics and Systems, 25(8), 417-453.
Dautenhahn, K, Ogden, B. & Quick, T. (2002). A
framework for the study of socially embedded and
interaction-aware robotic agents. Cognitive Systems
research, 3(3), 397-428.
Dreyfus, H. L. (1992). What computers still can’t do – a
critique of artificial reason. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Farnell, B. (1995). Do you see what I mean? Plains Indian
sign talk and the embodiment of action. Austin:
University of Texas.
Farnell, B. (1999). Moving bodies, acting selves. Annual
Review of Anthropology, 28, 341-373.
Gallese, V. & Goldman, A. (1998). Mirror neurons and the
simulation theory of mind-reading. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 2(12), 493-501.
Gallese, V., Keysers, C., & Rizzolatti, G. (2004). A unifying
view of the basis of social cognition. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 8 (9), 398-403.
Goldin-Meadow, S. (2003). Hearing gesture - how our
hands help us think. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.
Hendriks-Jansen, H. (1996). Catching ourselves in the act –
situated activity, interactive emergence, evolution, and
human thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hertenstein, M. J. (2002). Touch: its communicative
functions in infancy. Human Development, 45, 70-94.
Ingold, T. (2000). Evolving skills. In H. Rose and S. Rose
(Eds.), Alas, poor Darwin: arguments against
evolutionary psychology. New York: Harmony Books.
Iverson, J. & Thelen, E. (1999). Hand, mouth and brain –
the dynamic emergence of speech and gesture. Journal of
Consciousness Studies, 6 (11-12), 19-40.
Jacob, P., & Jeannerod, M. (2005). The motor theory of
social cognition: a critique. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
9 (1), 21-25.
Kozulin, A. (1986). Vygotsky in context. In L.S.
Vygotsky’s Thought and language. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Lindblom, J. & Ziemke, T. (2003). Social situatedness of
natural and artificial intelligence: Vygotsky and beyond.
Adaptive Behavior, 11(2), 79-96.
Lindblom, J. & Ziemke, T. (2005a). Embodiment and social
interaction: implications for cognitive science. In J.

1289

Zlatev, T. Ziemke, R. Frank and R. Dirven (Eds.), Body,
language, and mind: Embodiment (volume 1). Berlin:
Mouton de Gruyter, in press.
Lindblom, J. & Ziemke, T. (2005b). The “body-in-motion”
and social scaffolding: implications for human and
android cognitive development. Android Science
workshop, Stresa, Italy, July 25-26, 2005.
Loren, L. A. & Dietrich, E. (1997). Merleau-Ponty,
embodied cognition, and the problem of intentionality.
Cybernetics and Systems, 28(5), 345-358.
McNiell, D. (1992). Hand and mind: what gestures reveal
about thought. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Niedenthal, P. M., Barsalou, L. W., Winkielman, P.,
Krauth-Gruber, S. & Ric, F. (in press). Embodiment in
attitudes, social perception, and emotion. Personality and
Social Psychology Review.
Núñez, R. (1999). Could the future taste purple? Journal of
Consciousness Studies, 6(11-12), 41-60.
Priest, S. (1998). Merleau-Ponty. London: Routledge.
Riegler, A. (2002). When is a cognitive system embodied?
Cognitive Systems Research, 3(3), 339-348.
Rizzolatti, G., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L. & Gallese, V. (2002).
From mirror neurons to imitation: facts and speculations.
In A. N. Meltzoff and W. Prinz (Eds.), The imitative mind
– development, evolution, and brain bases. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Rogoff, B. (2003). The cultural nature of human
development. New York: Oxford University Press.
Segerstråle, U. & Molnar, P. (1997). Nonverbal
communication: crossing the boundary between culture
and nature. In U. Segerstråle and P. Molnar (Eds.),
Nonverbal communication: where nature meets culture.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Sheets-Johnstone, M. (1999). The primacy of movement.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Sheets-Johnstone, M. (2003). Answering the challenges of
animation: response to Crease’s review essay.
Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 2, 84-93.
Tomasello, M. (1999). The cultural origins of human
cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Vare la, C. R. (1994). Harré and Merleau-Ponty: beyond the
absent moving body in embodied social theory. Journal
for the Theory of Social Behavior, 24(2), 167-185.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: the development of
higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Wilson, M. (2002). Six views of embodied cognition.
Psychonomic Bulletin & review, 9(4), 625-636.
Ziemke, T. (2001) Are robots embodied? In Proceedings of
the First international Workshop on Epigenetic Robotic.
Lund University Cognitive Studies, vol. 85, Lund:
Sweden.
Ziemke, T. (2003). What’s that thing called embodiment? In
R. Alterman and D. Kirsch (eds.), Proceedings of the 25 th
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
1305-1310). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

