UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Category Learning from Equivalence Constraints

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3jk154hf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Hammer, Rubi
Hertz, Tomer
Hochstein, Shaul
et al.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Category Learning from Equivalence Constraints
Rubi Hammer1,2 (rubih@alice.nc.huji.ac.il), Tomer Hertz1,3 (tomboy@cs.huji.ac.il)
Shaul Hochstein1,2 (shaul@vms.huji.ac.il), and Daphna Weinshall1,3 (daphna@cs.huji.ac.il)
1. Interdisciplinary Center for Neural Computation 2. Neurobiology Department, Institute of Life Sciences
3. School of Computer Sciences and Engineering,
Hebrew University, Jerusalem, 91904 Israel
two exemplars belong to different categories, a Negative
Equivalence Constraint (NEC). These two types of
constraints are the building blocks of any categorization
learning scenario. In particular, labeling a set of exemplars,
including more than one of each of a number of categories,
provides both positive and negative constraints. As an
example, when a parent labels three unfamiliar animals to a
young child as “a dog”, “a dog”, and “a cat”, he actually
provides the child with one PEC (indicating the two dogs as
belong to the same category) and two NECs (indicating that
each one of the two dogs is not from the same category as the
cat). Yet, the way people use these two types of constraints
has not been studied directly or differentially.

Abstract
We investigated human category learning from partial
information provided as equivalence constraints. Participants
learned to classify stimuli on the basis of either positive or
negative equivalence constraints, that is, when informed that two
exemplars belong to the same category or to different categories,
respectively. Knowing that in natural contexts positive
constraints are usually informative while negative constraints are
rarely so, we suspected that participants would not use the two
types of constraints in similar ways, even in a setting in which the
amount of information in the two types of constraints is identical
and sufficient for perfect performance. We found that in general,
people can use the two types of constraints for category learning.
Further analysis revealed that when participants were provided
with highly informative positive constraints, categorization
performance of most participants was moderate and normally
distributed. In contrast, there was a dichotomy of participants
who were provided with highly informative negative constraints,
with some achieving even higher performances, while that of
others was significantly poorer. These results, together with those
of a battery of controls, support the following conclusions: (i)
People use positive constraints more intuitively, although they
fail to use them perfectly. (ii) The use of negative constraints
enables a less natural, but potentially more accurate
categorization strategy, which many participants failed to
implement even in the current simplified setting. These results
are consistent with the view that people are naturally biased
towards similarity-based categorization strategies (e.g. prototypes
or exemplars) rather than rule-based strategies.

Recent observations demonstrated that ecologically there are
inherent differences in the properties of PECs and NECs in a
multifarious world (Hertz et al, 2003). In most natural
scenarios NECs are abundant since it is highly likely that
randomly chosen pairs of objects belong to different
categories. And yet, in most cases such pairs comprise
objects that are highly different from one another in both
informative and irrelevant dimensions. Thus, informative
NECs, (constraints that present two highly similar objects as
belonging to two different categories) are rare. On the other
hand, all PECs are informative in the sense that they imply
that features dimensions that differentiate between the
positively paired objects are irrelevant, while the common
features are candidates for being relevant for the
categorization task at hand. In a study of the use of
equivalence constraints in clustering and similarity-learning
algorithms, it was found that generally PECs provide
performance gains that are significantly better than NECs
(Hertz et al, 2003). It was also found that incorporating PECs
into various clustering algorithms can be straightforward and
computationally feasible, while incorporating NECs is rather
complicated and computationally intensive.

Introduction
It is usually assumed that people categorize objects based on
their perceived similarities (Rosch & Mervis, 1975; Tversky,
1977; Medin & Schaffer, 1978; Nosofsky, 1988; Goldstone
& Barsalou, 1998). Yet, since most objects have many
visually-perceived features (values on physical dimensions:
e.g. red color, round shape, smooth texture), similarity
between objects is often difficult to define. Category learning
therefore often becomes learning which object features
(Tversky, 1977) or dimensions (Nosofsky, 1987) are most
important for similarity judgments (Medin, Goldstone, &
Gentner, 1993). In particular, different dimensions may be
relevant in different domains.

For these reasons, we expected that people may be more
likely to adopt proper tools for the efficient integration of
PECs but not NECs. Moreover, we hypothesized that this
bias will remain evident even when the two types of
constraints are highly and equally informative. For that it
essential to examine the existence of such a bias since it
might explain categorization errors as resulting from the
inadequate use of all available information. To test these
hypotheses, we designed an experiment in which only one or
the other type of constraint was presented in each
experimental condition. The amount of information provided
by each type of equivalence constraint was also manipulated.
First we investigated performance when the contributions of
PECs and NECs to category learning simulated those
expected in natural settings, by using constraints defined for
randomly selected object pairs. We then tested performance
when PECs and NECs were deliberately selected to be highly
and equally informative. As a control, we tested performance

Common to all category learning tasks is that they ultimately
provide the classifier with clues as to the relations between
particular exemplars – that two exemplars are from the same
or from different categories. These relations constrain the
perception and/or use of similarities (or dissimilarities)
between exemplars within (or between) categories. We call a
restriction that two exemplars belong to the same category, a
Positive Equivalence Constraint (PEC), and a restriction that

893

when participants were provided with no equivalence
constraints at all, or, at the other extreme, when provided
with “meta-knowledge” – i.e. “tips” on the best strategy for
the integration of constraints.

Procedure
Participants were told that during the experiment they would
have to learn which of the 32 “alien creatures” (test stimuli)
belonged to the same tribe as the one identified as “chief”
(standard). They were instructed that each trial in the
experiment was independent and would necessitate learning
a new way of discriminating between tribes. Participants
were not informed that for each trial 2 or 3 dimensions were
chosen as trial-relevant. In general, specific instructions were
not given about the categorization strategy to be used for
maximizing performance; rather, participants were simply
asked to perform the task intuitively, using the clues
provided.

Methods
Materials
3D computer-generated pictures of “alien creature faces”
were used as stimuli, as demonstrated in Figure 1. Each face
was characterized by a unique combination of 5 potentially
task-relevant features: chin, nose and ear shape, and skin and
eye color. All (32) combinations of these 5 binary
dimensions were presented in each of the 10 experimental
trials. Two or three randomly selected dimensions (of the 5
possible) were relevant for category definition on each trial.
Stimuli were presented on a 22-inch, high-resolution
computer screen, using specially designed software.

Clues (constraints) were provided as colored frames around
pairs of aliens, indicating that the members of the pair belong
to different tribes (NEC condition) or the same tribe (PEC).
Figure 1 shows examples of constraints. On each trial, 3
constraints appeared for 20 seconds together with the
ensemble of alien faces. The constraints were then removed
and the alien faces shuffled. Participants were then given 50
seconds to select (by drag-and-drop) those aliens that he or
she thought belonged to the chief’s tribe. The trial was then
terminated and the next experimental trial began.

Participants
89 university students participated in the experiment. They
were randomly assigned to the different experimental or
control conditions in a mixed experimental design.

P1

N2
N1

P2
P3
N3

Figure 1: Example of the stimulus configuration on one specific trial. Participants decided which of the 32 test stimuli belong to the
chief’s tribe. Clues (constraints) were presented as frames surrounding pairs of exemplars. Positive and Negative Equivalence Constraints
(PECs and NECs) are illustrated respectively as solid lines, marked P1-P3, and dashed lines, marked N1-N3. Note that in the experiment,
the two types of constraints never appeared together. Highly informative constraints, as demonstrated here, present pairs of images that
differ in only one feature. In the current example, participants had to learn that skin color and ear shape are relevant for categorization.
Specifically, NEC N2 informs participants that skin color is a relevant dimension because it is the only dimension discriminating between
the two exemplars. Similarly, N1 and N3 both imply that ear shape is relevant for categorization. P1, P2 and P3 inform participants that
eye color, nose shape and chin shape are not relevant for categorization since these features are different in pairs that belong to the same
tribe. In the highly informative constraint task, as in the current example, all the information needed for proper categorization (for either
NECs or PECs, separately) was provided (see text).

894

Results

Even without using the information presented in the
Equivalence Constraints, subjects could perform better than
chance by simply using an associative categorization strategy
that is based on some idiosyncratic similarity measure. We
therefore added a control condition to establish a
performance baseline, with a “no Equivalence Constraints”
(noEC) task. Twelve participants performed the same
categorization task in a totally unsupervised manner, i.e.
without being provided with either NECs or PECs.

We present the results of three experimental conditions: In
the first condition, subjects were provided with randomly
selected equivalence constraints (rPECs and rNECs). As
expected from the theoretical difference between these
constraints discussed above, the results clearly demonstrate
that randomly selected PECs are much more useful for the
categorization task than randomly selected NECs. In the
second – main – experimental condition, both types of
constraints were designed to be highly informative (hiPEC
and hiNEC). The results for this condition also demonstrate
that people use PECs and NECs differently. We then present
results from a third – control – experiment, which exposes
additional differences between the hiPEC and hiNEC
conditions.

After performing the noEC condition, the same 12
participants performed the randomly-selected NEC and PEC
tasks (rNEC and rPEC, in counter-balanced order). The
constraints were consistent with the assigned alien creature
categories, but no attempt was made to select the constraints
in a way that maximized the information provided for
optimal performance. Note that for the reasons mentioned in
the Introduction, in the rPEC condition the information
provided by 3 randomly selected constraints almost always
sufficed for identifying the task-relevant dimensions. This
was not the case for rNECs, where the information provided
was almost as poor as in the noEC task.

1. Category learning from random ECs
In these experiments, subjects were provided with randomly
selected equivalence constraints (rPEC or rNEC). As seen in
Figure 2, participants perform considerably better when
provided with rPECs than with rNECs. A set of withinsubject t-tests shows that in the rPEC condition the average
Z-score (0.52±0.12; mean±S.D.) was higher than in the
rNEC condition (0.38±0.10), t(11)=3.46, p<0.01.
Additionally, the mean Z-score in the noEC condition
(0.36±0.06) was significantly lower than in the rPEC
condition, t(11)=4.28, p<0.005, but not the rNEC condition,
t(11) =1.08, p=n.s.

60 other participants were assigned to the two main
experimental conditions: highly-informative Negative or
Positive Equivalence Constraints (hiNEC or hiPEC). 10
additional participants performed the two conditions as a
within-subject design (with counter-balanced order of
performing the two conditions). The performance patterns of
these ten participants were similar to those of the 60
participants in the between-experiment design; therefore, we
do not address their data separately. Thus, there were 40
participants, altogether, for each of these conditions.

1
0.8

Highly informative constraints were pairs of test stimuli
chosen so that the two images differed in only one
dimension. Thus, each constraint provided information on
the relevance of one dimension for tribe classification on that
trial: For a hiNEC, this dimension is necessarily relevant; for
a hiPEC, this dimension is irrelevant. Still, the hiPEC group
could first derive the irrelevant dimensions and then infer
that the rest of the dimensions were relevant. Since, on
average, half of the dimensions were relevant and half were
not, the amount of information provided by NECs was
identical to that provided by PECs. For both groups, in each
trial, the constraints were sufficient to derive explicitly all
relevant dimensions needed for perfect categorization.
Nevertheless, no participant performed perfectly (see
results). In order that the number of constraints not be
indicative of the number of relevant dimensions, we always
provided 3 constraints, sometimes providing redundant
information.

Z-score

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
noEC

rNEC

rPEC

hiNEC

hiPEC

Condition

Figure 2: mean Z-score and standard error in three experimental
conditions – with participants given no equivalence constraints,
random constraints, or highly informative constraints.

Performance Measures
We first report overall performance in the categorization task
using the Z-score, which is a combined purity and accuracy
measure defined by:
Z=

Mean Z-scores (and Std-Errors)

0.9

These results are consistent with the observation stated
above, that there are inherent differences in the amount of
information carried in a PEC vs. a NEC. In our paradigm
three randomly selected PECs almost always provided
sufficient information to identify the relevant dimensions for
the task, while three randomly selected NECs were almost
never informative enough for fully achieving this goal. This
may explain why mean performance using rNECs is very
similar to that in the noEC condition.

2 * Purity* Accuracy
2 * Hits
=
Purity+ Accuracy 2 * Hits + Misses+ FA

where Hits is the number of correctly selected tribe
members, Misses is the number of tribe members which were
not selected, and FA (False-Alarms) is the number of
incorrectly selected, non-tribe, members. Z-scores range
from 0 (poor) to 1 (perfect performance). We also compared
performance using the Signal Detection Theory measures, d’
and criterion (Green & Swets, 1966, 1974).

2. Category learning from highly informative ECs
How does performance change when participants are
provided with highly informative NECs (hiNEC) and PECs
895

conditions, there was a highly significant difference between
their standard deviations (Levene’s test of homogeneity of
variances: F(78)=17.31, p<0.001). Furthermore, the ShapiroWilk test of normality revealed that the Z-score distribution
was normal in the hiPEC condition, W(40)=0.955 p=0.20,
but not in the hiNEC condition W(40)=0.932 p<0.05.

(hiPEC)? Recall that in these conditions, we selected the
constraining pairs of stimuli so that each pair provided
information about exactly one relevant dimension (hiNEC),
or one non-relevant dimension (hiPEC). We shall compare
performance in these conditions to that with rPEC, rNEC and
noEC, and then compare the results of the hiPEC and hiNEC
conditions with one another, in greater detail.

These findings suggest that even under highly informative
constraint conditions, in which the information provided by
NECs is identical to that provided by PECs, participants use
these constraints differently. In the hiPEC condition, most of
the participants did not use all of the information provided by
the constraints, which was always sufficient to perform the
task perfectly. For this reason, hiPEC performance was
usually moderate, and it was normally distributed. In
contrast, in the hiNEC condition, performance was either
poor or excellent. It seems that many participants did not use
hiNECs correctly, but those who did obtained almost perfect
performance. This suggests that NECs are less intuitive as a
source of information for category learning tasks.

As can be seen in Figure 2, mean Z-scores in both the hiNEC
(0.57±0.24) and hiPEC (0.55±0.16) conditions are
significantly higher than with noEC, t(50)=4.95, p<0.001 and
t(50)=6.45, p<0.001, respectively. As expected, the average
Z-scores in these conditions are also significantly higher than
with rNEC (hiNEC: t(50)=3.92, p<0.001; hiPEC: t(50)=3.66,
p<0.005), but not significantly higher than with rPEC.

hiNEC
14
12

To analyze further the differences between use of hiNEC and
hiPEC, we compared participant d’ and criterion in these
conditions. We found no significant difference between the
average d’ in hiNEC (1.87±1.10) and hiPEC (1.64±0.64)
t(78)=1.157, p=n.s. However, the standard deviations of the
d’ in the two conditions did differ significantly F(78)=19.41,
p<0.001. Additionally, the mean criterion used in the hiNEC
condition (1.65±0.49) was significantly higher than in the
hiPEC condition (1.27±0.35), t(78)=4.03, p<0.001, and their
standard deviations also differed significantly, F(78)=10.91,
p<0.005.

Number of Participants

10
8
6
4
Std. Dev = .25
2

Mean = .57
N = 40.00

0

Normalized Hits = Hits/(Hits+Misses)

.05 .15 .25 .35 .45 .55 .65 .75 .85 .95

Z-score

hiPEC
14
12

Number of Participants

10
8
6
4

1.0
.9

”good”

.8
.7
.6
.5
.4

“poor”

.3
.2

hiPEC

.1
0.0
0.0

hiNEC
.1

.2

.3

.4

Std. Dev = .16
2

Mean = .55

Normalized False-Alarms = FA/(FA+CR)

N = 40.00

0

Figure 4: Participant performance in the hiPEC (empty/light
circles) and hiNEC (filled/dark squares) conditions plotted on a
ROC (Receiver Operating Characteristic) diagram. The dashed
ellipses separate the good hiNEC performers from the poor hiNEC
performers.

.05 .15 .25 .35 .45 .55 .65 .75 .85 .95

Z-score

Figure 3: Observed Z-score histograms in the hiNEC (top) and
hiPEC (bottom) conditions. Dashed lines represent the Gaussians
defined by the Means and Standard Deviations.

As seen in Figure 4, this difference in criterion leads to a
higher number of False-Alarms (FAs) with hiPEC than with
hiNEC. We found a highly significant negative correlation
between Hits and FAs in the hiNEC condition, r(40)=-0.59,
p<0.001, but not in the hiPEC condition r(40)=0.16, p=n.s.
The above-noted highly variable performances in the hiNEC
condition, together with the Hit/FA correlation, suggest that
this group of participants may in fact represent two distinct
subgroups: one with high Hit and low FA rates (“good” in

At first glance, it may appear that when NECs are designed
to provide the same amount of information as PECs, they
both lead to similar performance. However, as shown in
Figure 3, although there was no significant difference
between the average performance in the hiNEC and hiPEC
896

Figure 4) and the other (“poor”) with low Hit and high FA
rates. This division was confirmed using the K-means
algorithm to cluster the hiNEC group into two subgroups
(based on their Z-scores), marked by dashed ellipses in
Figure 4. There is no significant Hit-FA correlation for either
subgroup, individually, further justifying the division into
separate subgroups. We denote the subgroups hiNEC-good
and hiNEC-poor, respectively.

Before performing the hiNEC condition, the same
participants were informed that they should take into account
the dimension discriminating between each two constrained
exemplars because it is relevant for the categorization task.
As seen in Figure 6, “meta-knowledge” was extremely
helpful in improving participant performance in the hiNEC
condition but not the hiPEC condition. Performance in the
directed hiNEC condition (0.90±0.06) was significantly
higher than in the original non-directed hiNEC condition
(0.57±0.24) t(45)=7.45, p<0.001. Performance in the directed
hiNEC condition was also higher than in the hiNEC-good
subgroup alone (0.78±0.10). In contrast, performance in the
directed hiPEC condition (0.63±0.21) was not significantly
higher than in the non-directed hiPEC condition (0.55±0.16)
t(45)=1.20, p=n.s. These findings indicate that participants
provided with PECs naturally operate a categorization
strategy that leads to satisfactory performance equal to that
achievable when provided with best-strategy “tips”.

Comparing these subgroups, we found that the mean Z-score
in the hiNEC-good subgroup (0.78±0.10) was significantly
higher than in all other experimental conditions (e.g.
compared to hiPEC: t(58)=5.98, p<0.001). On the other
hand, the mean Z-score for the hiNEC-poor subgroup
(0.35±0.13) was not significantly different from that with
noEC, t(30)=0.60, p=n.s., or rNEC t(30)=0.07, p=n.s. (see
Figure 5). In practice, participants in the hiNEC-poor
subgroup behave as if they were not provided with any
equivalence constraints.

Mean Z-scores (and Std-Errors)

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Z-score

Z-score

Mean Z-scores (and Std-Errors)

noEC

rNEC

rPEC

hiNECpoor

hiNECgood

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Directed: hiNEC

hiPEC

hiPEC

hiNEC

hiPEC

Condition

Condition
Figure 6: mean Z-score and standard error of the directed
hiPEC and hiNEC conditions compared to the non-directed
hiPEC and hiNEC conditions. As can be seen, directions helped
participants only in the hiNEC condition.

Figure 5: mean Z-score and standard error in the hiNEC-good
and hiNEC-poor conditions compared to the other experimental
conditions.

Taken together, these findings unravel some of the basic
differences between the way that PECs and NECs are used.
While hiPECs intuitively provide most people with helpful
information for category learning, hiNECs provide little
information to some, and enough information for almost
perfect categorization performance to others.

The moderate performance even in the directed hiPEC
condition may be explained by a possibly inherent
disadvantage of PECs, amplified in our experimental
paradigm: PECs, unlike NECs, directly specify an irrelevant
dimension. Thus, participants can only learn indirectly which
dimensions are task-relevant. Since participants are not
aware of all the potentially task-relevant dimensions, it is
very likely that they will miss relevant dimensions even
when correctly filtering out the irrelevant dimensions by
using an optimal strategy. Missing or disregarding the
relevance of a dimension would lead to more False-Alarms,
and indeed, participants in the PEC condition have higher
False-Alarm rates, as shown in Figure 4.

3. Category learning from highly informative ECs
together with “Meta-Knowledge”
If indeed most people can effectively use PECs in an
intuitive manner, while using NECs requires specific
expertise obtained by only some people, we may expect that
teaching participants how to use hiNECs will substantially
increase their performance, while teaching them how to use
hiPECs will not provide as much benefit. To check this
hypothesis, we tested 7 additional participants (using a
within-participant design) with exactly the same hiPEC and
hiNEC conditions, augmented with additional “MetaKnowledge” – guidelines regarding the best strategy for
integration of constraints. Specifically, before performing the
hiPEC condition, participants were informed that they should
exclude the dimension discriminating between each two
constrained exemplars (and reserve judgment about the rest),
since this dimension is irrelevant for the categorization task.

Discussion
The goal of the current study was to investigate mechanisms
underlying categorization, by comparing performance when
using Positive Equivalence Constraints (PECs) vs. Negative
Equivalence Constraints (NECs). Due to the inherent
differences between PECs and NECs, we expected that
people naturally develop more effective tools for the efficient
integration of informative PECs than NECs. In fact, we
897

what to do a priori; (ii) it was easier for the participants to
learn the optimal strategy with NECs, perhaps because it
does not involve a set complement operation. Note that the
performance of the subgroup of good-hiNEC participants
was about as good as that of those provided with metaknowledge, suggesting that this subgroup was able to use a
similar strategy even without instruction.

hypothesized that this bias may be also evident when the two
types of constraints are highly and equally informative. Our
findings confirm these hypotheses, indicating that most
people have an inherent or early-acquired mechanism for
deriving useful information from PECs, but not from NECs.
What strategies are used with PECs?
We report the somewhat surprising result, that performance
with PECs derives little benefit from the availability of metaknowledge about the optimal strategy to perform the task.
This may be explained by one of the following:
(i) participants are already using the optimal strategy, and so
the “tips” give them no additional information, (ii)
participants’ default strategy, although different, leads to
similar performance levels as the optimal strategy, or (iii) the
default strategy is so natural and intuitive, that participants
are reluctant to shift to a potentially better strategy.

Our findings point out one way in which the human psyche
reflects statistical properties of objects and categories in the
world – most people have early-adopted tools that are useful
for integrating PECs since PECs are less common but always
informative. This innate strategy is good enough so that even
when being explicitly provided with a better categorization
strategy for using PECs, performance is not significantly
improved. In the case of NECs, only some people have a
useful strategy for proper use of this source of information.
When provided with guidelines for the best categorization
strategy using hiNECs, performance significantly improved,
further indicating that there is no inherent strategy for
optimally integrating NECs for categorization.

What is the default strategy that people use with PECs? It
seems that PECs are naturally suited to an exemplar-like
strategy, based on the storage of a large number of examples,
or to a prototype-like strategy, based on the abstraction of
typical elements in the class. In our setup, however, there are
no explicit classes, and there is little meaning to the notion of
class exemplars or prototypes. This does not rule out the
possibility that people still use these kinds of strategies,
trying to infer (or guess) class examples or class prototypes
from the constraints provided.

The implications of the current findings may be crucial for
understanding known phenomena in category learning, and
they may provide an effective tool for predicting
performance in different category learning tasks. As an
example, the tendency of children to over-generalize when
classifying objects (Neisser, 1987) may be seen as a
consequence of using mostly PECs, which, as pointed out
above, can lead to disregarding relevant dimensions and a
subsequent higher rate of False-Alarms. Only later in life, is
over-generalization reduced when more refined strategies are
acquired, such as the use of rare, but informative, NECs.

Recall that the only information that participants can reliably
derive from PECs is the identity of the dimensions that are
relevant or irrelevant. Thus, another strategy may be to
commence with a guess of the set of all potentially relevant
dimensions (beginning perhaps with the most salient
dimensions, corresponding to features that are common to
the first pair of exemplars seen). Afterwards, one rules out
dimensions sequentially, as evidence is accumulated that
some dimensions are irrelevant. Participants who use this
strategy in the hiPEC condition may miss relevant (less
salient) dimensions, resulting in many False Alarms.

References
Goldstone, R. L., & Barsalou, L. W. (1998). Reuniting perception
and conception. Cognition, 65, 231-262.

Green, D. M. & Swets, J. A. (1966 and 1974). Signal
Detection Theory and Psychophysics. New York: Wiley
and Huntington NY: Krieger

A third alternative strategy is the one offered to participants
in the directed hiPEC experimental condition as additional
"meta-knowledge". This strategy, if used correctly, should
lead to perfect performance. Specifically, for each pair in a
PEC, find the single dimension which differentiates between
the two examples, and identify this dimension as irrelevant.
After all the irrelevant dimensions are identified, find the set
of relevant dimensions (by performing a set complement
operation). As in the preceding strategy, the use of this
strategy may result in elevated False-Alarms, since
participants may have difficulty inferring the set of all
possible relevant dimensions. Similarly, in real-world cases,
the full group of possible dimensions may not be known or
even inferable – in which case using the optimal strategy for
PECs will not guarantee perfect performance.

Hertz, T., Shental, N., Bar-Hillel, A., & Weinshall, D. Enhancing
Image and Video Retrieval: Learning Via Equivalence
Constraints. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision & Pattern
Recognition, Madison WI, June 2003
Medin, D. L., & Schaffer, M. M. (1978). Context Theory of
Classification Learning. Psychological Review, 85, 207-238.
Medin, D. L., Goldstone, R. L., & Gentner, D. (1993). Respect for
similarity. Psychological Review, 100(2), 254-278.
Murphy, G. & Medin, D. L., (1985). The role of theories in
conceptual coherence. Psychological Review, 92, 289-316.
Neisser, U., ed. (1987) Concepts and Conceptual Development
Cambridge MA Cambridge U. Press:.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1987). Attention and learning processes in the
identification and categorization of integral stimuli. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
13, 87-108.
Rosch, E., & Mervis, C. D. (1975). Family resemblance studies in
the internal structure of categories. Cognitive Psychology, 7,
573-605.
Schneider, W., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1977). Controlled and automatic
human information processing: Detection, search, and attention.
Psychological Review, 84, 1-66.
Tversky, A. (1977). Features of similarity. Psychological Review,
84(4), 327-352.

PECs vs. NECs
When not provided with additional instructions, highly
informative NECs were effectively used by only some
participants, suggesting that this source of information
requires a less intuitive skill. Moreover, performance with
NECs, in contrast to PECs, benefited significantly from
meta-knowledge about the optimal categorization strategy.
Two interpretations can explain this difference:
(i) Participants were more open to advice on how to use
NECs because they did not have a strong intuitive idea of
898

