UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Categories and Feature Inference: Category Membership and a Reasoning Bias

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/665680jf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Yamauchi, Takashi
Yu, Na-Yung

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Categories and Feature Inference:
Category Membership and a Reasoning Bias
Takashi Yamauchi (tya@psyc.tamu.edu)
Na-Yung Yu (dbskdud40@tamu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Mail Stop 4235
Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77453
Abstract
This study investigated how the information about category
membership influences the prediction of properties of category
members. Results revealed that participants’ response patterns
became homogeneous and polarized when arbitrary noun labels
carried category membership information. We suggest that this
tendency arises because category membership information is
represented like an abstract rule and triggers a reasoning bias.
Keywords: Categorical reasoning

Categories and inferences are two of the most common forms
of organizing and generating new knowledge (Michalski,
1989). We create new categories to make predictions and
analyses, and obtain new inferential knowledge on the basis
of the conceptual categories we form. Categories such as
medical diagnosis and biological taxonomies underscore the
significance of categorization and inductive inference
(Murphy, 2002).
How do we use categories for predictive inferences?
Although many studies have documented the inductive
potential of categorization, exactly how categories modulate
our inferential behavior remains unclear. One theory
suggests that noun labels, especially those related to natural
objects such as dog, cat, and tree, create special expectations
in an observer, and guide the person to make predictions in a
way consistent with his/her expectations (Gelman, 2003).
Another theory suggests that category information is no
different from other regular attributes (Anderson, 1990;
Osherson, et al., 1990; Sloman, 1993, 1998; Sloutsky, 2003).
The information about category membership may draw more
attention; yet, people interpret category membership as they
do for other perceptual and conceptual attributes.
In this paper, we propose that category membership plays a
special role in feature inferences, and molds people’s
inferential behavior in a way other regular attributes cannot.
Specifically, we propose that the awareness of category
membership generally creates a reasoning strategy and biases
people’s inferential behavior.
Consider a simple prediction task in which one infers the
value of an unknown feature on the basis of another stimulus
(Figure 1) (Murphy & Ross, 1994; Yamauchi & Markman,
2000). In one case, two stimuli have the same arbitrary label
“monek” (Figure 1a); in the other case, two stimuli have
different labels “moneke” and “plaple.” In this circumstance,
we think that people generally apply the following reasoning
rules proportional to the extent to which the two labels carry

the information about category membership: Rule 1 – if two
items belong to the same category, then the two items have
characteristics in common; Rule 2 – if two items belong to
different categories, then the two items have different
characteristics.
Undoubtedly, this reasoning strategy is erroneous because
the members of natural categories are organized
probabilistically, and the shared label does not necessarily
guarantee shared features (and vice versa) (Rosch & Mervis,
1975). Moreover, psychological responses that we can
observe in empirical studies are characteristically
probabilistic. Therefore, such extreme “category-based”
responses would rarely happen. However, we think that there
is a cognitive bias to apply this “reasoning habit” in feature
inferences when category information is transparent.
This reasoning strategy reflects the mutual-exclusivity
constraint suggested by E. Markman (1989) and the
psychological essentialism assumption suggested by Medin
and Otorny (1989), and Gelman (2003). For example, the
reason why shared labels lead to shared features is because a
category is bound by some unknown or unknowable essential
features, and these essential features generate other features.
Likewise, two categories are viewed as mutually exclusive
because they are bound by two sets of essentially different
features.
We hypothesize that the mere presence of category labels
promotes this rule-based reasoning strategy and generates
polarity and uniformity in feature inference (e.g., Goldstone,
1994; Tajfel, 1963). For example, by applying this induction
strategy, people accentuate the difference between two groups
(i.e., polarity hypothesis), and discount perceptual variability
of individual stimuli (i.e., uniformity hypothesis). We tested
whether or not such reasoning biases would appear when the
arbitrary labels carry category membership information.

2404

Experiment
In our experiment, participants received pairs of a sample
stimulus and a test stimulus one pair at a time (Figure 1), and
predicted the feature value of a test stimulus on the basis of
the sample stimulus. The stimuli were schematic illustrations
of cartoon bugs, which were composed of 5 feature
dimensions with binary values (Table 1).
Twenty test stimuli were presented twice. In one case, a test
stimulus was paired with a sample stimulus that had the same
label, and in the other case, the same test stimulus was paired
with a sample stimulus that had a different label (Figures 1a
& 1b).

We manipulated the characteristic of “labels” solely in the
instructions. The instructions in one condition characterized
the two labels with respect to some arbitrary category
membership information – a category condition; the
instructions in the other three conditions characterized the
same labels with respect to other arbitrary attribute
information. We hypothesized that the extent to which the
two labels convey category information polarity and
uniformity biases would appear. That is, people exhibit a
strong tendency to consider that two stimuli have the same
features when they have the same labels, and two stimuli
have different features when they have different labels
(polarity hypothesis). Furthermore, the tendency to apply this
rule uniformly over a variety of different stimuli increases as
the two labels carry category membership information.
Participants & Materials A total of 112 undergraduate
students were randomly assigned to one of four conditions: a
category condition (N=30), a disease-attribute condition
(N=27), a food-attribute condition (N=29), and an islandattribute condition (N=26).

2405

Each stimulus was composed of 5 dimensions of binary
features:
(horns=long/short,
head=round/angular,
body=dotted/striped,
legs=eight
legs/four
legs,
tail=short/long) and a label (monek/plaple). Every test
stimulus had 2 out of the 5 features consistent with the
prototype of one category and 2 features consistent with the
prototype of the other category (Table 1), and 1 feature was
masked for an inference question. Ten test stimuli were
created from the 2 prototypes of Set A, and the other 10 test
stimuli were created from the 2 prototypes of Set B (see
Figure 2). These 20 test stimuli were shown twice. In one
case, a sample stimulus and a test stimulus had the same label
(i.e., match condition – Figure 1a). In the other case, a sample
stimulus and a test stimulus had different labels (i.e.,
mismatch condition – Figure 1b). In one version of stimuli,
the prototypes of Set A were shown as sample stimuli (Figure
2); in the other version of stimuli, the prototypes of Set B
were shown as sample stimuli. These prototypes were related
to each other in their abstract appearance but the exact
appearance of the two sets was different. For example,
“monek” prototypes in Set A and Set B both have long horns,

a round face, a dotted body, eight legs and a short tail, but
specific appearance of individual features were different.
These two sets of stimuli were used to test the effect of
perceptual variability in feature inference.
Procedure & Design Participants were shown a pair of a
sample stimulus and a test stimulus on a computer screen, and
were asked to select one of two feature values for the body
part in question. One was consistent with the feature shown in
the sample stimulus, and the other was inconsistent with the
feature shown in the sample stimulus. Participants were
instructed to make their decisions on the basis of the sample
stimulus. Each participant received a total of 40 trials.
The design of the experiment was 4 (labeling characteristic
– category, disease-attribute, food-attribute, island-attribute)
× 2 (matching status – match vs. mismatch × 2 (feature set –
same vs. different) factorial. Labeling characteristic was a
between-subjects factor and this manipulation was made
solely in the instructions that participants received. In the
category condition, the two labels were characterized as
representing two “types” of bugs. In the disease-attribute
condition, the two labels were characterized as representing
two kinds of “disease” that the bugs carry. In the foodattribute condition, the same labels were characterized as
representing two kinds of “food” that the bugs eat regularly.
In the island-attribute condition, the two labels were
characterized as representing two different “islands” where
these bugs live. All the other aspects of the experiment were
identical across the four conditions. Matching status
represents the matched/mismatched status of two labels
displayed in a sample stimulus and in a test stimulus (Figures
1a & 1b). Feature set stands for the correspondence of the
feature sets used to depict sample stimuli and test stimuli.

category
disease
food
island

category
disease
food
island

Table 2
(same feature set)
Match
Mismatch
Polarity
.81
.22
.59
.71
.34
.37
.65
.36
.30
.60
.40
.20

.69
.65
.62
.58

(different feature set)
.32
.38
.37
.37

.37
.27
.25
.21

Note. The numbers in the cells represent the proportions of
selecting the feature value consistent with the sample
stimulus (i.e., “correct” responses).
Results: Polarity Effect The responses that were consistent
with the sample stimulus were coded as “correct” responses.
For example in Figure 1a, selecting the long horns was
defined as “correct,” and in Figure 1b, selecting the short
horns was defined as “correct.” To examine the impact of
“polarity,” we calculated “polarity scores” for each

participant by subtracting the proportion of correct responses
for mismatched stimuli from that for matched stimuli.
Overall, labeling characteristic and feature set did not affect
participants’ overall performance. There were no main effects
of these two factors; Fs<1.0. However, there was a significant
interaction effect between labeling characteristic and feature
set – F(1, 108)=11.63, MSE=0.02, p<.01. To identify the
location of the interaction effect, we applied one way
ANOVA separately to the two levels of feature set. This
analysis showed that the performance in labeling
characteristic differed primarily in the same feature set but
not in the different feature set (Table 2). Given the same
feature set, the mean polarity scores obtained from the four
labeling conditions were significantly different; F(3,
108)=4.75, MSE=0.168, p=.004. Such a disparity was not
observed in the different feature set; F(3, 108)=1.03,
MSE=0.128, p=.380. To isolate the sources of the main
effect, planned t-tests were applied to the data taken from the
same feature set alone. The difference between the category
condition
(M=.590, SD=0.384) and the food-attribute
condition (M=.297, SD=0.408) as well as the difference
between the category condition and the island-attribute
condition (M=.20, SD=0.357) was significant; (category vs.
food) t(57)=2.85, p=.02, d=0.741; (category vs. island)
t(54)=3.85, p=.001, d=1.03 (Bonferroni). The difference
between the category condition and the disease-attribute
condition (M=.374, SD=.460) was not significant; t(55)=1.93,
p=.177, d=.511. Note that the failure to reach a significant
level in this t-test came from the fact that the alpha level was
adjusted with the Bonferroni method. The effect size of the
two sample means was large (d=.511). Overall, a comparison
between the category condition and the other three attribute
conditions (M=.29, SD=0.416) revealed a significant disparity
as well; t(110)=3.42, p<.001, d=0.732. These results showed
that the mean polarity score in the category condition was
significantly greater than that in the other three attribute
conditions combined, suggesting that characterizing two
labels with category membership information indeed
polarized significantly subjects responses.
Attention weight and the polarity disparities. Did the polarity
differences observed in the labeling conditions stem from
different attention weights associated with the four types of
labeling? Sloutsky suggests that feature inferences in young
children are grounded in a “perceptual and attentional
mechanism” that detects multiple similarities between stimuli
(p. 247, Sloutsky, 2003). If the same similarity-matching
mechanism is instrumental in our adult subjects, then the
observed polarity differences should be explained merely by
different level of attention that the four types of labels
generated, rather than a reasoning bias per se. Following
Sloutsky’s suggestion, we examined if our results can be
explained by a “perceptual and attentional” mechanism.
Let us assume that the probability of selecting a feature
value of i in test stimulus X given sample stimulus Y is
monotonically related to the similarity between X and Y:
P( X i | Y ) = Φ( Sim( X , Y )) -- (1)
where

2406

Φ is a probability density function that translates a

similarity value between X and Y into a unique probability
value. In the Sloutsky model, the similarity between two
stimuli, X and Y, is measured by (2):
1− L
N −k
Sim( X , Y ) = WLabel
SVis
.attr

-- (2)

where N represents the total number of visual attributes in the
two stimuli, k denotes the number of matching attributes
between X and Y,

SVis.attr is an attention weight parameter

associated with perceptual attributes, W Label is an attention
weight parameter for verbal labels. L represents the
matching/mismatching status of labels. When two stimuli
have the same label, then L=1, when the two stimuli have
different labels, then L=0. Sloutsky and Fisher (2004)
demonstrated that this function can account for young
children’s feature inferences accurately.
In our setting, the probability of selecting feature value i in
test stimulus X given sample Y when X and Y have
mismatching labels can be expressed in (3)-(6).
( type )
N −k
Pmismatch
( X i | Y ) = Φ(WLabel _ type SVis
.attr ) -- (3)

Following this reasoning, we equated participants’
performance for mismatched stimuli over the four labeling
conditions and examined if the observed polarity disparities
would disappear. For this analysis, we first selected
participants whose average scores for the mismatched-samefeature set stimuli were 0.4 or less (there were only four
possible scores – 0.4, 0.3, 0.2, and 0 – that satisfy this
criterion because each participant received 10 mismatchedsame-feature set stimuli). We then calculated average
accuracy scores for the matched-same-feature set stimuli over
individual participants within each of the stratified levels (i.e.,
0.4, 0.3, 0.2, and 0) (Table 2). These stratified average scores
obtained in the three attribute conditions were compared to
the average stratified scores obtained in the category
condition by a paired t-test. This analysis showed that even
after equating the performance for the mismatched stimuli,
the polarity difference between the category condition and the
other attribute-based conditions remained robust; same
feature set; t(14)=2.24, p<.05, d=0.574; different feature set;
t(14)=3.06, p<.01, d=0.790.

( disease )
N −k
Pmismatch
( X i | Y ) = Φ(WLabel _ disease SVis
.attr ) -- (4)
( food )
N −k
Pmismatch
( X i | Y ) = Φ(WLabel _ food SVis
.attr ) -- (5)
( island )
N −k
Pmismatch
( X i | Y ) = Φ(WLabel _ island SVis
.attr ) -- (6)

Because all participants in the four conditions in our
experiment received the same stimuli, parameter

N −k
SVis
.attr can

have the same value across the four labeling conditions. Thus,
the different polarity levels observed between the category
condition and the three attribute conditions should have arisen
from different values of

1− L
, provided that the similarityWLabel

matching function is primarily responsible for the observed
results. That is,
W Label _ type < WLabel _ disease , W Label _ food , WLabel _ island Æ
( type )
( type )
Pmatch
( X i | Y ) − Pmismatch
(Xi |Y) >
( disease )
( disease )
Pmatch
( X i | Y ) − Pmismatch
(Xi |Y ) ,
( food )
( food )
Pmatch
( X i | Y ) − Pmismatch
(Xi |Y) ,
( island )
( island )
Pmatch
( X i | Y ) − Pmismatch
( X i | Y ) --- (7)

(7) indicates that the polarity difference between the category
condition and the other attribute conditions was caused
merely by different values of attention parameter W. (7)
further implies that if the performance for mismatched stimuli
is equivalent, attention weight W is also equivalent
(e.g., Pmismatch ( X i | Y ) = Pmismatch ( X i | Y ) Æ
( type )

( food )

W Label _ type = W Label _ food and see Appendix for proof).

2407

Table 3: Stratified comparisons of the performance for the
matched stimuli
(same feature set)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
category
.96
.75
.56
.38
0
disease
.94
.77
.50
.03
.05
food
.97
.65
.42
.18
.20
island
.80
.65
0
.32
-.05

category
disease
food
island

(different feature set)
0
0.1
0.2
.86
.70
.40
.86
.57
.37
.77
.65
.38
.80
.73
.30

0.3
.28
.03
.22
.20

0.4
.10
-.05
.20
.05

Note. The numbers represent mean of polarity scores.
Clearly, it is unlikely that the disparity between the
category condition and the other attribute conditions arose
from the attention weight factor alone.
Uniformity Effect. The uniformity hypothesis suggests that
when the two labels carry category membership information,
the response patterns of individual participants become
homogeneous. To test this hypothesis, we applied a cluster
analysis and a correlation analysis. In our cluster analysis, we
represented the entire responses of an individual participant
with a vector of 40 dimensions (each dimension represents a
response score (1or 0) obtained from one of 40 stimuli). We
then applied a hierarchical cluster analysis by measuring
squared Euclidian distances of individual vectors (see Figure
3 for dendrograms).

This analysis showed that an average dissimilarity distance
of individual participants was 14.94 in the category condition,
17.65 in the disease-attribute condition, 18.37 in the foodattribute condition, and 18.88 in the island-attribute condition,
suggesting that the response patterns obtained in the category
condition were relatively homogeneous as compared to those
obtained in the other attribute conditions. The four
dendrograms (Figure 3) revealed that 80% of the participants
(24/30) clustered in one group with a squared Euclidian
distance of 18.21 in the category condition. When the same
criterion 18.21 was applied to the other three conditions, only
48% of the participants (13/27) clustered in one group in the
disease-attribute condition, 44.8% of the participants (13/29)
clustered in the food-attribute condition, and 50% of the
participants (13/26) clustered in the island-attribute condition.
Do these results reflect different levels of attention weights
attached to verbal labels? Note that there were no statistical
differences between the four labeling conditions in the
different feature set. Thus, attention weight parameter W in
the different-feature set stimuli should be roughly equivalent
across the four labeling conditions (see (7) for this line of
argument). In this regard, we applied the same cluster
analysis solely to the responses obtained from the differentfeature set stimuli. Even with this limited data set, the
uniformity in the category condition was apparent (Figure
3b). Overall, 66.7% (20/30) of the participants in the category
condition clustered in the same group with a squared
Euclidian distance of 9.1 (the vectors in this analysis had 20
dimensions; therefore the Euclidian dissimilarity value is
smaller). Given the same criterion 9.1, 51.9% (14/27) of the
participants clustered in one group in the disease-attribute
condition, 48.3% (14/29) of the participants clustered in the
food-attribute condition, and 34.6% (9/26) of the participants
clustered in one group in the island-attribute condition.
2408

Correlation analysis. We examined the uniformity
hypothesis with a correlation analysis as well. As in the
cluster analysis, 40-dimensional vectors were constructed for
individual participants. In each labeling condition, 26 vectors
were selected randomly, and these 26 vectors were randomly
divided into two groups of 13 vectors. The individual values
of the 13 vectors were averaged over each dimension,
yielding two group-vectors of 40 dimensions. We then
measured Pearson’s correlation coefficient between the two
group-vectors. This procedure was repeated 1000 times in
each labeling condition and the mean of correlation scores
was calculated from a sample of 1000 (see Rosch & Mervis,
1975; for a similar analysis). This analysis shows that the
response patterns observed in the category condition were
highly correlated (M=.843, SD=.041), as compared to the
other attribute conditions; (disease, M=.697, SD=.080), (food,
M=.579, SD=.098), (island, M=.470, SD=.100). The same
correlation analysis was applied only to the responses
obtained from the different feature set stimuli. The overall
results remained the same even for this limited data set;
(category, M=.757, SD=.08; disease, M=.673, SD=.109; food,
M=.570, SD=.122; island, M=.561, SD=.121).
Discussion The results from the experiment showed that
inferential judgments that adult college students make were
influenced significantly by the matched/mismatched status of
labels when the labels convey category membership
information. When a sample stimulus and a test stimulus had
the same label, participants were more likely to predict that
the two stimuli had other features in common. In contrast,
when a sample stimulus and a test stimulus had different
labels, participants tended to predict that the two stimuli had
different features. This tendency was enhanced particularly
when two arbitrary labels carried category membership

information as compared to when labels conveyed
information about other attributes. We suggest that this bias
arises because category membership information evokes a
rule-like reasoning strategy. Although young children may
use a similarity-based feature matching mechanism for
feature inference (Sloutsky, 2003), adult subjects seem to
employ a peculiar reasoning strategy specific to category
membership.
Why do people employ a different reasoning strategy when
category membership is transparent? Categories by default
may be formed to subsidize inductive judgments, and for this
reason, they may be ontologically distinct from other
perceptual and conceptual attributes. For this reason, some
mechanical rule-like feature predictions may be automatically
triggered when stimuli convey information about category
membership. It is also possible that the effect of category
membership is context specific – it is learned later as one
experiences how a wide variety of perceptual and conceptual
groups work. Future studies have to examine the generality of
the current finding as well as the source of this reasoning bias.

Appendix
Following the formulation by Sloutsky and Fisher (2004), we
introduce (8) for the matched condition and (9) for the
mismatched condition.

Si
--- (8)
Si + S j
Si
WS i
--(9)
P( X i | Y ) =
=
WS i + WW ' S j S i + W ' S j
P( X i | Y ) =

(8) shows the probability of selecting sample-consistent
feature i (e.g., long horns in Fig. 1) in test stimulus X
given sample Y when X and Y share a label.
S i represents the similarity between X and Y when X’s
target feature has the value consistent with Y (long
j
horns in Fig. 1a), and S is the similarity between X
and Y when X’s target feature has the value inconsistent
with Y (short horns in Fig. 1a). W is the attention weight
i
for mismatching labels when S is given and W’ is
another attention weight for mismatching labels
j
associated with S . Following the Sloutsky model, if
( type )
( island )
Pmismatch
( X i | Y ) = Pmismatch
( X i | Y ) , then

Si
Si
= i
S + W 'island S j
S i + W 'type S j

W 'type = W 'island
References
Anderson, J. R. (1990). The adaptive character of thought.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Gelman, S. A. (2003). The Essential Child: Origins of
Essentialism in Everyday Thought. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Goldstone, R. L. (1994). Influence of categorization on
perceptual discrimination. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 123, 178-200.
Markman, E. M. (1989). Categorization and naming in
children: Problems of induction. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Medin, D. L., & Ortony, A. (1989). Psychological
essentialism. In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.),
Similarity and analogical reasoning (pp. 179-195). New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Michalski, R. S. (1989). Two-tired concept meaning,
inferential matching, and conceptual cohesiveness. In S.
Vosniadou & N. Ortony (Eds.), Similarity and analogical
reasoning (pp. 122-145). Cambridge, MA: Cambridge
University Press.
Murphy, G. L., & Ross, B. H. (1994). Predictions from
uncertain categorizations. Cognitive Psychology, 27, 148193.
Murphy, G. L. (2002). The big book of concepts. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Osherson, D. N., Smith, E. D., Wilkie, O., Lopez, A., &
Shafir, E. (1990). Category based induction. Psychological
Review, 97, 185-200.
Rosch, E., & Mervis, C. B. (1975). Family resemblances:
Studies in the internal structure of categories. Cognitive
Psychology, 7, 573-605.
Sloman, S. A. (1993). Feature-based induction. Cognitive
Psychology, 25, 231-280.
Sloman, S. (1998). Categorical inference is not a tree: The
myth of inheritance hierarchies. Cognitive Psychology, 35,
1-33.
Sloutsky, V. M. (2003). The role of similarity in the
development of categorization. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 7, 246-558.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Fisher, A. V. (2004). Induction and
Categorization in Young Children. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 133, 166-188.
Tajfel, H., & Wilkes, A. L. (1963). Classification and
quantitative judgment. British Journal of Psychology, 54,
101-114.
Yamauchi, T., & Markman, A. B. (2000). Inference using
categories. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory and Cognition, 26, 776-795.

2409

