UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Categorical Recurrence Analysis of Child Language

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0wz7s448

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Dale, Rick
Spivey, Michael J.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Categorical Recurrence Analysis of Child Language
Rick Dale (rad28@cornell.edu)
Michael J. Spivey (spivey@cornell.edu)
Department of Psychology, Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850 USA
Abstract

vocalization increase their quantity and quality. These
timely caregiver interactions perhaps provide clues that, as
grammar learning proceeds, there may also be a process of
syntactic coordination.
The strong assumption therefore has important theoretical
consequences. Recently, Garrod and Pickering (2004) have
argued that dialogue is such a fluid and seemingly simple
task for us because it is steeped in coordination mechanisms
found in many cognitive processes during social interaction.
The coordination assumptions about language input during
acquisition, both weak and strong versions, complement this
discussion by pursuing the extent to which coordination
occurs and changes at a syntactic level of description in
child-caregiver interaction. Although the weak assumption
can be corroborated easily by simple observation of child
and caregiver, the strong version remains a tricky issue to
quantify. For this reason, it is important to pursue novel
means of analyzing child-directed and child-produced
language.
This paper presents an approach toward strong
coordination by employing recurrence analysis, a technique
used in a variety of disciplines. The analysis reveals global
structural patterns of child and caregiver language alignment
during interaction. By “global,” we mean drawing general
quantitative measures, with minimal dependence on
statistical assumptions, describing the extent to which a bout
of child-caregiver interaction involves language structures
that are more or less similar to each other. Doing so
provides a quantification of syntactic coordination between
interlocutors in transcripts of naturalistic dialogue. The
method is based on analyzing ordered sequences of
measurements, and can be extended easily to comparing
how two ordered sequences of measurements involve
patterns of recurrence. The ordered sequences of concern
here, of course, are time series of syntactic class usage by
child and caregiver. The approach therefore provides a
window on how structures used by the child “recur” in those
used by caregiver (and vice versa).
The basic approach is given a technical introduction
below, followed by two analyses of corpora drawn from the
CHILDES database (MacWhinney, 2000).

Coordination between conversation partners occurs at
multiple levels, including choice of syntactic structure. A
number of outstanding questions concerning the origin of this
coordination require novel analytic techniques. Here we
introduce and adapt a widely applied dynamical analysis,
recurrence analysis. We use this method to explore lexical
and syntactic coordination between children and caregivers in
conversation. Results indicate that children and caregivers
coordinate sequences of syntactic classes, and that this
coordination diminishes over development.

Introduction
Quite a bit of research has been devoted to analyzing
children’s developing language and the kind of input
available for its acquisition. Recently, for example, some
research has suggested that caregivers may issue contrastive
responses to a child’s ungrammatical utterances, serving
both to model how a structure should be used and as
evidence that the child has erred (e.g., Chouinard & Clark,
2003). Accompanying this is the growing evidence that
positive statistical information available in the input is
sufficient to drive considerable generalization for learning
grammatical structure (e.g., Lewis & Elman, 2001; Reali &
Christiansen, 2003). All this research makes the broad and
surely sensible assumption that the language use of children
and caregivers is following a path of alignment or
coordination: Statistical input and contingent responses in a
conversation, if effective, shape the language of both the
child and caregiver toward “syntactic coordination.”
This assumption has a strong and a weak interpretation.
In the weak and clearly trivial version, coordination merely
refers to the child coming to use the particular language
spoken by the caregiver. In the strong version, it implies
that within individual interactions there is a process of
coordination taking place. The child (and/or parent) is
inclined to produce sequences of syntactic classes, during a
conversation, that match those being heard. Research on
adult conversation has lately suggested that a wide variety
of behavior is coordinated in this way during social
interaction.
For syntactic structures particularly, for
example, Branigan, Pickering and Cleland (2000) recently
demonstrated that, in a picture-description dialogue,
participants often repeat syntactic structures employed by
another member of the conversation (see Garrod &
Pickering, 2004 for a review). Research on preverbal
vocalization also suggests that coordination may be a crucial
characteristic of the language-learning task. For example,
Goldstein, King and West (2003) recently demonstrated
experimentally that maternal responses contingent on infant

Recurrence Analysis
The past 20 years have seen a family of techniques emerge
in the physical sciences that allows global analysis of time
series produced by dynamical systems. Global dynamical
analyses generate informative parameters concerning a time
series and the process generating it.
For example,
computing the Lyapunov exponent from a time series of
measurements (e.g., the weather) provides an indication of
530

Figure 1: (A) Random
series [0, 1]. (B) Sine
wave RP. C: CRP between
sine and random series.
(D) Lexical CRP for Abe
at 2 years 5 months. (E)
Syntactic class CRP for
Naomi. Zooming reveals
diagonal structures. Their
points represent syntactic
recurrence. The relevant
sequence is shown, with #
as end-of-sentence.

the how two trajectories diverge in the system through time
(e.g., chaotic systems; see Broer, Krauskopf & Vegter, 2001
for a recent volume on such analyses). Many of these
informative global techniques require that certain
assumptions be met about the dynamical system and the
observed time series (e.g., stationarity; see Eckmann,
Kamphorst & Ruelle, 1987 for a discussion). To overcome
these limitations, Eckmann et al. (1987) offered a diagnostic
technique permitting easily constructed visualizations of a
time series to gain insight into the dynamical system from
which it is drawn. The technique is free from the
assumptions more sophisticated analyses require. For
example, the Lyaponuv and other parameters require that a
time series be of sufficient (typically extensive) length to be
reliably computed. Recurrence analysis is not bound by this
assumption (see also Webber & Zbilut, 1994).
The foundation of recurrence analysis can be easily laid
out. Consider a time series of scalar measurements {xt},
with t = 1,…, N. An ordered sequence of vectors or
“windows” of size m can be constructed from this time
series, referred to as the “embedded” time series, ξ{xt} 1

RP can have widely varying features depending on its time
series. Fig. 1 illustrates some plots, revealing what
Eckmann et al. (1987) originally referred to as differing
“textures.” Fig. 1C presents a cross-recurrence plot (CRP),
a simple extension of the above technique to compare
recurrent vectors between two different time series (e.g.,
Marwan & Kurths, 2002).
CRP = {(i,j) | d(xi,yj) < ε}, where xi ∈ ξ{xt}, yi ∈ ξ{yt}
By quantifying the number and nature of recurrence points
in an RP or CRP, one draws a global measure of the
dynamical system generating the time series. For example,
Fig. 1A is a plot of uniform white noise between 0 and 1,
and exhibits little structure beyond the line of incidence
(LOI; where i = j, and d = 0 < ε). Fig. 1B is a plot of a time
series drawn from a sine wave function, and contains highly
regular structures in the form of diagonal lines. Zbilut and
Webber (1992; Webber & Zbilut, 1994) devised a
supplementary technique called recurrence quantification
analysis (RQA) consisting of a suite of measures extracted
from RPs. The simplest example is percent recurrence
(%REC), the percentage of points registered on the plot.
This is computed by dividing the total points by the number
of possible points: || RP || / (N – m + 1)2. Diagonal
structures on an RP are also informative, indicating periods
of high regularity where stretches of the time series are
recurrent. In Fig. 1B for example, almost all the points in
the plot fall along diagonal structures, indicating the
regularity of the sine wave itself.
This basic process of embedding a time series and
subjecting that embedding to analysis is a means of
manipulating data sequences that is used in a number of
disciplines. Among others, these include molecular biology
(Von Heijne, 1987), natural language processing and
computational linguistics (see Manning & Schütze, 1999,
for a review), and physiology (Webber & Zbilut, 1994). In
psychology, Riley, Balasubramaniam, and Turvey (1999)

ξ{xt} = {x1, …, xN-m+1}, where xi = (xi,…,xi+m-1)
By comparing each pair of vectors in the embedded time
series, a recurrence plot (RP) is constructed out of the points
(i,j) where i, j = 1,…, N – m + 1, when the ith and jth vectors
are sufficiently “close” or similar. An RP is therefore a set
of points (i,j) that visualizes how the dynamical system is
revisiting certain paths in the system’s trajectory.
RP = {(i,j) | d(xi,xj) < ε}, where xi, xj ∈ ξ{xt }
In the above equation, d is a distance metric, for example
Euclidean distance, and ε a threshold specifying how close
two vectors must be to register a point (i,j) to the plot. An
1

For simplicity, we omit discussion of the additional parameter of
lag. See Marwan (2003) for extensive discussion.

531

Analysis 1: Lexical Coordination

and Balasubramaniam, Riley, and Turvey (2000)
investigated the dynamics of posture under differing
conditions. Also, CRPs of bodily movements between
conversation partners unveil postural coordination during
dialogue (Shockley, Santana, & Fowler, 2003).

We first explore coordination of word sequences between
children and caregivers in conversation. Time series of
words (tokens such as “dog” or “the”) are translated into
numeric states, and recurrence points on plots are drawn
when two ordered words are the same between child and
caregiver (metric of C = {(0, 0)}). Following this analysis,
we can compare a second set of results based on syntactic
class recurrence to discern whether pure lexical patterns are
driving any syntactic coordination that categorical
recurrence analysis reveals.

Categorical Recurrence Analysis
Recurrence analysis so far requires scalar measurements that
permit the use of a continuous metric, such as a Euclidean
distance metric. A non-continuous, categorical comparison
of embedded vectors, however, allows this method to be
applied to a range of cognitive phenomena. The time series
evaluated may therefore be at a higher-order timescale, such
as words or gaze fixations on certain objects. For example,
the time series may consist of musical notes, with each
unique element labeled numerically, thus obtaining a time
series of numeric states.

Materials
We selected three English corpora from the CHILDES
database (MacWhinney, 2000): Brown’s Sarah (Brown,
1973), Kuczaj’s Abe (Kuczaj, 1976), and Sachs’ Naomi
(Sachs, 1983). These three corpora were used recently by
Chouinard and Clark (2003) for the reasons we choose them
here: The sample sizes are relatively large, numerous, and
drawn at regular intervals. Each sample was turned into two
separate time series, one for word usages by the child and
another for the caregiver. Numeric labels composing the
time series for each sample therefore stood for individual
lexical tokens. The four most common of these from Sarah’s
samples are shown in Table 2.

A B# C F A … ⇒ 1, 2, 3, 4, 1, …
To build a categorical RP, we compare directly any two
vectors from the embedded time series using a 0-threshold
function. This comparison generates a comparison vector,
cij, whose elements are 1 or 0, 1 representing a nonrecurring numeric state and 0 representing a recurring one.

$c k = 1 if | x ik # x jk | > 0
c ij = " | x i # x j |, where %
&c k = 0 if | x ik # x jk | = 0

!

Table 2: Frequent lexical items

To generate an RP or CRP for our purposes, a fixed set C of
comparison vectors serves as a metric. In the continuous
application above, a point (i,j) is a member of the RP or
CRP only if the vectors are sufficiently close according to a
continuous distance metric and threshold. In the categorical
case, only if cij is within this set C of relevant comparison
vectors will point (i,j) be added to the RP or CRP.

Lexical form
“you”
“I”
“a”
“the”

Procedure
Plot generation We used the Matlab CRP Toolbox
(Marwan & Kurths, 2002) to compute cross-recurrence plots
between child and caregiver. CRPs were constructed from
the time series using a bigram categorical metric (C =
{(0,0)}). For each child’s time series from sample k,
{childt}k, we generated a cross-recurrence plot with the
caregiver’s time series drawn from the same sample,
{caregivert}k. This plot reveals bigram alignment of word
usage between caregiver and child within the same
discourse context, namely, in the same conversation. In
addition, for every time series from sample k (a
conversation at a particular time), we also generated a plot
of the child’s series {childt}k crossed with the caregiver’s
from the sample k+1 (a conversation at another time), one
step ahead in development, {caregivert}k+1. This allows
recurrence analysis within the same interaction, then
analysis of syntactic coordination between child and
caregiver outside that interaction. Both groups of plots will
generate recurrence, but by comparing them we reveal
whether patterns of word usage that are recurrent between
caregiver and child are influenced by the context of the
given conversation.

RP/CRP = {(i,j) | cij ∈ C}
Such a categorical technique invites analysis of time series
from behavioral phenomena at a coarser timescale. Along
with the continuous version, it admits of a number of
benefits for analyzing psychological sequences (see Dale,
Spivey, & Richardson, in preparation; Richardson & Dale,
in press). In particular, the categorical nature allows
selection of more complex set metrics to investigate
recurrence in behavioral phenomena (see Table 1).
Table 1: Some example metrics
C
{(0)}
{(0, 1, 0)}
{(1, 0, 1)}
sum(cij) < a

Description

Interpretation

1 recurrent item
Different element
between 2 of the
same
Recurring element
between 2 different
elements
At least m - a
elements must be
the same

Repetition of one word
Novel word in a 2-word
“frame”

Numeric identifier
11
68
51
39

Word occurring in novel
context
At least m - a words in a
sequence the same in the
same ordered places

532

Naomi, and Abe, respectively). In fact, all %DREC50 scores
significantly exceeded %REC scores, indicating greater
recurrence occurring along the LOI.

Analysis We chose two RQA measures to explore (used in
both analyses). These measures are generated by analyzing
the number and nature of recurrence points in the plots of
our conversation samples. As a first measure, the simplest
comparison between conversation types is of the overall
recurrence of the plot (%REC). To compute this measure,
we simply take the number of points in the plot divided by
the area of the plot. Percentage recurrence represents the
raw amount of coordination between a child’s and
caregiver’s word sequences. This global quantity therefore
indicates the extent to which child and caregiver coordinate
word bigrams across the whole time series.
As our second measure, we used the temporal information
of the plot to investigate what temporal range the recurrence
points are falling into. Because each recorded point on a
cross-recurrence plot represents a revisitation between two
temporal indices (i and j), we can measure how the points’
indices are organized in the plot. For example, if a large
density of points appears near the LOI, it indicates that
alignment occurs within the specific temporal context of
ongoing conversation.2 In this case, we chose a window of
+/- 50 words outside the line of incidence of the plot, and
computed how many points fall in that range, then divided it
by the total possible points of that band along the LOI. This
obtains another percentage score (%DREC50), but is
determined by the temporal proximity of the points. This
also allows us some basis for comparing this measure to the
simplest, %REC.3

Developmental change All measures exhibited significant
change, diminishing across samples. These results are
presented in Table 3.
Table 3: Measures regressed over time
r
Child
Sarah
Naomi
Abe

%REC
-.39***
-.31**
-.34***

%DREC50
-.59***
-.57***
-.40***

Notes: * = p < .05, ** = p < .01, *** = p < .001

Discussion
These lexical CRPs generated surprisingly low %REC. In
particular, they likely exhibit higher recurrence early in
development because of the fewer lexical items used by
children. The measures diminish considerably because the
wider array of lexical items available for children reduces
the chances of recurrent lexical bigrams. Although this
initial result therefore seems obvious, it suggests that there
is not trivial lexical coordination that might drive the
syntactic coordination we explore in the following analysis.

Analysis 2: Syntactic Coordination

Results

Materials

An example cross-recurrence plot is presented in Fig. 1D. In
this earlier age sample, extensive lexical recurrence occurs
along the line of incidence, indicating consistent lexical
bigrams used in ongoing conversational context between
child and caregivers. Each corpus sample generated two
such plots, for same- and other-conversation conditions, and
we consider each measure based on these plots individually.

The same corpora were used in this analysis. However,
constructed time series were composed of the syntactic class
to which words belong. Each lexical class (noun, verb, etc.)
was assigned a numeric label, generating two time series of
numeric states. The four most frequent structures from
Naomi’s time series are shown in Table 4. This significantly
restricted the number of possible numeric states occurring
(e.g., we did not encode agreement in the time series),
permitting considerably more recurrence patterns in the
plots.

%REC All three corpora showed greater recurrence in
same- versus other-conversation conditions (.18% vs. .16%,
t(268) = 2.4, p < .05, .22% vs. .10%, t(180) = 6.8, p < .0001,
and .11% vs. .09%, t(414) = 8.2, p < .0001, for Sarah,
Naomi and Abe, respectively). Raw lexical bigrams are
more consistent between child and caregiver across the
entire conversation.

Table 4: Frequent lexical classes
Lexical form
verb
noun
pronoun
determiner

%DREC50 As intuitively expected, the line-of-incidence
band exhibited much more recurrence per unit length within
the same conversation than otherwise (.26% vs. .16%,
t(268) = 5.3, p < .0001, .32% vs. .09% t(180) = 10.3 p <
.0001, and .19 vs. .09 t(414) = 13.4, p < .0001, for Sarah,

Numeric identifier
5
2
6
14

Procedure
Plot generation As in the first analysis, the same- vs.
other-conversation plot types were constructed in this
analysis. Of course, the CRPs in this analysis were based on
time series of syntactic class usage, revealing recurrent
bigrams of grammatical class rather than lexical items.

2

Where the number of words used by child and caregiver were not
equal, we approximated the “true” LOI of the conversation by
examining the band of points from (1,1) to (Nm,Nk), where Nm is
the length of the caregiver usage, and Nk of the child.
3
A number of window sizes were tested, and results were
consistent with those presented.

533

General Discussion

Analysis Exactly the same measures were computed in the
CRPs: %REC and %DREC50.

We observed no exceptions to the general rule obtained
across measures in both analyses: Same-conversation plots
invariably produced greater recurrence than plots between
children and their mother’s usage from a separate
conversation. Although the magnitudes of difference can
appear small, the patterns are surprising in the second
analysis given that plots represent word class bigrams, and
not the specific lexical items used in the conversation, as in
the first analysis. Moreover, the more minute figures (in
particular %REC) from the first analysis suggest that this
syntactic coordination is not driven merely by the
coordination of individual lexical items.4 Also, with the
observation that these measures are reducing over
development, it seems that early on children may be guided
by the word class sequences used by caregivers (or, vice
versa; Newport, Gleitman & Gleitman, 1977). A probable
explanation for these data is that the sequences of word
types used in these conversations are representative of a
coupled process. Syntactic structures are coordinated in
conversation. The interesting proviso is that this coupling is
stronger at an earlier age. Whoever is responsible, caregiver
or child or both, there is significant care taken in adapting
word-class sequences used in conversation in early stages of
development.
In fact, Sokolov (1993) discusses whether there should be
expected patterns of “leading” by caregivers or children. He
offered a similar analysis of corpora by investigating
specific grammatical structures and how they are adapted by
child and caregiver within a particular sentence window of
conversation. His results are similar, though did not yet
provide insight into leading or following patterns of
syntactic alignment. The method presented here is capable
of accomplishing this. Dale and Spivey (in preparation)
have used the current method to investigate recurrence
points above and below the LOI of recurrence plots.
Temporal hypotheses of leading suggest that, for example,
more recurrence points should occur above the LOI if the
mother is using language subsequently aligned by the child.
The current method thus offers further insights into rich
temporal patterning and child-caregiver interaction.
The strong assumption, that syntactic coordination in
language development occurs within an interaction,
therefore seems to be supported by these data. Caregivers
may be attuning their language to the language learner, and
the language learner is picking up new skills in that context.
These results provide a quantification of coordination within
naturalistic conversation, and provide clues to how this
alignment may be subject to developmental change.
The current findings have a few limitations. First, the
method presented examines global patterns extracted from
raw corpora. This does not mean that structure-specific
patterns cannot be explored via categorical recurrence

Results
An example plot is shown in Fig. 1E. Though more
recurrence is clearly present, there is less obvious temporal
structure. Temporal patterning can only be establishing by
RQA of the plots across samples. As in the first analysis, we
consider each measure individually.
%REC As in lexical recurrence, all three corpora showed
greater recurrence in same- versus other-conversation
conditions (1.76% vs. 1.71%, t(268) = 2.1, p < .05, 2.13%
vs. 1.90%, t(180) = 2.3, p < .05, and 1.74% vs. 1.69%,
t(414) = 2.0, p < .05, for Sarah, Naomi and Abe,
respectively). Syntactic bigrams are more consistent
between child and caregiver across the same entire
conversation. Even with the diminished number of numeric
states and the resultant higher %REC, there is comparable
recurrence in other-conversation plots.
%DREC50 If syntactic coordination is present in
conversation, we should expect differences in this measure.
Indeed, the line-of-incidence band exhibited more
recurrence within the same conversation than otherwise
(1.90% vs. 1.72%, t(268) = 4.5, p < .0001, 2.26% vs. 1.87%
t(180) = 3.8, p < .0001, and 1.85% vs. 1.70% t(414) = 4.5, p
< .0001, for Sarah, Naomi, and Abe, respectively). In Abe’s
and Sarah’s analyses, these measures significantly exceeded
those of %REC, suggesting that syntactic alignment itself is
stronger along temporal proximity of ongoing conversation.
While Naomi’s is in the appropriate direction, this was not
significant.
Developmental change All measures exhibited diminishing
across age samples, though the patterns of significance are
different across the three children. These results are
presented in Table 5.
Table 5: Measures regressed over time
r
Child
Sarah
Naomi
Abe

%REC
-.06
-.48***
-.07

%DREC50
-.23**
-.56***
-.32***

Discussion
Children and caregivers engage in syntactic coordination in
conversation. Even though the magnitude of differences in
the global measure (%REC) is small, they are consistently
higher in the same- vs. other-conversation plots. The LOI
analysis exhibits wider differences, indicating that recurrent
bigrams of syntactic class are organized temporally in
conversation. In addition, recurrence measures are vastly
greater than in the first analysis. This supports that at least a
trivial lexical patterning explanation for these results is
unlikely.

4

This is not meant to deny that the genesis of syntactic
coordination could derive from the structure and organization of
lexically motivated phrases (e.g., Tomasello, 2003).

534

Goldstein, M. H., King, A. P., & West, M. J. (2003). Social
interaction shapes babbling: Testing parallels between
birdsong and speech. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 100(13), 8030 - 8035.
Kuczaj, S. (1976). -ing, -s and -ed: A study of the
acquisition of certain verb inflections. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, University of Minnesota.
Lewis, J.D., & Elman, J.L. (2001). Learnability and the
statistical structure of language: Poverty of stimulus
arguments revisted. Proceedings of the 26th Annual
Boston University Conference on Language Development.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES project: tools for
analyzing talk. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Marwan, N., Kurths, J.: Nonlinear analysis of bivariate data
with cross recurrence plots, Phys. Lett. A, 302(5-6), 2002,
299-307.
Marwan, N. (2003). Encounters With Neighbours . Doctoral
dissertation, University of Potsdam.
Newport, E., Gleitman, H. & Gleitman, L. (1977). Mother
I'd rather do it myself: some effects and non-effects of
maternal speech style. In C. E. S. C. A. Ferguson (Ed.),
Talking to children: language input and interaction.
Cambridge University Press.
Reali, F. & Christiansen, M.H. (2003). Reappraising
poverty of the stimulus argument: A corpus analysis
approach. Paper presented at the Boston University
Conference on Language Development.
Richardson, D.C. & Dale, R. (in press). Looking to
understand: The coupling between speakers’ and
listeners’ eye movements and its relationship to discourse
comprehension. Cognitive Science.
Riley, M.A., Balasubramaniam, R. & Turvey, M.T. (1999).
Recurrence
quantification
analysis
of
postural
fluctuations. Gait and Posture, 9, 65-78.
Sachs, J. (1983). Talking about the there and then: The
emergence of displaced reference in parent–child
discourse. In K. E. Nelson (Ed.), Children’s language,
Vol. 4, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Shockley, K., Santana, M.-V. & Fowler, C.A. (2003).
Mutual interpersonal postural constraints are involved in
cooperative conversation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 29,
326-332.
Sokolov, J. (1993). A local contingency analysis of the finetuning hypothesis. Developmental Psychology, 29, 10081023.
Tomasello, M. (2003). A usage-based theory of language.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Von Heijne, G. (1987). Sequence analysis in molecular
biology: Treasure trove or trivial pursuits? San Diego,
CA: Academic Press.
Webber, C.L., Jr. & Zbilut, J.P. (1994). Dynamical
assessment of physiological systems and states using
recurrence plot strategies. Journal of Applied Physiology,
76, 965-973.
Zbilut, J.P. & Webber, C.L., Jr. (1992). Embeddings and
delays as derived from quantification of recurrence plots.
Physics Letters A, 171, 199-203.

analysis. Future application of this technique could target
specific structures in the word-class sequences, and discover
how their recurrence patterns are changing through time.
This initial application of recurrence quantification analysis
to child-caregiver interaction may therefore open numerous
avenues of exploration concerning alignment of particular
structures, and how they are organized in discourse.
Second, the methods presented here do not yet address a
basic change in a child’s time series across age samples:
Sentence length is becoming longer. The overall reduction
in recurrence measures observed in the results therefore
must interact with a growing range of word class sequences.
Indeed, given that later samples of child word class
sequences contain fewer (but longer) sentences, the
percentage recurrence per sentence is increasing. In fact,
this makes the early samples’ results here even more
surprising: Despite the child’s shorter utterances, there is
still stronger coordination within the same conversation than
otherwise.
Despite these limitations, the work presented here
introduces a fairly simple technique for exploring recurrence
within child-caregiver interaction. In other domains, the
technique has been very useful because of its relatively few
statistical assumptions (Zbilut & Webber, 1992) and
amenability to very noisy datasets (see Bandt, 2004, for a
related method and discussion). This categorical adaptation
of recurrence analysis, and its application to language
corpora here, has introduced quantification of a simple but
strong hypothesis: Children and caregivers align word class
sequences within conversation.

References
Balasubramaniam, R., Riley, M.A. & Turvey, M.T. (2000).
Specificity of postural sway to the demands of a precision
task. Gait and Posture, 11, 12-24.
Bandt, C. (in press).
Ordinal time series analysis.
Ecological Modelling.
Branigan, H.P., Pickering, M.J. & Cleland, A.A. (2000).
Syntactic co-ordination in dialogue. Cognition, 75, B1325.
Broer, H., Krauskopf, B. & Vegter, G. (2001). Global
analysis of dynamical systems: festschrift dedicated to
Floris Takens. Bristol, UK: Institute of Physics.
Brown, R. (1973). A First Language: The Early Stages.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Chouinard, M.M. & Clark, E.V. (2003). Adult
reformulations of child errors as negative evidence.
Journal of Child Language, 30, 637-669.
Dale, R., Spivey, M.J. & Richardson, D.C. (in preparation).
Quantifying psychological sequences: Categorical
recurrence analysis.
Dale, R. & Spivey, M.J. (in preparation). Cross-recurrence
analysis of child-caregiver coordination.
Eckmann, J.-P., Kamphorst, S.O., Ruelle, D. (1987).
Recurrence lots of dynamical systems. Europhysics
Letters, 5, 973-977.
Garrod, S. & Pickering, M.J. (2004). Why is conversation
so easy? TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 8-11.
535

