UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Collaborative Learning; Collaborative Depth

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0pr8w8m7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Alterman, Richard
Hickey, Timothy J.
Taneva, Svetlana S.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Collaborative Learning; Collaborative Depth
Svetlena S. Taneva (svet@cs.brandeis.edu)
Richard Alterman (alterman@cs.brandeis.edu)
Timothy J. Hickey (tim@cs.brandeis.edu)
Computer Science Department, Brandeis University
Waltham, MA 02453 USA
Abstract

beneath the surface. In each of these cases, there is a
problem space – either the task to draw the figure or the task
to understand a graphing command – and within that
problem space the students interact at more than one level.
The notion of depth reflects both the frequency of, and the
degree to which, group members collaborate beneath the
surface. Any pair of learners working at depth are working
closely, but not all pairs of learners that work closely work
at depth.
The literature on hierarchical structure of task dialogues
and the relation of talk to action and/or learning has a rich
tradition in Cognitive Science. The recent work of Bangerter
& Clark (2003) is an example of theory that examines the
relation of talk to action. In their model, joint activity is
organized into projects and subprojects. Markers in
discourse – words like yes, okay, all right – tend to be used
to either sequence through projects (yes) or to open and
close subprojects (okay, all right). Markers in discourse
that are used to navigate projects can be used to give a crude
measure of “depth”: a count of the number of times
collaborators open and close subprojects measures how
much they interact beneath the surface.
We conducted an empirical study of how dyads of novice
programmers, undergraduates with various majors at
Brandeis University, collaboratively learned to program
graphic objects for the first time. Our results show that the
degree of collaboration beneath the surface is a strong
predictor of learning, both for individuals (as members of a
group) and for the group as an entity. Our results also show
that the amount the students talked, the frequency of their
talk, and the degree to which they work on the same
segment of code, did not in themselves correlate with either
individual or pair learning; these results are consistent with
the prior work on collaborative learning.

When collaborators are doing a task and then they
interactively explore some subtask that emerges, they are
collaborating beneath the surface of the task. Depth of
collaboration refers to both the frequency of, and the degree
to which, students collaborate beneath the surface. In this
paper we examine the notion of depth in relation to
collaborative learning. We provide evidence that the extent of
collaborative activity beneath the surface positively correlates
to learning outcome. The measure of depth we use is easy to
code and can be automatically produced.

Introduction
The literature on collaborative learning has identified some
conditions and characteristics of effective collaborations.
Collaborative learning works best for ill-structured domains
(Cohen, 1994) or when abstract concepts that are to be
learned enable representational negotiation (Schartz, Black,
and Strange, 1991; Schartz, 1995). A common feature of
successful cases of collaborative learning are that the
collaborators are working “closely”. What constitutes
closeness, however, varies: the participants help by giving
explanations not answers (Webb, 2001), ideas are shared
and considered common resources (Barron, 2000), the
students regulate each other’s work (Vedder, 1985), the
problem-solving task is managed explicitly through talk
(Chang & Wells, 1987), the participants work in a joint
problem space (Teasley & Roschelle, 1995), verbalizations
are produced that support reasoning about theories and
evidence (Teasley, 1995).
A necessary, but not sufficient, condition of a
collaboration that benefits individual learning is that the
collaborators work closely together. In this paper, we will
develop a general measure of closeness that is tied to the
“depth” at which the participants interact. Those groups
that more often work deeply learn more individually and as
a group.
A set of interactions among actors may be embedded in a
larger set of interactions. The actors are doing a task (this is
the surface) and then they interactively explore a subtask of
that task (this is beneath the surface). Two learners
collaboratively working on an organization for their activity
– e.g. agreeing on a sequence of actions to accomplish the
task of writing a computer program that draws a figure – are
collaborating beneath the surface. Two learners going back
and forth in interpreting conceptual information and in
developing a mental model of how the graphing commands
in a specific computer language work, are also operating

Literature
There are several finding in the literature that characterize
the interaction among successful collaborative learners.
Collaboration learning is most effective for ill-structured
domains (Cohen, 1994) and for learning abstract concepts
(Schartz, Black, and Strange, 1991). In general, the benefits
of collaboration depend on the participants working closely
together on task-related interactions (Cohen, 1984). A
division of labor which breaks out a collaborative
assignment into interdependent projects reduces the
complexity of the task for each of the participants and
thereby increasing the productivity of the group, but it also
2156

separates the competencies and understanding that each
individual gains from the collaboration (Stevens, 2000).
Conversation in itself is not sufficient to produce benefits
for collaborative learning. Helping by giving and receiving
elaborate explanations is a positive predictor of learning, but
providing a right answer to a question without explanation
is not (Webb, 1991:1992:2001). The talk of the participants
must produce certain types of verbalization – those that
support reasoning about theories and evidence (Teasley,
1995). For example, in the domain of scientific discovery,
the success of collaboration, as compared to the work of
individuals, was due to the active involvement of pairs in
interactive activities such as providing explanations and
considering justifications
(Okada & Simon, 1997).
Collaborators are more likely to produce these kinds of
verbalization than individuals working alone (Teasley, ibid).
If one participant rebuffs another’s attempt to effectively
collaborate, the verbalizations that are produced may be
more about face-saving than explaining and reasoning
(Afard & Kieran, 2001). With training, groups of students
provide and receive higher-order explanations at a greater
rate (Swing & Peterson, 1982). If one of the collaborators
is trained to play the role of facilitator, the talk of the
participants is more likely to produce the kinds of scientific
talk that increase individual learning (Ehrlich, 1991).
Joint attention is a central idea behind various cognitive
accounts of the interactive processes responsible for the
success or failure of a student collaboration. The conscious
coordinated effort to achieve a genuine collaboration, rather
than just cooperate with one another, is what determines
learning outcome in students’ problem-solving (Roschelle,
1992; Teasley & Roschelle, 1995; Barron, 2000; Matusov,
Bell & Rogoff, 2002).
While problem-solving, group members negotiate
meanings, which allows them to converge on the certainty

of conceptual understanding (Roschelle, 1992). In a
successful collaboration the students construct a joint
problem space, which is the result of a continued conscious
effort to coordinate language and activity with respect to
shared knowledge (Roschelle et al., 1995). Students who
build on each other’s ideas and provide solution proposals
that are relevant to the immediately proceeding conversation
learn the most (Barron, 2003). A higher level of reasoning is
achieved when collaborators work to develop a common
representation that incorporates the multiple perspectives of
all the participants, and thus the representational product is
at a more abstract level (Schwartz, 1995).
The effort invested in organizing a group’s activity
through explicit talk also affects learning outcome. Chang
and Wells (1987) define learning as problem-solving where
the planning and execution of tasks are brought under
conscious control. The group setting particularly supports
this process by making thinking explicit and available for
inspection and revision. Effective collaboration entails the
learner regulate each other’s work (Vedder, 1985). To work
together, students not only have to negotiate conceptual
meaning, but also goals, plans, procedures, and alternatives.
Thus, through explicit talk learners need to manage both the
problem space and the activity (or organizational) space.
When the participants are interacting with one another
they are paying attention to one another but not necessarily
at any depth.
When collaborators talk without paying
attention to one another’s thinking and/or ideas there is no
depth to the interaction. Depth measures how often the
participants switch levels within a task, interactively
exploring some subtask that has emerged. Negotiation of
meaning, construction and maintenance of a joint problem
space, task alignment, or effort to manage the collaborative
task are all interactions that indicate depth.

2157

Experimental Study

markers in discourse. Words like yes, yeah, uh-huh and mhmh are used by collaborators to step through a project.
They indicate progress of activity within the current depth
level and are referred to as horizontal transitions. Words
like okay and all right imply opening or closing of
subprojects. These signify a move below the surface or a
return from one, i.e. a change in depth level. They are
vertical transitions. For our purposes, a count of the number
of times collaborators open and close subprojects is a simple
measure of the number of times collaborators switch
between levels of the task hierarchy. It is a cumulative
measure both of how deeply collaborators work and of the
extent to which they navigate through depth levels in their
activity.
The above set of discourse markers is minimal. People
use a number of other discourse transitions – words and
sentences – to open and close subprojects. In our analysis
we considered an extended set of vertical markers that we
found commonly used throughout the interactions. These
included: so, cool, let's, let me, true, thanks, and, wait, stop,
sure. However, the results produced by the original and the
expanded sets were almost identical. We believe this is
evidence that even though measuring depth by means of
vertical transitions does not provide an exact count of
entries into and exits from subprojects, it gives a very good
estimate – sufficient to reveal trends in joint activity. For
clarity we decided to keep the presentation and discussion of
our data to the original model’s set of markers.
We performed an analysis of the transcripts of students’
collaborative sessions, counting vertical project markers to
calculate the depth of collaboration. Example 1 shows an
interaction segment and Figure 2 provides a graph of the

In our experiment, students were asked to draw a
geometrical figure of a man (see Figure 1), using the
programming language JScheme. The participants had no
previous experience with programming. Correctly drawing
the figure required writing code for drawing rectangles,
lines, circles, and arcs. Students needed to learn the
appropriate commands and to acquire an understanding
about the parameters for commands, as well as about the
way drawn objects map to the display page. The most
challenging part of the task is understanding the way the
coordinate system works - it originates in the upper left
corner of the screen with the y-axis growing downwards,
and each axis has a fixed length. Placing a point requires
thinking in terms of distance from the origin or from the
endpoints.

Figure 1: The man figure task.

Measuring Collaborative Depth
We will use Bangerter & Clark’s study (2003) of project

Example 1: Conceptual understanding and depth.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

A:
A:
B:
A:
A:
B:
A:
A:

ok
do you understand the whole concept of pixels?
not really
the screen is 500 x 500 pixels
ok
oh yeah no i understand that it's like a grid
x,y
right

Opens surface project and first subproject

Opens sub-subproject
Closes sub-subproject
Continues with project; opens sub-subproject
Closes sub-subproject, subproject and surface project

Figure 2: Representation of depth of student chat.
2158

sequence of projects and the opening and closing of
subprojects. In total there are six vertical moves between
levels: three up and three down. The surface project is to
reach shared understanding of the material in order to start
working on the assignment. At line 1, A opens the first
subproject with “ok” to establish that they share
understanding of the concept of pixels. At line 4, A initiates
the first sub-subproject of explaining the concept in order to
reach shared understanding. At this point the participants are
two levels beneath the surface. In line 5, “ok” marks the
closure of the sub-subproject and brings the activity back at
the subproject depth level. In line 6 “oh yeah” signifies
movement of the activity within the same depth level –
common ground is established in relation to the concept of
pixels. However, in line 6 “no” starts a divergence, a subsubproject in which B explicitly reconfirms shared
understanding. “Right” in line 8 concludes the episode by
confirming the overlap in conceptual understanding – this
closes all nested subprojects as well as the main, surface
project.
Whereas the first example shows two subjects interacting
beneath the surface as they try to understand the coordinate
system, this next example shows a pair of subjects switching
levels as they work on the solution.
1. A:
2. D:
3. A:
4.
5.
6.
7.

A:
D:
A:
A:
8. D:

4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

9.

Methodology
Groupware as Experimental Platform Groupware
systems are software applications that support groups of
people engaged in a common task. The use of groupware to
study collaborative learning has many advantages – chief
among them is the ability to collect a complete replayable
transcript of all the interactions between collaborators
without any transcription cost. The experimental platform
we used for this study was GrewpTool (Langton, Hickey &
Alterman, 2004; Langton, Granville, Hickey, & Alterman,
2004).

ok now we mirror image it
but I think its a bit long
oh yea...well, lets finish this hand firs tthen with the
oval before we do the next one
that way we can see it all together
okay
cuz i think some of the oval will overlap with the wrist
and it will look shorter
okay

E:
B:
B:

u look lilke a bio major
ahahah
hey
do you speak japanese?
for some reason i had the feeling that you do
not too much

Example 3: Lack of depth.
The conversation between these two participants goes for
forty-eight lines without a single use of a vertical transition
marker. The interaction does not involve any subprojects –
the surface project is for the students to get to know each
other and this is accomplished by a sequence of questions
and answers. The group members show a high degree of
joint focus. The lack of any vertical markers accurately
reflects the lack of depth.

GrewpTool The GrewpTool environment has a chat
window where students communicate using an IM-like
interface, a collaborative editor that allows one or more
students to simultaneously edit code, and a pair of browser
windows where students can navigate through the
assignment and a manual. All user interaction with the tool
is logged and there is a playback mechanism, which allows
one to analyze the learning session in great detail. Figure 3
shows a snapshot of GREWPtool as seen by the students.

Example 2: Task work and depth.
These collaborators are coordinating the sequence of
actions they will undertake. The surface project in Example
2 is to make a plan on how to complete the shared solution
for drawing the hands of the man-figure.
• line 1: “ok” opens a subproject of mirroring the
image of one hand for the representation on the
display page of the other hand.
• line 3: They open a sub-subproject of finishing up
the first hand.
• line 5: “okay” closes the sub-subproject.
• line 6: A opens another sub-subproject of further
negotiating actions.
• line 8: “okay” closes the sub-subproject, and the
subproject of mirroring the image. The plan is
completed and the surface project is closed as well.
The vertical transitions give us a good estimate of the
extent to which group members switch levels beneath the
surface of a task. In Example 3, the participants maintain a
joint focus, but are not working in the problem space, nor
are they interacting beneath the surface.
1.
2.
3.

E:
B:
B:
B:
B:
E:

Figure 3: The GREWPtool as seen by the students.
Protocol Throughout the Fall 2003 semester, we conducted
experiment sessions that took place in one of the computer
labs. Upon arrival students were briefed about the study and
trained on using the tool. Pairs were randomly assigned and
were placed to work on distant workstations (separated by

what is ur major?
psychology
u?

2159

cubicles). After completing an entrance survey and a tenminute pre-test, participants were instructed on the task and
on how to use the online scaffolds. Students were given
ninety minutes, after which they had to complete a post-test
and an exit survey. The tests were intended to assess three
categories of coding knowledge – vocabulary, syntax, and
semantics.

Does the frequency of chat between participants
positively correlate to the learning outcome?
Participants’ interaction can be divided into segments. By
definition, a chat segment is a set of utterances exchanged
while both students are in the chat window. The beginning
and end of a segment is marked by activity of either
participant in a window other than the chat area – e.g. in the
editor or browser. Frequency of chat was operationally
defined as the total number of chat segments for a complete
learning session. Some groups went for long periods of time
without communicating, while others “kept in touch” by
chatting frequently. The frequency of chat interactions per
group was compared with the total learning for the group.
No statistical significance was found: r(10) = - .272, p = n.s.
• Do pairs of students that more often sequence
through projects together learn more than those that
do not?
We tested for correlation between the use of horizontal
markers and learning – at the individual and at the group
level. The relations were not significant: r(10) = - .261, p =
n.s. at the group level, and r(10) = - .307, p = n.s. at the
individual. (Note: this relationship was also tested relative
to the amount of chat and still resulted in no statistical
significance)
In summary, the amount of time spent chatting, the
number of utterances, and the frequency of conversational
are not predictors of learning. Hence, for this task is not
sufficient to explain differences in collaborative learning
outcome.
•

Learning Learning achievement was determined by the
difference between pretest and posttest score.
Participants The participants were Brandeis University
undergraduates with backgrounds in various academic
disciplines, none of whom had any prior programming
experience, i.e. their expertise level was that of pre-novices
(VanLehn, 1989). The analysis presented in this paper is
based on the data of the interactions of ten dyads, or twenty
participants. The rest of the data was excluded from our
analysis due to technical problems with the early versions of
GrewpTool. All participants volunteered to take part in the
study and were compensated for their time.

Results
In the discussion below we first examine the relation of talk
and action independent of depth. Four measures are
considered: time spent chatting, number of chat utterances,
frequency of chat segments, and the use of horizontal
marker to sequence through projects at the same level.
These results are consistent with other findings in the
literature. Next we examine whether subjects working
closely together in the code window was a predictor of
learning.
The final result we present shows that
collaborative depth, independent of topic, does correlate to
learning.

Measuring Closeness in the Code Window
Suppose a pair of subjects divide up their task and work on
different segments of code at the same time. As they write
code, they are not working very closely. Subjects that work
on the same segment of code are working at the same time
are working more closely, but not necessarily very deeply –
they may only be peripherally aware of what their partner is
doing as they code. We measured the distance between the
cursors of each pair of subjects as they wrote code in the
code edit window. Subjects working on the same segment
of code will have a smaller mean difference between their
cursors in the code window than pairs of subjects who are
coding separately on different parts of the assignment.
• Do subjects that more frequently work on the same
segment of code at the same time learn more?
We compared the mean distance, in pixels, between the
cursors of collaborators to the learning they achieved. While
closeness of cursors was a strong predictor of the closeness
in learning outcome that members of the same group scored
(r(10) = .872, p < .01), it did not account for the degree of
learning achieved (r(10) = .017, p = n.s.). In other words,
pairs of students that organized their efforts by working on
the same segment of code at the same time were working
“closely” but they did not necessarily achieve more as
individual learners. This result is consistent with prior

Chatting itself is not enough
Group members who talk extensively, or talk frequently
are indicators that the participants are interacting. The
amount of time spent talking, the number of utterances
exchanged, and the frequency of chatting are measures of
how much collaborators talked, and consequently, of the
degree of joint focus. Each of these factors measures
closeness but not depth of collaboration.
• Does the total amount of time spent chatting
positively correlates to learning achievement?
We correlated the total time a dyad spent talking to the total
learning the dyad achieved. The result was not statistically
significant: r(10) = - .348, p = n.s. The time spent chatting
did not correlate to individual learning either - r(20) = - .253,
p = n.s.
• Does the number of chat utterances positively
correlates to how much is learned?
We tested this hypothesis on both the group level and the
individual level. For both we found no significant
correlation. Within a group we found r(10) = - .434, p = n.s.
and per individual r(20) = - .242, p = n.s.
2160

Hallinan (Eds.), Instructional groups in the classroom:
Organization and processes. Academic Press. 171-188.
Cohen, E. (1994) Restructuring the classroom: Conditions
for productive small groups. Review of Educational
Research, 64(1) 1-35.
Langton, J., Granville, K., Hickey, T. & Alterman, R. (2004
October). Enhancing CS programming lab courses using
collaborative editors. Paper presented at the Consortium
for Computing Sciences in Colleges Conference,
Baltimore, Maryland.
Langton, J., Hickey, T. & Alterman, R. (2004). Integrating
tools and resources: a case study in building educational
groupware for collaborative programming. The Journal of
Computing Sciences in Colleges, 19, 140-153.
Matusov, E.L., Bell, N., & Rogoff, B. (2002). Schooling as
cultural process: Working together and guidance by
children from schools differing in collaborative practices.
In R.V. Kail & H.W. Reese (Eds.), Advances in Child
Development and Behavior (vol. 29). Academic Press.
Okada, T., & Simon, H.A. (1997). Collaborative discovery
in a scientific domain. Cognitive Science, 21(2), 109-146.
Roschelle, J. (1992). Learning by collaborating: Conceptual
change. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2, 235276.
Roschelle, J. & Teasley, S.D. (1995). Construction of shared
knowledge in collaborative problem solving. In C.
O’Malley (Ed.), Computer-supported collaborative
learning. New York, NY: Springer-Verlag.
Schwartz, D. L. (1995). The emergence of abstract
representations in dyad problem solving. The Journal of
the Learning Sciences, 4, 321-354.
Sfard, A. and Kieran, C. (2001) Cognition as
Communication: Rethinking learning-by-talking through
multi-faceted analysis of students’ mathematical
interactions. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 8(1), 42-76.
Stevens, R. (2000) Divisions of labor in school and in the
workplace: Comparing computer and paper-supported
activities across settings. Journal of Learning Sciences,
9(4), 373-401.
Teasley, S. D. (1995). Communication and collaboration:
The role of talk in children’s peer interactions.
Developmental Psychology, 31 (2), 207-220.
VanLehn, K. (1989). Problem Solving and Cognitive Skill
Acquisition. In M. I. Posner (Ed.), Foundations of
Cognitive Science. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Vedder, P.H. (1985). Cooperative learning: A study of
processes and effects of cooperation between primary
school children. Doctoral dissertation, University of
Groningen, The Netherlands.
Webb, N.M. (1991). Task-related verbal interaction and
mathematics learning in small groups. Journal of
Research In Mathematics Education, 22, 366-389.
Webb, N. (1992) Testing a theoretical model of student
interaction and learning in small groups. In R. HertzLazarowitz & N. Miller (Eds.), Interactions in
cooperative groups. New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press.
Webb, N. (2001) Verbal interaction and learning in peerdirected groups. Theory into Practice. 24(1) 32-39.

research. Peripheral awareness does not necessarily entail
depth only “closeness”.

Depth of Collaboration
The amount of vertical transition markers utilized by
collaborators reflects the depth of collaboration.
• Does depth correlate to learning?
As described earlier in this paper – vertical discourse
markers crudely measures what we refer to as depth of
collaboration. We tested this hypothesis at the individual
and at the group level – at both the relationship was strongly
significant: the relative use of vertical markers (as a
percentage of the whole interaction) positively correlated to
total group learning with r(10) = .762, p <.01; at the
individual level, the correlation was with r(20) = .560, p <
.01.

Concluding Remarks
Collaborating students can be working closely, talking and
interacting a lot, without having meaningful interactions.
Meaningful interaction depends on depth.
Depth lies at the intersection of joint focus, joint problem
space and the structure of activity. It is when collaborators
switch levels within a hierarchy of tasks, in an
interdependent fashion, as they jointly progress through the
problem space that they interact beneath the surface. Our
findings show that a simple measure of depth is sufficient to
predict whether pairs of learners in our experiment benefited
from the collaboration. These findings do not depend on an
analysis of which tasks and subtasks were explored in depth.
Depth is a dimension of closeness that differentiates
between effective and ineffective learning collaborations.
We used a measure of depth that is easy to code and can be
produced automatically, and for this reason, depth is an
especially useful tool for the analysis of the role of
collaborative interaction in learning.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Science
Foundation under Grant No. EIA-0082393.

References
Bangerter, A., & Clark, H. H. (2003). Navigating joint
projects with dialogue. Cognitive Science, 27, 195-225.
Barron, B. (2000). Achieving coordination in collaborative
problem-solving groups. The Journal of the Learning
Sciences, 9, 403-436.
Barron, B. (2003). When smart groups fail. The Journal of
the Learning Sciences, 12, 307-359.
Chang, G. L., & Wells, G. (1987). The literate potential of
collaborative talk. In M. MacLure, T. Phillips, & A.
Wilkinson (Eds.), Oracy matters. Philadelphia, PA: Open
University Press.
Cohen, E. (1984) Talking and working together: Status
interaction and learning. In Peterson, Wilkinson, &

2161

