UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Communicating Likelihood and Managing Face: Can We Say it is Probable When We Know it
to be Certain?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3z99d3h0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Bonnefon, Jean-Francois
Villejoubert, Gaelle

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Communicating Likelihood and Managing Face:
Can we Say it is Probable when we Know it to be Certain?
Jean-François Bonnefon (bonnefon@univ-tlse2.fr)
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique
Laboratoire Travail et Cognition, 5 allées A. Machado 31058 Toulouse Cedex 9 France

Gaëlle Villejoubert (g.villejoubert@lubs.leeds.ac.uk)
Leeds University Business School, Maurice Keyworth Building, The University of Leeds, LS2 9JT United Kingdom
Abstract

cept. All other values represent intermediate degrees of
membership.
The peak of a membership function is the probability
(or the mean of the probabilities) at which the function
reaches its maximum value. A number of studies (reviewed in Budescu & Wallsten, 1995, and Wallsten &
Budescu, 1995) have shown most probability phrases to
be single peaked. For instance, the membership function of ‘possible’ increases monotonically until it peaks
at around .7, then decreases monotonically. Only very
specific phrases, such as ‘certain’ or ‘impossible’ monotonically increase or decrease all the way through the
probability interval [0, 1].
Membership functions indicate the extent to which
each probability value may ‘typically’ be communicated
by a given phrase. The possibility that a given phrase
may translate into different probability values at different times is thus captured by this approach. Membership functions, however, are taken to portray the meaning of probability phrases independently of the context
in which they are used. In other words, this approach
precludes the possibility that the membership function
of a given phrase would vary as a function of the context
in which it is evaluated.
Teigen and Brun (1995, 1999) proposed that probability phrases can not only convey meanings of vague likelihood but also have communicative functions that are
embedded in them. Such a communicative function, directionality, invites the hearer of the message to focus on
the occurrence or the non-occurrence of the event being
predicated, depending on the polarity of the phrase used
by the speaker. For example, saying ‘it is unlikely that it
will rain tomorrow’ rather than ‘there is a small chance
that it will rain tomorrow’ focuses on the absence rather
than the presence of rain. However, Budescu, Karelitz,
& Wallsten (2003) showed that phrases’ directionality
could be predicted from properties of their membership
function. Consistent with the authors’ predictions, positive phrases were found to be negatively skewed and have
peaks above 0.5 whereas negative phrases tended to be
positively skewed and have peaks below 0.5. Moreover,
the authors demonstrated that this relation was invariant across contexts.
Intuitively, however, neither of these interpretations
of the meaning of verbal probability phrases seems to
account for the meaning conveyed by the speaker who
says: ‘It is probable that your bad breath makes men

Different functions can be performed by probability
phrases such as: ‘it is probable/possible/likely that x.’
Mainly, speakers may communicate a vague judgment
about the likelihood of event x, or they may wish the
recipient to focus on reasons for the occurrence of event
x. We argue that there is another communicative function which has yet to be documented, namely, the facemanagement function. Such function consists in mitigating threat to the addressee when x is a criticism or
an imposition. Data show that the phrases ‘possibly’
and ‘probably’ are indeed understood differently (have
different membership functions) depending on whether
they modify neutral or face-threatening contents. We
consider the potential misunderstandings and judgmental mistakes that may arise from ambiguity about which
function of verbal uncertainty is being performed.

Functions of Verbal Uncertainty
Imagine a conversation between two very close friends,
one of whom is complaining that she gets little attention
from men. The other friend then replies: ‘It is probable
that your bad breath makes men uncomfortable.’ What
does she mean by ‘probable’ ?
From the onset of the study of the meaning verbal
probabilities, researchers have proposed that expressions
such as it is probable that x or it is possible that x are used
to express, albeit vaguely, a judgment about the likelihood of the proposition or event they predicate (e.g.,
Lichtenstein & Newman, 1967; Wallsten et al., 1986).
Thus, the sentence ‘it is probably going to rain tomorrow’ means that the speaker has some intermediate confidence in the prediction that it is going to rain, a confidence that could perhaps be expressed as a 70% chance,
but definitely not as a 99% chance.
Starting from the assumption that probabilistic
phrases are vague concepts in the sense of fuzzy set theory (Zadeh, 1965), Wallsten et al. (1986) and Rapoport,
Wallsten, and Cox (1987) suggested that the meaning of
a probability phrase could be represented by its membership function. The membership function of any given
phrase assigns a number to each value on the probability line [0, 1] that represents its degree of membership
in the concept defined by the phrase. Degree of membership is usually expressed as a real number from 0 to
1, such that memberships of 0 denote probabilities that
are absolutely not in the concept, and memberships of 1
denote elements that are perfect exemplars of the con316

uncomfortable.’ Indeed, it is believable that the speaker
is quite confident if not certain that it is her friend’s bad
breath that explains her romantic misfortunes. Similarly, directionality does not seem to play a role as the
use of a negative phrase seems anomalous: ‘It is unlikely
that your bad breath makes men uncomfortable’.
In this article, we wish to demonstrate that verbal probabilities phrases sometimes have another communicative function, more precisely a face-management
function. Such a function will be at use when the speaker
aims to avoid hurting somebody else’s feelings. Contrary to Budescu et al.’s (2003) argument that phrases
membership functions are invariant across contexts, we
will show that the phrases ‘probably’ and ‘possibly’ are
understood very differently when applied to neutral contents and when applied to face-threatening contents (i.e.,
criticisms or impositions). We begin with a brief presentation of the face management function of probability phrases. We then argue that a given probability phrase will translate into quite different membership functions depending on its communicative function.
Briefly, we predict that whilst the probability phrases
‘possibly’ and ‘probably’ have single peaked membership functions when they modify neutral contents, those
membership functions will be monotonically increasing
(or, at least, will peak much closer to 1) when they
modify face-threatening acts. We report an experiment
whose results support our predictions. Finally, we discuss how to extend our results and investigate situations
wherein untoward consequences follow from some ambiguity about which function of verbal uncertainty is being
performed. As for now, we will introduce the notion of a
face-threatening act, and the associated pragmatic function of verbal uncertainty.

For instance, a speaker might try to gently disagree
with an addressee (a positive fta) by saying ‘I think
perhaps you’re wrong’, or ‘you’re possibly wrong here’.
In other terms, the speaker will modify her positive fta
by a probability phrase. Likewise, a speaker might try to
soften an imposition upon an addressee (a negative fta)
by saying ‘I guess you may have to pay for my lunch’
or ‘you’ll probably have to pay for my lunch’. Again,
the speaker modifies her negative fta by a probability
phrase, for politeness concerns.
Note that the speaker is not, strictly speaking, modifying the likelihood of her disagreeing or imposing something upon the addressee. If the addressee recognizes the
politeness strategy for what it is, he should not understand the probability phrase as communicating a judgment of likelihood, but simply as a politeness marker.
Now if we assume that differences in the meaning of
probability phrases translate into differences in membership functions, we should expect different membership
functions for a given probability phrase, depending on
whether it modifies an fta or not.

Different Membership Functions?
A number of studies established that the phrases ‘probably’ and ‘possibly’ have single peaked membership functions. We claim that this result only generalizes to neutral (i.e., not face-threatening) contents. When ‘probably’ and ‘possibly’ modify an fta (a criticism or an imposition), they will perform a pragmatic, face-management
function of communication. As a consequence, their prototypical probability value ought to be close to 1, resulting in a monotonically increasing membership function,
or, alternatively, in a membership function peaking much
closer to 1 than for neutral content.

Managing Face

Method
Participants A total of 112 students at Leeds University Business School took part to the experiment; 49
were men, 57 were women, 6 did not provide gender information. Age ranged from 18 to 44 (median = 19).
Most participants were management majors.

The core assumption of Politeness Theory (Brown &
Levinson, 1978/1987) is the universal want to maintain
‘face’. Face is decomposed into two components, negative face, the want to be free of action or from imposition, and positive face, the want to be approved of, liked,
or admired. Any action or utterance that can be construed as a restriction or an imposition onto someone is
a threat to negative face. Likewise, any behavior or utterance that can be construed as disapproval or criticism
is a threat to positive face.
When an utterance amounts to a threat to positive or
negative face (i.e., when it qualifies as a face-threatening
act, henceforth an fta), the speaker must decide on a
politeness strategy to mitigate the threat. Politeness
Theory describes a number of such possible strategies,
and the considerations that drive the choice of a strategy for a given fta in a given context. We do not need,
however, to consider in further detail the issue of strategy
choice, for the present report will only feature one specific strategy known as ‘hedging’. More precisely, among
the numerous forms of hedging, we will only consider how
a speaker might politely weaken a statement she knows
to be true.1
1

Material and Procedure Membership functions
were elicited using the Multiple Stimuli Method introduced in Budescu et al. (2003). Participants were presented in turn with 8 statements of the form ‘[speaker]
tells you that [modifier, content]’. The speaker was identified each time with a different first name, alternatively
male and female. The modifier was a between-subject
variable, either ‘possibly’ or ‘probably’. The type of content was a within-subject variable: Four contents were
neutral and the otherfour were face-threatening (two
criticisms and two impositions). The four neutral contents were taken from Budescu et al. (2003) and adapted
to a British setting, for instance by speaking of Scotland
rather than Wisconsin, and of rugby rather than basketball. See Table 1 for a complete list of neutral contents
and ftas.
ing as a strategy is not limited to the preservation of the
addressee’s face, but can perform a vast number of functions
(Channell, 1994; Jucker, Smith, & Lüdge, 2003).

Hedges are not limited to probability phrases, and hedg-

317

Table 1: Neutral statements and face-threatening acts (ftas) used as experimental material.
Content type
Neutral

ftas

Sentence
In the near future the wages in some areas of the country will increase slightly
Next week Scotland will experience a major snow storm
In the next few years rugby teams from the south-west will dominate the sport
I will find an excellent job immediately after I graduate from university
You will have to drive me to the airport
You have made a big mistake
You will have to pay for the cinema tickets
Your bad breath makes people uncomfortable

Alongside with each of the eight statements, participants were presented with 10 probabilities (introduced
in the form of percentages, from 10% up to 100%) and
had to judge to what extent the speaker may have had
this probability in mind when uttering the statement.
This judgment was expressed on a 10-point scale anchored at ‘absolutely not’ to the left and ‘absolutely’ to
the right. For example, after having read that ‘Eileen
tells you: You have probably made a big mistake’, participants were asked the following question: ‘Can Eileen
think the probability that you have made a big mistake
is...’ followed by the 10 possibilities 10%, 20%, up to
100%, and had to provide a judgment for each of the
10 possibilities.2 The order of statements was counterbalanced across questionnaires. Questionnaires were
filled out during class. Participation was optional and
anonymous, but participants had the option to provide
an email address so as to take part in a prize draw. Two
participants won a prize of £25 in vouchers. The experiment was conducted in English.

Results and discussion
Figure 1: Membership function of ‘probable’ for neutral
content and for face-threatening acts (fta).

Mean membership of each probability from 0.1 to 1.0 was
computed by averaging membership judgments across
participants. Both for ‘possibly’ and ‘probably’, membership functions were remarkably similar for the four
neutral contents on the one hand, and for the four ftas
on the other hand. Figures 1 and 2 respectively depict
the membership function of ‘probable’ and ‘possible’ as
a function of content.
The ‘peak’ of a membership function was computed by
(a) averaging for each participant the probability values
which received the highest membership ratings, then (b)
averaging across participants the values so obtained –
or, alternatively, considering the median of the values so
obtained. (Note that some small discrepancy is not uncommon between the numerical computation of the peak
and its graphical representation: Thus the values of Table 2 do not exactly match what appear to be the peaks
of the membership function in Figures 1 and 2.) With respect to neutral contents, we obtain classic, single peaked

membership functions for ‘possible’ and ‘probable’. The
two membership functions peak at a little below .6 and
.7, respectively (see Table 2). The membership functions
with respect to ftas are clearly different, even though
they do not support the strong version of our hypothesis.
The membership function of ‘possible’ is clearly single
peaked rather than monotonically increasing, even for
ftas. The membership function of ‘probable’ is nearly
monotonically increasing, but does feature a small decrease at the very end of the probability interval.
The weaker version of our hypothesis is, however,
clearly supported by the data, as membership functions
peak much closer to 1 for ftas than for neutral contents
(see Table 2). This is especially true if one considers the
median value for the distribution of peak across participants, rather than the mean value which in this case
appears to be a little too sensitive to outliers.
The membership function of ‘probable’ peaks reliably
higher for ftas than for neutral contents, t = 6.0 (n =

2

Unlike Budescu et al. (2003), we did not ask participants
about the membership of probability 0. We were concerned
that asking up front a rather infelicitous question might compromise the credibility of the task.

318

their membership functions, is different depending on
whether these probability phrases modify neutral or facethreatening content. The prototypical probability associated to a probability phrase is much higher when this
phrase modifies face-threatening content than when it
modifies neutral content. Moreover, this result was obtained using a within-subject design, that is, at the individual rather than group level.

General Discussion
The preliminary investigation we have just reported
lends credence to the idea that people can and do distinguish between the likelihood-communication function of
verbal uncertainty, and its pragmatic, face-management
function. Now that our initial assumption has been experimentally grounded, we intend to take this research
in two complementary directions. First, we need to extend our initial result to other probability phrases, other
hedges than probability phrases, and to a greater variety of ftas. Second, we intend to explore the limits
of people’s ability to distinguish between the two functions, and to investigate the types of mistakes than can
arise from confusion between the two functions. We will
now consider in turn these two aspects of our research
program.

Figure 2: Membership function of ‘possible’ for neutral
content and for face-threatening acts (fta).
Table 2: Mean and median peaks of the membership
functions of ”possible” and ”probable” depending on the
content they modify (neutral vs. face-threatening).
Possible
Neutral
fta
Probable
Neutral
fta

Mean (SD)

Median

.58 (.26)
.70 (.25)

.55
.74

.67 (.23)
.80 (.19)

.66
.85

Extensions
Other phrases As of now, we have only considered
the phrases ‘possible’ and ‘probable’. There seems to be
no reason why our analysis should not apply to some
other common probability phrases such as ‘fair chance’
or ‘likely’, or variations such as ‘very probable’ or ‘somewhat likely’. Modal verbs such as ‘I guess’, ‘I suppose’, or
‘I think’ would also fall within the scope of our analysis.
Indeed, Brown and Levinson (1978/1987) lists a number of probability phrases that may be used to soften or
weaken a fta, not to mention prosodic and kinesic cues
to uncertainty such as raised eyebrow, hands thrown up,
umms and errs, or even the use of pitch.
Other FTAs Our approach to ftas has been rather
crude insofar as we have only considered two kinds
of threats, both directed towards the addressee’s face.
Other threats to the addressee’s face include suggestions,
remindings, and dares (negative ftas), or bad news,
non-sequiturs, and the raising of divisive topics (positive
ftas). In addition, threats to the speaker’s own face
could be worth considering, such as expressions of gratitude, unwilling offers, and responses to faux-pas (negative ftas), or apologies, confessions, or acceptance of
compliments (positive ftas).
Aside from the intrinsic value of generalizing our initial findings, the consideration of other ftas would allow
for some control over a potential bias of our experimental material. All the ftas we have considered include a
direct reference to the addressee (they all began by ‘You’
or ‘Your’), whilst none of the neutral contents do. Using
the various ftas we have just introduced will eliminate
the need for systematic reference to the addressee.

53), p < .001; the 95% confidence interval for that difference is [.08, .16] and Cohen’s d is .48, a moderate effect size. Likewise, the membership function of ‘possible’
peaks reliably higher for ftas than for neutral contents,
t = 5.2 (n = 59), p < .001; the 95% confidence interval
for that difference is [.08, .18] and Cohen’s d is .61, again
a moderate effect size.
The median peak of the membership functions differs
widely as a function of content, with a gap of nearly
.20 between the prototypical probability of ftas and
the prototypical probability of neutral contents (both
for ‘possibly’ and ‘probably’). This difference is statistically reliable, Z = 4.7 for ‘possible’ and Z = 4.5 for
‘probable’, p < .001 in both cases.
Although data do not provide full support to the
stronger version of our hypothesis (especially since the
membership function of ‘possible’ does no seem to be
monotonic even when the phrase modifies an fta),
they clearly validate its weaker version. The meaning of ‘probable’ and ‘possible’, as assessed through
319

Other hedges Just as probability phrases can modify
the likelihood of a proposition, other phrases can modify other aspects of information. For example, the phrase
‘some’ modifies quantity the same way the phrase ‘probably’ modifies likelihood: Saying that ‘some vegetarians
eschew milk’ conveys the information that not all do,
the same way as saying that ‘Nicole will probably not
have milk’ conveys the information that she might after all.3 One may thus wonder whether the polite, facemanagement function of likelihood modifiers may have
its counterpart with respect to quantity modifiers.
It is apparently the case that quantity modifiers can be
understood as mere politeness markers when they modify an fta. Imagine that you have been invited to give
a seminar in a university you are visiting. After the
seminar, you ask one of the local students what people generally thought of your talk, and her answer is:
‘Some thought you were terribly long.’ Does the use
of ‘some’ here exclude the possibility that everybody
felt that way? It rather seems that ‘some’ is used for
face-management purpose in lieu of quantity modification purpose. The possibility still obtains that the whole
audience thought you were too long, but that the student
is too polite not to hedge her answer.

When a probability phrase modifies a medical diagnosis, its prototypical interpretation is positively correlated
with the severity of the condition. For example, addressees will think of a much higher probability when
told they ‘probably’ have cancer compared to when told
they ‘probably’ have a common cold. Now, announcing
bad news is an fta according to Politeness Theory, and
all the more threatening when the news is worse. Thus,
diagnosing a common cold does not require a politeness
strategy, but the need for such a strategy increases with
the severity of the diagnosed condition. Hence, the more
severe the condition is, the more likely the addressee is
to consider the probability phrase as a politeness marker
rather than a true likelihood modifier – and when an addressee does so, he will automatically think of the condition as having higher probability than otherwise, thus
the result of Weber and Hilton (1990).
Mistaking politeness for uncertainty Just as numerical probabilities can convey a misleading impression
of precision, verbal probabilities may convey a misleading impression of uncertainty. Sometimes, an addressee
will not realize that an fta is being performed, and will
thus mistakenly think of a probability phrase as communicating genuine uncertainty. Consider the situation
wherein a subordinate has to correct a superior. Correcting a mistake is intrinsically an fta, and the need for
politeness is made even more crucial by the fact the addressee has greater social status than the speaker. Thus,
however certain the speaker is that the addressee has
made a mistake, she will hedge her statement so as not to
be rude. Now the addressee might understand the probability phrase as implying that the speaker is genuinely
unsure whether the mistake is real, and thus fail to question and revise his initial beliefs. Being surrounded by
people who systematically use probability phrases when
correcting your mistakes is therefore likely to lead you
to have unwarranted confidence in the accuracy of your
own judgments and knowledge, a widely studied phenomenon known as ‘overconfidence’ (e.g., Klayman, Soll,
Gonzlez-Vallejo, & Barlas, 1999). Indeed, Klayman and
Burt (1998) report that overconfidence is prominent in
‘constrained’ social networks, i.e., small networks with a
leader in a central, coordinating position, and weak connections to outsiders. Correcting the mistakes of the person at the center of such a network would arguably call
for politeness strategies such as hedging. If the politeness strategy is mistaken for genuine uncertainty about
whether the leader is truly wrong, overconfidence will
quickly pervade the network.

Mistakes and Confusion
The results we have reported establish that people can
distinguish between the likelihood communication function and the face management function of verbal uncertainty, and that they interpret probability phrases
accordingly: More precisely, upon hearing that some
event x is ‘probable’ or ‘possible’, they tend to think
of x as having a higher numerical probability if it is an
fta rather than a neutral content. We are not claiming,
however, that people are perfectly accurate in their assessment of which function a given probability phrase is
meant to perform. On the contrary, we reckon that some
situations can make it difficult to judge which function
is being performed. People may thus mistake genuine
uncertainty for politeness, or politeness for genuine uncertainty. We will now consider in turn two examples of
potential confusion between face management and likelihood communication.
Mistaking uncertainty for politeness Sometimes,
a speaker will want to modify an fta with a probability phrase because she is genuinely uncertain about its
likelihood. If the addressee understands the probability
phrase to be a mere politeness marker, he will think of
the fta as having a higher probability than what the
speaker had in mind. This may help explain a puzzling phenomenon reported in Weber and Hilton (1990):

Conclusion
We have argued for the existence of two distinct functions of verbal uncertainty, which translate to different
numerical probabilities for a given probability phrase.
Whilst people appear to be sensitive to which function is
being performed, the possibility obtains in some contexts
for confusion and misunderstandings to arise. This risk
is all the higher in constrained, hierarchized networks
within which people make massive use of verbal uncertainty, have to assess the possibility of severe events, and

3

Both the inferences from ‘probably’ to ‘not certainly’ and
from ‘some’ to ‘not all’ are considered scalar implicatures by
pragmaticists (for a general neo-Gricean approach to scalar
implicatures, see Levinson, 2000; for an experimental take
at a Relevance theoretical approach of the implicature from
‘some’ to ‘not all’, see Bott & Noveck, in press). Conversational pragmatics thus pervades even what we have deemed
the likelihood communication function of verbal uncertainty,
just as it pervades most reasoning and decision making processes (see Hilton, 1995, for a review).

320

Rapoport, A., Wallsten, T. S., & Cox, J. A. (1987). Direct and indirect scaling of membership functions of
probability phrases. Mathematical Modeling, 9, 397–
417.
Teigen, K. H., & Brun, W. (1995). Yes, but it is uncertain: direction and communicative intention of verbal
probabilistic terms. Acta Psychologica, 88, 233–258.
Teigen, K. H., & Brun, W. (1999). The directionality
of verbal probability expressions: effects on decisions,
predictions, and probabilistic reasoning. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 80,
155–190.
Wallsten, T. S., & Budescu, D. V. (1995). A review of
human linguistic probability processing: general principles and empirical evidence. The Knowledge Engineering Review, 10, 43–62.
Wallsten, T. S., Budescu, D., Rapoport, A., Zwick, R.,
& Forsyth, B. (1986). Measuring the vague meanings
of probability terms. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 115, 348–365.
Weber, E. U., & Hilton, D. J. (1990). Contextual effects
in the interpretation of probability words: perceived
base-rate and severity of events. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 16, 781–789.
Zadeh, L. A. (1965). Fuzzy sets. Information and Control, 8, 338–353.

are prone to have divergent interpretations of the relevant information they work on. From this perspective,
we are tempted to think of intelligence agencies as providing us with our worst-case scenario.

Acknowledgments
Part of this research was conducted while Gaëlle Villejoubert was an invited lecturer at the Laboratoire
Dynamiques Sociales et Vie Politique, Université de
Toulouse-Le Mirail, France. We thank Denis Hilton and
Ben Slugoski for helpful discussions about probabilities
and pragmatics. We also thank Steven Sloman for helpful comments on an earlier version of this report.

References
Bott, L., & Noveck, I. A. (in press). Some utterances
are underinformative: The onset and time course of
scalar inference. Journal of Memory and Language.
Brown, P., & Levinson, S. C. (1978/1987). Politeness:
Some universals in language usage. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Budescu, D. V., & Wallsten, T. S. (1995). Processing linguistic probabilities: General principles and empirical
evidence. In J. Busemeyer, D. L. Medin, & R. Hastie
(Eds.), Decision making from a cognitive perspective.
San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Budescu, D. V., Karelitz, T. M., & Wallsten, T. S.
(2003). Determining the directionality of probability
words from their membership functions. Journal of
Behavioral Decision Making, 16, 159–180.
Channell, J. M. (1994). Vague Language. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hilton, D. J. (1995). The social context of reasoning: Conversational inference and rational judgement.
Psychological Bulletin, 107, 248–271.
Jucker, A. H., Smith, S. W., & Lüdge, T. (2003). Interactive aspects of vagueness in conversations. Journal
of Pragmatics, 35, 1737–1769.
Karelitz, T. M., & Budescu, D. V. (2004). You say ‘probable’ and I say ‘likely’: Improving interpersonal communication with verbal probability phrases. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 10, 25–41.
Klayman, J., & Burt, R. S. (1998). Individual differences in confidence and experiences in social networks.
Working paper, Center for Decision Research, Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago.
Klayman, J., Soll, J. B., Gonzlez-Vallejo, C., & Barlas, S.
(1999). Overconfidence: It depends on how, what, and
whom you ask. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 79, 216–247.
Lichtenstein, S. & Newman, J. R. (1967). Empirical scaling of common verbal phrases associated with numerical probabilities. Psychonomic Science, 9, 563–564.
Levinson, S. C. (2000). Presumptive meaning: The theory of generalized conversational implicature. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
321

