UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Compelling Promises and Hollow Threats: Why You can Keep Someone to His Promise but
Not to His Threat

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/36p0w4dz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Dieussaert, Kristien
Schaeken, Walter
Van Belle, William
et al.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Compelling Promises and Hollow Threats:
Why You can Keep Someone to His Promise but Not to His Threat
Sara Verbrugge (Sara.Verbrugge@psy.kuleuven.ac.be)
Laboratory of Experimental Psychology, University of Leuven, Tiensestraat 102
3000 Leuven, Belgium
Department of Linguistics, University of Leuven, Blijde-Inkomststraat 21
3000 Leuven, Belgium

Kristien Dieussaert (Kristien.Dieussaert@psy.kuleuven.ac.be)
Laboratory of Experimental Psychology, University of Leuven, Tiensestraat 102
3000 Leuven, Belgium

Walter Schaeken (Walter.Schaeken@psy.kuleuven.ac.be)
Laboratory of Experimental Psychology, University of Leuven, Tiensestraat 102
3000 Leuven, Belgium

William Van Belle (William.VanBelle@arts.kuleuven.ac.be)
Department of Linguistics, University of Leuven, Blijde-Inkomststraat 21
3000 Leuven, Belgium
Abstract
This paper focuses on the differences in interpretation between
promises and threats. We investigated to what extent uttering a
conditional promise or threat implies an obligation for the
speaker to carry out the reward or punishment mentioned in the
consequent. Therefore, we presented the participants of the
experiment with four promise contexts and four threat contexts.
These were each time followed by six conditional sentences of
which the antecedent remained the same and the consequent
varied in credibility. The experiment provided us with
interesting findings about the difference in interpretation
between promises and threats: there appears to be a greater
discrepancy between uttering and putting into effect the
consequent of a conditional in the case of threats than in the
case of promises.

Introduction
While the differences between conditional promises and
threats, on the one hand, and conditional tips and warnings,
on the other hand, have received ample treatment in the
psychological literature (Dieussaert, Schaeken & d’Ydewalle,
2002; Evans & Twyman-Musgrove, 1998; Newstead, Ellis,
Evans & Dennis, 1997; Ohm and Thompson 2004), not much
attention has been paid to the internal differences of the two
groups. This paper will have a closer look at the respects in
which promises and threats do differ.
More in particular, we want to question the belief that
promises and threats are predominantly interpreted in the
same way, the only difference being that promises involve a
positive consequent and threats a negative one. Based on
evidence from various corners (dictionary definitions, speech
act theory, reasoning literature…), we will argue that there is
more to this distinction.

When we have a quick look at the definitions of promises
and threats in the dictionary (Collins Cobuild), we see that a
promise is defined as ‘a statement which you make to
someone in which you say that you will definitely do
something or give them something’ while a threat is defined
as ‘a statement by someone that they will do something
unpleasant, especially if you do not do what they want’. Two
differences can be observed. Firstly, the modifier ‘definitely’
hints at the more binding character of a promise. Secondly, a
condition (‘especially if…’) is added to the threat, while this
is not the case for the promise, suggesting that threats are
mostly conditional upon something while promises might
also be unconditional.
The way promises and threats are analyzed in Speech Act
Theory (Searle, 1979; Searle, 1998; Searle & Vanderveken,
1985; Traugott & Dasher, 2002, pp. 204-214) gives us more
definite clues for their main difference. In Searle’s Speech
Act Theory a classification is made into different speech acts:
commissives, directives, assertives, expressives, declarations.
They differ in one or more felicity conditions, these are
conditions that are assumed to be fulfilled in order for a
speech act to be performed felicitously. Promises and threats
are both ‘commissives’ (i.e., they involve a commitment by
the speaker to ‘undertake the course of action represented in
the propositional content’, Searle, 1998, p. 149). However,
promises and threats differ in that ‘no obligation is involved
in threatening’ (Searle & Vanderveken, 1985, p. 193). So, it is
claimed that promises are naturally more binding than threats.
‘… promises involve a rather special kind of commitment,
namely an obligation. This undertaking of an obligation
increases the degree of strength of the commitment.’ (Searle
& Vanderveken, 1985, p. 192) In threats, there is no such
obligation and the strength of the commitment is
consequently weaker.

2307

Verbrugge, Dieussaert, Schaeken and Van Belle (2004)
provided evidence for this fact by means of a reasoning task.
Participants endorsed more inferences derived from
conditional promises than from conditional threats. This was
the case, even though they chose promise-items that were
rated in a pretest as less credible than the threat-items.
Uttering a promise was interpreted as a very strong
commitment, whereas a threat implied a looser connection
between antecedent and consequent. They also analyzed the
justifications participants gave for their acceptance or
rejection of an inference. In 13% of these justifications,
participants explicitly referred to the fact that a ‘promise’ or a
‘threat’ was concerned. An analysis of these 13% showed that
participants claimed that they endorsed the inference based on
a conditional promise because it was a promise and ‘promises
should be kept’. For threats, however, participants claimed
that they did not endorse the inference because ‘it was only a
threat’. This was a further argument in support of our claim.
These data were entirely in accordance with the way threats
and promises are analyzed in Speech Act Theory (see above).
Beller (2002; Beller & Bender, 2004; Beller, Bender, &
Kuhnmünch, in press) claims that the results obtained by
means of reasoning tasks alone are too limited to procure a
complete understanding of conditional promises and threats.
Therefore, he advocates a multidimensional approach
integrating motivational, linguistic, deontic, behavioural and
emotional aspects in order to grasp a coherent picture of
people’s reasoning and interpretation of conditional promises
and threats. More specifically related to our claim (and at
odds with the claims made by Speech Act Theory), Beller
states that both when a person uses a promise or a threat,
‘there is an obligation to cooperate if the addressee fulfills his
goal’ (2002, p. 118). For a promise, this means that when the
addressee does what has been asked in the antecedent, the
speaker has to fulfill his promise. For a threat, however, this
means that if the addressee cooperates (complies with the
speaker’s request to refrain from something), the speaker will
not punish him. In our opinion, there is some asymmetry at
this point in that, translated into the language of reasoning
tasks1, MP is the most prominent inference for promises,
while DA is the most prominent inference for threats2. Beller
explains this by saying that a threat is interpreted as its
complementary promise (e.g., from ‘If you do that, I will
punish you’ to ‘If you don’t to that, I won’t punish you’).
This complies with Fillenbaum’s claim that the ‘fallacy of the
negated antecedent is particularly intimately involved in the
understanding of conditional threats’ (1978, p. 208). In other
words, the interpretation of a conditional threat depends on
1

the hearer making the DA-inference. The hearer realizes that
he definitely must not do the antecedent. In this way, he
thinks that he will also be able to avoid the bad consequences
spelled out in the consequent. For promises, the guideline for
action is simply to follow the MP-inference. The hearer
merely has to fulfill the antecedent to obtain the reward
mentioned in the consequent.
In their investigation into the differences between
inducements and advice, Ohm and Thompson (2004) refer to
Beller’s claim that for a promise the speaker is obliged to
ensure the outcome of the consequent once the antecedent has
been complied with, while for a threat there is an obligation to
withhold the punishment if the antecedent is not fulfilled.
Ohm and Thompson (2004), however, modify this finding.
They make the interesting observation that someone who
utters a promise is more highly perceived to be under the
obligation to ensure the outcome of what he has promised
than is the case for threats. They asked participants whether
they thought that the speaker was obliged to ensure the
outcome (i.e., the consequent): 37% of the responses for
threats indicated that the speaker was obliged to ensure the
outcome, which contrasts with the 90% rate for promises
(Ohm & Thompson, 2004). As they note themselves, this is at
odds with Beller (2002). Therefore, they prefer speaking in
terms of permission for threats (there is a permission to
punish if the antecedent has not been fulfilled), whereas
obligations do hold for promises (there is an obligation to
reward if the antecedent has been fulfilled) (see also above
Verbrugge et al., 2004).
In this manuscript, we will combine the analysis of speech
acts and the threads Beller (2002; Beller, Bender, &
Kuhnmünch, in press), Ohm and Thompson (2004),
Verbrugge et al. (2004) have spun concerning obligations for
promises and threats. More particularly, we will adduce
evidence that there appears to be a significant difference in
the strength of link between uttering a conditional promise or
threat and putting it into effect.
The present research was set up to overcome two
difficulties in the previous literature. Firstly, what is
innovating about our approach is that we investigate the link
between saying something and doing it. Although Speech Act
Theory is obviously interested in how saying something
involves doing it, it appears that there looms a large gap
between uttering words and doing what those words say. This
has not been looked at in the literature mentioned above,
which is a serious shortcoming in our opinion. This study
attempts to fill this gap. Secondly, the claims made in Speech
Act Theory have not been directly experimentally tested
(apart from Verbrugge et al., 2004). So, in this study we
attempt to go beyond the intuitions of a small group of
linguists and we try to find more solid grounds for these
claims by testing the linguistic claims experimentally.

In such experiments participants are given a conditional sentence
and are asked about the four classical arguments in propositional
logic: Modus Ponens, Modus Tollens, Affirming the Consequent,
Denying the Antecedent.
2
In an MP-inference the conditional rule is given, followed by the
antecedent, then the participant is asked about the occurrence of
the consequent. In the DA-inference the conditional rule is given,
the antecedent is denied, and then the speaker is asked about the
occurrence of the consequent.

Experiment

2308

We set up an experiment in which we offered participants
four promise contexts and four threat contexts consisting both
of high-credibility and low-credibility items. The experiment

investigates the strength of link between uttering a particular
conditional promise or conditional threat and carrying out the
promise or threat. On the basis of the literature discussed
above, we hypothesize that the distance between uttering and
carrying out will be smaller for a conditional promise than for
a conditional threat.

Method

Sofie and Lynn are having an argument at a party. They
are hurling reproaches at one another. All of a sudden,
Sofie exclaims:
Items
Score A: Score B:
uttering
carrying
out
E1 If you insult me, my boyfriend
will punch you in the face.
E2 If you insult me, I will punch
you in the face.
E3 If you insult me, I will refuse
to talk to you.
E4 If you insult me, I will kill you.
E5 If you insult me, I will refuse
to help you evermore.
E6 If you insult me, I will refuse
to come to your party tomorrow.

Participants
Thirty-nine secondary school students (fifth and sixth grade)
took part in the experiment. None of them had had any
training in logic.
Materials
The test consisted of eight items: four promise contexts and
four threat contexts. One item comprised of a particular
context followed by six conditional sentences. The antecedent
of these conditionals remained the same in all six sentences,
only the consequent varied in credibility. The consequents
were intuitively selected, including both highly credible and
less credible items. The participants were asked to indicate by
means of a seven-point scale to what extent they deemed the
conditional sentence probable in the given context. A
distinction was made between the probability of uttering that
conditional promise or threat in the given context and the
probability of carrying it out. For each of the conditional
promises or threats they had to indicate how probable they
considered it that someone would say or carry out the
conditional promise or threat in the given context. For an
example see below (Figure 1, see also Appendix).

How probable is it in your opinion that Sofie
A. utters the threats above? (score A)
B. carries out the threats above? (score B)

Design
Each participant received eight different contexts, each
followed by six threats or promises. The experimental design
was set up as a within subjects design. The independent
variables were type of inducement (promise and threat) and
credibility (high and low). For the pretest, the dependent
variable was the score on the ‘carrying out’ question. For the
experiment proper, the score on the ‘carrying out’ question
was subtracted from the score on the ‘saying’ question and
was used as the dependent variable.

Can you score each sentence on a seven-point scale
according to its probability in the given context, whereby:
1 = Impossible
2 = Highly unlikely
3 = Unlikely
4 = Could be true, but could just the same not be true
5 = Likely
6 = Very likely
7 = Certain
Figure 1: Example item.

Results

Procedure
It was a paper-and-pencil task. Each participant received a
questionnaire of 5 A4-sheets. The first page included the
instructions. The instructions and items were presented to the
participants in Dutch, their mother tongue. Every participant
received the same questionnaire. It took the average
participant 15 minutes to fill in the questionnaire.

On the basis of the results obtained in the test, we selected
two conditional sentences per context: the items participants
thought most and least credible. In other words, we decided to
retain the items with the highest and lowest score per context
as high-credibility and low-credibility items respectively. For
the selection of these items, only the scores for ‘carrying out’
were taken into consideration. For the credible items the score
was 4 (= could be true, but could just the same not be true) or
higher and for the incredible items the score was 3 (=
unlikely) or lower. An ANOVA-analysis did not reveal any
significant differences between promises and threats.
Moreover, planned comparisons revealed no significant
differences between the high-credibility promises (4.76) and
high-credibility threats (5.08) and the low-credibility
promises (1.82) and low-credibility threats (1.67)
respectively. However, planned comparisons showed that the
high-credibility promises differed significantly from the lowcredibility promises (p<.01) and the high-credibility threats
differed significantly from the low-credibility threats (p<.01).

2309

Moreover, an ANOVA-analysis confirmed that the
conditional with high probability and the conditional with low
probability per context differed significantly in each case (see
Table 1). These materials were used as the basis for the
analysis that will be discussed below.

Lambda (4,35)= .55 p<.0005) with the difference for threats
(0.84) being greater than for promises (0.34), a main effect of
credibility (Wilks’ Lambda (4,35)= .45 p<.0001), and an
interaction effect between pragmatic type and credibility
(Wilks’ Lambda (4,35)= .61 p<.005).
For ease of interpretation, Figure 2 represents the results of
the interaction effect in a graph.

Table 1: Results comparison high – low credibility items.
Compared items
A2 - A3
B3 - B4
C1 - C3
D6 - D2
Threats

E6 - E4
F3 - F2
G1 - G4
H4 - H5

Statistics
F(1,38)=235.
59 p<.0001
F(1,38)=124.
63 p<.0001
F(1,38)=112.
61 p<.0001
F(1,38)=51.5
8 p<.0001
F(1,38)=247.
93 p<.0001
F(1,38)=216.
63 p<.0001
F(1,38)=209.
26 p<.0001
F(1,38)=144.
99 p<.0001

Uttering minus carrying out
Uttering minus carrying out

Pragmatic type
Promises

1,6
1,4
1,2
1
0,8
0,6
0,4
0,2
0

promise
threat

high

low
Credibility

A comparison was made between the promises and threats
we selected (most and least credible items) with regard to the
difference in score between uttering and carrying out the
consequent of a conditional. For every conditional, the score
of carrying out was subtracted from the score of uttering. This
was done because we are primarily interested in the link
between saying something and doing something, and this
cannot be attained by means of the other analyses. We could
also have had a look at the scores for saying something and
carrying it out separately, but we thought they could only
throw a partial light on the link between both. Nevertheless,
we will present the results here in brief, in order not to
obscure potential differences that might not be observable
when only considering the difference score. As said above,
items were chosen on the basis of the scores for ‘carrying out’
so that no differences were observed between promises and
threats3. An ANOVA-analysis for the results of ‘uttering’
showed that promises and threats differed (F(1,38)=17,59,
p<.001). Planned comparisons revealed that the highcredibility threats scored higher than the high-credibility
promises (p<.01) and that the low-credibility threats scored
higher than the low-credibility promises (p<.001).
As for our main point of interest (i.e. the difference scoreresults), a MANOVA-analysis was conducted with pragmatic
type (promise - threat) and credibility (high – low) as repeated
measures. It revealed a main effect of pragmatic type (Wilks’

Figure 2: Difference uttering – carrying out.
Scores for uttering – carrying out: high credibility promises =
0.15; high credibility threats = 0.28; low credibility promises
= 0.52; low credibility threats = 1.40.
As for the difference between promises and threats, a
planned comparison revealed a significant difference between
low-credibility promises and low-credibility threats (p<.0001)
and no significant difference between high-credibility
promises and high-credibility threats. We can conclude that
the main effect of pragmatic type is due to the low-credibility
items.
As for the difference between the high-credibility and the
low-credibility condition, a planned comparison revealed a
significant difference between high-credibility threats and
low-credibility threats (p<.0005) and no significant difference
between high-credibility promises and low-credibility
promises. We can conclude that the effect of credibility is
mainly due to the threat items.

Discussion

3

There is clearly a bigger difference between uttering the
consequent of a conditional and putting it into effect for
threats than for promises. In the case of a threat, there appears
to be a greater discrepancy between saying and doing: it is not
because someone utters a threat, that this will be interpreted
as an obligation to ensure the outcome (cf. Ohm &
Thompson, 2004). For promises we observe a stronger link
between uttering a conditional promise and carrying it out.
The main effect of credibility was what we expected. It
goes without saying that there will be a larger gap between
uttering something and putting it into effect for lowcredibility promises and threats than for highly credible
promises and threats.

In further research it would be interesting to start from an
equation of the scores for ‘saying’ for promises and threats and to
see whether low-credibility threats would be scored much lower
than low-credibility promises on the ‘carrying out’ question. Based
on our previous research, we confidently hypothesize that this will
be the case.
2310

The interaction effect offers the most interesting results.
The main effects of pragmatic type (threat > promise) and of
credibility (high > low) are apparently for the largest part due
to the big increase for low-credibility threats. There is an
increase between uttering and carrying out both in the case of
promises and of threats. However, the increase is far more
remarkable for the threat-items. While the planned
comparison revealed no significant difference between highcredibility promises and low-credibility promises, it did
reveal a significant difference between high-credibility threats
and low-credibility threats.
These results indicate that the connection between saying
and doing is much stronger for promises than for threats. This
suggests that promises maintain the implicature that promise
is debt (cf. Verbrugge et al., 2004), even in the low-credibility
condition. The strength of the connection between saying and
doing, on the other hand, decreases considerably in the lowcredibility condition for threats. That may well be the reason
why threats will be uttered more easily, because no belief will
be attached to their potential realization anyhow.

Conclusion
The experiment discussed in this paper has shown that there
is indeed an important difference in the interpretation of
conditional promises and threats. While promise is and
remains debt, threat is quite another matter. Uttering a
promise is interpreted as a real commitment, whereas threats
imply a looser connection between antecedent and
consequent (cf. Verbrugge et al., 2004)
The experiment provided us with the observation that there
is a greater discrepancy between uttering and carrying out a
conditional threat than a conditional promise. While both
were attached as much belief to in the high-credibility
condition, there was a large divergence in the low-credibility
condition. We can conclude that there are important
differences to be observed between conditional promises and
threats, that have often been overlooked. While promises
should be kept, threats are easier said than done. That is also
the reason why you can keep someone to his promise, but not
to his threat.
In terms of speech act theory, we could claim that promises
will probably have a greater perlocutionary effect (i.e., the
bringing about of effects on the audience by means of uttering
the sentence, cf. Levinson, 2003, p. 236) on the hearer than
threats. Because participants know the consequent of a
promise (i.e., the reward) should be given, it is a greater
incentive to comply with the antecedent. For threats,
however, there is a bigger chance that the consequent (i.e., the
punishment) will not be carried out and therefore it is a less
compelling argument. Threats can be uttered gratuitously,
without sincere intentions, because no obligations arise for
carrying out these threats.
This is also in accordance with the general idea in learning
psychology and education that rewards are better at inducing
a change in behavior than punishments. Our study suggests
that using promises instead of threats might also be more
effective in changing behavior.

When one utters a promise, one enters into an obligation
and therefore promises are more compelling, while threats
often remain hollow words. Or, as the seventeenth century
philosopher Hobbes (Leviathan, 1651, pt.3 chapter 38, p. 456,
as cited in Traugott & Dasher, 2002, p. 205) put it: 'Even
amongst men, though the promise of good, bind the promiser;
yet threats, that is to say, promises of evil, bind them not.'

Acknowledgments
Preparation of this manuscript was supported by a grant from
the Fund for Scientific Research-Flanders (FWO).

References
Beller, S. (2002). Conditional promises and threats –
Cognition and emotion. Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
113-118). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Beller, S., & Bender, A. (2004). Cultural differences in
cognition and emotion of conditional promises and threats
– comparing Germany and Tonga. Proceedings of the
Twenty-Sixth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 85-90). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Beller, S., Bender, A., & Kuhnmünch, G. (in press).
Understanding conditional promises and threats. Thinking
and Reasoning.
Collins Cobuild English Dictionary. (1995). London: Harper
Collins Publishers.
Dieussaert, K., Schaeken, W., & d’Ydewalle, G. (2002). The
relative contribution of content and context factors on the
interpretation of conditionals. Experimental Psychology,
49, 181-195.
Evans, J. St. B. T., & Twyman-Musgrove, J. (1998).
Conditional reasoning with inducements and advice.
Cognition, 69 (1), B11-B16.
Fillenbaum, S. (1978). How to do some things with IF. In J.
W. Cotton & R. L. Klatzky (Eds.), Semantic factors in
cognition. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Levinson, S. C. (2003). Pragmatics. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Newstead, S. E., C. Ellis, J. St. B. T. Evans & I. Dennis
(1997). Conditional Reasoning with Realistic Material.
Thinking and Reasoning, 3 (1), 49-76.
Ohm, E., & Thompson, V. (2004). Everyday reasoning with
inducements and advice. Thinking and Reasoning, 10 (3),
241-272.
Searle, J. R. (1979). Expression and Meaning. Studies in the
Theory of Speech Acts. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Searle, J. R. (1998). Mind, language and society: Philosophy
in the real world. New York: Basic books.
Searle, J.R., & Vanderveken, D. (1985). Foundations of
illocutionary logic. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Traugott, E. C., & Dasher, R. B. (2002). Regularity in
Semantic Change. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

2311

Verbrugge, S., Dieussaert, K., Schaeken, W., & Van Belle,
W. (2004), Promise is debt, threat another matter. The
effect of credibility on the interpretation of conditional
promises and threats. Canadian Journal of Experimental
Psychology / Revue canadienne de psychologie
expérimentale 58 (2), 106-112.

Appendix
Promises: high credibility
A2 If you are a good boy this afternoon, you will get an ice
cream after dinner.
B3 If you help me with my maths exercises, I will treat you to
a drink tonight.
C1 If you obtain 60% for this test, chapter 5 will be omitted
from the exam.
D6 If you get married in church, we will buy you a wide
screen television set.
Promises: low credibility
A3 If you are a good boy this afternoon, you will be allowed
to stay at home tomorrow instead of going to school.
B4 If you help me with my maths exercises, I will do your
homework for the rest of the year.

C3 If you obtain 60% for this test, you will be excused for the
exam.
D2 If you get married in church, we will pay your living costs
for a year.
Threats: high credibility
E6 If you insult me, I will refuse to come to your party
tomorrow.
F3 If you keep on making nasty remarks, we will have to
return home immediately.
G1 If you chatter during lessons, you will be sent out into the
corridor.
H4 If you tell your little brother that Santa Claus does
not exist, you will have to stand in the corner.
Threats: low credibility
E4 If you insult me, I will kill you.
F2 If you keep on making nasty remarks, I will ignore every
traffic light.
G4 If you chatter during lessons, you will be expelled from
school.
H5 If you tell your little brother that Santa Claus does not
exist, we will refuse to look after you any longer.

2312

