UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Computational Modeling of Chord Fingering for String Instruments

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7cp5z258

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
Lombrozo, Tania

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Computational Modeling of
Chord Fingering for String Instruments
Daniele P. Radicioni (radicion@di.unito.it)
Centro di Scienza Cognitiva - Università e Politecnico di Torino
Via Po, 14 - 10123 Torino, Italy

Vincenzo Lombardo (vincenzo@di.unito.it)
Dipartimento di Informatica - Università di Torino
Corso Svizzera, 185 - 10149 Torino, Italy
Abstract
Fingering is a cognitive process that maps each note
on a music score to a fingered position on some instrument. This paper presents a computational model for
the fingering process with string instruments, based on
a constraint satisfaction approach. The model is implemented in a computer program, which has been tested
in an experiment in comparison with three human experts. The results have confirmed the predictions based
on a set of constraints that encode the bio-mechanical
aspects of the performer’s hand in its interaction with
the musical instrument.

Introduction
Music performance involves the transformation of symbolic representations of a score into physical gestures
that can operate a music instrument. A model of music
performance consists of the interpretation of the score
and the application of the gestures to some sound synthesis device that represents the instrument. Gesture
modeling is favorably coupled with a physical model of
the instrument, since the latter permits a natural representation of the performer/instrument interaction.
Fingering is an essential part of gesture modeling,
since it significantly affects the technical and expressive
qualities of the sounds being produced (Traube et al.,
2003). Since fingering defines for each note in the score
both the position on the keyboard/fingerboard and the
(left hand) finger involved in playing, it sets the parameters that influence the final timbre of the sound during
performance. In this paper, we address the modeling
of the fingering process for the guitar. The case of guitar, and of string instruments in general, is particularly
relevant, since the same note can be played in several
positions on the fingerboard.
Fingering is a complex cognitive process of music production that relates a score, together with the technical and ”idiomatic” aspects of the instrument for which
that score has been conceived, and a performer, with
all her/his knowledge upon the piece, the composer’s
intentions and the execution style (Clarke et al., 1997;
Parncutt et al., 1997). So, fingering involves several competences: musical analysis, for the interpretation of the
notes in input, physical constraints, posed by the instrument where the notes have to be played, bio-mechanical
constraints, which characterize the possible figures of the
hand.

Moreover, modeling the fingering process can contribute to the development of automatic performance environments (Parncutt, 1997). In fact, despite its central
role in music performance, scores often lack of fingering indications, considered unnecessary (being common
knowledge within a certain musical practice) or an execution choice (Gilardino, 1975a, 1975b). Therefore, a
cognitive model may supply this fundamental information.
The fingering problem consists in determining for each
note in the score, a position <string, fret> on the fingerboard and a finger of the left hand that presses it.
The notion of position provides a unique identifier for the
correspondence between the note and the fingerboard. A
fingered position is the triple <string, fret, finger>,
combining a position with one of the four available fingers. Provided that guitarists do use four fingers of the
left hand (from the index to the little finger), n notes
generate up to 4n different fingerings in the worst case.
Since the same note can be found on up to 4 positions
(i.e., pairs <string, fret>) (Figure 1), this number
might grow up to 16n .
From the temporal point of view, fingering can be
decomposed into two subproblems: the fingering of
melodies, where the notes to be played form a sequence,
and the fingering of chords, where multiple notes (2 to
6 in the case of guitar) have to be played simultaneously. The two subproblems are addressed differently. In
melody fingering, the fingered position of one note depends on the application of constraints over a sequence
of notes, and the model must account for the consistency of subsequent positions; in chord fingering, the
fingered position of one note depends on the other notes
of the chord, and all the positions must satisfy the constraints applied at the same time. We must also consider
that a whole account of fingering includes both melody
and chord fingerings, since a melody can consist of both
chords and individual notes.
In previous papers we have addressed the melody
fingering problem in the reduced case of individual
notes (Radicioni et al., 2004); in this paper we approach the chord fingering problem by introducing a
novel model based on the constraint satisfaction problem
(CSP) framework. CSP framework has been successful
in modeling several problems, like map coloring, vision,
robotics, job-shop scheduling, diagnosis, spatiotemporal
reasoning, etc. (Dechter, 1998). A constraint satisfac-

1791

strings

frets

0

I

II

III

IV

V

1

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

76

2

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

71

3

55

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

67

4

50

51

52

53

54

55

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

5

45

46

47

48

49

50

51

52

53

54

55

56

57

6

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

51

52

VI VII VIII IX

X

XI XII

Figure 1: Outline of the notes (indicated as MIDI numbers) on a guitar fingerboard, showing that the same
tone can be found on up to 4 different positions, i.e.,
the case of E treble (MIDI number 64), that lies at <1,
0>, <2, 5>, <3, 9>, <4,14> (the figure displays only
the first XII frets). The fret labelled 0 indicates an open
string: i.e., the note produced by plucking the string
without pressing any fret.

The models in (Sayegh, 1989), (Parncutt et al., 1997)
and (Radicioni et al., 2004) are fully functional computational models. In this case the models have been implemented in systems that are able to take in input a score
and return a sequence of fingered positions (consider, in
fact, that both models addressed the melody fingering
problem). These models share the principle of penalizing difficulties: fingering is represented like a search for a
combination of positions that pursues an overall effortsaving behavior. The model in (Parncutt et al., 1997)
addresses the main ergonomic constraints that pianists
meet while playing melodies. The fingering is computed
in two steps, with a “generate and test” approach: enumeration of all possible fingerings, and weighting of fingerings according to the degree of difficulty. Weighting
is conducted on the basis of a set of 12 rules, each one
determining the contribution of some source to an overall difficulty score (e.g., rule 6 slightly discourages the
use of ring and little fingers by penalizing their use with
a heavier score). In such setting, the lowest rated fingering is ”the one that [...] will be used most often in
performance” (Parncutt et al., 1997).
The algorithmic approach proposed by Sayegh (1989)
exploits a graph-based representation, with the vertices
grouped in layers; for each note, the possible fingered
positions, each encoded by a vertex, form a layer; each
vertex of a layer is connected to all the vertices of the
following layer. Weights on the edges represent the difficulties of a transition from a fingered position to the
next. The problem of finding a suitable fingering is represented as the problem of finding a path in the graph, such
that the difficulties are minimized. Unfortunately, neither the sources of difficulty (in the form of constraints
on bio-mechanical, ergonomic or cognitive factors) nor
experimental results on the viability of this approach
have been provided by Sayegh. Recent evidence support
the fact that performers pursue an overall effort-saving
behavior (Parncutt et al., 1997; Parlitz et al., 1998; Heijink & Meulenbroek, 2002). The graph-based Sayegh’s
approach has been recently improved by Radicioni et al.
(2004) by introducing the relevant notion of segmentation of a music score and a characterization of the biomechanical constraints (see also below).
The present work proposes a model which attempts to
grasp the main physical and bio-mechanical difficulties
implied in chord fingering. The overall approach is similar to Parncutt & colleagues’ for the case of keyboard
instruments in melody fingering. The novelties of our
approach are the framework in which the problem is encoded, namely the CSP framework, the application to
the chord fingering problem and an experimental validation. We now introduce the CSP framework and the
encoding of the fingering problem.

tion problem consists in assigning values to variables,
which satisfy a set of constraints. Here we cast the
chord fingering problem by representing each note that
composes a chord as a variable; each variable may then
be assigned up to 16 values given by the possible fingered positions (triples <string, fret, finger>), and
physical and bio-mechanical constraints restrict the viable instantiations. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first modeling attempt that addresses specifically
the chord fingering problem.
The paper is organized as follows: we first review the
existing approaches to general fingering; then we introduce the CSP methodology and we show that the fingering problem can be cast in CSP terms together with
the search strategy. Finally, we present and discuss the
results of an experimental test in which we compare the
output of the implemented model on 34 chords with the
fingerings provided by 3 expert guitarists.

Related work
The interdisciplinary nature of the fingering problem has
been addressed from several points of view, both in the
music practice and the scientific research. In the music practice, the importance of fingering is acknowledged
in music performance (Gilardino, 1975a; 1975b), composition (see e.g., Aguado, 1843), education (Gellrich &
Parncutt, 1998) and theory (Duarte, 1966). In the scientific research, motor behavior in the fingering process has
been investigated in (Palmer & Meyer, 2000), sometimes
with a focus on keyboard and fingerboard instruments
(Jacobs, 2001; Heijink & Meulenbroek, 2002). Physical
parameters that result from fingering have been taken
into account in the physical model of the classical guitar
by Cuzzucoli and Lombardo (1999), while others have inferred some aspects of the instrumental gesture, including fingering, by analyzing the signal that results from
the sound production process (Traube et al., 2003). The
cognitive issues involved in fingering have been raised
in the introductive work of Sloboda (1985), refined by
Clarke et al. (1997) for the case of keyboard fingering,
and modeled with a computational approach by Parncutt (1997) and Parncutt et al. (1997).

Chord fingering modeled as a constraint
satisfaction problem

1792

The fingering model takes in input chords described by
a score in the traditional western music notation (called
common practice notation – CPN) and returns in output all the fingerings that satisfy a set of constraints that

Table 1: The set of bio-mechanical constraints.

V1

Set of constraints
One note per string: on each string it is possible to play at
most one note at a time

V3

V2

Max span over finger pairs: for each finger pair, there exists
a maximum span that can never be exceeded:

index

middle

ring

little

little

4

3

1

-

-

ring

3

0

middle

2

-

index

-

≠
V2

NoOverlaps: higher fingers press higher frets

maxSpan

V1

V4

a)

≠
≠
≠

V4

≠
V3

b)

Figure 2: Frame a): The map-coloring problem, consisting of assigning a color (from a set of colors) to each
region of the map, such that no two adjacent regions
have the same color. Frame b): its equivalent graph.

Barré index : all the positions of the barré are on the same
fret and all the other positions in the chord are in highernumbered frets

are derived from the instrument shape and the anatomy
of the hand. The problem is cast in CSP terms, where
the variables are the notes indicated in the score, the
domains of the variables are the fingered positions (i.e.
position on the fingerboard plus a finger of the left hand)
and the set of constraints that restrict the possible combinations of fingered positions. In the case several fingerings satisfy such a set of constraints, the model also
provides a ranking on comfort accounts. We now introduce the problem cast in CSP and the search strategy
that computes the suitable fingerings.

Problem representation
Given that CSP variables are the notes and the domains
are the fingered positions, we need to define a suitable set
of constraints. Based on guitar handbooks from historical composers (Aguado, 1843) and contemporary teachers (Duarte, 1966), on a review of some of the didactic
opuses of the early 19th century guitar composers (Giuliani, 1812; Sor, 1815) and on our musical experience, we
devised a set of bio-mechanical constraints that express
which combinations of fingered positions could actually
be played by a human performer (see Table 1). One
note per string expresses the constraint that it is possible to play at most one note at a time on each string,
so any position prevents from other placements on the
same string; no overlaps ensures that higher-numbered
fingers press higher-numbered frets1 ; max spans over finger pairs expresses a maximum span of frets for each pair
of fingers, that can never be exceeded2 . Finally, since a
chord can be composed by 2 to 6 fingered positions and
the available fingers are only four, we can apply the barré
technique, in which a single finger can press more than
one position simultaneously. We restrict the use of barré
to the index finger: the constraint Barré index states
1
Recall that we start numbering fingers from index, numbered 1, to little finger, numbered 4, and frets from I to XVII
(see Figure 1).
2
There also exists a minimum span, which is not reported
here for space reasons.

that all the positions of the barré are on the same fret
and all the other positions in the chord are in higher
numbered frets.
Given such a set of constraints, the fingering problem can be encoded as a CSP: a CSP consists of
the assignment of values to variables, which satisfy
a set of constraints. A constraint satisfaction problem P = {X , D, C} is defined by a set of variables,
X1 , X2 , ..., Xn , and a set of constraints, C1 , C2 , ..., Cm .
Each variable Xi has a domain Di of possible values.
Each constraint Ci involves a subset of the variables and
specifies the allowed combinations of values for the current subset. An assignment that satisfies all the constraints is a consistent assignment, and a solution to a
CSP is an assignment to all the variables so that all constraints are satisfied (Kumar, 1992). In order to represent graphically a CSP, one can build the equivalent constraint graph, in which each vertex represents a variable,
and each arc represents a constraint between variables
standing at the end points of the arc. A typical example
of CSP is the map-coloring problem, depicted in Figure 2:
four regions on a map have to be colored in such a way
that no two adjacent regions have the same color. In
the CSP formulation, we have a variable for each region
and its domain is the whole set of colors. For each pair
of variables corresponding to adjacent regions there is a
binary constraint that prevents from assigning the same
value to adjacent vertices.
Our formulation of the fingering problem for chords
can be stated as follows: we are given 1) a set of variables: the notes composing the chord; 2) a finite and discrete domain for each variable: from 1 up to 16 fingered
positions (that is, 4 positions combined with the 4 available fingers) per note; 3) a set of constraints defined over
each pair of the original set of variables plus the barré
specific constraint. The goal is to find one assignment
to the variables such that the assignment satisfies all the
constraints; yet, if more than a unique assignment arises,
the goal is to rank them in order to predict which will
be preferred by human performers.
The graph in Figure 3 represents a chord fingering
problem. For example, the note F2, corresponding to the
variable x in the graph, could be played on <6,1,1> i.e.
on the 6th string, 1st fret, by index finger; on <6,1,2>, by
middle finger; and so forth. Each vertex is connected to

1793

z

Dz = {<6,13,1>,<6,13,2>,<6,13,3> <6,13,4>,
<5,8,1>,<5,8,2>,<5,8,3>,<5,8,4>,
<4,3,1> <4,3,2> <4,3,3> <4,3,4>}

y

Dy = {<6,8,1>,<6,8,2>,<6,8,3> <6,8,4>,
<5,3,1>,<5,3,2>,<5,3,3>,<5,3,4>}

x

Dx = {<6,1,1>,<6,1,2>,<6,1,3> <6,1,4>}

Figure 3: A chord in input and the domains related to
each note of the chord. Each triple in the note domains
indicates <string,fret,finger>.

all the other vertices: an edge connecting two vertices,
e.g. x and y, indicates that while pressing a fingered
position related to y, the performer is constrained by
pressing a fingered position related to x.

The search strategy
Given a representation in CSP terms, a search strategy is applied to find the assignments to variables that
satisfy the constraints. A CSP search strategy propagates constraints statically to yield a simpler problem
and then proceeds with a standard depth-first algorithm
to ground the variables. In case the algorithm reaches
a dead end, backtracking resorts to the last instantiated
variable that has alternatives open.
Constraint propagation reduces the size of the variable
domains while not affecting the final set of solutions. The
graph of the simplified problem satisfies the properties
of arc-consistency and path-consistency. Arc-consistency
means that given an arc (Vx , Vy ) −i.e., connecting the
variable x to the variable y−, it is arc consistent if for
every value i in Dx , there is some value j in Dy such
that the instantiations Vx = i and Vy = j are permitted by the binary constraint between Vx and Vy . Pathconsistency (or k-consistency) means that it is possible
to instantiate up to k-variables consistently. Since pathconsistency has an exponential complexity, it is customary to trade-off between the consistency degree and the
computational effort via the introduction of the directional arc-consistency and directional path-consistency
(Dechter, 2003). Directionality limits consistency to apply only along a given order on variables: in the case of
directional path-consistency that is adopted in this paper, given the order < x1 , x2 , ..., xn >, the requirement
is that for all i, j ≤ k we have that {xi , xj } is pathconsistent relatively to xk . Directional path-consistency
is useful in the modeling of the fingering process since the
search intuitively starts from one fingered position and
then proceeds through the order given by the increasing
pitch. Increasing pitch provides a natural order over the
notes of a chord; the whole western classical harmony
theory is grounded on this principle. The application of
directional path-consistency to the chord fingering problem implies that the performer considers only a subset of
the cartesian product of the fingered positions available
for each note of the chord as s/he proceeds in order of
increasing pitch.

In particular, the algorithm that checks the directional
path-consistency scans the variables in order and retrieves, for each note, the relative domain. Once reached
the k -th variable, the algorithm restricts the domains
of the lower variables on the basis of the constraints
that involve any xi ≤ xk and xk ; the algorithm then
iterates the restriction taking as reference the variable
xk−1 and restricting the domains of xi ≤ xk−1 ; and so
on. The same iterative process is executed on pairs of
linked variables, thus restricting the combined domains
on the basis of the constraints with respect to a higher
variable. So, the combined domains of xi and xj are
restricted with respect to the domain of some variable
xk ≥ xi and xj . Once the graph has been made directional path-consistent, a depth-first search with backtracking occurs. The search follows the natural order,
and starts by combining pairs of fingered positions from
higher strings (namely, the basses: the sixth and fifth
string in Fig. 1), lower frets and lower fingers. Underpinned by the didactic guitar literature (Aguado, 1843;
Duarte, 1966), we assume that playing at the lower frets
is more comfortable; yet, the first fingers (index, middle)
are stronger, and then they are expected to press the
strings with more ease (see also Parncutt et al., 1997):
the first fingerings that the search finds are expected to
be more comfortable than the last ones.
So the search strategy implements a preference for
comfortable fingerings, given the evidence that, in absence of higher cognitive constraints like phrasing, performers choose the bio-mechanically easiest solutions
(Heijink & Meulenbroek, 2002). This is immediately applicable to cases of chord fingering on spot (out of any
musical context), like in pedagogical situations. These
cases are considered for the experimental validation described below.

Example
Let us consider the chord presented in Figure 3. The
order of variables is {x, y, z}. The directional pathconsistency algorithm performs two steps: a) the domain
of each variable i < z is revised (that is, restricted) relatively to z; b) each binary constraint (combining the
allowed pairs of values from i and j) Rij , i, j ≤ z is
further revised relative to z. The combinations that are
still available after running the algorithm are in Table 2.
Step a: DPC revises (that is, restricts the domain of)
y relatively to z, yielding Dy = {<6,8,1>; <6,8,2>;
<6,8,3>; <5,3,1>; <5,3,2>; <5,3,3> };
then it revises x relative to z and x relative to y, yielding
Dx = { <6,1,1>; <6,1,2>; <6,1,3> }.
Step b: inconsistencies are deleted from Rxy , obtaining
Rxy = { [<6,1,1>,<5,3,2>]; [<6,1,1>,<5,3,3>] }.
When DPC terminates, the graph is directional pathconsistent relatively to the order, and the combinations
of fingered positions which satisfy the constraints are
presented in Table 2: on this new and simpler problem
we perform the search.
The depth-first search takes the first entry of the fingered positions in Rxy , and searches in Ryz for a combination such that y ∈ Rxy = y ∈ Ryz . Then it is

1794

the fingerings computed by the model are recognized to
be practicable by the experts (the set of constraints is
adequate); 2) the fingerings provided by human experts
(that had to indicate only three fingerings) must be a
subset of those computed by the model (human performers have further constraints that are not related to biomechanical issues). 3) A weak prediction concerns the
order of the control strategy in terms of strings, frets
and fingers, which is consistent with the instrumental
practice. In this case we predict that the highest ranked
fingerings of the model and the experts coincide.
Results. 1) All the fingerings computed by the model
have been found viable (100% precision), and 2) include
those provided by the experts, except for overall 6 cases
(over 218 fingerings computed in total by the model, so
2.75% missing – 97.25% recall); 3) on average over the
three experts, the 66.6% of the highest ranked fingerings
computed by the model matched the highest ranked by
the experts (67.6% of the first expert, 70.6% of the second, 61.7% of the third); making the comparison over
the first three fingerings, on average over the three experts 48% of the triplet found by the model matched
exactly the triplet provided by the experts (47%, 47%,
50%).

Table 2: ”Legal” combinations after DPC algorthm has
terminated. The search is then performed on this simplified problem.
Rxy

Ryz

Rxz

<6, 1,1>,<5, 3,2>

<5, 3,1>, <4, 3,1>

<6, 1,1>, <4, 3,2>

<6, 1,1>,<5, 3,3>

<5, 3,1>, <4, 3,2>

<6, 1,1>, <4, 3,3>

<5, 3,2>, <4, 3,1>

<6, 1,1>, <4, 3,4>

<5, 3,2>, <4, 3,3>

<6, 1,2>, <4, 3,4>

<5, 3,3>, <4, 3,4>
<6, 8,1>, <5, 8,1>
<6, 8,1>, <5, 8,2>
<6, 8,2>, <5, 8,2>
<6, 8,2>, <5, 8,3>
<6, 8,3>, <5, 8,4>

checked whether the tuple {x, z} ∈ Rxz , (it is a solution) or not (it is a dead-end). Whenever the search
reaches a dead end, it performs backtracking to the
last instantiated variable that still has alternatives available. In the case exemplified, the search leads to the solutions {<6,1,1>, <5,3,2>, <4,3,3>} and {<6,1,1>,
<5,3,3>, <4,3,4>}.
In general, the higher the connectivity of the problem, the smaller the number of solutions, thus more
notes compose the chord, the more the performer is constrained: e.g., if the entire F Major chord (F2-C3-F3A3-C4-F4) spanning over the 6 strings was examined, a
single solution would have been found, despite a widely
larger number of possible combinations.

Discussion and conclusion

Experimental validation

The analysis of the results informs that the set of constraints, given the restricted conditions of the experiment that does not take into account any musical context, performs well. The 6 missed fingerings are due to
a heavy restriction of the Max span constraint, which
forbids large stretches between the middle and ring fingers although these seem realizable by human experts.
In fact, the current model does not take into account the
diminishing width of frets towards the body end of the
fingerboard, thus making the difficulty associated with
stretching constant all along.
The control strategy only makes a weak prediction.
However, this is more controversial even in the human
experts data. In fact, there is a poor homogeneity of
the first fingerings provided by the human performers
(only in the 67% of the cases they agree on the preferred
fingering). If we neglect the finger component of the
triple (<string, fret, finger>), we can compare the
results on the basis of the pairs (<string, fret>). Now
we find that they agree in the 97% of the cases, and the
model agreement raises to the 92.1%. So, the model and
the human experts tend to choose the same places on
the fingerboard, whereas not always they use the same
fingers. Similarly, if we restrict the comparison between
experts and model to the cases where the experts exactly
agreed on the triplets, the success ratio of the model
raises to 75%. A further analysis over the difficult cases
of fingering, namely those that have received only two
fingerings (instead of three) by at least one of the experts
(14 over 34), reveals that the model produces exactly the
same data in the 71% of cases (against the 48% above).
Several complexity factors were disregarded, which
may complete the assessment of the results and help explaining the limitations of the model and suggesting a

To the ends of providing a first experimental validation
of the model described, we have developed a computer
program to evaluate the set of constraints (What is the
degree of predictive power of the set of constraints? Does
it actually allow to find all the fingering(s) that human
performers provide? What is the relation between the
model and the experts’ results?) and the control strategy (Does the pruning strategy miss any solution given
by the human performers? Does the control strategy
consider fingered positions in the same order as the human performers?)
Material. Written fingerings of 3 guitarists, bachelor in
guitar performance, were considered. Thirty-four chords
composed by 3 to 6 notes were selected: they all admit at least two different fingerings. To avoid ambiguity,
each fingered position had to be expressed in the notation <string, fret, finger>.
Procedure. Human performers were requested to
write, when possible, three different fingerings for each
chord, in the order of preference. The same set of chords
was given in input to the implemented model. After the
guitarists ended their task, they were requested to indicate whether any fingering computed by the model was
not practicable.
Predictions. On the bases of previous literature, we
make the following predictions. We expect that 1) all
1795

guideline for future work. First, chords have been considered as spots, without a context, while we know that
fingering is also an expressive mean (Gilardino, 1975a,
1975b; Parncutt et al., 1997; Traube et al., 2003): the
experiment has tackled exactly this condition, but the
model would perform worse in realistic conditions. Also,
tempo plays an important role: fast tempi may determine situations of high task load, which increases the
demand for economic fingerings, thus compelling performers towards ’ingrained finger habits’ (Clarke et al.,
1997); slow tempi -and even more the case consideredwould make easier achieving an intended expressive or
timbral effect. Familiar fingerings may be adopted for
new chords (e.g., we refer to the practice of the transposition, which on fretted instruments is a widespread
habit). Chords may also be part of musical patterns together with melodic fragments, and such patterns may
be learned, stored and retrieved as a block (Drake &
Palmer, 2000). This may help explaining some differences, where fingerings provided by performers under the
exclusive bio-mechanical aspect are not always preferable. Lastly, it is reasonable to suppose that skilled performers are able to distinguish between more/less salient
constraints; for the present, a preference for some sorts
of fingerings is implemented by the search strategy.
Although in this paper we report experimental data
for the chord fingering subproblem, we are confident that
the CSP approach can be successful on modeling the
whole of the fingering problem. Future work will address
the merging of chord and melody fingering, which leads
to consider real pieces from the classical repertoire, and
to explore the automatic expressive performance, where
the modeling of instrument/performer interactions plays
a central role.

Acknowledgments

Gellrich, M., & Parncutt, R. (1998). Piano techique and
fingering in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries:
bringing a forgotten method back to life, British Journal of Music Education, 15, 5–23.
Gilardino, A. (1975a;b). Il problema della diteggiatura
nelle musiche per chitarra, Il Fronimo, 10, 11–14; 13,
5–12, in Italian.
Giuliani, M. (1812). Opus 1, Wien, Artaria, 1812,
Reprint: in Chiesa, R. (Eds), Studi per chitarra, Vol.I,
Milano, Suvini Zerboni, 1985.
Heijink, H., & Meulenbroek, R.G.J. (2002). On the
Complexity of Classical Guitar Playing: Functional
Adaptations to Task Constraints, Journal of Motor
Behaviour, 34, 339–351.
Jacobs, J.P. (2001). Refinements to the ergonomic model
for keyboard fingering of Parncutt, Sloboda, Clarke,
Raekellio, and Desain, Music Perception, 18, 505–511.
Kumar, V. (1992).
Algorithms for ConstraintSatisfaction Problems: A Survey, AI Magazine, 13,
32–44.
Parlitz, D., Peschel, T., Altenmüller, E. (1998). Assessment of dynamic finger forces in pianists: effects of
training and expertise, Journal of biomechanics, 31,
1063–1067.
Parncutt, R. (1997). Modeling piano performance:
Physics and cognition of a virtual pianist, Proceedings of Int. Computer Music Conference (Thessalonki/GK, 1997), 15–18. San Francisco/CA.
Parncutt, R., Sloboda, J.A., Clarke, E., Raekallio, M.,
Desain, P.(1997). An ergonomic model of keyboard
fingering for melodic fragments, Music Perception, 14,
341–382.
Radicioni, D., Anselma, L., Lombardo, V. (2004).
A prototype to compute string instruments fingering, In R. Parncutt, A. Kessler & F. Zimmer (Eds.) Proceedings of the Conference on Interdisciplinary Musicology (CIM04), Graz, Austria,
http://gewi.uni-graz.at/∼cim04/.
Sayegh, S. (1989). Fingering for String Instrument with
the Optimum Path Paradigm, Computer Music Journal, 13, 76–84, Fall 1989.
Sloboda, J.A. (1985). The musical mind: The cognitive
psychology of music, Oxford, Clarendon Press.
Sloboda, J.A., Clarke, E., Parncutt, R., Raekallio, M.
(1998). Determinants of finger choice in Piano SightReading, Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 24, 185–203.
Sor, F. (1815). Opus 6, Paris, 1815-17, Reprint: in
Chiesa, R. (Eds), Studi per chitarra, Vol.I, Milano,
Suvini Zerboni, 1985.
Traube, C., Depalle, P., Wanderley, M. (2003). Indirect
Acquisition of Instrumental Gesture Based on Signal,
Physical and Perceptual Information, Proceedings of
the 2003 Conference on New Interfaces for Musical
Expression (NIME-03), Montreal, Canada.

We’d like to thank Luca Anselma, Diego Magro, Davide
Ruzza and three anonymous reviewers for their valuable
advices.

References
Aguado D. (1843).
Nuevo método para Guitarra,
Madrid, 1843. New guitar method, London, Tecla.
Clarke, E.F., Parncutt, R., Raekallio, M., Sloboda J.A.
(1997). Talking fingers: an interview study of pianists’
view on fingering, Musicae Scientiae, 1, 87–107.
Cuzzucoli, G., & Lombardo, V. (1999). Physical model
of the played classical guitar, including the player’s
touch, Computer Music Journal, 23, 52–69.
Dechter, R. (1998). Constraint Satisfaction, MIT Encyclopedia of the Cognitive Sciences (MTECS).
Dechter, R. (2003). Constraint processing, Morgan
Kaufmann, San Francisco, CA.
Drake, C., & Palmer, C. (2000). Skill acquisition in
music performance: relations between planning and
temporal control, Cognition, 74, 1–32.
Duarte, J. (1966). Foundation studies in classical guitar
technique, Novello, Borough Green, Sevenoaks, Kent,
(UK).
1796

