UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Configuring the Phonological Organization of the Mental Lexicon using Syntactic and
Semantic Information

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8jp7j5v5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
Tamariz, Monica

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Configuring the Phonological Organization of the Mental Lexicon Using Syntactic
and Semantic Information
Monica Tamariz (monica@ling.ed.ac.uk)
Department of Linguistics, AFB, 40 George Square
Edinburgh EH8 9LL, UK
vowel/consonant, vowel length, consonant voicing etc. For
the calculation of each word pairwise distance, they applied
the Wagner-Fisher edit distance algorithm - the number of
changes, including deletions and insertions, necessary to
turn one word into the other (Wagner & Fisher, 1974) using the mismatch penalties described above for the
changes, and an extra penalty for deletions and insertions.
For the cooccurrence distance they constructed a
cooccurrence-based 500-dimension vector space based on
the 100 million-word British National Corpus. They
lemmatized the corpus to reduce vector sparseness and
measured the cooccurrence distance as 1 - cosine of the
angle between two word cooccurrence vectors. Finally, they
obtained a measure of isomorphism as a correlation between
the phonological and the cooccurrence distances of
Pearson’s r = 0.061, which a Monte-Carlo analysis showed
to be highly significant (p<0.001, one-tailed).
Tamariz (2005) replicated these results for Spanish using
partially overlapping methodology and measuring similarity
values instead of distances. In this case, two subsets of the
Spanish lexicon were used: all cvcv and all cvccv words of
frequency larger or equal to 20 in a one-million word corpus
of phonetically transcribed Spanish speech (Marcos Marin,
1992). For the calculation of the phonological space,
identity in a number of parameters of word-form similarity
was considered for each word-pair. In these homogeneous
word groups, the parameters considered were sharing each
of the consonants; sharing all the consonants; sharing each
of the vowels; sharing all vowels; having the stress on the
same syllable; and having the same stressed vowel in the
same position. Each of these parameters was assigned a
value according to its faring in a psycholinguistic study of
their relative impact of word similarity judgments. For
cooccurrence similarity, a vector space was constructed
based on the corpus mentioned above. The isomorphism
was measured with Fisher Divergence, an informationtheoretical metric of the divergence between two similarity
matrices. Isomorphism was calculated in two conditions: in
the ‘syntax’ condition, the context words that provide the
dimensions of the cooccurrence vector space included highfrequency content and function words, and the metric of
phonological similarity included stress parameters that
capture morphosyntax. In the ‘no syntax’ condition,
cooccurrence vector space included content words only and
the phonological similarity metric excludes stress
parameters. Monte-Carlo analyses showed significant
isomorphism in most cases for cvcv and cvccv word groups
(‘syntax’ condition: p<0.05 and p<0.001; ‘no syntax’
condition: p<0.05 and p=0.09, respectively).

Abstract
This paper tests the hypothesis that the lexicon structure
responds to two opposed pressures. First, the pressure for
isomorphic representations means that words that occur in
similar contexts tend to sound similar. Second, the pressure
for disambiguation needs a way to distinguish the similarsounding words that occur in similar contexts. This corpusbased study finds that while some aspects of the phonological
organization of the lexicon respond to the first pressure,
others respond to the second. The results presented here
support the idea of a complex lexicon able to find solutions
and adapt its structure to disparate, often conflicting
pressures.
Keywords: Isomorphism; mental lexicon; lexical phonology;
lexical semantics; distributional statistics; similarity metrics.

Introduction
The phonological structure of the monolingual mental
lexicon has been studied with different methodologies based
on lexical recognition (Cutler, Dahan & Van Donselaar,
1997), production (Van Son & Pols, 2003) or syntactic
structure (Kelly 1996, Christiansen & Monaghan, in press).
This paper presents a corpus-based method that explores
aspects of the phonological organization of the mental
lexicon. This method assumes and is based on an
isomorphism between a phonological and a cooccurrencebased representation of the mental lexicon, the latter
capturing syntactic and semantic factors. This means that
syntax and semantics, through their systematic relationship
with phonology, play a part in the evaluation of the
parameters that configure phonological organization.

Background: Isomorphism in the Lexicon
In an analogical model of the lexicon words are defined in
terms of their relationships to the rest of the words in the
lexicon at different levels. For example, at the phonological
level, words that sound similar are closer together than
words that sound differently; in a cooccurrence based
representation, words that tend to occur in similar contexts
in speech are closer together than words that do not share
context-words. Shillcock, Kirby, McDonald and Brew
(2001) considered the 1733 most frequent monosyllabic,
monomorphemic English words in the British National
Corpus and calculated first the phonological distances
between all the possible word-pairs. They first produced
values for the distance between segments - they assigned
penalties for mismatches between segment features such as

2145

Data. Random searches were performed in the ‘syntax’ and
‘no syntax’ conditions in three independent phonological
spaces: those formed by cvcv, cvccv and cvcvcv words of
frequency larger or equal to 20 from the corpus (252 words
of structure cvcv, 146 cvccv words and 148 cvcvcv words).
Procedure. The random search is based on measuring the
correlation (isomorphism) between many randomly
generated phonological similarity spaces and the veridical
cooccurrence similarity space. An analysis of the covariance
of the random phonological parameter values with the
correlation values will reveal which parameters are driving
the correlation. The algorithm includes the following steps:
(1) Generation of a set of random parameter values. (2)
Computation of the phonological similarity values for all
the word pairs using the random parameter values. (3)
Calculation of the Fisher divergence (a measure of
isomorphism) between the obtained pairwise phonological
similarity values and the veridical cooccurrence similarities
for the same word pairs. (4) Record the random parameter
values and the Fisher divergence obtained with them. (5)
2,000 repetitions of steps 1 to 4.

An Adaptive Lexicon
The general principle underlying the methodology presented
in this paper is that quantitative aspects of the mental
lexicon structure can be explained in terms of the pressures
that brought them about. The isomorphism measured by
Shillcock et al. (2001) and by Tamariz (2005) may be
responding to a pressure for structure-preserving
representations originating in the nervous system, with clear
examples in the visual, auditory, somatosensory and motor
systems, where the structure of a stimulus is systematically
preserved in its cortical representation. In the case of a
complex stimulus, its different aspects are processed by
different brain mechanisms, and all partial representations
are isomorphic with each other (as well as with the
stimulus). This brings about important processing
advantages, such as allowing synthetic and analytical
processes.
However, a highly isomorphic lexicon also presents one
distinct disadvantage: words with similar meanings, used in
similar contexts, would tend to sound similar. This poses a
problem for communication: two words that sound the
similar are usually distinguished by the context, but if their
contexts are also similar (caused by the pressure for
isomorphism), they will be easily confused.
In the rest of this paper I test the hypothesis that the
lexicon organization reflects the pressure for isomorphism,
but also the effects of an opposed pressure that works to
differentiate the forms of words that tend to occur in similar
contexts.

The Impact of Phonological Parameters on
Phonological-Cooccurrence Isomorphism
Methods
Figure 1: Illustration of the parameter space (cvcv words,
'syntax' condition) obtained with a random search. The
surface is created by 2000 3-D points. The horizontal
position of each point is given by the values of the
phonological parameters ‘first vowel’ and ‘two consonants’.
The vertical position is the isomorphism value (Fisher
divergence) of that point.

The point of departure for this experiment is the test to
determine the existence of isomorphism employed by
Tamariz (2005) described above. The method employed is a
random search of a parameter space, which indicates the
behavior of dependent variables with respect to an
independent variable. In this case, we are interested in the
behavior of parameters of phonological similarity with
respect to the isomorphism between the phonological and
the cooccurrence spaces.
The algorithm works as follows: In each word group and
each condition, I generate a random configuration of values
of parameters of phonological similarity, which is used to
calculate the phonological similarity in all the word pairs of
a sample of the lexicon. I measure the correlation of these
pairwise similarity values with the cooccurrence similarity
values for the same word group using Fisher divergence.
The novelty of this approach is that the phonologycooccurrence isomorphism value is used to evaluate the
phonological parameters - a high correlation indicates that
the random parameter values tend to contribute to the
isomorphism, and a low correlation indicates that the
random parameter values tend to go against it.

The result of the random search is a multidimensional
hyperspace, the dimensions being the parameters of
phonological similarity. Each set of random parameter
values represents a point in the hyperspace. Each point has
an associated isomorphism, value, given by the Fisher
divergence. Figure 1 illustrates this hyperspace, showing
just two of the dimensions involved in its configuration (tc
and v1).
Analysis of the Results. I consider three aspects of each
phonological parameter: its linear covariance and the
regression model that best fits its behavior with respect to
the phonological-cooccurrence isomorphism, and its
relationship with psychologically measured parameter
values.

2146

First, the linear covariance of each parameter with the
Fisher divergence measures the effect of each parameter on
isomorphism. A low Fisher divergence value indicates a
high isomorphism, so I use the negative of Pearson’s r as
the measure of the linear covariance of the parameter with
isomorphism. A positive covariance indicates that high
values of the parameter in question improve the
isomorphism measured; a negative covariance indicates that
low values of the parameter improve the isomorphism; a
covariance near zero indicates that the parameter does not
greatly affect the isomorphism.
Second, I examine how different regression equations
model the relationship between the phonological parameters
and isomorphism. I run ten nonlinear standard regression
functions on the data (logarithmic, inverse, quadratic, cubic,
compound, power, sigmoid, growth, exponential and
logistic) and obtain an r2 value for each of them (r2
=regression sum of squares/total sum of squares), a measure
of how well each model fits the data. Similar performance
across the independent word groups cvcv, cvccv and cvcvcv
will cross validate the models.
Third, I compare the linear impact value of each
parameter with empirically obtained values for the same
parameters. The psychologically informed values come
from a study reported in Tamariz (2005) which directly
compared the salience of each parameter of phonological
similarity in a word similarity judgment task. That study
only included cvcv and cvccv words, so cvcvcv is not
analyzed in this respect.

ranging from .84 to .95), which indicates that each
parameter is subserving the same function in three
independent subsets of the lexicon. This has a double effect:
while providing extra evidence for the existence of an
isomorphism between the two levels of the lexicon at hand,
the coherence of the results from independent data indicates
reliability of the methodology.
An analysis of the results of the linear covariance of
parameters with isomorphism reveals several trends in all
word groups. Figure 2 shows that consonant parameters (in
white) have positive impact on isomorphism, while vowel
parameters (in grey) have a negative impact. This is the case
in all groups and conditions, except for a negative c2 (the
syllable-final consonant) and c3 (the second-syllable initial
consonant) in cvccv words; sharing all vowels in cvccv and
cvcvcv words, and, the last vowel in cvcvcv words. The
impact of the final vowel is much lower in the 'no syntax'
condition than in the 'syntax' condition in all word groups.
This may be explained by the fact that the final vowel
carries in many instances morphosyntactic information:
when correlated with syntax-laden cooccurrence
representations, the phonological representations are more
influenced by the weight of the last vowel.
Another similarity between all word groups is that sharing
all consonants or vowels (tc, tv) tends to have greater impact
on isomorphism (higher parameter values) than sharing
single consonants or vowels (c1, c2, c3, v1, v2, v3). The
only exception is sharing the final vowel (v3) in the 'syntax'
condition in cvcvcv words, with a higher impact than
sharing any combination of vowels; again, this may be
explained by the morphosyntactic information encoded by
the final vowel.
Another common feature of the 'syntax' condition across
word groups is the high impact value of stress parameters in
the last and one-but-last syllable. In the three word groups,
sharing the stress on the same syllable brings two words
close together in the phonological similarity space. Because
the parameter impact value is so high, we know that words
sharing the stress on the same syllable must be close
together in the cooccurrence similarity space too. Sharing
the same stressed vowel has very different effects
depending on the syllable. The same stressed vowel on the
final syllable (sv2) makes words very phonologically
similar. The stressed final vowel encodes important verb
morphosyntactic information in Spanish. The fact that the
present methodology so clearly picks up the importance of
parameter sv2 in the phonological similarity space when
correlated with a syntax-laden cooccurrence space both
endorses the methodology and confirms the syntaxphonology correlation proposed by the phonological
typicality literature (see review in Christiansen &
Monaghan, in press).
Sharing the stressed vowel on the penultimate syllable has
a very negative impact on isomorphism. Over 80% of
Spanish bi- and trisyllablic words are stressed on this
syllable, so the negative impact value indicates that sharing
the same stressed vowel in the penultimate syllable
(phonologically similar words) corresponds to dissimilarity

Results
Linear Covariance. The linear covariance of the parameter
values with isomorphism was obtained for the three wordgroups in the two conditions. With minor variations, the
linear impact values shown in Figure 2 apply to all groups
and conditions.
cvcv, syntax

0.6

(-Pearson's r)

0.4
0.2

s2

tc
c1

c2

sv2

s1

0
-0.2

tv
v2

-0.4
-0.6

v1

sv1

Figure 2. Linear impact parameter values for the cvcv word
group in the ‘syntax’ condition (white = consonants; grey =
vowels; black = stress).
The bars in Figure 2 show the covariance of each
phonological parameter with the isomorphism between the
phonology and the cooccurrence spaces. The results for all
word groups and conditions were highly coherent (R2 values

2147

Class one parameters: Individual and groups of
consonants, the stressed syllable and the identity of the final
stressed vowel all have positive impact values on
isomorphism and are best modeled by an exponential

in the cooccurrence space. This is going against the pressure
for isomorphic representations, but may help an opposed
pressure: the pressure for words to be easily distinguished
from each other, particularly words that occur in similar
contexts.
Nonlinear Regression Models. An examination of the r2
obtained with the ten nonlinear regression equations
(measuring how well models fit the data) reveals some
connections with the linear impact parameter values: (1)
The linear function is never the best predictor of the
isomorphism given the parameter data, but it obtains its best
r2 values for negative-impact parameters. (2) The
exponential, growth, logistic and compound functions return
very similar r2 values. (3) The best single predictor of
negative-impact parameters (such as same vowel and same
stressed vowel in the penultimate syllable) is the sigmoid or
S-curve function. (4) The worst single predictor of negativeimpact parameters is the inverse function. (5) The best
compound predictor of the sign of the parameter impact is
the sign of [exponential r2 minus the S-curve r2]. In positive
impact parameters, exponential r2 > S-curve r2. In negative
impact parameters, exponential r2 < S-curve r2.
Comparison with Empirical Values. The impact
parameter values and the empirical values are significantly
correlated in the cvccv group (p<0.05 in the ‘no syntax’
condition, p<0.01 in the ‘syntax’ condition), but not in the
cvcv one. Figure 3 shows cvcv words in the ‘syntax’
condition.

( b1*t )

function Y = b0 * (e
) . Strong isomorphism (low
Fisher divergence values) is brought about by high
parameter values, indicating that words sharing these
phonological traits tend to be close together in the
cooccurrence-based space.
The pressure for isomorphism predicts a lexicon where
class one parameters have high values. The fact that the
empirical values are higher than predicted suggests that
pressures other than that for isomorphism are affecting the
lexicon.
Class two parameters. Individual vowels and the identity
of the penultimate-syllable stressed vowel have negative
impact values on isomorphism, possibly playing a role in
word differentiation and disambiguation. They are best
modeled
by
a
sigmoid
curve
function

Y = e

tv

tc

empirical value

0.2
sv2
0.15
s1
0.1

0.05

sv1

c1
s2

v2
v1
c2

0
-0.6

-0.4

-0.2

0

impact value

0.2

b1
t

))

and also reasonably well modeled by
a linear function Y = b0 + b1t. Strong isomorphism (low
Fisher divergence values) is brought about by low
parameter values, indicating that words sharing these
phonological traits tend to be far apart in the cooccurrencebased space.
The pressure for word differentiation predicts a lexicon
where class two parameters have high values. The fact that
the empirical values are lower than predicted suggests that
the pressure for word differentiation is not the only one
affecting the lexicon.
I propose that each of these two parameter classes is
responding selectively to one of the two opposed pressures
at hand. In Spanish, Class one parameters such as sharing
consonants, stress and the final stressed vowel organize the
lexicon in a systematic way leading to isomorphism
between the cooccurrence-based and the phonological
lexical representations. Class two parameters such as
sharing vowels, particularly the stressed vowel in the
penultimate syllable, differentiate words that would
otherwise be easily confused.
Characteristics of Class one and Class two parameters
may help explain why they have adopted these opposed
roles in the organization of the lexicon.
Class one parameters are either closely linked to narrow
niches of syntactic function (e.g. the final stressed vowel
encoding verb tense and person) or offer many
combinatorial possibilities (e.g. consonants: there are 18
consonants in Spanish compared with only five vowels).
These two characteristics are desirable in parameters that
drive isomorphism between phonology and word
cooccurrence: the links with syntactic function obviously
so; the high combinatorial power better allowing systematic
relationships
of
phonological
space
with
the
multidimensional cooccurrence space.
Class two parameters allow fewer combinatorial
possibilities (e.g. vowels) and may be related to word
differentiation, the pressure opposed to isomorphism in the

Empirical values vs. impact parameter
values. cvcv +syntax

0.25

(b 0 + (

0.4

Figure 3. Scatter plot of the parameter impact values against
the empirical values.
Most of the impact values correlate well with the
empirical ones. In general, the corpus-based methodology
yields higher consonant values (consonant parameters
placed in the bottom-right half of the graphs), while the
empirical method yields higher values for the vowels
(vowel parameters in the top-left half of the graphs). This
indicates that while consonants are more important in an
isomorphic lexicon, people focus more on vowels when
asked to tell how similar words sound.

Discussion
The analysis of the results suggest that there are two classes
of parameters of phonological similarity with respect to the
phonological-cooccurrence isomorphism.

2148

consonant-based phonological dimension of the lexicon (in
the k_l position). It is then easy to memorize which of the
few possible vowel (Norwegian has 11 vowels) were
present.
A number of studies suggest that stress information is
processed independently of segmental information. Cutler's
(1986) results show that, in English, stress distinctions
between pairs such as trusty-trustee do not affect the
outcome of lexical decision tasks; French speakers'
judgment about nonword similarity is not affected by stress
differences either (Dupoux, Pallier, Sebastian-Galles, &
Mehler, 1997). The effect in English is explained by the fact
that word stress strongly correlates with segmental
information – vowel quality – with most stressed vowels
pronounced fully and most unstressed vowels reduced to
schwa; therefore, stress information is redundant and
speakers can rely on segmental information only. In French,
all words are stressed on the last syllable, so stress does not
help differentiate between words and speakers do not pay
attention to it when judging similarity. In Spanish, stress
information cannot be predicted from segmental
information; therefore it should have an impact on similarity
judgments.
These studies show evidence that Class one parameters
have links with syntactic function and a higher
combinatorial power than class two parameters and that
different neural mechanisms may underlie processing of
consonants (Class one) and vowels (Class two). This,
together with the results in this paper, supports the division
of function between class one parameters (maintain
isomorphism, which in turns helps generalization and
inference) and class two parameters (help word recognition
in an isomorphic lexicon).

configuration of the lexicon structure. The fact that, in
cvccv words, c2 and c3 are Class-two parameters supports
the connection with combinatorial power: only seven
consonants can occupy the syllable-coda position (c2) in
Spanish, and the following consonant (c3) is constrained by
c2. One way of determining the importance of the
differential combinatorial power of vowels and consonants
would be a cross-linguistic comparison of the result of this
kind of study in languages with many and with few
contrastive vowels.
Another differentiating factor between Class one and
Class two parameters, particularly between consonants and
vowels, is their neural substrate. Boatman, Hall, Goldstein,
Lesser, and Gordon’s (1997) experiments with patients with
implanted subdural electrodes showed that electrical
interference at different brain sites could impair consonant
discrimination or vowel and tone discrimination. A study by
Caramazza, Chialant, Capazzo & Miceli (2000) of two
Italian-speaking aphasics with selective impaired processing
of vowels and consonants, respectively, suggests that
vowels and consonants are processed by different neural
mechanisms. In another study in Spanish, Perea and Lupker
(2004) found that nonwords created by transposing two
consonants of a target words primed the target word (e.g.
caniso primed casino). However, when two vowels were
transposing no priming occurred (e.g. anamil did not prime
animal). Perea and Lupker propose that these differences
could arise at the sub-lexical phonological level, and
mention that the transposition of two consonants preserves
more of the sound of the original than the transposition of
two vowels. These results, plus the supporting facts of the
appearance of vowels as phonological units earlier in life
than consonants (Bertoncini, Bijeljac-Babic, Jusczyk,
Kennedy & Mehler, 1988) and the earlier spelling of vowels
than of consonants in Spanish (Ferreiro & Teberosky,
1982), suggest that, at least in languages like Spanish and
Italian, vowels and consonants are processed separately.
The ‘phonological similarity effect’ (PSE) (Conrad &
Hull, 1964) says that when people are asked to recall a list
of words, they perform worse if the words sound similar to
each other. In a recent paper, Lian and Karslen (2004) tested
the PSE of cvc nonwords with Norwegian participants,
analyzing the impact of three parameters of phonological
similarity - sharing middle vowels (mal, sar, tas), the
consonant frames (kal, kol, kul) or the rhyme (kal, mal, sal)
- with two tasks: recall and recognition of the words in the
list. Their results bear on the differential processing of
consonants and vowels. They found a reversal of PSE in
several conditions. Sharing mid-vowels did not produce
PSE, and sharing the consonants and sharing the rhyme
actually reversed the PSE, that is to say, lists of words
sharing the consonant frames and the rhyme were generally
recalled and recognized better than distinct word lists. Most
relevant to the present discussion is the fact that consonant
frame lists (kal, kol, kul) were recalled and recognized better
than rhyme lists (kal, mal, sal), showing an advantage of
vowel variation over consonant variation in this kind of
tasks. Consonant frame lists could be easily placed in a

Conclusion
I have presented a new paradigm to study the phonological
organization of the lexicon which takes into account other
levels of lexical organization such as syntax and semantics,
until recently considered to be independent from phonology.
The present results support the existence of isomorphism in
the lexicon, but also show evidence of the effects of an
opposed force that tends to disambiguate word forms that,
in a fully isomorphic lexicon, would be easily confused.
More generally, this paper supports the idea that the lexicon
is an adaptation to the set of pressures that act upon it.

Acknowledgments
This research has benefited from the financial support of
EPSRC studentship award nr. 00304518.

References
Bertoncini, J., Bijeljac-Babic, R., Jusczyk, P.W., Kennedy,
L., & Mehler, J. 1988. An investigation of young infants'
perceptual representations of speech sounds. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 117: 21-33.
Boatman, D., Hall, C., Goldstein, M.H., Lesser, R. &
Gordon, B. 1997. Neuroperceptual differences in
2149

From signal to syntax. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, 249-262.
Lian, A. & Karlsen, P.J. 2004. Advantages and
disadvantages of phonological similarity in serial recall
and serial recognition of nonwords. Memory and
Cognition, 32(2): 223-234.
Marcos Marín, F. 1992. Corpus oral de referencia del
español, Madrid: UAM.
Perea, M. & Lupker S.J. 2004. Can CANISO activate
CASINO? Transposed-letter similarity effects with
nonadjacent letter positions. Journal of Memory and
Language, 51(2): 231-246.
Shillcock, R.C., Kirby, McDonald, S. & Brew, C. 2001.
Filled pauses and their status in the mental lexicon.
Proceedings of the 2001 Conference of Disfluency in
Spontaneous Speech, 53-56.
Tamariz, M. 2005. Exploring the adaptive structure of the
mental lexicon. PhD thesis. The University of Edinburgh.
Van Son, R.J.J.H. & Pols, L.C.W. 2003. Information
structure and efficiency in speech production,
Proceedings
of
EUROSPEECH2003,
Geneva,
Switzerland.
Wagner, R.A. & Fisher, M.J. 1974. The string-to-string
correction problem. Journal of the Association for
Computing Machinery, 21(1): 168-173.

consonant and vowel discrimination: As revealed by
direct cortical electrical interference. Cortex, 33(1): 8398.
Caramazza A., Chialant D., Capasso R., Miceli G. 2000.
Separable processing of consonants and vowels. Nature,
403(6768): 428-430.
Christiansen, M.H. & Monaghan, P. (in press). Discovering
verbs through multiple-cue integration. In K. Hirsh-Pasek
and R.M. Golinkoff (eds.). Action Meets Word: How
Children Learn Verbs. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Conrad, R. & Hull, A.J. 1964. Information, acoustic
confusion, and memory span. British Journal of
Psychology, 55: 429-432.
Cutler, A. 1986. Forbear is a homophone: lexical prosody
does not constrain lexical access. Language and Speech,
29: 201-220.
Cutler, A., Dahan, D. & Van Donselaar, W.A. 1997.
Prosody in the comprehension of spoken language: A
literature review. Language and Speech, 40 (2): 141-202.
Dupoux, E., Pallier, C. Sebastian-Galles, N. and Mehler, J.
1997. A destressing "deafness" in French? Journal of
Memory and Language, 36: 406-421.
Ferreiro, E. & Teberosky, A. 1982. Literacy before
schooling. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Kelly, M.H. 1996. The role of phonology in grammatical
category assignment. In J. Morgan & K. Demuth (eds.)

2150

