UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Contrast-Class Cues and Dual Goal Facilitation in Wason's 2-4-6 Task: Evidence for an
Extended Iterative Counterfactual Model

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6f3563q6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Ball, Linden J.
Gale, Maggie

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Contrast-Class Cues and Dual Goal Facilitation in Wason’s 2-4-6 Task: Evidence for
an Extended Iterative Counterfactual Model
Maggie Gale (M.Gale@derby.ac.uk)
Institute of Behavioural Sciences, University of Derby
Western Road, Mickleover
Derby DE3 9GX, UK

Linden J. Ball (L.Ball@lancaster.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Lancaster University
Lancaster, LA1 4YF, UK
triples that the experimenter classifies as either conforming
or not conforming to the target rule. The participant
continues to generate triples until they are confident that
they know the rule, at which point they announce it. The tobe-discovered rule is ‘any ascending sequence’. Despite the
simplicity of the task only 20% of participants successfully
announce the rule on their first attempt (e.g., Tukey, 1986;
Wason, 1960).
Unsuccessful announcements tend to be restricted forms
of the target rule such as ‘numbers ascending by equal
intervals’ (Kareev, Halberstadt, & Shafir, 1993). Wason
(1960) also noted that solvers and non-solvers could be
differentiated in terms of both the quantity and quality of
triples produced before rule announcement: Solvers
generated reliably more triples of which a greater proportion
received negative feedback. Wason labeled this tendency of
non-solvers to test triples that conformed to their hypothesis
as a ‘verification bias’ (more commonly referred to
nowadays as a ‘confirmation bias’).
Early criticism of the task came from Wetherick (1962),
who argued that it is the initial 2-4-6 exemplar that induces
participants to form the overly restricted hypothesis. Van
der Henst, Rossi, and Schroyens (2002) provided support
for this view. They invoked relevance theory, arguing that
participants would expect that information provided by the
exemplar triple was relevant to the task, which would lead
to an initial hypothesis that was restricted by the
information contained in the exemplar. An experimental
manipulation that caused participants to believe that the
regularities in the exemplar were generated by chance did,
indeed, undermine the usual tendency for people to produce
overly restrictive hypotheses.
Recent research by Cherubini, Castelvecchio, and
Cherubini (2005) has clarified the process of initial
hypothesis generation. In a series of ingenious experiments
they varied the type and number of perceivable relationships
in the example triples (e.g., ascending numbers, equal
intervals, even numbers etc.). Results showed that
participants preserved much more information in their initial
hypotheses when the presented exemplars contained ‘high
information’ regularities rather than ‘low information’
regularities. For example, given the triples 2-4-6 and 3-5-7

Abstract
Successful performance on Wason’s (1960) 2-4-6 task is
typically poor at approximately 20%. One reliable way to
enhance solution rates is to use Tweney, Doherty, Worner,
Pliske, Mynatt, Gross, and Arkkelin’s (1980) logicallyidentical Dual Goal (DG) version of the task, where
participants are requested to discover two complementary
rules, one labeled ‘Dax’ (the standard ‘ascending numbers’
rule) and the other labeled ‘Med’ (i.e., any other number
triple). Despite the robustness of the DG effect, the
mechanism by which the DG paradigm facilitates
performance has remained obscure. The present studies
assessed various theoretical proposals by providing
participants examples of Med triples of varying ‘usefulness’,
as indexed by the cues that they provided for establishing a
relevant contrast class to the Dax rule. Results showed that
the usefulness of the Med exemplar had a significant effect on
successful discovery of the Dax rule. We propose that the
present DG results can best be accommodated by extending
Oaksford and Chater’s (1994) Iterative Counterfactual Model
beyond its current focus on the standard single goal 2-4-6
task.
Keywords: Hypothesis testing; Wason’s 2-4-6 task; dual-goal
facilitation; contrast-class cues; iterative counterfactual
model.

Introduction
The traditional paradigm for investigating hypothesistesting behaviour is the 2-4-6 task. Introduced by Peter
Wason in 1960, this deceptively simple task was designed
to examine whether people conformed to the contemporary
scientific philosophy of falsification (Popper, 1959). The
value of falsification as a hypothesis testing strategy lies in
the fact that any number of confirming instances cannot
prove a hypothesis to be correct, whereas a single
disconfirming instance is sufficient to disprove it. Thus, a
strong test of any hypothesis is one that attempts its
disconfirmation.
In the standard, single goal (SG) form of Wason’s 2-4-6
task participants are asked to discover a rule for generating
groups of three numbers (triples). They are given an
example triple of 2-4-6 as one that conforms to the
experimenter’s rule, and they are asked to generate further
738

people prefer the hypothesis ‘numbers ascending by two’
rather than ‘ascending numbers’ because the former
hypothesis conveys more information. The studies of Van
der Henst et al., and Cherubini et al., make important
contributions to elucidating how initial hypotheses are
formed. However, both sets of researchers are silent on the
question of why participants fail to test their hypotheses
according to the Popperian ideal of falsification and thus
discover the correct rule.

Information Quantity Theory: Proposed by Wharton et al.
(1993), information quantity theory is an intuitively
appealing proposal that invokes the observations that: (1)
solvers produce more triples before rule announcement than
non-solvers, and (2) DG instructions typically lead to higher
levels of triple production. Evidence for this proposal has
been mixed. Klayman and Ha (1989) examined participants’
‘best guesses’ after they had generated 6, 12 and 18 triples,
and showed that increasing numbers of participants had
correctly guessed the target rule at each stage. By contrast,
Vallée-Tourangeau et al. (1995) and Gale and Ball (2003)
showed that DG instructions facilitate performance even
when the number of triples generated is held constant across
SG and DG paradigms.

Dual Goal Instructions
A key issue of note in the history of the 2-4-6 task is that
although reported rates of success are typically poor for the
task in its standard form (at around 20%), one reliable way
to improve success rates is to use Dual Goal (DG)
instructions as introduced by Tweney, Doherty, Worner,
Pliske, Mynatt, Gross, and Arkkelin, (1980). In this
logically and formally identical version of the task,
instructions are varied such that participants are asked to
discover two complementary rules, one labeled ‘Dax’ the
other ‘Med’. Participants are given 2-4-6 as an example of
the ‘Dax’ rule and are then asked to generate triples that are
classified as conforming to either the ‘Dax’ rule (which
produces ‘ascending sequences’) or the ‘Med’ rule (which
produces all other sequences). This manipulation causes
task success to rise dramatically, with rates of over 60%
commonly being reported (e.g., Farris & Revlin 1989a,
1989b; Tukey, 1986; Wharton, Cheng, & Wickens, 1993).
Despite the robustness of this DG effect there is little
consensus as how best to account for this phenomenon,
although a variety of theories have been proposed. We turn
now to examining these theories and their predictions.

Triple Heterogeneity Theory: Triple heterogeneity theory
(Vallée-Tourangeau et al., 1993) appeals to the idea that
successful solvers produce not only a greater number of
triples than non-solvers, but also that generated triples are of
a greater variety, reflecting a wider exploration of the
hypothesis space. To test this idea Vallée-Tourangeau et al.
(1993) introduced a simple method of codifying triples as
either ‘positive’ (conforming to the target rule) or ‘negative’
(not conforming to the target rule). Positive triples were
further subdivided into ‘constant positives’ (rising by equal
intervals) or ‘variable positives’ (rising by non-equal
intervals). Negative triples were categorized into eight
possible ‘negtype’ forms: Equal numbers, descending
numbers, two equal numbers and one larger number etc.
Vallée-Tourangeau et al. reported results of a study
demonstrating increases in the variety of triples people
generated (e.g., more negtypes and posvars) contingent
upon the presence of DG instructions. We are concerned,
however, that this account is largely descriptive in nature
such that it does not offer any detailed explanation of the
mechanism by which DG instructions promote a wider
exploration of the problem space.

Goal Complementarity Theory: According to the goal
complementarity theory, DG facilitation is caused by the
combination of a ‘positive test strategy’ (Klayman and Ha,
1987) and the complementary nature of the Dax and Med
rules. It is proposed (e.g., Wharton et al., 1993) that
participants test the Dax hypothesis with positive triples
until satisfied with their formulation of the rule (e.g.,
‘numbers rising with equal intervals’), at which point they
turn their attention to the Med rule. Positive testing of the
current Med hypothesis (e.g., ‘numbers rising with unequal
intervals’) leads to unexpected Dax feedback and engenders
the need to reformulate the Dax rule. A prediction of the
goal complementarity theory is, therefore, that it is the
production of triples rising by non-equal increments (socalled ‘variable positives’) to test the Med hypothesis that
leads to the progressive refinement of the Dax hypothesis
and eventual task success. A strong version of the goal
complementarity theory, however, was recently undermined
in a study by Gale and Ball (2003), who manipulated the
relationship between the Dax and Med rules such that they
were no longer complementary, yet they still found a large
facilitatory effect of DG instructions (see also ValléeTourangeau, Austin, & Rankin, 1995, for related evidence).

Contrast Class Theory: Gale and Ball (in press) conducted
a close analysis of the triples generated by successful and
non-successful participants in SG and DG conditions and
noted that the production of at least one ‘descending’ triple
was reliably associated with task success. Gale and Ball
argue that the production of a descending triple provides a
salient ‘contrast class’ that causes the participant to focus on
the ‘ascending’ aspect of the Dax hypothesis, thus
promoting discovery of the target Dax rule. Further analysis
showed that participants given DG instructions were far
more likely to produce a descending triple than those given
SG instructions.

Aims of the Study
The primary aim of the present study was to explore further
Gale and Ball’s (in press) contrast class theory by providing
participants not only with the standard 2-4-6 Dax exemplar
but also a Med exemplar that provided either a ‘useful’ or a
739

‘non-useful’ contrast class cue. Half of our participants
were, therefore, told that an example of the Med rule was
the triple 6-4-2 (useful contrast class information). We
predicted that this Med exemplar would promote
identification of the Dax rule since 6-4-2 and 2-4-6 are
oppositional on the salient – and crucially relevant –
dimension of ‘ascending’ versus ‘descending’. The other
half of our participants were told that an example of the
Med rule was the triple 4-4-4 (non-useful contrast class
information). We predicted that this Med triple would not
promote successful Dax discovery as 4-4-4 and 2-4-6 are
oppositional on the salient – but non-relevant – dimension
of ‘three identical numbers’ versus ‘three different
numbers’. Our experiment also allowed us to assess other
theories of DG facilitation. For example, by requiring all
participants to generate exactly 10 triples we were able to
control for information quantity whilst also being able to
analyze the 10 triples produced so as to quantify key aspects
of triple heterogeneity.

of Gorman (1992), participants were allowed only one
guess at these rules.

Results
Solution Success Across Conditions
Analysis of the solution-success data was concerned only
with correct announcements relating to the Dax rule. This
scoring method is standard practice in studies with DG task
variants (cf. Vallée-Tourangeau et al., 1993). Table 1 shows
the frequency of correct rule announcements for the Dax
rule in each of the experimental conditions. It is clear that
the usefulness of the CCC that had been provided had a
dramatic effect on success rates for this task: 74% of
participants who received a useful CCC made a correct rule
announcement, while only 20% of participants who
received a non-useful CCC were successful on the task. A
chi-square analysis showed this effect to be highly
significant, χ2(1) = 12.44, p < .001. Interestingly, these
success rates are very similar to those typically reported in
the literature for the DG and SG paradigms respectively
(e.g., Wharton et al., 1993). This observation suggests that it
may not be DG instructions per se that lead to task success
in the DG paradigm, but rather that DG instructions
facilitate participants’ production of a salient contrast class
which, in turn, promotes successful discovery of the target
Dax rule.

Method
Participants
Forty-three, first-year psychology students from the
University of Derby took part in the study on a voluntary
basis. None had received any teaching relating to reasoning
or logic.

Design

Table 1: Frequency of correct DAX rule announcements by
condition.

An independent-measures design was employed with the
manipulation reflecting the usefulness of the contrast class
cue (CCC) that was salient in the presented example of the
Med rule. One group of participants received a useful CCC
(6-4-2) and the other group were given a non-useful CCC
(4-4-4). Participants were randomly assigned to the two
conditions. The DG paradigm was used in both conditions
of this experiment.

Condition
Useful CCC
Non-Useful CCC

N
23
20

Success
Solver
Non-solver
17
6
4
16

Production of Descending Triples
The purpose of this study was to test the idea that the key to
success on the DG 2-4-6 task relates to the availability or
discovery of useful contrast class information that facilitates
identification of the potential scope of the Dax rule. In our
previous research (e.g., Gale & Ball, in press) we have
noted that successful solvers are those who uncover at least
one descending triple during their hypothesis testing, and
that DG instructions promote the production of at least one
such descending triple.
With these findings in mind, we decided to examine the
present dataset for any effect of the presence versus absence
of the participant’s production of a descending triple on
their task success. Table 2 presents data collapsed across the
useful versus non-useful CCC manipulation. The table
shows that while all but 10 participants produced at least
one descending triple, there was no single instance of a
participant solving the task in the absence of a descending
triple. A chi-square analysis indicated that this effect was
highly reliable, χ2(1) = 12.44, p < .001.

Procedure
Participants were tested individually in a quiet laboratory.
Standardized DG instructions were read out to all
participants as follows: “I have in mind two rules that
specify how to make up sequences of three numbers
(triples), and your task is to discover these rules. Triples
that fit one of my rules are called Dax triples and those that
fit my other rule are called Med triples…”. All participants
were given 2-4-6 as an example Dax triple. Those in the
useful CCC condition were given 6-4-2 as a Med exemplar,
while those in the non-useful CCC condition were given 44-4 as a Med exemplar. Participants were then asked to
produce exactly 10 triples, and they received feedback for
each triple in the form of ‘Dax’ or ‘Med’. After 10 triples
had been generated participants were asked to write down
their best guess at the two rules. In line with the procedure

740

Table 2: Frequency of correct Dax announcements by
presence vs. absence of at least one descending triple.
Descending Triple
Absent
Present

N
10
33

Table 4: Mean number of triple types produced by success,
with standard deviations in parentheses.

Success
Solver
Non-solver
0
10
21
12

Heterogeneity measure
Constant Positives
Posvars
Negtypes
Negative feedback
Descending triples
Variety

The data were further explored to ensure that the type of
CCC that had been provided had a reliable influence on
whether or not at least one descending triple was produced
(see Table 3). This analysis (collapsing across solver vs.
non-solver) showed that all participants receiving a useful
CCC produced at least one descending triple, while only
50% of participants receiving a non-useful CCC produced a
descending triple, χ2(1) = 14.99, p < .001. It can thus be
concluded that the CCC manipulation was successful in
terms of its capacity to induce the generation of triples of a
particular type (i.e., descending numbers).

Discussion
The study aimed to explore accounts of facilitated
performance on DG versions of Wason’s 2-4-6 task, with
particular attention being given to Gale and Ball’s (in press)
contrast class ideas. Data deriving from the study support
contrast class predictions, while offering little support for
either the goal complementarity or triple heterogeneity
theories. By holding the number of triples required constant
we were also able to show that the information quantity
account does not provide an adequate explanation for the
different success rates seen in our experimental conditions.
How, then, can we explain the detailed theoretical
underpinnings of the contrast class account? We appeal here
to what we believe to be the most psychologically plausible
account of behaviour on the SG version of the 2-4-6 task,
that is Oaksford and Chater’s (1994) Iterative
Counterfactual Model (ICM), itself a development of Farris
and Revlin’s (1989a, 1989b) earlier counterfactual strategy.
The ICM focuses on how hypotheses are created rather than
on how they are tested, with one key aspect being how
hypotheses are revised when falsifying evidence is obtained.
The operation of the ICM can best be illustrated with an
example: Imagine a participant’s working hypothesis, H, is
‘even numbers ascending by two’. According to the ICM,
the participant then generates an alternative hypothesis, H',
that is complementary to H for a single property (a
procedure that reflects Tschigi’s, 1980, ‘vary one thing at a
time’ hypothesis-testing strategy). Thus, given the exemplar
2-4-6 and the H of ‘even numbers ascending by 2’, an H' of
‘odd numbers ascending by two’ could be generated. A
positive example of H' (e.g., 3-5-7) would be generated and
tested. If this test proves positive then both H and H' must
be false, and a new H must therefore be generated based on
the common properties of the triples generated so far. In the
example given, a new H of ‘number ascending by two’
might be generated. The process is then repeated with a new
H' (e.g., ‘numbers descending by two’) being posited and
tested. The cycle continues, with each new H being
informed by the common properties of the pool of tested
triples that have so far received positive feedback, until a
point is reached where the current H satisfies the reasoner
and the hypothesis is announced as the target H.

Table 3: Frequency of production of at least one descending
triple by condition.
Condition
Useful CCC
Non-Useful CCC

N
23
20

Success
Solver
Non-solver
4.71 (1.47)
3.86 (2.10)
0.71 (1.06)
0.64 (1.78)
1.62 (0.97)
2.41 (2.36)
4.62 (0.97)
5.18 (1.74)
3.81 (1.33)
1.36 (1.73)
7.04 (1.20)
6.90 (1.63)

Descending Triple
Present
Absent
0
23
10
10

Triple Type
One aim of the present study was to explore other accounts
of DG facilitation such as Vallée-Tourangeau et al.’s (1993)
triple heterogeneity theory. Triples were, therefore, codified
using the system introduced by Vallée-Tourangeau et al.
(see above) and statistical comparison were pursued
between the triple types generated by solvers and nonsolvers (Table 4). The only significant difference on any of
these measures of triple variety related to the number of
descending triples that were produced, with solvers
producing reliably more than non-solvers, t(41) = 5.77, p <
.001.
One further measure of triple heterogeneity was also
calculated: The overall number of different types of triple
generated, whether positive or negative. Again there was no
significant difference across task success. These results
provide further evidence against both the triple
heterogeneity account and the goal complementarity
account of facilitated performance on the DG task. The
triple heterogeneity theory proposes a wider exploration of
the problem space, as indexed by the variety of triples
generated; the present analyses suggest that variety of
triples does not, in fact, influence success on the DG task.
The goal complementarity theory suggests that it is the
production of variable positive triples that should be a key
feature of successful DG solving. Again, the data presented
here do not support this notion.

741

At its inception, Oaksford and Chater’s (1994) ICM was
concerned with hypothesis generation in the SG task, and
not with explaining facilitated performance in the DG
paradigm. We believe, however, that the ICM can be
extended to encompass DG facilitation (cf. Gale & Ball, in
press). We propose, for example, that reasoners are not only
sensitive to the information regularities in Dax and Med
triples (cf. Cherubini et al., 2005) but also to the contrast
class that such regularities invoke. Thus, at the second
iteration in our example above, the participant would be
given the feedback that ‘6-4-2 is a Med triple’. H and H' are
complimentary for the property ascending versus
descending, and, we suggest, it is this opposition which
establishes a salient contrast class that promotes the insight
that ascending and descending are the relevant
characteristics of the pool of triples tested.
Supporting evidence for an extended ICM that
incorporates ideas of contrast-class identification
is
provided by the solution-success results of the present
study. In relation to the non-useful CCC condition, for
example, we had expected that participants who were given
the illustrative 4-4-4 Med triple would generate a ‘three
equal numbers’ hypothesis for Med, and would, therefore,
be lured toward considering a (non-relevant) ‘three different
numbers’ hypothesis for Dax. Our results indeed showed
instances of participants going as far as announcing a final
Dax rule as being ‘three different numbers’ in the nonuseful Med condition. This supports the notion that
reasoners are highly susceptible to focusing on the apparent
relevance of available contrast class cues during their
hypothesis testing.

same as that for the previous study, with the exception that
the Med example provided was 9-8-1.

Results
Eight of the 22 participants (36%) solved the 9-8-1 DG task.
A chi-square analysis was employed to compare the
performance of these participants with those in the original
study. This indicated a reliable difference in success rates
across conditions, χ2(2) = 13.5, p = .001. Examination of
adjusted residual values showed that the difference was
between those given 6-4-2 as a Med exemplar and those
given either 4-4-4 or 9-8-1. This observation supports our
proposals for an extended ICM to capture successful
hypothesis testing in DG versions of the 2-4-6 task.

Conclusion
The present studies offer insights into how Oaksford and
Chater’s (1994) Iterative Counterfactual Model may be
extended to account for the facilitatory effect of DG
instructions on Wason’s (1960) 2-4-6 task. In particular, we
propose that the inclusion of a mechanism within the ICM
that directly promotes the identification and use of salient
contrast class cues relating to Dax and Med triples can
provide psychologically plausible explanations of a number
of important DG phenomena (cf. Gale & Ball, in press).
First, such a mechanism accounts for why the production
of descending triples is seen to mediate between DG
instructions and discovery of the Dax rule, as descending
triples, categorized by the experimenter as instances of the
Med rule, will help establish an appropriate contrast class
(descending vs. ascending) that captures the true scope of
the Dax rule. Second, this mechanism accounts for why (as
seen in the present studies) different Med exemplars either
promote or inhibit discovery of the target Dax rule. This is
because some Med exemplars (e.g., 4-4-4 or 9-8-1) will
provide non-useful contrast class cues that are of little or no
help in Dax identification, whilst other Med exemplars (e.g.,
6-4-2) readily cue the identification of a highly useful DaxMed contrast class (i.e., descending vs. ascending).
In sum, Oaksford and Chater’s (1994) Iterative
Counterfactual Model appears to provide a compelling
foundation for explicating the detailed processes involved in
hypothesis generation and testing within both SG and DG 24-6 tasks. We acknowledge, however – as, indeed, do
Oaksford and Chater (1994) – that the ICM needs further
refinement and evaluation to provide a fully coherent
account of all 2-4-6 phenomena. At some point we are
certain that researchers will have to grapple once again with
the complexities of direct recording, coding and analysis of
participants’ moment-by-moment hypothesis formulation
and triple generation in order to track more clearly the
complex relationship that seems to exist between
hypotheses, triple instances, feedback and rule discovery in
Wason’s 2-4-6 paradigm.

Follow-Up Study
Given the previous interpretation of our results we decided
to run a follow-up study involving a DG condition that
presented an example Med triple that provided non-useful
contrast class information, but in a subtly different way to
the 4-4-4 exemplar in the previous study. To this end we
presented 9-8-1 as an illustrative Med triple. Whereas 4-4-4
and 2-4-6 contrast on the single, non-relevant dimension of
‘three identical numbers’ versus ‘three different numbers’,
9-8-1 and 2-4-6 contrast on: (1) several, non-relevant
dimensions (e.g., ‘mixed odd and even numbers’ vs. ‘only
even numbers’, ‘unequal intervals’ vs. ‘equal intervals’, and
‘middle number is not arithmetic mean of the outer
numbers’ vs. ‘middle number is the arithmetic mean of the
outer numbers’); and (2) a single, relevant dimension (i.e.,
‘descending numbers’ versus ‘ascending numbers’). We
predicted that the multiplicity of the available contrast class
cues would, at the very least, render performance on this 98-1 variant of the DG task as impoverished as that seen with
the 4-4-4 variant previously described.

Method
Twenty-two University of Derby students took part in the
follow-up study. The method employed was exactly the
742

References

Popper, K. (1959). The logic of scientific discovery.
London: Hutchinson.
Tschigi, J. E. (1980). Sensible reasoning: A hypothesis
about hypotheses. Child Development, 51, 1-10
Tukey, D. D. (1986). A philosophical and empirical analysis
of subjects’ modes of inquiry in Wason's 2-4-6 task.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 38A, 533.
Tweney, R. D., Doherty, M. E., Worner, W. J., Pliske, D.
B., Mynatt, C. R., Gross, K. A., & Arkkelin, D. L. (1980).
Strategies of rule discovery in an inference task.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 32, 109123.
Vallée-Tourangeau, F., Austin, N. G., & Rankin, S. (1995).
Inducing a rule in Wason's 2-4-6 task: A test of the
information-quantity
and
goal-complementarity
hypotheses. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 48A, 895-914.
Van der Henst, J-P, Rossi, S., & Schroyens, W. (2002).
When participants are not misled they are not so bad after
all: A pragmatic analysis of a rule discovery task. In W.
D. Gray, & C. D. Schunn (Eds.) Proceedings of the
Twenty-Fourth Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 902-907). Mahwah, NJ: LEA.
Wason, P. C. (1960). On the failure to eliminate hypotheses
in a conceptual task. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 12, 129-140.
Wetherick, N. E. (1962). Eliminative and enumerative
behaviour in a conceptual task. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 14, 129-140.
Wharton, C. M., Cheng, P. W., & Wickens, T. D. (1993).
Hypothesis-testing strategies: Why two goals are better
than one. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
46A, 743-758.

Cherubini, P., Castelvecchio, E., & Cherubini A. M. (2005).
Generation of hypotheses in Wason's 2-4-6-task: An
information theory approach. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 58A, 309-332.
Farris, H., & Revlin, R. (1989a). Sensible reasoning in two
tasks: Rule discovery and hypothesis evaluation. Memory
and Cognition, 17, 221-232.
Farris, H., & Revlin, R. (1989b). The discovery process: A
counterfactual strategy. Social Studies of Science, 19,
497-513.
Gale, M., & Ball, L. J. (2003). Facilitated rule discovery in
Wason’s 2-4-6 task The role of negative triples. In R.
Alterman & D. Kirsh (Eds.), Proceedings of the TwentyFifth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Boston, MA: Cognitive Science Society.
Gale, M., & Ball, L. J. (in press). Dual-Goal facilitation in
Wason’s 2-4-6 task: What mediates successful rule
discovery? Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology.
Gorman, M. E. (1992). Experimental simulations of
falsification. In M. T. Keane, & K. J. Gilhooly (Eds.),
Advances in the psychology of thinking: Vol. 1. Hemel
Hempstead: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Kareev, Y., Halberstadt, N., & Shafir, D. (1993). Improving
performance and increasing the use of non-positive
testing in a rule-discovery task. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 46A, 729-742
Klayman J., & Ha, Y-W. (1987). Confirmation,
disconfirmation and information in hypothesis testing.
Psychological Review, 94, 211-228.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (1994). Another look at
eliminative and enumerative behaviour in a conceptual
task. European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 6, 149169.

743

