UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Context Sensitivity of Relational Nouns

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8p9181j1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Asmuth, Jennifer A.
Gentner, Dedre

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Context Sensitivity of Relational Nouns
Jennifer A. Asmuth (asmuth@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Dedre Gentner (gentner@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Abstract
(1) This goal has priority until the submission deadline
has passed.

We present findings that relational nouns are more contextsensitive than entity nouns in two conceptual combination
recognition tasks. Across two experiments, we investigated
people’s ability to recognize entity nouns and relational nouns
either in the same context as at encoding or in a different
context. We found that (1) participants showed greater
recognition sensitivity for entity nouns than for relational
nouns and (2) relational nouns showed a greater disadvantage
in recognition in new contexts relative to old contexts. Thus,
the encoding of relational nouns appears to be more
influenced by context than the encoding of entity nouns. We
discuss parallels with encoding patterns for verbs and nouns.

(2) The dog chased the ball across the field.
We suggest that the first sentence—which contains
mostly relational nouns—is more likely to occur in adult life
than the second, with its concrete entity nouns. The
importance of relational nouns in our everyday discourse
becomes clear if we try to express the meaning of (1)
without using relational nouns.
Relational nouns have some commonalities with verbs
and prepositions, in that their meanings are centered around
extrinsic relations with other concepts. Relational nouns are
also similar to verbs in that they are semantically
unsaturated (i.e., they take arguments). A relational noun
takes an argument (often not obligatory) and assigns a
thematic role. For example, barrier implies three arguments,
not all of which need be explicit: a figure, something that
blocks access, and a goal. This greater syntactic complexity
more closely approximates the behavior of verbs than of
entity nouns.
This similarity between relational nouns and verbs can be
seen in other phenomena as well. As with verbs (Gentner,
1982; Gentner & Boroditsky, 2001), a rich understanding of
relational nouns occurs later in acquisition than that of
entity nouns. Relational nouns such as uncle are typically
understood first as object reference terms (e.g., friendly man
with a pipe) before evolving to a more relational
interpretation (Gentner & Rattermann, 1991; Keil, 1989;
Waxman & Hall, 1993). Kurtz and Gentner (2001)
compared relational categories (named by relational nouns
like shield and surprise) to superordinate entity categories
(such as furniture and vegetable). Productivity and response
fluency were much higher for entity categories than for
relational categories. In addition, exemplars generated for
the entity categories were rated as much more similar to
each other than those generated for the relational categories
by independent raters.
One way to begin exploring the differences between
entity nouns and relational nouns is to consider some known
contrasts between nouns and verbs. To clarify this proposal,
we offer the following intriguing analogy:

Introduction
This paper explores the psychology of relational nouns.
Relational nouns refer to relational categories: categories
whose membership is determined by common relational
structure (including extrinsic relations to other entities),
rather than by common properties (see Gentner & Kurtz,
2005). For example, for X to be a bridge, X must connect
two other points or entities; for X to be a carnivore, X must
eat animals. Relational categories contrast with entity
categories like radish or penguin, whose members share
many intrinsic properties.
One way to distinguish between entity and relational
categories is the fetch test: if asked to find a member of the
category, how do you know one when you see it? For an
entity category like tulip, all you have to do is locate the
entity itself—its intrinsic properties suffice to identify it.
But for a relational category like thief, intrinsic properties
are not enough: you need to verify its relations to other
entities. Specifically, you need to check that there are other
entities that serve as victim and purloined goods.
While there has been considerable work on entity nouns
and taxonomic categories, the study of relational nouns and
categories is relatively new (Gentner & Kurtz, 2005;
Anggoro, Gentner & Klibanoff, 2005; Jones & Love, in
preparation; Barr & Caplan, 1987; Markman & Stillwell,
2001). This is surprising, given their frequency and
importance. Our informal ratings of the 100 highest
frequency nouns in the British National Corpus revealed
that roughly half showed extrinsic relational structure in
adult discourse. For example, consider the following
sentences:

relational nouns : entity nouns : : verbs : nouns

163

this case, people should be more sensitive to a change in the
entity noun than to a change in the relational noun.
The properties of noun–noun conceptual combinations
have been well-studied and provide an appropriate arena in
which to study the mutability of concepts (Costello &
Keane, 2001; Murphy, 1988; Wisniewski, 1996).

Gentner (1981; Gentner & Boroditsky, 2001) described a set
of interrelated processing distinctions between verbs and
nouns. For example, verbs are acquired later than nouns in
both first and second languages (Caselli et al., 1995;
Gentner & Boroditsky, 2001), paralleling the pattern noted
above. We focus here on two interrelated differences: (1)
verbs are less likely to be accurately remembered or recalled
than nouns (Kersten & Earles, 2004; Earles & Kersten,
2000) and (2) verbs are more context-sensitive and
semantically mutable than nouns (Gentner, 1982; Gentner &
France, 1988). By mutability we mean a word’s propensity
to take on a different encoding in different contexts. Gentner
and France (1988) compared nouns and verbs along this
dimension by asking participants to paraphrase
semantically strained intransitive sentences such as The
lizard worshipped. The results showed greater semantic
change for the verbs than for the nouns; for example, asked
to paraphrase the above sentence, one participant wrote
“The small grey reptile lay on a rock and stared
unblinkingly at the sun.”
Mutability and poor recognition and recall may well be
related: memory for verbs may be more dependent on
semantic context because their meanings are more variable
in different contexts than are nouns (see also Gentner, 1981;
Kersten & Earles, 2004). For example, had a memory task
been administered in the Gentner & France study, it is likely
that participants would have been more likely to remember
lizard than worshipped. Kersten and Earles tested this
connection between mutability and recognition. In their
experiment, participants were asked to remember either the
nouns or the verbs from a list of intransitive sentences and
later given a recognition list. At test, memory for verbs was
significantly improved when the verb was paired with the
same noun as at encoding. This effect of context was much
smaller for nouns.
These clear differentiations between nouns and verbs
provide a starting point for investigating the differences
between relational nouns and entity nouns. In this paper, we
ask whether this pattern—greater contextual mutability with
concomitant lowering of recognition accuracy—will hold in
the comparison between relational nouns and entity nouns.
Suppose, as the analogy with verbs would suggest, that
relational nouns are more mutable than entity nouns. Then
we might expect that when relational nouns are combined
with entity nouns, the relational nouns would be both less
stable under paraphrase and less well-retained in a memory
task.
To do this, we adopted the basic logic of the Kersten and
Earles studies. We presented phrases containing a relational
noun and an entity noun at study, and then compared
recognition for the entity nouns versus the relational nouns
given either the same (old) context word or a new context
word. Our hypothesis is that the encoding of relational
nouns is highly context sensitive, while the encoding of
entity nouns is relatively context-independent; thus, entity
nouns will retain their intrinsic character across the study
and test situations (regardless of their relational partners). In

Experiment 1
In our first study, we employed a recognition paradigm from
Kersten and Earles’ (2004) investigation of noun and verb
recognition. Participants were given a list of conceptual
combinations consisting of an entity noun (E) and relational
noun (R) (e.g., a leg reference) and asked to rate how
difficult the sentences were to understand on a scale from 1
to 7.
After rating the phrases, participants were given an
unrelated filler task, followed by a recognition test that
included the old conceptual combinations (EoldRold),
combinations of old entity nouns and new relational nouns
(EoldRnew), combinations of old relational nouns and new
entity nouns (EnewRold), and completely new combinations
(EnewRnew). Their task was to say whether each phrase had
been seen in the original ratings task. For example, if a
participant saw a truck limitation during the ratings task, she
would see one of the phrases in Table 1 during the
recognition test. (Only the first sentence is old; the others
are new.)
Table 1. Recognition Combinations
encoding phrase: a truck limitation
phrase at test:
EoldRold
a truck limitation
EoldRnew
a truck threat
EnewRold
a book limitation
a book threat
EnewRnew
Old items were always combined with new items except
when they appeared in their original phrase. That is, if both
truck limitation and book threat were seen at encoding, then
truck threat would not be seen at test. This allowed us to
distinguish between the false alarms triggered by the Eold
and those triggered by Rold at recognition. We expected high
hit rates for the EoldRold combinations, since participants
have actually seen the phrase before. Likewise, an EnewRnew
combination should elicit a very low false alarm rate since
both words are entirely new.
The key predictions are as follows. If relational nouns are
more context sensitive than entity nouns, then we should see
greater discrimination between the original combinations
and the EoldRnew phrases than between the original
combinations the EnewRold phrases. This is because the
meaning of the relational noun is more dependent upon its
context and is therefore more susceptible to a shift in
meaning between the different contexts. For example,
suppose a participant instantiates the phrase a truck
164

participant. To measure recognition sensitivity for EnewRold
phrases, we computed the proportion of hits to previously
encountered ER phrases and the proportion of false alarms
to new entity nouns that were presented with a familiar
relational noun (see Table 2). These proportions were used
to compute d’ for each participant, a measure of recognition
sensitivity that takes individual bias into account, for
EnewRold phrases.
Likewise, to measure recognition sensitivity for EoldRnew
phrases, we computed the proportion of hits to previously
encountered ER phrases and the proportion of false alarms
to new relational nouns that were presented with a familiar
entity noun (also in Table 2). These results were used to
compute d’ for the EoldRnew phrases.
As expected, participants were highly accurate in
correctly recognizing old noun–noun combinations (M =
.86, SD=.13) and unlikely to false alarm to entirely new
combinations (M = .11, SD=.15). Clearly, participants had
been attending to the task. Turning to the comparisons of
interest, the mean false alarm rate to EoldRnew combinations
(old entity nouns paired with new relational nouns) was
higher than that of EnewRold combinations (new entity nouns
paired with old relational nouns) (.28 and .17, respectively)
in both word orders. That is, people were more likely to
incorrectly identify a new phrase as old when the entity
noun was old than when the relational noun was old.

limitation at encoding as “a vehicle that is hard to park.” If,
at recognition, the same participant sees the EoldRnew phrase
a truck threat and interprets it as “a runaway vehicle,” she
should feel a sense of recognition based on the common
concept of vehicle, thus she may be likely to false-alarm to
the phrase. However, if she sees the EnewRold combination a
book limitation at test, she might think of “a boring story.”
This should be less similar to her prior encoding of “hardto-park vehicle” and therefore less likely to trigger a false
alarm.

Participants
Fifty-three Northwestern University
participated for course credit.

undergraduates

Materials and Procedure
The encoding materials consisted of 96 conceptual
combination phrases: 64 entity noun–relational noun
combinations, and 32 conventional combination (e.g.,
noodle casserole or football stadium) filler items. To
encourage naturalistic encoding, the participants were
instructed to interpret each phrase as if it had been
overheard while passing through the dining hall and rate the
difficulty of constructing an interpretation on a scale from 1
to 7. The difficulty ratings of the conventional conceptual
combinations served as a manipulation check to ensure that
participants were paying attention to the rating scale
throughout the task.
There were two independent variables: word order of the
phrase (ER, entity noun followed by relational noun, or RE,
relational noun followed by entity noun) and recognition
context. Word order was manipulated between participants,
while recognition context was manipulated within
participants.
The recognition materials consisted of 32 conceptual
combinations presented in the same word order as seen at
study: 8 EoldRold, 8 EoldRnew, 8 EnewRold, and 8 EnewRnew
phrases. One of the EnewRnew phrases and one of the EnewRold
phrases was omitted from analysis due to a combination
error.
The nouns were matched in frequency according to the
norms of Francis and Kucera (1982). All nouns fell in the
frequency range of 20-100. The average entity noun
frequency was 48.43; average relational noun frequency was
47.00. There was no reliable difference in frequency
between the two lists (t<1).
Participants completed the paper-based ratings task for
the 96 conceptual combinations, participated in an unrelated
filler task for 20 minutes, then completed the paper-based
recognition task.

Table 2. Experiment 1: Hits, False Alarms, and d'
ER
mean SD

RE
total
mean SD mean SD

Hits EoldRold

.88

.12

.84 .15

.86

.13

FA EoldRnew

.26

.20

.32 .27

.28

.23

FA EnewRold

.16

.17

.20 .20

.17

.18

FA EnewRnew

.08

.16

.15 .12

.11

.15

d' EoldRnew

2.30

1.27

2.04 1.49 2.20 1.35

d' EnewRold

2.79

1.17

2.43 1.18 2.65 1.17

Participants were better able to discriminate between the
old phrases and EnewRold combinations (mean d’ = 2.65) than
old phrases and EoldRnew combinations (mean d’ = 2.20),
F(1,47) = 10.60, p<.01. To put this more simply, people
were more sensitive to a change in the entity noun than to a
change in the relational noun. This is consistent with the
idea that the entity nouns were encoded in a relatively
context-independent way during study (as well as during
test); thus, entity nouns retained their intrinsic character
across these two situations, regardless of their relational
partner. In contrast, relational nouns were interpreted so as
to fit the entity nouns with which they were paired, both at
study and at test. Thus, seeing an old relational noun paired
with a new entity noun did not trigger a sense of familiarity,
since the relational noun would now have a slightly
different interpretation.

Results and discussion
Data from three participants were excluded from analysis
because their false alarm rate exceeded their hit rate; data
from one participant was excluded because the hit rate fell
below the criterion set by 1.5 x interquartile range. Two
measures of recognition sensitivity were computed for each
165

new context than in the old; and (3) that there should be an
interaction between noun focus (entity or relational) and
recognition context (old or new).

The results of this study bore out the predictions.
However, two concerns led us to carry out a second study.
First, we wished to isolate the effect of encoding mutability
to a greater degree than was permitted by the whole-phrase
recognition method. Our goal is to discover whether entity
nouns are encoded in a more context-independent manner
than relational nouns. Although the results of Experiment 1
are consistent with this prediction, the interpretation is
somewhat clouded by the fact that in the whole-phrase
recognition test, each word acted both as cue and target. In
Experiment 2 we conducted a cleaner recognition test by
asking participants about only one of the words—either the
relational noun or the entity noun.
Our second concern was that one of our two word
orders—the RE order—was perceived as quite difficult by
participants. Phrases in the RE order (e.g., barrier peanut)
were judged more difficult (M = 5.21) than the same
combinations in ER order (e.g., peanut barrier) (M = 4.8),
t(126) = 2.82, p<.01. This difference is consistent with
discussions of word order in conceptual combination
(Murphy, 1988; Gerrig & Murphy, 1992; Wisniewski,
1996). Conceptual combinations are often understood by
using the modifier to fill a slot in the head noun schema. In
entity noun–relational noun combinations, the relational
noun has a salient, established relational structure with
arguments to be filled. Therefore the combination is most
natural if the relational noun occupies the head position,
where its well-established relational structure provides slots
that can be filled by the entity noun in the modifier position.
Thus, a peanut barrier would be something that blocks
peanut(s) from reaching some location or goal; in contrast,
while barrier peanut can be interpreted (e.g., as a
stubbornly unmoving peanut), it seems less natural.
Although the major results of Experiment 1 did not
appear to be affected by word order, we were concerned that
the perceived awkwardness might compromise the
naturalness of the interpretations. Therefore in Experiment
2, we decided to use only the more natural ER combination
order.

Participants
Seventy-two Northwestern University undergraduates
participated in this study in exchange for course credit.

Materials and Procedure
The encoding materials were drawn from our stimuli list for
Experiment 1. They consisted of 96 conceptual combination
phrases in ER order: 64 relational noun–entity noun
combinations and 32 conventional combinations (e.g.,
noodle casserole or football stadium) as filler items.
Participants were instructed to imagine what the phrase
might mean and to rate the difficulty of this task on a scale
of 1 to 7. The conventional conceptual combinations served
as a manipulation check to ensure that participants were
paying attention to the rating scale throughout the task.
There were two independent variables: noun focus
(whether the participant was tested on entity nouns or
relational nouns) and recognition context (old or new).
Noun focus was manipulated between participants, while
recognition context was manipulated within participants.
The recognition materials consisted of 32 conceptual
combinations: 8 EoldRold, 8 EoldRnew, 8 EnewRold, and 8
EnewRnew phrases. On the recognition test, participants saw
noun–noun phrases, and were instructed to say whether the
target word (in red) was old or new. Individuals participated
in a computer-based ratings task for the 96 conceptual
combinations. Then they received an unrelated filler task for
20 minutes; finally, they completed the computer-based
recognition task.

Results
Data from seven participants were excluded because their
false alarm rate exceeded their hit rate. Two measures of
recognition sensitivity were computed for each participant.
The first measured a participant’s ability to detect a word
when it was presented in the same semantic context as that
at encoding. For this “old context” measure, we calculated
the proportion of hits to old words presented with the (same)
old context word as at encoding and the proportion of false
alarms to new words presented with an old context word (as
reported in Table 3). These proportions were used to
compute the d’ for an old context.
The second measure represented a participant’s ability to
recognize a word in a new context. For this “new context”
measure, we calculated the proportion of hits to old words
that were presented with a new context word and the
proportion of false alarms to new words that were presented
with a new context word (Table 3). These proportions were
used to compute the d’ for a new context, as shown in
Figure 1.

Experiment 2
In order to isolate the encoding mutability effect, in
Experiment 2 we adapted Kersten and Earles’ (2004) noun–
verb recognition paradigm to test recognition sensitivity for
words within noun–noun phrases. Participants first viewed
conceptual combination phrases as in Experiment 1. At
recognition, they saw phrases with one word indicated as
the target word to be recognized. The target word could
appear with an old or new context word.
If the encoding of relational nouns is more influenced
by context than that of entity nouns, we should expect entity
nouns to be more stable across different contexts. That is,
we expect recognition sensitivity for relational nouns to be
more impaired by a new context than that of entity nouns.
Using d’ as the measure of sensitivity, we predict (1) that d’
should be higher overall for entity nouns than for relational
nouns; (2) that d’ for relational nouns should be lower in the
166

recognition test (Experiment 1), people are more likely to
judge a phrase to be “old” if the entity noun is old,
(regardless of the relational noun). The results of
Experiment 1 suggest that participants are more sensitive to
the difference between old noun pairs and new pairs when
the entity noun has been changed than when the relational
noun has been changed. That is, people were able to
recognize a change in entity noun regardless of its relational
noun context. However, their recognition of relational nouns
was influenced by its entity noun context.
In Experiment 2, participants showed greater recognition
sensitivity for entity nouns than for relational nouns. In
addition, relational nouns showed a greater disadvantage in
new contexts relative to old contexts than did entity nouns.
Both these results suggest that entity nouns were given a
stable encoding that could later be recognized in a relatively
context-independent way. In contrast, the encoding of
relational nouns is influenced by the entity noun with which
they occur.
This pattern parallels that for nouns and verbs reported by
Kersten and Earles (2004). They found that people were
better able to recognize old nouns across different verbs
than old verbs across different nouns, and noted that this
pattern could follow from the greater contextual mutability
of verbs over nouns (Gentner, 1981; Gentner & France,
1988). Our findings invite an analogous conclusion for
relational nouns as compared to entity nouns.
This pattern may be the result of a shift in the encoded
features of the relational noun; while the defining extrinsic
relations of the relational noun remain constant, the context
may constrain and filter the properties of the relational
noun. For example, barrier in the context of career
advancement may refer to education or experience, while
barrier in the context of athletic performance may be
limitations of strength or endurance. Because the meaning
of a relational noun is so dependent on its external relations,
it is more likely to experience a shift in meaning in different
contexts than an entity noun defined by primarily intrinsic
relations.
Further extensions. An obvious direction is to ask what
other verb characteristics may be shared by relational nouns.
For example, are they more variable cross-linguistically and
harder to translate than entity nouns? A second natural
extension of this investigation is to examine the differences
within relational nouns. One important distinction is
between relational schema categories such as robbery,
which convey a relational structure linking a set of
arguments, versus relational role categories such as thief,
which convey one specific argument of a schema. This
distinction between relational role categories and relational
schema categories may enter into the phenomena that
characterize relational versus entity nouns. For example, are
relational schema nouns more or less “verb-like” than
relational role nouns? Another question is whether relational
nouns that are morphologically derived from verbs (e.g.,
betrayal from the verb betray or hindrance from hinder)

Table 3. Experiment 2: Hits, False Alarms, and d’
E
mean SD

R
mean SD

0.75 0.19
0.25 0.13
1.53 0.62

0.75 0.18
0.38 0.22
1.26 0.89

0.61 0.21
0.13 0.15
1.79 0.95

0.53 0.24
0.26 0.17
0.91 0.74

old context
Hits
FA
d'
new context
Hits
FA
d'

As predicted, participants tested on entity nouns showed
greater recognition sensitivity (M = 1.66, SD = .81) than
those tested on relational nouns (M = 1.08, SD = .84),
F(1,63) = 14.04, p<.01) across old and new contexts. There
was no main effect of context. Also as predicted, there was a
significant interaction of noun focus and context, F(1,63) =
5.66, p<.05. The mean d’ for relational nouns in a new
context was less than the mean d’ in an old context
(significant by a planned comparison, t(33) = 2.17, p < .05,
one-tailed). Although the mean d’ for entity nouns in the
new context was greater than that in the old context, the
difference was not statistically reliable. These results
suggest that the change of context had a more deleterious
effect on recognition of relational nouns than on recognition
of entity nouns.

2.50
2.00
1.50

E
R

1.00
0.50
0.00
old context

new context

Figure 1. Experiment 2: Mean d’ in old and new contexts

General Discussion
Taken together, these experiments support two related
claims: (1) that relational nouns are more mutable—that is,
more context sensitive—than entity nouns during encoding;
and (2) that recognition sensitivity for relational nouns is
more disadvantaged in a new context than is recognition
sensitivity for entity nouns.
Our hypothesis is that when people interpret an ER
phrase, they tend to adapt the relational noun to fit the entity
noun. Consistent with this hypothesis, in a whole-phrase
167

Gentner, D. (1982). Why nouns are learned before verbs:
Linguistic relativity versus natural partitioning. In S.
Kuczaj (Ed.), Language development: Vol. 2. Language,
thought and culture. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gentner, D., & Boroditsky, L. (2001). Individuation,
relativity and early word learning. In M. Bowerman & S.
Levinson (Eds.), Language acquisition and conceptual
development. New York: Cambridge University Press
Gentner, D., & France, I. M. (1988). The verb mutability
effect: Studies of the combinatorial semantics of nouns
and verbs. In S. L. Small, G. W. Cottrell, & M. K.
Gentner, D. & Kurtz, K.J. (2005) In Ahn, W., Goldstone, R.
L., Love, B. C., Markman, A. B., & Wolff, P.
Categorization inside and outside of the lab: Festschrift
in Honor of Douglas L. Medin. Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.
Gentner, D., & Rattermann, M. J. (1991). Language and the
career of similarity. In S. A. Gelman & J. P. Byrnes
(Eds.), Perspectives on language and thought:
Interrelations in development. London: Cambridge
University Press.
Gerrig, R. J., & Murphy, G. L. (1992). Contextual
influences on the comprehension of complex concepts.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 7, 205-230.
Jones, M., & Love, B. C. (in preparation). Beyond common
features: The role of roles in determining similarity .
Keil, F.C. 1989. Concepts, kinds, and cognitive
development. Cambridge, MA: Bradford/MIT Press.
Kersten, A.W., & Earles, J.L. (2004). Semantic context
influences memory for verbs more than memory for
nouns. Memory & Cognition, 32, 198-211.
Kurtz, K.J., & Gentner, D. (2001). Kinds of kinds: Sources
of category coherence. Proceedings of the Twenty-third
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 522527.
Lassaline, M. E. (1996). Structural alignment in induction
and similarity. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 22(3), 754-770.
Markman, A. B., & Stilwell, C. H. (2001). Role-governed
categories. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical
Intelligence, 13, 329-358.
Murphy, G. L. (1988). Comprehending complex concepts.
Cognitive Science, 12, 529-562.
Murphy, G. L., & Medin, D. L. (1985). The role of theories
in conceptual coherence. Psychological Review, 92, 289316.
Rehder, B. & Hastie, R. (2001) Causal knowledge and
categories: The effects of causal beliefs on categorization,
induction, and similarity. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 130, 323-360.
Waxman, S.R., & D.G. Hall. 1993. The development of a
linkage between count nouns and object categories:
evidence from fifteen- to twenty-month-old infants. Child
Development, 64, 1224-1241.
Wisniewski, E. J. (1996). Construal and similarity in
conceptual combination. Journal of Memory and
Language, 35, 434-453.

differ from non-derived relational nouns such as friend,
sister, or carnivore.
A
final
question
is
whether
the
relative
abstractness/concreteness of the nouns plays a role in
contextual mutability and recognition sensitivity. We are
currently designing a study in which participant ratings will
be used to create ER noun pairs controlled for abstractness.
Finally, although we have contrasted relational nouns
with entity nouns, the contrast should probably be thought
of as a continuum rather than a dichotomy. For example,
Sloman and Malt (2003) have argued that artifact categories
are characterized neither by essences nor by intrinsic sets of
properties but at least in part by relational information such
as the intended and actual function. Causal structure has
also been shown to play an important role in the learning
and processing of categories (Ahn, 1999; Rehder & Hastie,
2001) and in how people draw inferences from categories
(Lassaline, 1996). As Murphy and Medin (1985) suggested,
theory-like relational structure may be a prominent aspect of
categories in general. If so, then the study of relational
nouns and the categories they denote may shed light on
phenomena of greater import.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Sam Day, Jason Jameson, Dan Bartels, and the
rest of the Language and Cognition Group at Northwestern
University.

References
Ahn, W. (1999). Effect of Causal Structure on Category
Construction. Memory & Cognition, 27, 1008-1023.
Anggoro, F., Gentner, D., & Klibanoff, R. (2005). How to
go from nest to home: Children's learning of abstract
relational categories. Proceedings of the 27th meeting of
the Cognitive Science Society.
Barr, R. A., & Caplan, L. J. (1987). Category
representations and their implications for category
structure. Memory & Cognition, 15, 397-418.
Caselli, M.C., Bates, E., Casadio, P., Fenson, J., Fenson, L.,
Sanderl, L., & Weir, J. (1995). A cross-linguistic study of
early lexical development. Cognitive Development, 10,
159-199.
Costello, F., & Keane, M. T. (2001). Testing two theories of
conceptual combination: Alignment versus diagnosticity
in the comprehension and production of combine
concepts. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 27(1), 255-271.
Earles, J.L., & Kersten, A.W. (2000). Adult age differences
in memory for verbs and nouns. Aging, Neuropsychology,
and Cognition, 7, 130-139.
Francis, W.N., & Kucera, H. (1982). Frequency analysis of
English usage: Lexicon and grammar. Boston: Houghton
Mifflin.
Gentner, D. (1981). Some interesting differences between
nouns and verbs. Cognition and Brain Theory, 4, 161177.

168

