UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Creating False Memories in Humans with an Artificial Neural Network: Implications for
Theories of Memory Consolidation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/30q3w5ht

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Ans, Bernard
Musca, Serban C.
Rousset, Stephane

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Creating False Memories in Humans with an Artificial Neural Network:
Implications for Theories of Memory Consolidation
Serban C. Musca (Serban.Musca@upmf-grenoble.fr)
Stéphane Rousset (Stephane.Rousset@upmf-grenoble.fr)
Bernard Ans (Bernard.Ans@upmf-grenoble.fr)
Psychology and NeuroCognition Lab - CNRS UMR 5105, University Pierre Mendes France (Grenoble 2),
1251 Avenue Centrale, BP 47, 38040 Grenoble cedex 9, France

Abstract
Building on the human memory model that consider LTM to
be similar to a distributed network (McClelland, McNaughton
& O'Reilly, 1995), and informed by the recent solutions to
catastrophic forgetting that suppose memories are
dynamically maintained in a dual architecture through a
memory self-refreshing mechanism (Ans & Rousset, 1997,
2000; Ans et al., 2002, 2004; French, 1997), we checked
whether false memories of never seen (target) items can be
created in humans by exposure to "pseudo-patterns" generated
from random input in an artificial neural network (previously
trained on the target items). In a behavioral experiment using
an opposition method it is shown that the answer is yes:
Though the pseudo-patterns presented to the participants were
selected so as to resemble (both at the exemplar and the
prototype level) more the control items than the target items,
the participants exhibited more familiarity for the target items
previously learned by the artificial neural network. This
behavioral result analogous to the one found in simulations
indicates that humans, like distributed neural networks, are
able to make use of the information the memory
self-refreshing mechanism is based upon. The implications of
these findings are discussed in the framework of memory
consolidation.
Keywords: distributed information; neural networks; human
memory; representation format in human memory; memory
self-refreshing; exemplar theory; prototype theory; indirect
memory test; familiarity; perceptual fluency.

Introduction
Can information be transported between a GDN–a
multi-layered network trained by a gradient descent learning
procedure–and humans? This question is central to models
of human memory that suppose that LTM is similar to a
distributed network (e.g. McClelland, McNaughton &
O'Reilly, 1995) and that memories are dynamically
maintained in a dual architecture through a memory selfrefreshing mechanism (Ans & Rousset, 1997, 2000; Ans et
al., 2002, 2004; French, 1997).
GDN's memory gradually emerges as a result of the
processing of the training exemplars: the connection
weights between the processing units reach values that
allow the network to perform correctly. Thus the memory of
a given trained GDN can be conceived as the particular set
of connections weights between its processing units.

Of course, when trained on a new set of exemplars S2, the
connection weights of a network previously trained on a set
of exemplars S1 change in order to allow the network to
perform correctly on S2, and this new connection weight set
does not allow the network to perform correctly on S1 any
more (catastrophic interference or catastrophic forgetting:
McCloskey & Cohen, 1989; Ratcliff, 1990). To get round
this obstacle, an obvious solution is to train S1 and S2
concurrently, thus transforming sequential learning (i.e. first
S1, then S2) into concurrent learning (i.e. S1, and S2 at the
same time). However, concurrent learning relies on the
assumption that S1 is still available when S2 is to be learned,
an unreasonable assumption when GDNs are used to
simulate human memory phenomena: Every old exemplar is
not available nor is it learned anew each time some new
exemplars are learned (Blackmon et al., 2004). A first step
towards a more plausible solution to the problem of
catastrophic forgetting in GDNs in sequential learning tasks
is due to Robins (1995): Once a network has been trained on
S1, its memory is sampled, thus generating "random
input-computed output" pairs (or pseudo-items) that are
stored in a non-neuromimetic memory; then, instead of
training the network on S2 only, it is trained both on S2 and
on the stored pseudo-items. If this solution makes it possible
to reduce catastrophic forgetting in the absence of S1
exemplars, it also resorts to an implausible "copy-paste"
procedure in order to store the pseudo-items before they are
used as training material.
The next solutions (Ans & Rousset, 1997; French, 1997)
avoid the "copy-paste" procedure by having recourse to
GDN architectures that are able to learn "on the fly" the
"random input-computed output" pairs. For instance, Ans &
Rousset's (1997) architecture is made of two separate
GDNs, NET1 and NET2; once trained on S1, NET1
generates reverberated "random input-computed output"
pairs (called pseudo-patterns, PPs) that are used to train
NET2. Then, when NET1 is to learn a new set of exemplars
S2, NET1 is not only trained on S2 but also on PPs generated
this time in NET2 (and conveying information on S1). Were
a third new training set S3 to be learned, NET1's memory
would first be transmitted to NET2 through PPs, then NET1
would be trained on both S3 and PPs generated in NET2
(now conveying information on both S1 and S2). To sum up,
this architecture is very efficient in avoiding catastrophic

1576

forgetting in the absence of old training exemplars and even
in the case of numerous phases of sequential learning.
It will be shown that the memory of a GDN
auto-associator can be transported to humans by means of
PPs. However, this would not be a new result if the PPs
presented to the participants amounted to the exemplars
used to train the network, under their initial form or as
noisy, distorted versions of them; except for the use of a
neural network to generate the stimuli, this would be a
classic learning/memory result (cf. Medin & Schaffer, 1978;
Nosofsky, 1986; Posner & Keele, 1968; Reed, 1972).
The originality of this research is to show that a network's
memory is transported to human participants and affects
their behavior even though all the PPs used as stimuli are
very different from the initial training exemplars.
In order to make this point, an opposition method was
adopted: The PPs presented to the participants were selected
so as to resemble more some other exemplars (hereafter
control items) than the exemplars used to train the network
(hereafter target items). Participants were only presented
with selected PPs during a first, training phase, and then
tested with the target items and the control items. A higher
familiarity for the target items than for the control items–
though the latter resemble more the PPs previously
presented to the participants–would show a memory
transport between the neural network and the participants.
The experiment is preceded by a simulation: A new
(untrained) GDN auto-associator was trained on the very
PPs stimuli used in the behavioral experiment. Starting from
a comparison of behavioral and simulation results, the
discussion will consider the possible interpretations of the
behavioral data.

opposition method allows for the following contrasted
predictions.
If the selected PPs are but distorted items, owing to the
selection constraints (exposed below), they are distortions
closer to the control items than to the target items; thus
NET2, trained only on the selected PPs, would exhibit a
better performance at test on the control than on the target
items. On the contrary, it may be that despite the constraints
applied to the PPs, the selected set of PPs convey enough
important information on the function instantiated by NET1
once it has been trained on the target items for NET2 to
instantiate a similar function; in this case NET2, trained
only on the selected PPs, would exhibit at test a better
performance on the target than on the control items.

Simulation
The simulations involved the construction of 106 items, also
used in the behavioral experiments (cf. Figure 1). The items
were matrices constructed as follows. Starting from the
centre of a 19¯19 black grid, the following procedure was
applied 20 times: A direction (up, down, left or right) was
randomly chosen and two squares in that direction were
turned white, then the last square served as starting point for
the procedure on the next step. Any resulting pattern wider
or higher than 13 squares was discarded, the remaining were
re-centered on a 13¯13 grid until 106 different and
meaningless items were available. Each item was then
coded as a vector of length 169, with black squares coded 0
and white squares 1. This set of items was subsequently
randomly divided into two lists of 53 items, List A and
List B.
The opposition method outlined in the introduction was
used in the simulation. A first network (NET1) was trained
on the target items (e.g. List A items), then generated PPs
that were selected so as to retain only those that resemble
more the control items (i.e. List B items) than the target
items. Then, a new network (NET2) was trained only on the
selected PPs and tested on the target and control items. The

Figure 1: Examples of the experimental material: a) List A
items; b) PPBA pseudo-patterns; c) List B items; d) PPBB
pseudo-patterns. See text for details.

1577

Material and Procedure
NET1 is a backpropagation three-layer auto-associator
with 169 input units, 169 output units, 16 hidden units, a
learning rate of .01 and a momentum of .7, initialized with
random connection weights uniformly sampled between
-0.5 and 0.5. After NET1 has been trained on the target
items, then PPs were generated according to Ans &
Rousset’s (1997, 2000) procedure: Binary random input was

fed to the input layer, resulting activation propagated
through the network to the output layer, the output was then
fed to the input layer (reverberation), and again propagated
through the network, and so on. PPs are output patterns
produced after five re-injections (cf. Figure 1). Out of
4,325,000 PPs generated in this way, only those PPs that
complied with all the three following rules were retained:
(R1) In terms of Euclidean distance, each selected PP is
closer to a control item than to any target item;
(R2) To reduce the number of PPs while increasing their
variety, the RMS distance between any two selected PPs is
greater than .15;
(R3) the mean of the Euclidean distances between each
target item and the centroid of the selected base of PPs (the
"mean PP", noted PPM) is greater than the mean of the
distances between each control item and PPM ; with a
formula:

1
1
d (Ti , PPM ) > ∑ d (C j , PPM )
∑
N i =1
N j =1
with Ti = target item i;
C j = control item j;
N

Figure 2: Network performance (RMS error) on target and
control items, after training on a PP base (PPBA or PPBB,
according to a target list counterbalancing).

N

(1),

Behavioral experiment

d ( X , Y ) = the Euclidian distance between vectors

The general procedure consists in presenting humans
incidentally with PPs generated in a GDN auto-associator
that had previously been trained on a list of target items.
Sensitivity to the information that the selected PPs convey
on the target items would be evidenced if humans are shown
to have some form of memory for the never seen target
items. These items obviously cannot be presented to the
participants previous to the test phase, so a task where
participants would be instructed to overtly recognize the
target items is impossible. Therefore participants' memory
will be assessed with an indirect design that allows for a
measure of their familiarity with these items.
The experiment is strictly matched with Simulation with
respect to the items and the PP lists used. The memory
advantage for the never seen target items (over the control
items) is tested by comparing perceptual fluency for target
and control list items.
After an incidental exposure to the selected PPs used in
Simulation, the participants performed a duration judgment
task–under time pressure–both on the target and the control
list items. Participants were induced to believe that two
slightly different presentation times were used and had to
classify items' display duration as short or long. Actually all
items had exactly the same duration. Participants' subjective
impression that a given item "lasts more" is linked to an
increased perceptual fluency (Jacoby, 1983; Witherspoon &
Allan, 1985), whose real cause is familiarity with that item
(Whittlesea, Jacoby & Girard, 1990) — but that participants
would attribute to different presentation times. Thus, if
humans are sensitive to the distributed information
conveyed by PPs, there will be more long responses on the
target than on the control list items.

X and Y;

PPM =

1 S
∑ PPk ;
S k =1

S = the number of selected PPs;
N = the number of target (control) items.
The significance of these selection rules is that they make
sure that the PPs resemble more the control items than the
target items, both at the exemplar level and at the prototype
level. This is an important provision in the event of results
showing a better performance at test on the target items.
More precisely, without these constraints such a result could
arise trivially, that is merely because the PPs would
resemble more the target items (i.e. would be distorted
versions of them).
When the target list for generating the PPs was List A,
this procedure led to PPBA, a 3000-PP base. For
counterbalancing sake the 3000-PP base PPBB was
generated by applying the same selection procedure to PPs
generated in a network trained with List B as target list.
NET2, a new network similar to NET1, was trained either
on PPBA or PPBB base and tested on both target and control
list items. Twelve replications per PP base were run.

Results
As shown in Figure 2, the average error — RMS between
the output of NET2 and the tested item — was dramatically
smaller for the target than for the control list items [F(1, 22)
= 33,160, MSE = 0.000005, p < .0001]. Hence, though
drastically selected in order to resemble more the control
items than the target items, the PPs generated in NET1 still
conveyed efficiently information on the specific (target)
items learned by NET1.
1578

Method
Participants Seventy students (mean age = 20.5 years, SD
= 1.6) participated for course credit.
Stimuli The PPs used in Simulation and the original 106
items were used as stimuli, displayed as 13¯13 matrices
(260¯260 pixels) centered on a black background on a 17"
(1024¯768 pixels) screen.
Design and procedure Participants first performed an
incidental study task: They were to detect a cross that
appeared (9 percent of the trials) in a random location on a
background made of PPs: PPs were displayed for 400 ms
each, with no void in between. Prior to performing this task
with the 3000-PP base, and in order to ensure optimal
exposure to it, participants underwent a warm-up phase
where 500 of the 3000 PPs were displayed.
Then participants engaged in the duration judgment task:
They were to classify the display duration of images as
short or long. In order to progressively introduce the test to
the participants, a 52-item warm-up phase was designed; in
order to prevent interference with test items, only PPs were
used during this warm-up phase1. During the warm-up, the
first 40 trials used two different display durations (200 or
250 ms): The first eight trials were example trials, then
participants received feedback on their responses to the
remaining 32 trials. The remaining 12 PPs were then
presented without feedback and with closer display
durations (200 or 230 ms). After this warm-up, participants
performed the critical duration judgment task, presented to
them as "the same test on a different type of stimuli";
unbeknown to the participants, the presentation time for the
106 items of interest (i.e. target and control items) was in
fact always of exactly 200 ms. The inter-stimuli interval was
of 1300 ms.
For counterbalancing sake there were two experimental
groups: The target list of Group A was List A (and their
control list was List B), and the target list of Group B was
List B (and their control list was List A).

Figure 3: Behavioral results. Effect of previous incidental
exposure to PPs on long responses (denoting familiarity) to
target and control items in a duration judgment task. All
stimuli correspond strictly to those used in Simulation
(PPBA was used for Group A and PPBB for Group B,
according to a target list counterbalancing).

Discussion

Results

In this paper it was shown that false memories can be
created in humans by exposure to material created in a
multi-layered network trained by a gradient descent learning
procedure (GDN). The motivation of this research stems
from the question of whether humans have the ability to
capture distributed information hold in a GDN when
presented with samples (reverberated pseudo-patterns, PPs)
of the function instantiated by the network. This question is
central to a model of human memory that supposes that the
final memory (LTM) is similar to a GDN (e.g. McClelland,
McNaughton & O'Reilly, 1995) and that memories are
dynamically maintained in a dual architecture by means of a
memory self-refreshing mechanism based on PPs (Ans &
Rousset, 1997; Ans & Rousset, 2000; Ans, Rousset, French
& Musca, 2002, 2004; French, 1997).
The results of the behavioral experiment presented here
show that the answer is yes. The transport of distributed
information has been evidenced in a behavioral experiment
using PPs manipulated so as to prevent them from being the
exemplars used to train the network or their prototype–
under their initial form or as noisy, distorted versions. Even
though the selected PPs resembled more the control items
than the target items–both at the exemplar and the prototype
level–it was shown that the participants presented only with
these PPs were more familiar with the target items than with
the control items.
What properties of human memory are responsible for
these surprising results? To answer this question, we
consider the results of Simulation of and other
supplementary aspects.

Responses given by the participants during the first 800 ms
are considered. This time limit was chosen in accordance to
existing studies that used similar tasks to assess familiarity
(e.g. Jacoby, 1991; Ratcliff and McKoon, 1995).
As Figure 3 shows, there were more long responses for
the target than for the control items [F(1, 68) = 4.517, MSE
= 9.868, p = .0372]. This denotes a stronger familiarity of
the participants with the never seen target items (than with
the never seen control items), a familiarity grounded in the
prior exposure to the (drastically selected) PPs. No other
effect was significant–Group effect: F(1, 68) = 0.370;
interaction: F(1, 68) = 0.088.
1

Both the 500-PP warm-up base used in the incidental study phase
and the 52-PP warm-up base used in the duration judgment task
comply with the 3 selection rules described in Simulation.
1579

A first element is brought by simulations conducted with
two versions of a matching memory model. In these models,
the similarity of each target and control item to a set of PPs
(e.g. PPBA) is computed and taken as a performance
indicator. Two versions of the model were used: One,
exemplar-based, computes the similarity between each item
and each PP; the other, centroid-based, computes the
similarity between each item and the centroid of the set of
PPs (i.e. the "mean" PP).
The exemplar-based version of the model can be best
described in two steps. First, the similarity Sim(Ii, PPj)
between an item Ii and a pseudo-pattern PPj is defined as a
decreasing function of their RMS:

[

]

Sim( I i , PPj ) = 1 − RMS (I i , PPj )

γ

(2),

where γ ≥ 1 denotes an aggregate parameter.
Then, in order to compare the target and the control lists, a
global similarity score is computed for each item as the
mean of its similarities to all the PPs. The aggregate
parameter γ modulates the contribution of each PP to the
global similarity score of the item at hand: For low values of
γ all the PPs make a contribution to the global similarity,
whereas for high values of γ only PPs (very) close to the
item at hand make a significant contribution (thus tending
towards a PP-specific matching).
The centroid-based version of the model works in a very
similar way, except that the global similarity of each item to
PPM, the centroid of the set of PPs, is used. It is computed in
one step:

Sim( I i , PPM ) = [1 − RMS (I i , PPM )] (3).
γ

Simulations with both versions of the model failed to
replicate the behavioral results, whatever the value of
parameter γ. This makes it obvious that if human memory
functioned as a matching system like those used here, one
could not expect the results that the participants exhibit; the
nature of the memory system bear crucial consequences on
the results.
In order to highlight the crucial role of the learning
material and as a further support for the idea that the
selected PPs used in Simulation are not mere item
distortions, one more set of simulations was conducted. The
same network as NET2 in Simulation was used, but with a
very different training material. No PPs were created or
used at any point in these simulations; instead, mere
distortions of the target items were used as training material
for NET2.
Distortions of the target items (hereafter distorted
patterns, DPs) were created by adding a random number
lying between 0 and 0.8 (if component's value was 0) or
subtracting it (if component's value was 1) to each
component of each target item. In order to ensure that DPs
and PPs differ only with respect to the absence/presence of
information on the function instantiated by NET1 in
Simulation, the same three rules used to select the PPs were
applied to select among the created DPs.
As expected from the selection rules, when NET2 was
trained on mere item distortions, it exhibited a slightly but

significantly better performance on the control item list than
on the target item list. This result validates the selection
rules used and constitutes a clear-cut comparison reference
for analyzing the results found in Simulation. When the
training material is not made of samples of the function
instantiated by a GDN, NET2 not only fails to produce the
results found in humans and in the corresponding simulation
(Simulation), but produces the opposite pattern of results.
This highlights the importance of the learning material: if
PPs were just distortions of the target items, the
simulation of the behavioral experiment (Simulation) would
not have produced the result it did, but the opposite one–just
as the simulations that used DPs do.
The behavioral results are simulated when the stimuli
used to train the network are samples (i.e. PPs) of the
function instantiated by a GDN that has previously been
trained on the target stimuli and, importantly, when the
memory model used is itself a GDN. After training on PPs,
such a system instantiates a function that is very compatible
with a good performance on the target items but not on the
control items. These considerations seem to point at the
conclusion that the participants, after extended exposure to
PPs, have captured the function conveyed by the PPs. Under
this account, participants' increased familiarity with the
target (as compared to the control) items would stem, in a
way similar to the GDN trained on PPs in Simulation, from
the fact that the target items are obviously compatible with
this function.
Because of the thorough controls and the incidental nature
of the task used during the acquisition phase, alternative
accounts for the behavioral results are scarce: Participants
were not asked to attend to the PPs, which served only as a
background in the cross-detection task. Thus there was no
explicit or implicit request that the participants learn the
PPs. Furthermore, all the PPs were obviously part of a
single category (that of samples of the function instantiated
by a GDN that has previously been trained on the target
items), and no categorization was ever required of the
participants during the acquisition phase. Two versions of a
very simple matching model were considered and they
failed to exhibit the result found in the behavioral
experiment. There are of course more other theories/models
that assume more complex mechanisms (e.g. Kruschke,
1992; Medin & Schaffer, 1978; Nosofsky, 1986; Reed,
1972), but they all apply to situations where a categorization
task is used during the acquisition phase. Now, this was not
at all the case for the experiments presented here.
What are the implications of these results? False
memories for never seen items can be created in humans by
mere exposure to distributed network attractors in an
experimental setting that allows for avoiding an
interpretation in terms of prototype or exemplars. The
implication of this result is that the actual items are not
needed for learning to occur in humans: distributed
information coming from a GDN can also induce this
learning.

1580

A second implication of the results concerns the nature of
memory consolidation. In a GDN architecture, a dynamical
and continuous consolidation is required in order to avoid
catastrophic forgetting. This constraint of permanent
rehearsal pays off, as consolidation is confined to a fully
distributed architecture that comes with all the interesting
properties of distributed neural networks. As discussed in
the introduction, the solution whereby memories are
dynamically maintained relies on the use of PPs generated
in the GDNs that make up the architecture. This leads
naturally to the question whether memory consolidation in
the brain is achieved by continuous cortical consolidation in
a distributed system similar to a GDN architecture. Of
course this question cannot be answered directly. However,
if humans could not be shown to be sensitive to the kind of
information involved in memory self-refreshing in GDN
architectures, one would have good reasons to be prone to
give a negative answer. Now, we showed here that false
memories can be created in humans through exposure to
PPs generated in a GDN. PPs are not just odd, disembodied
entities that came up because they are essential to the
memory self-refreshing mechanism in a distributed network
architecture: Humans are sensitive to and capable of
learning from PPs.
Though this paper deals with humans' ability to learn
from PPs, the hypothesis of an intra-cortical PP mechanism
cannot be tested directly. Because visual modality was
chosen to pass the PPs to the human cognitive system and
because of the particular experimental design, the results
concern phenomena situated at the frontier between memory
and perception. Beyond having shown that humans are
sensitive to distributed information, a result that supports an
original view on the nature of human memory
consolidation, our hope is that the experiment presented
here also brings new methodological tools for related fields
of research.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by a research grant from
the European Commission (HPRN-CT-1999-00065) and by
the French government (CNRS UMR 5105). We would like
to thank Alan Chauvin, Robert French, Dwight Kravitz,
James McClelland, David Plaut and Gautam Vallabha for
valuable discussions and suggestions on draft versions of
this paper.

References
Ans, B., & Rousset, S. (1997). Avoiding catastrophic
forgetting by coupling two reverberating neural networks.
Comptes Rendus de l'Académie des Sciences Paris, Life
Sciences, 320, 989-997.
Ans, B., & Rousset, S. (2000). Neural networks with a selfrefreshing memory: Knowledge transfer in sequential
learning tasks without catastrophic forgetting. Connection
Science, 12, 1-19.
Ans, B., Rousset, S., French, R. M., & Musca, S. C. (2002).
Preventing catastrophic interference in multiple-sequence

learning using coupled reverberating Elman networks. In
W. D. Gray & C. D. Schunn (Eds.), Proceedings of the
24th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
71–76). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Ans, B., Rousset, S., French, R. M., & Musca, S. C. (2004).
Self-refreshing memory in artificial neural networks:
learning temporal sequences without catastrophic
forgetting. Connection Science, 16, 71-99.
Blackmon, J., Byrd, D., Cummins, R., Poirier, P., & Roth,
M. (in press). Atomistic learning in non-modular systems.
Philosophical Psychology.
French, R. M. (1997). Pseudo-recurrent connectionist
networks: an approach to the ‘sensitivity-stability’
dilemma. Connection Science, 9, 353–379.
Jacoby, L. L. (1983). Perceptual enhancement: Persistent
effects of an experience. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 9, 21-38.
Jacoby, L. L. (1991). A process dissociation framework:
Separating automatic from intentional uses of memory.
Journal of Memory and Language, 30, 513-541.
Kruschke, J. K. (1992). ALCOVE: An exemplar-based
connectionist model of category learning. Psychological
Review, 99, 22-44.
McClelland, J. L., McNaughton, B. L., & O'Reilly, R. C.
(1995). Why there are complementary learning systems in
the hippocampus and neocortex: insights from the
successes and failures of connectionist models of learning
and memory. Psychological Review, 102, 419-457.
McCloskey, M., and Cohen, N. J., (1989). Catastrophic
interference in connectionist networks: the sequential
learning problem. In H. G. Bower (Ed.), The Psychology
of Learning and Motivation, Vol. 24 (pp. 109–165). New
York: Academic Press.
Medin, D. L., & Schaffer, M. M. (1978). Context theory of
classification learning. Psychological Review, 85, 207238.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1986). Attention, similarity, and the
identification-categorization relationship. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 115, 39-57.
Posner, M. I., & Keele, S. W. (1968). On the genesis of
abstract ideas. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 77,
353-363.
Ratcliff, R. (1990). Connectionist models of recognition and
memory: constraints imposed by learning and forgetting
functions. Psychological Review, 97, 285–308.
Ratcliff, R., & McKoon, G. (1995). Bias in the priming of
object decisions. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 21, 754-767.
Reed, S. K. (1972). Pattern recognition and categorization.
Cognitive Psychology, 3, 382-407.
Robins, A.V. (1995). Catastrophic forgetting, rehearsal and
pseudorehearsal. Connection Science, 7, 123–146.
Whittlesea, B. W., Jacoby, L. L., & Girard, K. (1990).
Illusions of immediate memory: Evidence of an
attributional basis for feelings of familiarity and
perceptual quality. Journal of Memory and Language, 29,
716-732.
Witherspoon, D., & Allan, L. G. (1985). The effect of a
prior presentation on temporal judgments in a perceptual
identification task. Memory and Cognition, 13, 101-111.

1581

