UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Design Problem Solving with Conceptual Diagrams

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2pd798z0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Dogan, Fehmi
Nersessian, Nancy J.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Design Problem Solving with Conceptual Diagrams
Fehmi Dogan (fehmidogan@iyte.edu.tr)
College of Architecture, Izmir Institute of Technology

Nancy J. Nersessian (nancyn@cc.gatech.edu)
College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology
- Conceptual diagrams are double-referential in the sense
that they correspond to the design conceptualization and to
potential generic spatial configurations, both of which are
components of design conceptualizations.
Studies in design representations have focused on sketches
(Goel, 1995; Goldschmidt, 1991; Suwa & Tversky, 1997).
These studies show that sketches are significant in generating
ideas through their ambiguous and dense structure. However,
research in the area of diagrammatic reasoning provides
evidence for how diagrams can differ from sketches. The
results of these studies have shown that diagrammatic
representations directly represent the structure of their target
domain (Shimojima, 2001; Stenning & Lemon, 2001), and
thus simplify the complexity of conceptual domains (Bauer &
Johnson-Laird, 1993).
Shimojima (2001) argues that the main determining factor
of diagrammatic representations is the existence of nomic
constraints. These constraints establish correspondences
between the representation and what is represented through
keeping at least one characteristic of the target domain
present. Stenning and Lemon (2001) describe diagrammatic
representations as "…plane structure[s] in which representing
tokens are objects whose mutual spatial and graphical
relations are interpreted directly as relations in the target
structure" (p. 36). Johnson-Laird (2002) characterizes
diagrammatic representations and their target domains in
terms of a correspondence to a target domain, wherein the
structure of the two domains remains the same. The
correspondence between diagrams and their target domains,
according to Johnson-Laird, is about structure and not any
other arbitrary feature. Based on these characterizations of
diagrams, the distinction we focus on here between sketches
and diagrams is that diagrams highlight and represent
structural relationships of their target domains, whereas
sketches may represent these relationships but do not
explicitly highlight them.
Johnson-Laird also points to an important similarity
between mental models and diagrams in that they both
maintain structural correspondences with their represented
domains. We propose that some diagrams can provide
external representations of structural correspondences of a
mental model of a core design conceptualization.
Manipulating such diagrams physically can create
corresponding changes in the mental model, as has been
proposed for simulative model-based reasoning with physical
models (Nersessian, 2002). In this research we hypothesize
that diagrammatic representations could potentially act as

Abstract
This study examines the role of “conceptual diagrams” in
architectural design, specifically how they facilitate conceptual
elaboration in problem-solving processes. We single out a class
of conceptual diagrams that we claim to be “doublereferential,” in that their structure corresponds to the generic
structure of both the design conceptualization and solution. As
such modifications of diagrams produce changes in the
conceptualizations and their corresponding design schemes.
Keywords: Conceptual diagrams; diagrammatic reasoning;
design cognition.

Studies in diagrammatic reasoning have investigated the role
of diagrams in different domains in supporting reasoning,
problem solving, and communication (Hegarty, Meyer, &
Narayanan, 2002). These studies often are confined to
domains that pose relatively well-defined problems, such as
geometry (Koedinger & Anderson, 1990) and physics (Larkin
& Simon, 1987), with fewer studies in domains where the
problems are ill-defined, such as scientific discovery (Cheng,
1996), and architecture (Do & Gross, 2001).
Our study investigated the roles played by diagrams in
concept generation and elaboration in complex, ill-defined
problem solving situations as exemplified in architectural
design. The paper discusses the characteristics of one
particular class of diagrams, conceptual diagrams (Dogan,
2003). This class of diagrams was identified through
cognitive-historical analyses (Nersessian, 1995) of several
case studies in the history of architectural design (Dogan
2003). In the context of this paper we can only outline the
salient points of one study, Daniel Libeskind’s Jewish
Museum in Berlin. We argue that conceptual diagrams differ
from other types of representations used in design—in
particular, sketches—in that they represent both the
designer’s conceptualizations and generic design solution
schemes. This “double referential” nature allows them
function as mediators between the problem space and the
solution space in the design process.

Conceptual diagrams in design
By “conceptual diagram” we mean:
- A visual/spatial configuration representative of the core of
a design conceptualization.
They differ from sketches in design in that:
- They are not realistic representations of physical objects;
they are, rather, representations of abstractions.
They differ from other kinds of diagrams in design in that:

600

process. Furthermore, different from those views which
define problem structuring only in terms of information
transfer, we claim that problem structuring could occur
through formulation of a coherent conceptual framework
responding to the main requirements of a design situation.
We contend that the dual search in design is facilitated
through the double-referential aspect of conceptual diagrams.
Conceptual diagrams represent both the generic structure of a
design conceptualization, corresponding to problem
structuring, and potential generic spatial configurations,
corresponding to problem solutions. They align the structure
of problem space with the structure of solution space. On our
hypothesis, manipulations of the diagram are propagated to
both spaces whenever there is a structural change, suggesting
that if there is a structural change in the conceptual diagram it
has the potential of changing the structure of the
corresponding conceptualizations. Thus, when conceptual
diagrams are constructed and manipulated in the design
process, problem structuring and problem solution are
brought into alignment. Conceptual diagrams can be thought
of as:
- mediating representations between abstract concepts and
specific spatial configurations, i.e., between problem
structuring and problem solution.
Given the potential significance of conceptual diagrams, an
inquiry into their role in actual design processes with
successful outcomes might provide some answers to the
question of how search in the problem space and search in the
solution space are coordinated with each other and what role
conceptual diagrams play in this coordination. In the
remainder of this paper we will outline a cognitive-historical
analysis of such a design process. Rather than constructing an
historical narrative, cognitive-historical analysis examines
problem solving practices exhibited in historical data with the
objective of enhancing understanding of cognition.

physical models representative of mental representations and
we conjecture that:
- manipulations of the components of conceptual diagrams
are likely to change the structure of their corresponding
mental models.

Why are diagrams well suited for design?
In the literature on design cognition and problem solving,
design problems are held to be ill-defined (Reitman, 1964).
Search in well-defined problems is confined to identifying the
operators, whereas in ill-defined problems search includes
both an alternative structuring of the problem statement and
determining operators. In problem-solving literature, the
former is known as problem structuring, whereas the latter as
problem solution (Newell & Simon, 1972). We are not
convinced that thinking of design problem solving in terms of
the traditional notions of search through problem and solution
spaces provides the best means of understanding the role of
conceptual diagrams. However, since much of the literature
in design cognition we want to respond to is couched in these
terms, our analysis here will be as well.
The distinction between problem structuring and problem
solution has often been cited as a distinguishing factor of
design problems (Goel & Pirolli, 1992) and design problem
solving is considered to progress in two search spaces,
problem structuring and problem solution, as opposed to a
single search from an initial state to a goal state. Problem
structuring is the process through which information
transferred from our knowledge is used to better define an illdefined design problem (Goel & Pirolli, 1992), whereas
problem solution is the process through which specific design
schemes are formulated. For instance, to design a house of
worship, among others, a designer needs to know for which
denomination and for how many people this structure is going
to be built. Any piece of information used to further specify
the house of worship is an element of problem structuring. In
contrast, when the designer starts thinking about the form,
shape, and spaces of the house of worship, e.g., a triangular
instead of a circular building, a specific design scheme is
formulated in the solution space.
The main controversy in design studies about the dual
search has been about the nature of the interaction between
the two searches. Some have argued that there is a linear
progression from problem structuring to problem solution
(Goel & Pirolli, 1992); others have suggested a reverse linear
progression (Lloyd & Scott, 1994), yet others have claimed
that the interaction between the two is co-evolutionary rather
than linear (Maher & Tang, 2003). The results from this
research, however, are inconclusive about the relationship
between problem structuring and problem solution in design
and about their temporal order. Architectural design is replete
with instances when designers start with problem structuring
(Goel & Pirolli, 1992) and with those where the design starts
with a solution (Lloyd & Scott, 1994). The main issue,
therefore, is not about the temporal order between problem
structuring and problem solution in design, it is rather about
the nature of the coordination of the dual search in the design

The Design Process of the Jewish Museum of
Berlin
With the case study of the Jewish Museum we highlight the
significance of a series of conceptual diagrams through which
Daniel Libeskind coordinated his evolving conceptualization
with the formulation of a design scheme. The initial
conceptualization centered on a representation of the Star of
David (highlighting Jewish identity and history in the search
of the problem space, i.e., problem structuring) and a zigzag
line as a potential building form (constraining search of the
solution space, i.e., problem solution). During the design
process, the efforts of Libeskind and his assistants were
directed towards improving the zigzag design while
Libeskind simultaneously tried to reach a conceptually sound
base for the specific design. In this process, constructing a
series of diagrams helped Libeskind correlate the search in
the solution space with the search in the problem space and
end with a satisfying conceptual basis for the solution that
entwined the structure of the building with Jewish identity
and history in Berlin and in Germany, as it zigzagged through
space and time.
601

is invisible in nature, yet resident in the physical urban fabric
of the city. The imagined network emerged, e.g., from such
explorations as superimposing addresses of historical Jewish
figures in Berlin on a map of contemporary Berlin. Libeskind
saw this network as an invisible aspect of Berlin because
although the history of social and cultural interaction runs
through the fabric of Berlin it remains largely unseen – the
holocaust had the effect of eliminating the Jewish culture
from the post-war city. Libeskind's Star represents both this
presence and absence, this history and its distortion.
Libeskind started the design process by drawing six
distorted and eight partial Stars on the back of the Berlin
Museum pamphlet, attached to the competition invitation
letter he received from the competition organizers. On the
second page of the same document, Libeskind had about 15
more stars and on the back of the page he drew a zigzag
(Figure 2), which became the final form of his building. On
the site plan, he sketched a preliminary layout for his building
and its relation to a close-by public circle.

The task for Design Competition for the Jewish Museum in
Berlin was to propose an extension to the Berlin Museum that
would house its Jewish Collection. Our analysis of the design
process is based primarily on an investigation of archival
materials at the Getty Research Institute, which houses
sketchbooks, final competition drawings and other drawings,
letters, and additional textual materials from Libeskind’s
office. Other investigated materials include published
writings of Libeskind and of others on the Jewish Museum
and on Libeskind's architecture. In addition, a member of the
design team was contacted to provide information about the
design process. In the space of this paper we can only
highlight salient aspects of the design process.
The design process of the Jewish Museum progressed in
two search spaces. On one hand, the design team focused on a
design scheme in the form of a zigzag, on the other hand the
principal architect (Libeskind) worked on sorting out
important features of the design conceptualization through the
use of Star of David. Libeskind used the Star repeatedly to
establish connections among different issues relevant for the
design concept while at a later stage he managed to combine
the search in the solution space, i.e., the zigzag form of the
building, with the search in the problem space.
For Libeskind, the Star represented Jewish history and
culture throughout the history of Berlin and its absence in the
present-day city. He drew many variations of the Star
throughout the process, leading to the version drafted for the
competition entry (Figure 1). We will refer to this specific
drawing as the conceptual diagram of the Jewish Museum
project, because the drawing is:
- A visual/spatial configuration representing the core of the
design conceptualization: with this diagram Libeskind
emphasized the pervasiveness, yet, invisibility of the Jewish
presence in Berlin and the intertwined histories of Jews and
Germans.
- Double-referential: the spatial configuration both represents
a generic spatial configuration and highlights the main
features of the design conceptualization.

Figure 2: The zigzag building with the Berlin Museum.
(© Research Library, The Getty Research Institute, Los Angeles, 920061)

In the initial competition representation the distorted star on
the site plan and the zigzag lines, one of which shows a
zigzag building adjacent to the Berlin Museum in an
axonometric drawing, were conceived as generic spatial
configurations for the Jewish Museum. In the subsequent
design process, the team changed the width of the zigzag and
explored ways of making the zigzag more vertical, while
Libeskind merged the zigzag plan with the distorted star
layout. In the final design, the spatial configuration of the
building was represented by two intertwining-lines, one
straight line defining the voids and one zigzag line housing
the exhibition spaces.

Design Conceptualization
In the process of constructing and elaborating a meaningful
conceptualization of the design situation, Libeskind focused
on two major themes: the relationship between Jews and
Germany in the history of Berlin and the invisibility of Jewish
culture in present day Berlin.
The conceptual dilemma for Libeskind was acknowledging
the oneness of Jewish and German culture without
diminishing the significance of the historical facts of the
thirties and forties. Libeskind articulated a conception of the
historical evolution of the relationship through a series of

Figure 1: Star Matrix: a distorted version of Star of David.
(© Research Library, The Getty Research Institute, Los Angeles, 920061)

Over the course of the design process Libeskind used
various drawings of the Star to establish a network of
connections among different points of the city designating a
network of historical social interactions among Berliners that
602

drawings in which the Jewish and German histories are
depicted by two converging/diverging lines representative of
their close interaction. In some of these drawings (Figure 3),
Libeskind draws numerous numbers of trajectories between
two points (AB), representing the individual biographical
trajectories of citizens of Berlin, which Libeskind refers to as
histories.

of Berlin, therefore, is an "obstructionist form" which renders
invisible the Jewish material presence in Berlin.
Conceptually Libeskind makes the invisible visible by
trying to trace the Jewish presence in Berlin’s sky (Figure 5).
The sky invokes the Jewish presence in the air of Berlin while
the Star of David materializes that on the map of
contemporary Berlin.

Figure 3: Trajectories between points AB.
(© Research Library, The Getty Research Institute, Los Angeles, 920061)

None of these trajectories, however, is linear. They are all
convoluted lines that crisscross each other and their sum is a
complex network of lines rather than a single resultant of all
different lines. The conception of history in these drawings
dictates a double helix-like historical progression of two
intertwined lines, suggestive of the zigzag layout of the
design, which refers to the merging as well as parting of the
two histories and which represents the complex and
convoluted historical relationship between Jews and
Germans.
In one particular drawing (Figure 4) the analogy between
the history of the interaction of Jews and Germans and the
Jewish Museum Building becomes clearer. Libeskind labels
the straight linear block cutting through the building as the
Jewish history line whereas the zigzag block as the Berlin
history. He also adds dates to the zigzag substantiating the
idea that the lines represent trajectories in history. In his final
scheme, the straight line would become the series of voided
spaces that cut across the exhibition spaces. At this stage, the
conceptualization of the historical relationships between Jews
and Germans is not yet linked to the Star of David imagery.

Figure 5: The Berliner Luft—the air across Berlin.
(© Research Library, The Getty Research Institute, Los Angeles, 920061)
Later in the design process, Libeskind managed to combine
the two components of his design concepts, i.e., the oneness
of German-Jewish history and the invisibility of Jewish
presence, with a series of diagrams in which intertwined
zigzag lines (Jewish-German history lines) transformed into a
Star of David (invisibleness of Jewish presence) (Figure 6). In
one of his set of drawings, he drew several incomplete or
distorted stars in different form and nature. Here, Libeskind
explodes the two completely enclosed lines of the original
star becoming two intertwined lines suggestive of the final
zigzag footprint of the Museum building and the double-helix
like histories of Jews and Berlin. In certain cases, the two
lines start as the two triangles of the Star of David, yet they
suddenly break the geometry of the star and become a zigzag.
In these instances, there is a combination of an incomplete
star and a zigzag. In other instances, there are no stars. The
intertwining lines start as a zigzag and remain like that. In the
majority of these cases, both lines make acute turns. In one
case, however, one of the lines remains straight all the way
through and the other makes up-and-down turns very similar
to the overall composition of Libeskind's competition entry.
In few of them the lines become one zigzag line and a straight
line cutting through the zigzag.
Through this set of diagrams, Libeskind managed to
conceptually integrate different lines of thinking and aligned
the search in the solution space with the search in the problem
space. When Libeskind transformed the two intertwining
lines of the Star into a zigzag line and a straight line cutting
through the zigzag, he also changed the initial zigzag form
which the design team had been working on since the
beginning of the design process. In the subsequent phases, the
form of the building became one of a zigzag and an
interrupted line cutting through the zigzag which becomes
visible only at times when it crosses the zigzag. At these
crossing Libeskind placed void spaces—unoccupied spaces—
which are representative of the contemporary invisibility of
the Jewish presence in Berlin.

Figure 4: Crisscrossing Jewish and German history lines.
(© Research Library, The Getty Research Institute, Los Angeles, 920061)

The German-Jewish history, however, remains obscure
when one walks in the streets of contemporary Berlin not
only because Jews no more live in Berlin but also because
their mutual artifacts were destroyed. The contemporary plan

603

Initially, the process of the Jewish Museum did start with a
focus on problem structuring, as Goel and Pirolli (1992)
suggested, but exploration in the problem space continued
throughout the design process. Second, the zigzag provided a
generic design solution scheme right from the beginning of
design. Different from Goel and Pirolli's characterization, the
initial phases of design were not only dedicated to problem
structuring but also to problem solution. Contrary to the linear
characterization, Libeskind thought and elaborated on a
conceptualization while developing a satisfactory design
scheme. This last point seems to support co-evolutionary
views of design (Maher & Tang, 2003) and solution-oriented
views of design (Lloyd & Scott, 1994). In contrast to coevolutionary views of design, however, the explorations in
the problem space and the solution space remained isolated
during most of the design process and there was no need for
constant interaction between the two exploration spaces. Most
often the implications of moves in one space did not get
propagated into the other, as is predicted by co-evolutionary
views of design. Rather, only significant changes in the
problem space, e.g., the linkage between the intertwined
histories of Jews and Germans and the invisibility of Jews in
contemporary Berlin, were propagated into the solution space,
e.g., the addition of the voided spaces into the zigzag building
form. Furthermore, search in the solution space provided
meaning to an independently conceived design scheme and its
elaboration. It enabled the scheme to be interpreted as a
satisfactory solution to the design problem of creating a
Jewish Museum in Berlin.
Libeskind’s conceptual elaboration provides a fascinating
example of how manipulation of the components of diagrams
can mediate changes in the corresponding conceptual and
spatial configuration domains. One example of a significant
and traceable conceptual elaboration in this design process
occurred when the idea of the intertwined histories of Jews
and Germans was integrated with the idea of the significance
of Jewish culture for the German culture. In this instance,
Libeskind modified the Star of David through a series of
diagrams and literally unfolded it into two zigzagging lines
with which the two conceptual ideas were combined into a
single representation. Figure 7 is our schematic representation
of this process some of which is evidenced in Libeskind’s
Figure 6.
The combination of the two conceptualizations could have
been triggered by the perceptual similarities between the two
diagrammatic representations, the zigzag and the star (Figure
7). The matching perceptual features were: crisscrossing
lines, intersections, and corners. Once the two diagrammatic
representations were combined the meanings of these
perceptual features were superimposed. In the final
configuration each element acquired a double meaning, at
once representing the invisible nature of Jewish culture in
contemporary Berlin and the integrated history of Jews and
Germans. Furthermore, Libeskind finally managed to relate
the two explorations in the problem space and in the solution
space through mutating the star into two crisscrossing lines.
In the final spatial configuration, Libeskind left a void where

Figure 6: Star evolving into a zigzag.
(© Research Library, the Getty Research Institute, Los Angeles, 920061)

Discussion
Libeskind’s explorations within the problem space and
solution space followed neither Goel and Pirolli’s (1992)
linear characterization of design nor the co-evolutionary
characterization (Maher & Tang, 2003). Libeskind’s
exploration within the problem space continued throughout
the design process, even though the spatial configuration was
determined early in the design process, through borrowing
from an earlier project of Libeskind, and that generic
configuration remained the design solution throughout the
process.
Libeskind’s conception of the design remained relatively
constant throughout the design process, even while various
sources influenced his elaboration of the design concept.
Throughout the process Libeskind established links to
historical, philosophical, cultural, and material sources to
various instantiations of the star diagram. Each instantiation
of the diagram can be characterized as a move within the
problem space through which new relationships to other
domains were established. In the elaboration, new layers of
meaning were added by connecting the generic representation
of the Star (problem space) with the zigzag configuration
(solution space). But throughout the core conceptualization
and the core configuration solution remained constant.
With respect to explorations within the solution space,
Libeskind and the design team remained within the same
space throughout. The design team only considered closely
related schemes, all of which retained the generic spatial
configuration. As with his Star conceptualization, Libeskind
elaborated the meaning of the spatial configuration of the
zigzag. Although the design team took the generic zigzag
form from an earlier project, in the subsequent design
process, Libeskind linked the zigzag to the elaborated
conceptualization by transforming it into two crisscrossing
lines: a straight line representative of the Jewish history and a
zigzag line representative of the German history. The
crisscrossing lines of the zigzag originated in the crisscrossing
lines of the Star of David. The emergent configuration was
representative of both the Star and the zigzag. Therefore, the
solution space acquired two specific conceptual source
domains: the visibility of the Jewish presence, embodied in
the Star imagery, and the intertwined histories of Jews and
Germans, in the intersecting lines.

604

Do, E. Y.-L., & Gross, M. D. (2001). Thinking with diagrams
in architectural design. Artificial Intelligence Review,
15(1-2), 135-149.
Dogan, F. (2003). The role of conceptual diagrams in the
architectural design process: Case studies of the first
unitarian church by louis kahn, the staatsgalerie by stirling
& wilford associates, and the jewish museum by daniel
libeskind. Unpublished Ph.D., Georgia Institute of
Technology, Atlanta.
Goel, V. (1995). Sketches of thought.Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press.
Goel, V., & Pirolli, P. (1992). The structure of design
problem spaces. Cognitive Science, 16(3), 395-429.
Goldschmidt, G. (1991). The dialectics of sketching.
Creativity Research Journal, 4(2), 123-143.
Hegarty, M., Meyer, B., & Narayanan, N. H. (2002).
Diagrammatic representation and inference: Second
international conference, diagrams 2002, callaway gardens,
ga, usa, april 18-20, 2002: Proceedings.Berlin New York:
Springer.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2002). Peirce, logic diagrams, and the
elementary operations of reasoning. Thinking &
Reasoning, 8(1), 69-95.
Koedinger, K. R., & Anderson, J. R. (1990). Abstract
planning and perceptual chunks: Elements of expertise in
geometry. Cognitive Science, 14(4), 511.
Larkin, J. H., & Simon, H. A. (1987). Why a diagram is
(sometimes) worth ten thousand words. Cognitive Science,
11, 65-99.
Lloyd, P., & Scott, P. (1994). Discovering the design
problem. Design Studies, 15(2), 125-140.
Maher, L., & Tang, H.-H. (2003). Co-evolution as a
computational and cognitive model of design. Research in
Engineering Design, 14(1), 47.
Nersessian, N. (1995). Opening the black box: Cognitive
science and history of science. Osiris, 10, 194-211.
Nersessian, N. (2002). Maxwell and "the method of physical
analogy": Model-based reasoning, generic abstraction, and
conceptual change. In D. B. Malament (Ed.), Reading
natural philosophy: Essays in the history and philosophy of
science and mathematics (pp.129-166).Chicago, Ill. Open
Court.
Newell, A., & Simon, H. A. (1972). Human problem
solving.Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.
Reitman, W. (1964). Heuristic decision procedures, open
constraints, and the structure of ill-defined problem. In M.
W. Shelly & G. L. Bryan (Eds.), Human judgments and
optimality (pp. 282-315). New York: Wiley.
Shimojima, A. (2001). The graphic-linguistic distinction:
Exploring alternatives. Artificial Intelligence Review, 15(12), 95-114.
Stenning, K., & Lemon, O. (2001). Aligning logical and
psychological perspectives on diagrammatic reasoning.
Artificial Intelligence Review, 15(1-2), 29-62.
Suwa, M., & Tversky, B. (1997). What do architects and
students perceive in their design sketches? A protocol
analysis. Design Studies, 18, 385-403.

the lines crossed, symbolic of the invisibility of the Jewish
presence in present Berlin.

Figure 7: Combination of the invisibility of the Jews and the
history lines of Jews and Germans [drawn by the author].
This manipulation of the components of the two
diagrammatic representations and their coalescence is an
example of how changes in a physical representational system
can create corresponding changes in a conceptualization. The
change in the conceptualization, in turn, triggered a change in
the spatial configuration of the building, i.e., in empty spaces
at the points where the lines cross. This superimposition of
meanings was achieved through manipulating diagrammatic
representations, and changes in the conceptualization and in
the spatial configuration were mediated by the structure of
emergent the diagrammatic representations. The emerging
representation retained its structural correspondence to both
of its corresponding conceptual domains and thus acquired
double meaning.

Conclusion
This study presents a case in which a series of diagrams
facilitated conceptual elaboration in the design process while
aligning the search in the solution space with search in the
problem space. The study shows that modifications and
elaborations in design conceptualizations can be fostered
through the manipulation of components of conceptual
diagrams, which are here considered physical representations
corresponding to mental models. The study shows also that
design can start either in the solution space or in the problem
space, but that search in both spaces needs to be aligned.
Conceptual diagrams, because of their double-referential
nature are potentially significant in facilitating search in dual
space.

References
Bauer, M. I., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1993). How diagrams
can improve reasoning. Psychological Science, 4(6), 372378.
Cheng, P. (1996). Scientific discovery with law-encoding
diagrams. Creativity Research Journal, 9(2-3), 145-162.

605

