UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Determinants of Feature Centrality in Clinicians' Concepts of Mental Disorders

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0th6b2gq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Ahn, Woo-kyoung
Levin, Sarah
Marsh, Jessecae K.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Determinants of Feature Centrality
in Clinicians’ Concepts of Mental Disorders
Woo-kyoung Ahn (woo-kyoung.ahn@yale.edu)
Department of Psychology, 2 Hillhouse Avenue
New Haven, CT 06520 USA

Sarah Levin (slevin@hsph.harvard.edu)
Department of Epidemiology, 677 Huntington Avenue
Boston, MA 02115 USA

Jessecae K. Marsh (jessecae.marsh@yale.edu)
Department of Psychology, 2 Hillhouse Avenue
New Haven, CT 06520 USA
Abstract

equally weighted according to the DSM-IV. For instance,
“refusal to maintain body weight at or above minimal levels” in anorexia nervosa was judged to be significantly more
central than “absence of the period (in women) for more
than 3 months of menstrual cycles.” What would be the
bases of clinicians’ weightings of these symptoms?
The implications for the current study are two-fold. First,
there are clinical implications. If clinicians’ perception of
feature centrality deviates from a certain norm (e.g., DSMIV), we can develop better training programs that address
the basis of these misperceptions. Second, there are implications for basic cognitive psychology. Previous studies
have demonstrated strong influences of people’s theories
about concepts in determining feature centrality (e.g., Ahn,
1998; Rehder & Hastie, 2001; Sloman, Love, & Ahn, 1998).
Examining this phenomenon in the domain of mental disorders offers an interesting test-bed because the theories that
clinicians hold about mental disorders appear to be rather
fragile. For one thing, it is a well-known fact that there
rarely is any consensus on or clear understanding of the etiology of mental disorders. Furthermore, the DSM-IV
(APA, 1994) discourages users from applying their own
theories by forcing them to go through a checklist of isolated symptoms regardless of any potential causal structures
underlying these symptoms. Given that the major guideline
for mental disorder diagnosis pushes for such an atheoretical
stance, it is interesting to examine whether the influence of
theory would be as robust as in other domains.
In the current study, we examined clincians’ concepts of
MDD and Dysthymia. These two mental disorders are good
candidates for studying clincians’ theories because they are
highly prevalent, and most clinicians are familiar with them
(Flanagan & Ahn, 2005). Thus, clinicians’ judgments on
these disorders could not be simply attributed to their lack
of experiences with these disorders. In what follows, we will
first describe how we measured feature centrality in these
disorders. Then, we will discuss three potential determinants
for feature centrality.

What determines which features are more central in concepts?
Sloman, Love, and Ahn (1998) examined laypeople’s concepts about everyday objects (e.g., chairs and apples) and
found that lay theories of these concepts determined feature
centrally as much as category validity judgments (i.e., how
prevalent features are in a given category) did. The current
study examined determinants of feature centrality in 35 clinical psychologists, psychiatrists, and clinical social workers’
concepts of Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) and
Dysthymic disorder (Dysthymia). Unlike previous findings,
we found that category validities were by far the strongest
predictor of conceptual centrality in clinicians’ concepts of
these mental disorders and their theories about these disorders
were only a weak, albeit significant, predictor. We discuss
possible reasons for this discrepancy.
Keywords: categorization; reasoning; clinical diagnosis; theory-use; causal reasoning.

Introduction
Features in concepts vary in their importance. In the concept
of cats that most educated people hold, for instance, the genetic structure of a cat would be judged to be much more
important than the fact that they meow. That is, we can easily imagine a cat that does not meow, but it is extremely
difficult to imagine a cat that does not have “cat DNA”.
The current study examines why some features in clinicians’ concepts of mental disorders are more crucial than
others. The domain of mental disorders is particularly interesting because the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders (American Psychiatric Association
[APA], 1994), the official guidelines that clinicians must
follow for diagnostic and insurance purposes, explicitly
specifies that all symptoms of a given disorder be weighted
equally (with only a few exceptions). For instance, there are
four symptoms listed as the diagnostic criteria for anorexia
nervosa, all of which have to be present in order to be diagnosed with the disorder. Yet, Kim and Ahn (2002) found
that clinical psychologists assign significantly different ratings of importance among symptoms that are supposed to be
67

Measure of Feature Centrality

likely to be diagnosed with that mental disorder than patients presenting more causally peripheral symptoms (e.g.,
symptom C).
The possible reason behind this is the following (Sloman
et al., 1998). By definition, a feature that causes other features determines the fate of many other features. It would be
difficult to imagine an item missing a causal feature because
deleting that feature requires adjusting all the other features
that depend on it. For instance, if a cat does not have cat
DNA, that would require changes to all other biological
properties of the cat. As a result, a causally central feature
should be immutable, or conceptually central. In contrast, a
feature that is causally peripheral in one’s theory would be
easy to remove without having to change many features in
one’s mental representation. For instance, a cat’s claws are
caused by a cat’s DNA make-up, and it would be easy to
imagine removing a cat’s claws without having to change
other biological properties of the cat, such as shape or size.
However, to the extent that changing an effect feature also
requires change in a cause feature, causal centrality might
not fully predict mutability. For instance, suppose one believes that the only way an animal can look like a cat is to
be born from another cat, and all animals that were born
from a cat must look like a cat. Then upon seeing an animal
that does not look like a cat (i.e., absence of an effect feature), the person would also conjecture that the animal was
not born from another cat (i.e., absence of a cause feature).
That is, if a cause is a necessary and sufficient condition for
an effect, changing an effect must entail changing a cause,
making cause and effect features almost equally immutable.
Another possible reason why causal centrality might not
fully predict mutability is that a person may not be fully
confident in his/her own causal theories, in which case the
person might easily mutate a cause feature while leaving
other features intact. For example, if a person is not confident that s/he has correctly identified the true cause of a
cat’s coloration, the person may be willing to change the
feature playing this causal role without changing the effects
represented in his/her causal theory.
The main goal of the current study is to examine which –
category validity, diagnosticity, or causal centrality – predicts mutability of features in clinicians’ concepts of MDD
and Dysthymia. Each of these factors is a potential determinant for mutability, but there are also reasons why they
might not necessarily determine mutability. Thus, it is an
empirical question to ask which one of these factors would
significantly influence weightings of symptoms or features
of a mental disorder in clinicians’ minds.
Sloman et al. (1998) found that for everyday objects (e.g.,
apples, guitars, etc.), both the centrality in one’s theories
about the objects and the category validity strongly correlated with mutability of features (rank correlation of 0.72 for
the former and Pearson correlation of 0.66 for the latter),
whereas diagnosticity did not correlate (Pearson correlation
of 0.04). In the domain of mental disorders, Kim and Ahn
(2002, Experiment 2) found the rank-order correlation between causal centrality and mutability of features to be 0.43,

To measure the centrality of features in a concept, we first
asked clinicians to generate features of MDD and
Dysthymia, and then to give a rating on the ease of changing
a feature (i.e., how easy it is to imagine removing a feature
in a concept, such as how easy it is to imagine a patient with
MDD that does not display sleep disturbances.) Henceforth,
this measure will be referred to as mutability (Sloman et al.,
1998). A feature that is easy to transform in one’s mental
representation would be less central in the concept. For instance, it is easier to imagine an apple that is not sweet than
to imagine an apple that does not grow from an apple tree;
therefore growing from an apple tree is more central to the
concept of apples.
One way of understanding mutability as a measure of
conceptual centrality in clinical settings is to imagine a typical diagnosis session where a clinician is confronted with a
patient who displays a full set of symptoms for a certain
disorder except for one symptom. A clinician’s assessment
of the likelihood that the person has the target disorder
would be a function of how much weight the clinician assigns to that missing symptom. Thus, the mutability task
would approximate importance of a symptom in a clinician’s conceptualization of a disorder.

Potential Determinants of Feature Centrality
In addition to simply discovering which features or symptoms of mental disorders clinicians weight more, it is also
crucial to understand why some features are perceived to be
more important than others. In the current study, we examined three potential determinants.
The first determinant was category validity (i.e., how
common the feature is among those with the disorder, or the
likelihood that a person displays a certain symptom given
that the person has a disorder). A feature may be central to a
disorder because it is common in the disorder. Note, however, that a highly prevalent feature does not have to be
conceptually central. For instance, all tires are black, but it
is easy to imagine a tire that is not black.
The second potential determinant was diagnosticity (i.e.,
how predictive the feature is of the disorder, or the likelihood that a person has a certain disorder given that the person has a symptom). A feature may be central to a disorder
because it is highly diagnostic. Again, note that this does not
necessarily have to be the case. For instance, grows on a
tree might be highly central in our concept of apples, but it
is not necessarily diagnostic: Knowing that an object has
grown on a tree does not tell us that the object is highly
likely to be an apple.
The third potential determinant was causal centrality. In
Kim and Ahn’s study (2002), it was found that causal centrality predicted centrality of a feature in a concept such that
the more causal a symptom was in a clinician’s theory, the
more important it was in their diagnoses. For instance, if a
clinician believed that symptom A causes symptom B,
which in turn causes symptom C, patients presenting more
causally central symptoms (e.g., symptom A) were more
68

but they did not examine other potential determinants of
feature centrality, making it difficult to conclude about relative contributions of clinicians’ theories. The current study
offers such an occasion. Given that clinicians’ theories
about mental disorders might be rather fragile as discussed
earlier, clinicians’ weightings on features might be based
more on statistical factors (e.g., category validity or diagnosticity). In contrast, theory-based reasoning might be so
robust that clinicians would be cognitively driven to apply
their theories, ignoring other statistically based determinants.

features, 7) physical features, 8) possible genetic, physiological, biological, psychological, and environmental
causes/correlates of the disorder, etc.”).
For the feature listing task, participants entered their features on a Microsoft® Excel spreadsheet. They were instructed, “Please separate out each feature in any way that is
meaningful to you and enter each feature into an individual
cell in the Excel spreadsheet in front of you”; therefore,
participants determined for themselves what counted as
separate features. Once the feature list was generated for
one disorder, the experimenter ran a pre-set macro program
on Excel to generate stimulus lists for the category validity,
diagnosticity, mutability questions, and the theory drawing
task on separate worksheets of the Excel file. The macro
program randomized the order of the features for each task.
The first three tasks were then carried out by entering responses on the Excel spreadsheet. For the theory drawing
task, the experimenter printed out the participant generated
features, cut out separate slips for each feature, and presented them to the participant. The order of the rating tasks
and the theory drawing task was counterbalanced.
For the rating tasks, each individual was asked to rate
each of the features he or she had generated (indicated as X
below) in terms of three questions:

Methods
Participants
Thirty-five participants were recruited using lists of licensed
psychiatrics, clinical psychologists, and clinical social
workers obtained from the Tennessee Department of Public
Health and the Connecticut Department of Public Health.
Recruitment letters were sent to psychiatrists and social
workers in Tennessee in the spring of 2003, to all eligible
psychiatrists and social workers in New Haven, CT in the
summer of 2003, and to all eligible psychologists in New
Haven in the fall of 2003. Eligible clinicians were licensed
for at least 10 years and for no more than 30 years1. Participants were paid for participating in the study at a rate that
would roughly correspond to their normal pay scale ($100
per hour for psychiatrists, $85 per hour for clinical psychologists, and $70 per hour for social workers).

• Category Validity question: “Of all people who have
[Major Depressive Disorder / Dysthymia], what percentage
have X?”
• Diagnosticity question: “Of all people who have X, what
percentage have [Major Depressive Disorder /
Dysthymia]?

Procedure
To give an overview of the procedure, participants performed a set of tasks for both MDD and Dysthymia. They
first generated lists of features. Various tasks were then
performed to obtain different measures of each feature, including diagnosticity, category validity, and mutability.
Participants were also asked to draw relationships between
features in order to examine their theories. All of these tasks
were completed for one disorder and then for the other disorder in a counterbalanced fashion. The experiment was
self-paced and the entire task took about 2 hours on average
(ranging from 1 hour to 5 hours). Below each of these tasks
are explained in detail.
In the first task, participants were asked to list features of
a disorder. In order to prevent the demand characteristics of
listing the DSM diagnostic criteria, the instructions specified that it was the participant’s own concept that was of
interest and that we were not testing their knowledge of the
DSM. The instructions provided examples of types of features that participants could list (i.e., “1) symptoms that are
often seen in people with this disorder, 2) symptoms that are
rarely seen in people with this disorder, 3) symptoms that
are often associated with this disorder, 4) demographic
characteristics, 5) precipitating conditions, 6) accompanying

• Mutability question: “Imagine a typical [Major Depressive Disorder / Dysthymia] patient. How easy is it for you
now to change your image of this person such that this person does NOT have X?” (0=very easy and 100=very difficult)
Participants completed one type of rating question for all
of their self-generated features before moving on to the
other types of rating questions. The order of the three types
of rating questions was counterbalanced.
Participants were also given the theory drawing task. Participants were provided with slips of paper for each feature
they listed and asked to “arrange them on the sheet in such a
way that will facilitate the drawing process” and to tape
them in place. Then for every feature X that is related to a
feature Y, they were asked to draw “a line between the two
features and label the line with the kind of relation that links
them.” They were told to “draw an arrowhead on the line to
denote the direction of the relationship.” Participants were
provided with a list of possible relationships they might
consider (but to which they were not limited). They were
told to not include an arrowhead if there is no direction in a
relationship and told to draw bidirectional arrows if they
believe that the two features influence each other in a bidirectional way. Finally, they were asked to rate the strength
of each relationship from 1 (weak) to 3 (strong).

1

One clinical psychologist was licensed for 7 years, but no noticeable difference was found between this participant and others.

69

Results

Table 2: Ratings on Dysthymia Features Listed by More
than 50% of Clinicians

To reiterate, we asked participants to rate mutability, which
served as a measure of conceptual centrality of features. We
also asked about three potential determinants of conceptual
centrality: category validity, diagnosticity, and causal centrality. Causal centrality was calculated from the participants’ theory drawings as in Kim and Ahn (2002) and Sloman et al. (1998)2. Tables 1 and 2 show mean ratings on
these measures for MDD and Dysthymia for features listed
by more than 50% of participants3.
First, it is interesting to note that participants’ weightings
of symptoms, as indicated by their ratings on the mutability
task, deviated from the DSM-IV criteria. For MDD, depressed mood and anhedonia should be equally weighted,
but estimates for depressed mood (M = 82.3) were significantly higher than those for anhedonia (M = 71.1, p < 0.05
for a one-sample t-test for subjects who listed both features).
In addition, low energy, poor concentration, sleep disturbances, suicide, and appetite disturbance in MDD should be
equally weighted according to the DSM-IV. However, the
mutability ratings of these features ranged from 32.1 to
60.9. A one-way ANOVA with these five features as a

Features

Category
Mutability Causal Diagnosticity Validity
Features
Ratings Ranks
Ratings
Ratings
depressed mood
82.3
1
46.2
89.0
anhedonia
71.1
8
54.7
81.6
hopelessness
69.5
8
62.1
76.3
low energy
60.9
3
23.2
76.3
impaired
functioning
55.8
8
29.7
68.8
poor
concentration
49.5
5
26.0
69.4
sleep
disturbances
42.1
2
35.3
65.9
suicide
35.6
4
68.7
48.5
appetite
disturbance
32.1
6
21.0
56.3

ci ,t

4

47.8

89.0

depressed mood

73.3

1

37.6

85.9

low energy
sleep
disturbances

54.8

3

20.5

65.7

27.0

2

22.9

51.8

Category Causal
Mutability Diagnosticity Validity Centrality
Rating
Rating
Rating
Rank
Mutability
Rating
Diagnosticity
Rating
Category
Validity
Rating
Causal
Centrality
Rank

From the theory drawings of participants, a causal centrality
ranking was calculated using an iterative process (Sloman et al.,
1998). In this process, the causal centrality rank of a given feature
increases as a function of both the number of features it causes and
the causal centrality of the features it causes. The equation is
where

78.3

Table 3: Correlations among four measures of features for
MDD

2

ci ,t = Â d ij c j ,t -1

chronicity

factor showed a significant difference in these ratings, F(4,
169) = 5.11, p < .01. For Dysthymia, sleep disturbance (M
= 27.0) received significantly lower ratings than low energy
(M = 54.8), t(49) = 4.25, p < .01, although these two symptoms should be equally weighted according to the DSM-IV.
This indicates that sleep disturbance was thought to have
greater causal centrality than low energy, despite their equal
criterial weighting in the DSM.
Second, various correlations were calculated in order to
determine which factor correlates with the conceptual centrality of features. For each participant, correlations between
the scores from three rating tasks were calculated and
Spearman rank correlations were calculated between each of
the three ratings and the causal centrality rankings. Correlations were averaged across participants by taking the average of the Fisher transformation of each correlation and
taking the inverse Fisher of the resulting average. These
correlations for MDD and Dysthymia are shown in Tables 3
and 4, respectively. The average correlations were compared
to a correlation of zero using a one-sample t-test. In Tables
3 and 4, * indicates p < .05 and ** indicates p < .01 from
these tests.

Table 1: Ratings on MDD Features Listed by More than
50% of Clinicians

given by

Category
Mutability Causal Diagnosticity validity
Ratings Ranks
Ratings
Ratings

is the centrality of fea-

j

ture i at iteration t and dij is the number representing the extent to
which feature j depends on feature i. We performed 10 iterations.
3
All reported analyses were carried out over all features generated
by each participant. For simplicity, Tables 1 and 2 present only the
ones that are generated by more than 50% of participants.

70

1.00

0.24 **

0.74 **

0.20 **

1.00

0.20 **

0.05

1.00

0.22 **
1.00

Effect of Causal Theories

Table 4: Correlations among four measures of features for
Dysthymia

To examine the role of causal theories, we measured clinicians’ causal theories about these disorders and derived the
centrality of a feature within their own theories. It was hypothesized that a feature that many features depend on
would be more conceptually central than a feature that only
a few or no features depend on. As in previous studies (e.g.,
Kim & Ahn, 2002; Sloman et al., 1998), the current study
found positive correlations between causal centrality and
mutability, which although statistically different from 0,
were fairly low: 0.20 for MDD and 0.17 for Dysthymia.
These correlations appear to be weaker than those found in
previous studies. We will discuss the reasons below.
The effect of causal centrality on mutability found in the
current study appears weaker than that found in Kim and
Ahn (2002), who measured similar kinds of correlations in
clinicians’ concepts of MDD. In their study, they used 26
features for Major Depressive Episode that were taken from
the DSM-IV (both criterion and texts), rather than generated
by clinicians. For MDD, they found correlations much
higher than what was obtained in the current study (e.g., r =
0.43 in their Experiment 2). One critical difference between
Kim and Ahn and our current study is that the current study
utilized only the features that clinicians spontaneously recalled. The general consensus is that recalling a feature is
more difficult than recognizing a feature (e.g., it is easier to
agree that bears have a pancreas than to spontaneously recall
“having a pancreas” as a feature of the category “bear”).
Thus, our clinicians might have failed to report many less
central features that are part of their concepts and theories.
If so, the current study suffers from a truncated range problem where most of the features used were fairly salient and
central ones to begin with.
Aside from the methodological details, both of these
studies on mental disorders confirm that the effect of theories in the domain of mental disorders seems only moderate.
For instance, the correlations between causal centrality and
mutability found in the current study (0.20 and 0.17) markedly contrast with the correlation of 0.72 found in Sloman et
al. (1998) for lay people on everyday objects. Why is the
effect of causal centrality more prominent in laypeople’s
concepts of everyday objects than in clinicians’ concepts of
mental disorders?
One possible reason is that clinicians might be less confident in their theories about mental disorders than lay people
are about everyday objects. For instance, laypeople’s theories include such straightforward knowledge as, people eat
apples because they are sweet, or chairs are comfortable
because they have backs. For mental disorders, theories
might not be as definite. It is the current ambiguity in the
theoretical relations between features of mental disorders
that is the very reason why the DSM-IV avoids utilizing
theories. Indeed, Kim and Ahn (2002) also found that clinicians’ self-ratings of familiarity with disorders correlated
with the extent to which their causal theories influenced
feature centrality. Thus, although clinicians’ theories somewhat influence feature centrality, the extent of influence

Category Causal
Mutability Diagnosticity Validity Centrality
Rating
Rating
Rating
Rank
Mutability
Rating
Diagnosticity
Rating
Category
Validity
Rating
Causal
Centrality
Rank

1.0

0.45 **

0.69 **

0.17 *

1.00

0.34 **

0.29 **

1.00

0.16 *
1.00

As before, we obtained the effect of causal theories on
feature centrality as indicated by significantly positive correlations between causal centrality rank and mutability. The
correlation between mutability and causal centrality was
consistent – out of 35 clinicians, the correlation was positive
in 26 clinicians for MDD, and in 22 clinicians for
Dysthymia – but not large (correlations of 0.20 and 0.17 for
MDD and Dysthymia, respectively). In addition, the current
results showed that diagnosticity significantly predicted
mutability in both MDD and Dysthymia.
However, the strongest predictor of the mutability rating
was category validity (correlation coefficient of 0.74 and
0.69 for MDD and Dysthymia, respectively)4. The correlation between mutability and category validity was statistically higher than the correlation between mutability and
causal centrality for both disorders (MDD: t(31) = 3.87, p <
0.001; Dysthymia: t(31) = 3.32, p < .005). Likewise, for
MDD the correlation between mutability and category validity was significantly higher than the correlation between
mutability and diagnosticity, t(31) = 3.56, p < 0.002. For
Dysthymia this correlation of mutability and category validity was marginally higher than the correlation between mutability and diagnosticity, t(31) = 1.94, p = .061.

Discussion
We measured conceptual centrality of features by asking
clinicians to judge ease of imagining removal of a feature in
the concept of a mental disorder (e.g., Ahn et al., 2000;
Medin & Shoben, 1988). Using this task, we found that
features that clinicians spontaneously generated vary a great
deal in terms of conceptual centrality. Even among the features that the DSM-IV explicitly gives equal weight, significant differences in conceptual centrality were found. Three
potential determinants for feature centrality were considered: causal centrality, diagnosticity, and category validity.

4

All of the following correlation t-tests were completed utilizing
Hotelling's t-test for correlated correlations within a population.

71

Conclusion

might be limited by clinicians’ lack of confidence in their
own causal theories.
Another possibility is that the levels of categories used in
the current study might not be as basic as in Sloman et al.’s
(1998) study. That is, although MDD and Dysthymia are
diagnostic categories in the DSM-IV, they might not be basic level concepts to clinicians; instead, they might believe
in sub-types of MDD or Dysthymia. This is consistent with
an anecdotal observation from Kim and Ahn’s (2002) study
where a clinician complained that drawing these theories is
not that feasible because there are too many different kinds
of a given disorder, each varying in how the symptoms are
related. For instance, there might be different types of Borderline Personality Disorder depending on different causal
mechanisms. Thus, the theories that are measured in the
current study might have been at a level too abstract to have
any strong or specific influence. What count as basic level
categories in the domain of mental disorders deserve further
research.

The two most notable results of the current study are that the
effect of causal theories is weaker with mental disorders
than with everyday objects, and that category validity influenced feature centrality most in clinicians’ concepts of
mental disorders. These results demonstrate boundary conditions for the effect of causal theories and prompt future
research to specifically target the underlying mechanisms of
theory influence. They also provide useful data for improving clinical training.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Maria Parente for collecting some
of the data for this study and Elizabeth Flanagan, Christian
Luhmann, and Chuck Sanislow for helpful suggestions
during this study. Support for this research was provided in
part by a National Institute of Mental Health Grant (NIH
R01-MH57737) to Woo-kyoung Ahn.

References

Effect of Category Validity

Ahn, W. (1998). Why are different features central for natural kinds and artifacts?: The role of causal status in determining feature centrality. Cognition, 69, 135-178.
Ahn, W., Kim, N. S., Lassaline, M. E., & Dennis, M. J.
(2000). Causal status as a determinant of feature centrality. Cognitive Psychology, 41, 361-416.
American Psychiatric Association (1994). Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders – 4th Edition
(DSM-IV). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association Press.
Flanagan, E., & Ahn, W. (2005). Clinicians’ familiarity with
and views on the bases of mental disorders. Manuscript in
preparation.
Kim, N. S., & Ahn, W (2002). Clinical psychologists’ theory-based representations of mental disorders predict their
diagnostic reasoning and memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 131, 451-476.
Medin, D. L., & Shoben, E. J. (1988). Context and structure
in conceptual combination. Cognitive Psychology, 20,
158-190.
Rehder, B., & Hastie, R. (2001). Casual knowledge and
categories: The effects of causal beliefs on categorization,
induction, and similarity. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 130, 323-360.
Sloman, S. A., Love, B. C., & Ahn, W. (1998). Feature
centrality and conceptual coherence. Cognitive Science,
22, 189-228.

The most notable results of the current study are the findings that category validity of features predicted feature centrality more than any other determinants. The correlation
found (0.74) is comparable to Sloman et al.’s (1998) results
(0.66) on a similar measure for laypeople’s concepts of everyday objects.
As discussed in the introduction, a prevalent feature does
not have to be immutable. Tires are black but we can easily
mutate this feature and imagine a tire that is not black.
Watermelons are round or oval, but we can conceive that
one might develop an oddly shaped watermelon without
having to change other aspects of a watermelon -- indeed
Japanese farmers have produced cube watermelons (to
maximize space efficiency in refrigerators). As indicated by
these examples, a prevalent feature can be mutable presumably because it does not play a central role in our theory
about that object; for instance, there are reasons why tires
have to be round but there is no specific reason why tires
have to be black beyond conventional reasons.
Although category validity generally does not have to be
correlated with immutability, our results show that they are
closely related in clinician’s conceptions of MDD and
Dysthymia. What this suggests is that clinicians may have
more statistical, and less theoretical, concepts of mental
disorders. If one were uncertain that his/her causal theory of
a mental disorder is valid, it probably would be a more suitable strategy to rely on base rates of features within a target
patient population in order to determine importance of features.
Given such a strong influence of category validity, it
would be imperative to further examine whether clinicians’
estimates of category validity of features are accurate. If, as
our findings suggest, clinicians draw heavily on their sense
of category validity in weighing information for the purpose
of diagnosis, any misconceptions about category validity
will have important clinical applications.
72

