UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Developmental Changes in the Interference of Motor Processes with Mental Rotation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9hd1f4z8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Daum, Mortiz M.
Frick, Andrea
Mast, Fred W.
et al.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Developmental Changes in the Interference of
Motor Processes with Mental Rotation
Andrea Frick (a.frick@psychologie.unizh.ch)
Cognitive and Developmental Psychology, Department of Psychology, University of Zurich,
Attenhoferstrasse 9, CH-8032 Zürich, Switzerland

Moritz M. Daum1, (moritz.daum@cbs.mpg.de)
Cognitive and Developmental Psychology, Department of Psychology, University of Zurich,
Attenhoferstrasse 9, CH-8032 Zürich, Switzerland

Simone Walser (simone.walser@gmx.net)
Cognitive and Developmental Psychology, Department of Psychology, University of Zurich,
Attenhoferstrasse 9, CH-8032 Zürich, Switzerland

Fred W. Mast (f.mast@psychologie.unizh.ch)
Cognitive Neuroscience, Department of Psychology, University of Zurich,
Treichlerstrasse 10, CH-8032 Zürich, Switzerland

develop and which basic processes are involved. Piaget and
Inhelder (1971) proposed a basic distinction between static
and kinetic mental images. They suggested that imagery in
the preoperational child remains essentially static, and
therefore children are neither able to represent movements
nor anticipate the results of movements or spatial
transformations. According to Piaget and Inhelder (1971), it
is not until the concrete operational stage, at about 7 to 8
years of age, that the child is able to use kinetic imagery,
which is to represent movements of objects in space,
manipulate mental images, or anticipate the outcome of
events.
However, Piaget’s methods, which largely relied on
drawings, search tasks, and verbal reports, have been
criticized repeatedly (e.g., Kosslyn, Margolis, Barrett,
Goldknopf, & Daly, 1990; Marmor 1975), mainly because
of the potential confound of performance and competence.
Seeking more objective and quantitative measures, more
recent developmental studies on mental imagery adopted a
task developed by Shepard and his colleagues (Cooper &
Shepard, 1973; Shepard & Metzler, 1971). In this paradigm,
the subject is required to discriminate whether a rotated
figure is exactly the same or a mirror image of the original
upright figure. Shepard and Metzler (1971) demonstrated
that the time adults required making this discrimination
increased linearly with the angular difference in rotation.
This suggests that the adults had mentally rotated one form
into congruence with the other.
Mental rotation studies with children demonstrated
(Kosslyn et al., 1990; Marmor, 1975) that participants as
young as 5 years old use mental rotation to solve the task,
(i.e., their response times showed a linear increase with
angular disparity of the two stimuli), but they do so at a

Abstract
Preceding studies with adult human subjects revealed that
motor activities can influence mental rotation of body parts
(e.g., hands) and abstract shapes. In this study, we
investigated the influence of a rotational hand movement on
mental rotation performance from a developmental
perspective. Five-, eight-, and eleven-year-olds and adults
were given a mental rotation task while they simultaneously
rotated their hand (guided by a handle) about the same axis.
The direction of the manual rotation was either compatible or
incompatible with the direction of the mental rotation. As a
baseline, children and adults performed the mental rotation
task without concurrent hand movement. Response times
increased with increasing stimulus orientation angle,
indicating that subjects of all age groups used mental rotation
to perform the task. Older age groups showed shorter
response times. A differential influence of the direction of
manual rotation on mental rotation was found for five-yearolds and eight-year-olds, but not for eleven-year-olds and
adults. These results suggest that the ability to dissociate
motor from visual mental processes increases with age.
Keywords: cognitive development, children, imagery, mental
rotation, motor processes

Introduction
Kinetic imagery in children
In research on cognitive development, imagery abilities
have been recognized as a highly important competence
(Piaget & Inhelder, 1971). Despite this initial interest, few
studies have investigated imagery in children. Therefore, to
date there is little evidence about how imagery abilities
1

Moritz M. Daum is now at the Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Department of Psychology,
Infant Cognition and Action, Amalienstrasse 33, 80799 Munich, Germany

720

slower speed (i.e., the younger the children, the longer it
takes them to mentally rotate the stimuli). In a study that
compared familiar with unfamiliar stimuli, Kail, Pellegrino
and Carter (1980) found that the time required to encode
and compare the stimuli decreased with age, and that even
after 8 years of age, there was still a notable increase in the
speed of mental rotation. However, some researchers have
reported age invariance in rotation rates for children aged 9
years and older (Childs & Polich, 1979).
In most studies mentioned above, children were instructed
or trained to apply a mental rotation strategy to solve the
task. However, preschoolers have been found to use mental
rotation spontaneously. Marmor (1977) tested 4- and 5-yearolds for an effect of training to use a mental rotation
strategy, applied prior to the test. This study revealed no
difference in performance between trained and untrained
children. Moreover, no interaction of training and age was
found. These findings suggest that 4- and 5-year-olds are
able to use and evoke kinetic imagery. Assessing response
time patterns and verbal reports, Estes (1998) showed that
6-year-olds were comparable to adults, both in their
spontaneous use and subjective awareness of mental
rotation.
In short, developmental research on mental rotation has
shown that the capability, spontaneous usage, and awareness
of a mental rotation strategy can be found in children as
young as 4 or 5 years of age, and that the speed of mental
rotation increases with age.

response times of mental rotation (from 0° to 360°); in some
cases the location of the minimum shifted toward the
direction of the manual rotation.

Motor processes and kinetic imagery in children
Despite compelling evidence showing that motor activity
interferes with mental transformations in a direction specific
manner, still relatively little is known about this interference
in children. Rieser, Garing, and Young (1994) showed that
walking without vision facilitates children’s ability to
imagine a spatial layout from another perspective. Similarly,
Black and Schwartz (1996) showed that physically turning a
cup facilitated the ability to predict the point at which
imaginary water inside the cup would reach the rim. More
recently, Funk, Brugger and Wilkening (in press),
demonstrated that the actual position of participants’ hands
can influence how fast children distinguish rotated right and
left hands. However, it still remains largely unclear whether
or to what extent motor processes influence children’s
performance in mental imagery.
The present experiment was conducted with children and
adults and employed a dual task paradigm similar to
Wohlschläger and Wohlschläger (1998) and Wexler et al.
(1998). We pursued the following research questions: a)
does manual rotation interfere with mental rotation, b) does
the direction of manual rotation exert a differential effect on
mental rotation, and most importantly c) if there are any
effects of manual rotation on mental rotation, do they
develop with age?

Motor processes and kinetic imagery

Method

Results from mental rotation studies with adult participants
provided evidence for the assumption that imagery and
perception share some of the same underlying processes
(Corballis & McLaren, 1982; Jolicoeur & Cavanagh, 1992).
This was further supported by neuroimaging studies
showing that partly the same brain areas associated with
mental imagery are also active during perception (e.g.
Kosslyn, Thompson, Kim, & Alpert, 1995). Yet in other
studies, some researchers found evidence for increased
difficulty to mentally rotate pictures of hands showing
physically impossible or awkward positions (Cooper &
Shepard, 1975; Parsons 1987, 1994; Sekiyama, 1982) and
activation in motor areas during mental rotation of body
parts (e.g., Parsons, Fox, Downs, Glass, Hirsch, Martin,
Jerabek, & Lancaster, 1995).
These findings led to the assumption that mental rotation
also engages processes other than those known to be
associated with the perception of real or apparent visual
motion, and that processes of action planning are probably
involved (Jolicoeur & Cavanagh, 1992; Kosslyn, 1994;
Wohlschläger & Wohlschläger, 1998).
For example,
Wohlschläger and Wohlschläger (1998) found that mental
rotation of an object performed in the same direction as a
concurrent manual rotation (about the same axis) is
performed faster compared to when the manual and mental
rotation are opposite in direction. Similarly, Wexler,
Kosslyn and Berthoz (1998) reported shorter response times
and fewer errors when the directions of mental object
rotation and manual rotation where compatible. Their motor
task modified the inverted V-shaped curve representing

Participants
A total of 84 participants were tested. Data of four 5-yearolds were excluded from analysis, due to a lack of attention
and compliance to the task (disrupting manual rotation). The
remaining 80 participants included four age groups, each
with 20 participants: 5-year-olds (mean age 5;7, range 5;2 to
5;11, male: 11, female: 9), 8-year-olds (mean age 8;6, range
8;0 to 8;11, male: 11, female: 9), 11-year-olds (mean age
11;5, range 11;0 to 11;11, male: 7, female: 13) and adults
(mean age 37;4, range 23;10 to 68;4, male: 10, female: 10).
Children were recruited from different primary schools in
the region of Zürich, Switzerland. Adult participants were
personal acquaintances of one of the authors. Participants
had normal or corrected to normal vision. Only right-handed
people were recruited.

Apparatus
The experimental apparatus consisted of three parts: a
laptop computer, a rotatable wheel with a handle, and a
response pad. Participants were seated at a table. The laptop
was positioned on a table, in front of the participant.
The wheel and the response pad were mounted on a Tshaped wooden construction that could be fixed to any table,
ensuring a constant distance from the wheel to the response
pad (see Figure 1 for a schematic drawing of the apparatus).
This construction protruded the table’s top by 19 cm,
occluding the wheel, which was attached 12 cm below.
721

The larger stimulus, the “ground”, was 5 cm high and
spanned the whole screen width at the lower margin of the
display. In the very middle at the upper rim of this ground,
there were two holes. One hole had a square shape and one a
round shape. The small stimulus, the “figure”, was
presented centered right above these holes, in the upper part
of the display. The figure had a size of 6.5 cm by 7 cm, and
on its lower end (in the upright position) one half was
square, the other half was round. When moved down on the
display, the round and square parts of the small figure
would perfectly fit into the round and square holes in the
ground. We presented mirror versions of both the figure and
the ground, which resulted in 4 figure-ground combinations,
of which two would match and two would not match.
The figures were always presented in the same position
on the screen but varied in eight different orientations: 0°,
+45°, +90°, +135°, 180°, -135°, -90°, -45°. In the upright
orientation (0°), no mental rotation was required to solve the
task. A positive angle corresponded to stimuli rotated in
clockwise direction; a negative angle corresponded to
stimuli rotated in counterclockwise direction. There were a
total of 32 stimulus pairs: 2 (figure version) x 2 (match) x 8
(orientation angle). Each stimulus pair was presented twice.

Figure 1: Schematic drawing of the apparatus
and experimental situation.
This protrusion prevented participants from seeing their
right hand operating the wheel. The response pad was
positioned above the wheel, mounted visibly on top of the
protrusion. The height of the participant’s chair was
adjustable, so that each child could comfortably reach the
handle of the wheel, and from there switch to the answering
pad on top of the construction, without having to move the
upper part of their body. The wheel could be turned in the
participants’ frontal plane only in either direction. The
handle was perpendicular to the wheel, 5 cm off the center,
and could be turned without loosening the grip
A “Cedrus Response Pad (RB 520)” was used for
measuring the responses. Two response buttons were
enlarged by black or white 4 x 8 cm cardboard pieces, so
that they could be pressed easily and quickly. The distance
between the two response buttons was 4.5 cm. The
experimenter operated one small button to proceed to the
next trial, and remained seated to the right of the participant
throughout the entire session. From this viewpoint she could
see the participants’ face, their hands at the wheel, and the
computer screen (corresponding approximately to the
viewpoint in Figure 1).

Procedure
Children were tested at their school or kindergarten in a
separate room. Adults were tested at home. The experiment
consisted of a familiarization phase, a training phase, and an
experimental phase and lasted between 15 and 40 minutes.
In a familiarization phase, the mental rotation task was
explained with two cardboard pieces that were magnified
replications of the stimuli on the computer screen. The
pieces were laid out flat on the table in front of the
participant, in the same spatial arrangement in which they
later appeared on the computer screen. The experimenter
explained that the figure could be turned flat on the table,
but not lifted or flipped over. The first trials could be solved
by physically turning the figure with the hands. Then
participants were asked to imagine what the figure would
look like if it were rotated, and thus trying to find out
whether it actually fits into the holes. At least five trials
were presented to each participant, using the four possible
figure-ground combinations. As soon as a participant had
solved three subsequent trials correctly, the training phase
began.

Stimuli
The stimuli were presented on the computer screen, a 14inch TFT display, with a resolution of 1400 x 1050 pixels,
True Colour, with an ATI graphic board. The program used
was Superlab Pro by Cedrus.
Two different two-dimensional stimuli were presented
simultaneously. In the present experiment, however, it was
crucially important to control for the direction in which the
stimulus was rotated mentally. Therefore, figure-ground
pairs (like a puzzle-game, see Figure 2) were used rather
than two similar figures. This paradigm ensured that
participants rotated the small figure, and thus ruled out any
ambiguity in the direction of mental rotation.

In the training phase, stimuli were presented on the
computer screen. Participants were asked to hold the handle
of the wheel with their right hand without turning it, and not
to let go until they found out the answer. At this point, they
were supposed to press the correct button on the response
pad as quickly as possible. Participants had to hit the left
(white) button for matches, the right (black) button for
mismatches. Feedback was given after each practice trial
(but not for the experimental trials later): for correct trials a
smiley face appeared on the screen, for incorrect trials a
frowney face. Before the next trial began, a cartoon figure
appeared centered on the computer screen to attract
participants’ attention. The experimenter would then trigger

Figure 2: Four examples of figure-ground pairs as they
appeared on the computer screen. In examples A (+45°)
and C (0°), the figure would fit into the ground after an
appropriate rotation; in B (-90°) and D (+135°) the figure
would not match the holes.
722

the following trial by pushing a button, as soon as the
participant’s eyes were centered on the computer screen; the
stimulus would appear after 750 ms. A predetermined order
of 12 trails was presented (0°, +22°, -67°, 180°, +112°,
-157°, -22°, 180°, +67°, -112°, +157°, 0°). The angles used
in the training differed from the angles used in the
experiment proper.
The experimental phase consisted in four blocks of 32
trials. The first block (A) was a mental rotation task without
rotating the handle. The participant’s hand rested on the
handle; this was done to keep the distance to the response
pad comparable with the second (B) and third (B) block, in
which the handle was rotated manually. The fourth block
(A) was again without manual rotation. This ABBA-design
provided the same amount of trials with and without
rotation, while equally distributing possible training effects.
Within each block, trials were presented in random order.
After the first block (A) participants were briefly trained
to turn the wheel continuously at a speed of about 2.5
seconds per cycle. In the following experimental trials,
participants turned the wheel for about one cycle, before the
experimenter would initialize the next trial. Whenever the
rotation speed changed considerably, the experimenter
asked the participants to turn faster or slower.
Half of the participants were instructed to rotate the wheel
clockwise;
the other half rotated the wheel
counterclockwise. For participants in the clockwise group,
the positive stimulus orientations, +45°, +90°, and +135°
resulted in incompatible manual and mental rotations, the
negative orientations, -135°, -90°, and -45° resulted in
compatible rotations (see Figure 3). Conversely, for
participants in the counterclockwise group, positive
stimulus orientations led to compatible rotations and
negative ones to incompatible rotations. Thus, for each
participant 24 trials were compatible, 24 trials were
incompatible, and 16 trials were neutral (0° and 180°).

Figure 3: Stimulus orientations: positive orientations are
compatible to counterclockwise manual rotation; negative
orientations are compatible to clockwise manual rotation.
Additionally, the variables age and stimulus orientation
interacted, F(12, 258) = 7.58, p <.001, 2 = .26. The
increase of response time over orientation angle was larger
the younger the participants were. Response times were
shorter when the task was performed without manual
rotation, F(1, 64) = 17.56, p <.001, 2 = .22. There was also
an interaction between manual rotation (with or without)
and the factor age, F(3, 64) = 4.15, p < .01, 2 = .16. The
difference in response times between the conditions with
and without manual rotation decreased with age. No effect
of measurement repetition was found, F < 1.

Results
Response times
Response times of all correct trials were submitted to an
analysis of variance (ANOVA), with the within-subject
factors stimulus orientation (0º, +45º, +90º, +135º, 180°,
-135°, -90°, -45°), manual rotation (with or without) and
measurement repetition, as well as with the betweensubjects factor age.
Response times are illustrated in the upper part of Figure
4. A significant age effect was found, F(3, 64) = 62.83,
p < .001, 2 = .75, response times increased with decreasing
age. Response times also increased with increasing angle of
stimulus orientation, F(4, 258) = 44.51, p < .001, 2 = .41.
This was true for all age groups (adults: F(2, 29) = 24.78,
p < .001, 2 = .61, 11-year-olds: F(2, 33) = 24.16, p < .001,
2 = .60, 8-year-olds: F(3, 55) = 23.51, p < .001, 2 = .60,
5-year-olds: F(4, 60) = 15.63, p < .001, 2 = .49).

Figure 4: Means and standard errors of response times
(upper part and left y-axis) and error rates (lower part and
right y-axis) for each stimulus orientation and age group.

723

Response times were shorter with compatible manual
rotations than with incompatible manual rotations. There
was a significant age by compatibility interaction,
F(3, 64) = 3.86, p < .05, 2 = .15, showing that the
difference of response times between the compatible and the
incompatible condition decreased with age.
A separate analysis of each age group showed that the
effect of compatibility could only be found in the two
younger age groups (5-year-olds: F(1, 16) = 6.15, p < .05,
2 = .28, 8-year-olds: F(1, 16) = 9.38, p < .01, 2 = .37, see
Figure 6). The response times of the 11-year-olds and the
adults were also faster with compatible manual rotation but
these differences did not reach significance (11-year-olds:
F < 1, adults: F(1, 16) = 1.37, p = .26, 2 = .08).

Error rates
Overall, participants answered incorrectly in a total of 5.7 %
of the trials. Error rates are displayed in the lower part of
Figure 4. The errors of all participants were submitted to an
ANOVA with the within-subject factors stimulus orientation
(0º, +45º, +90º, +135º, 180°, -135°, -90°, -45°) and manual
rotation (with or without) and the between-subjects factor
age. Error rates increased with increasing angle of mental
rotation, F(5, 301) = 30.84, p < .001, 2 = .33. The largest
amount of errors was found with a stimulus orientation
angle of 180º. No effect of manual rotation was found,
F(1, 64) = 3.72, p = .06, 2 = .06. Participants produced an
equal amount of errors in the condition with manual rotation
as in the condition without manual rotation. The betweensubjects factor age was significant, F(3, 64) = 12.57, p <
.001, 2 = .37. The older participants were, the less errors
they produced.

Figure 5: Means of the response times, averaged over age
groups. Filled symbols indicate clockwise manual rotation;
empty symbols indicate counterclockwise manual rotations.
Squares indicate compatible mental and manual rotation;
triangles indicate incompatible mental and manual rotation.
Compatible versus incompatible rotations Figure 5 shows
that (with only one exception) participants produced longer
response times for incompatible trials (triangles) than
compatible trials (squares). In order to analyze the influence
of compatible and incompatible manual rotation on mental
rotation, negative and positive stimulus orientation angles
were pooled into compatible and incompatible angles.
Response times of the angles 0º and 180º were excluded
from data analysis. Response times were submitted to an
ANOVA with the within-subject factors stimulus orientation
(45º, 90º, 135º), compatibility (compatible vs. incompatible
manual rotation) and the between-subjects factor age. A
main effect of compatibility was found, F(1, 64) = 14.26, p
< .001, 2 = .18.

Compatible versus incompatible rotations Similar to the
response times, error rates were analyzed with respect to
compatible and incompatible manual rotations. An ANOVA
was performed with the within-subject factors stimulus
orientation (45º, 90º, 135º), compatibility (compatible vs.
incompatible manual rotation) and the between-subjects
factor age. Only a main effect of compatibility, F(1, 64) =
6.28, p < .05, 2 = .09, and the interaction between
compatibility and age, F(3, 64) = 3.25, p < .05, 2 = .13,
were significant. In the condition with compatible manual
rotation, participants produced fewer errors than in the
incompatible condition, and this difference decreased with
increasing age.

Discussion
Significant effects of age, stimulus orientation, and the
interaction of these two factors are consistent with results
from previous studies, and indicate that all age groups did
mentally rotate the stimuli, and that rotation speed increased
with age.
Separate analyses for age groups yielded a significant
effect of compatibility for the younger children (5-year-olds
and 8-year-olds) but not for older children (11-year-olds)
and adults. Younger children showed slower response times
for incompatible compared to compatible trials. These
results are in line with recent findings (Funk et al., in press)

Figure 6: Means and standard errors of the differences in
response times between incompatible mental and manual
rotation and compatible mental and manual rotation.
724

that incompatible hand positions during mental rotation of
hands had an even larger effect on children than on adults.
This suggests that the ability to decouple visual mental
activities and motor processes develops with age.
The absence of a compatibility effect for the adults is
inconsistent with the results reported by Wexler et al.
(1998). It is possible that a difference in attention demands
or speed of manual rotation could account for these
conflicting results. Wexler et al. (1998) trained their
participants to maintain a particular speed they memorized
prior to the study. In this study, we ensured for each trial
that the participants were in fact performing the manual
task, but it would have been too hard for the young children
if they also had to more strictly control the speed of their
movement. For adults on the other hand, the present task
was quite easy and their response times were very fast. A
faster manual rotation speed might have been necessary to
interfere with their faster mental rotation. Thus, age
differences in mental rotation speed might account for the
age differences in the magnitude of the compatibility effect.
If this were the case, we would expect a large decrease in
compatibility effect between 11-year-olds and adults.
However, the largest difference in the magnitude of the
compatibility effect was found between 8- and 11-year-olds.
An increase in work load by adding a manual rotation task
to the mental rotation task led to an increase in response
times, even more so for children. However, general
processing capacities cannot explain the selective difference
between incompatible and compatible manual and mental
rotation that distinguishes between younger and older
children or adults. As a further sign of selective interference,
and in line with Wexler et al. (1998), compatibility of
manual and mental rotation resulted in a shift in the typical
V-shaped response time function, favoring the direction of
manual rotation.
Further behavioral experimentation, supported by
neuroimaging studies, might give a deeper insight in the
conditions under which motor activities interfere with
children’s mental activities, and whether there is in fact a
developmental shift allowing for better decoupling visual
and motor processes with increasing age.

Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 1, 48-56.
Corballis, M. C., & McLaren, R. (1982). Interaction
between perceived and imagined rotation. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 8, 215-224.
Estes, D. (1998). Young children's awareness of their
mental activity: The case of mental rotation. Child
Development, 69, 1345-1360.
Funk, M. Brugger, P. & Wilkening, F. (in press) Motor
processes in children’s imagery: The case of mental
rotation of hands. Developmental Science.
Jolicoeur, P., & Cavanagh, P. (1992). Mental rotation,
physical rotation, and surface media. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 18, 371-384.
Kail, R., Pellegrino, J., & Carter, P. (1980). Developmental
changes in mental rotation. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 29, 102-116.
Kosslyn, S. M. (1994). Image and brain. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Kosslyn, S. M., Margolis, J. A., Barrett, A. M., Goldknopf,
E. J., & Daly, P. F. (1990). Age differences in imagery
ability. Child Development, 61, 995-1010.
Kosslyn, S. M., Thompson, W. L., Kim, I. J., & Alpert, N.
M. (1995). Topographical representations of mental
images in primary visual cortex. Nature, 378, 496-498.
Marmor, G. S. (1975). Development of kinetic images:
When does the child first represent movement in mental
images? Cognitive Psychology, 7, 548-559.
Marmor, G. S. (1977). Mental rotation and number
conservation: Are they related? Developmental
Psychology, 13, 320-325.
Parsons, L. M. (1987). Imagined spatial transformations of
one's hands and feet. Cognitive Psychology, 19, 178-241.
Parsons, L. M. (1994). Temporal and kinematic properties
of motor behavior reflected in mentally simulated action.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 20, 709-730.
Parsons, L. M., Fox, P. T., Downs, J. H., Glass, T., Hirsch,
T. B., Martin, C. C., Jerabek, P. A., & Lancaster, J. L.
(1995). Use of implicit motor imagery for visual shape
discrimination as revealed by PET. Nature, 375, 54-58.
Piaget, J., & Inhelder, B. (1971). Mental imagery in the
child. New York: Basic.
Rieser, J. J., Garing, A. E., & Young, M. F. (1994).
Imagery, action, and young children's spatial orientation:
It's not being there that counts, it's what one has in mind.
Child Development, 65, 1262-1278.
Sekiyama, K. (1982). Kinesthetic aspects of mental
representations in the identification of left and right
hands. Perception and Psychophysics, 32, 89-95.
Shepard, R. N., & Metzler, J. (1971). Mental rotation of
three-dimensional objects. Science, 171, 701-703.
Wexler, M., Kosslyn, S. M., & Berthoz, A. (1998). Motor
Processes in Mental Rotation. Cognition, 68, 77-94.
Wohlschläger, A., & Wohlschläger, A. (1998). Mental and
manual rotation. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 24, 397-412.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Swiss National Science
Foundation, grant no: 611-066052.

References
Black, T., & Schwartz, D. L. (1996, June). When imagined
actions speak louder than words. Paper presented at the
annual meeting of the Jean Piaget Society, Philadelphia.
Childs, M. K., & Polich, J. M. (1979). Developmental
differences in mental rotation. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 27, 339-351.
Cooper, L. A., & Shepard, R. N. (1973). The time required
to prepare for a rotated stimulus. Memory and Cognition.
1, 246 250.
Cooper, L. A., & Shepard, R. N. (1975). Mental
transformation in the identification of left and right hands.

725

