UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Different Domains in Abstract Concepts

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/57x1c6mw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Caramelli, Nicoletta
Setti, Annalisa

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Different Domains in Abstract Concepts
Annalisa Setti (ncaramelli@psibo.unibo.it)
Department of Psychology, viale Berti-Pichat, 5
40127 Bologna (Italy)

Nicoletta Caramelli (settiann@psibo.unibo.it)
Department of Psychology, viale Berti-Pichat, 5
40127 Bologna (Italy)
Abstract
This study is a first attempt to unravel the almost unexplored
domain of abstract conceptual knowledge. Four kinds of
abstract concepts (nominal kinds, states of the self, cognitive
processes, and emotion concepts) were investigated in two
experiments. Emotion concepts displayed a specific pattern in
both concreteness/abstractness and imagery ratings (cf.
Altarriba et al., 1999), as did the other considered domains of
abstract knowledge (Experiment 1). In Experiment 2 we
highlighted the specific pattern of information (taxonomic,
thematic, attributive, etc) these different abstract domains
elicited in a definition production task.
Keywords: Conceptual knowledge;
abstract conceptual domains.

abstract

concepts;

Introduction
Concrete concept nouns, such as chair and book, differ from
abstract concept nouns, such as freedom and language.
While the former refer to entities that are perceivable and
spatially constrained, the latter refer to entities characterized
by properties that are neither perceivable nor spatially
constrained. Paivio’s (1971; 1986; Paivio, Yuille, &
Madigan, 1986) Dual Code Theory was a first attempt to
explain this difference. In this perspective, while abstract
nouns are coded only by the verbal system, concrete nouns
are coded by both the verbal and the imagens systems, and
this explains why concrete nouns, which are more
imageable, are also remembered better than abstract ones. In
fact, while the former may benefit from two memory codes,
the latter benefits from only one (cf. Paivio, 1983 for a
review of dual code empirical evidence).
Although the different degree of imageability can explain
a good deal of the processing differences between abstract
and concrete nouns, it is not enough to fully clarify them.
Studying word context availability, Schwanenflugel and
Shoben (1983) showed that it is more difficult to find an
appropriate context for abstract than for concrete words.
Accordingly, when abstract and concrete words were
preceded by an appropriate context, no difference between
them was found in reading time. Moreover, context
availability ratings were shown to correlate with both
concreteness (Schwanenflugel & Shoben, 1983; Altarriba,
Bauer & Benvenuto, 1999) and imageability ratings
(Wiemer-Hastings, Krug & Xu, 2001) and to be a good
predictor of lexical decision performance (Schwanenflugel,
Harnishfeger, & Stowe, 1988).
1997

As Altarriba, et al. (1999) remarked, the correlation
between concreteness ratings and the other dimensions of
concept nouns, such as imageability and context
availability, has often been calculated contrasting the ratings
obtained on the whole set of abstract and concrete nouns.
This might have obscured possible effects due to their subdomains. This is suggested by the fact that, in their research,
while imageability did correlate with concreteness in the
overall analysis, it did not when the sets of concrete,
abstract and emotion words were analyzed independently.
The analysis of emotion words showed that they were
considered significantly less concrete than abstract words.
Moreover, their context availability was lower than that of
abstract words, and they were rated as more imageable than
abstract words, but less imageable than concrete ones. The
authors interpreted these results as evidence that concrete,
abstract and emotion words belong to different domains
with emotion concept nouns differing from other abstract
concept nouns, contrary to what is usually assumed. In a
subsequent study, after replicating these results, Altarriba &
Bauer (2004) also found that concrete, abstract and emotion
words differed in a free recall task and in a lexical decision
task with a priming paradigm. Similarly, both Nelson &
Schreiber (1992) and Wiemer-Hastings, Krug & Xu (2001),
with a concreteness rating task, found that while
concreteness ratings were distributed into two general
clusters, referring to concrete and abstract items, different
degrees of concreteness were present within each cluster.
Thus, the same difference between concrete and abstract
concept nouns, which seems intuitively obvious, apparently
is not so clear-cut, as the different concreteness ratings,
observed between abstract and concrete concept nouns
(Wiemer-Hastings et al., 2001), and the results obtained
with emotion concepts (Altarriba et al., 1999) have shown.
Furthermore, while words referring to concrete objects
usually studied are nouns, abstract terms are nouns, verbs,
adjectives and adverbs. While concrete concept nouns
usually refer to two distinct kinds of entities, i.e. natural
kinds and artefacts, the variety of abstract concept nouns is
large and unknown. While the domains of both natural
kinds, e.g. plants and animals, and artefacts, e.g. tools and
vehicles, are well differentiated (see Keil, 1989), the domain
of abstract concept nouns, instead, has been scarcely
explored thus far, emotion words aside. Nevertheless, it is
possible to suppose that the overall domain of abstract
concepts can also be distinguished in sub-domains. In fact,
on intuitive grounds, some abstract concepts seem to be

“less abstract” than others like, for example, entrance and
idea.
The aim of this study was to provide evidence that the
overall domain of abstract concepts can be divided into
different sub-domains. It is worth noting that we do not aim
to produce an exhaustive taxonomy of abstract concepts. In
fact, our starting point was the set of abstract concepts
already studied as an homogeneous domain in previous
works, with the aim to show that some well differentiated
types can be distinguished into it.
Therefore, in Experiment 1 participants were asked to rate
a set of abstract concept nouns, which were supposed to
belong to four different domains (cognitive processes,
emotions, nominal kind and states of the self), on four
dimensions (concreteness, context availability, imageability
and abstractness) in order to check whether the considered
abstract conceptual domains are differentiated along these
dimensions. Moreover, as many studies on concrete
concepts have shown that different types of information
characterise their kinds, it is possible to suppose that also
the domains of abstract concepts are characterised by
information of different types. Hampton (1981), for
example, suggested that the features elicited by abstract
concept nouns describe situations (i.e. agents, actions and
goals). Recently, Barsalou & Wiemer-Hastings (in press)
found that all the concepts elicited situational information
by comparing abstract (truth), intermediate (a cook), and
concrete concepts (a bird) in an oral characteristicproduction task. Concrete and abstract concepts, however,
differed in the type of situations elicited. While the
situational content of concrete concepts consisted primarily
of situations referring to agents, the content of abstract
concepts consisted in events and introspective statements.
Analysing the linguistic contexts provided by the verbs with
which abstract words co-occur, Wiemer-Hastings &
Graesser (2000) showed that abstract concepts may be better
conceived of as being defined by the ‘abstract structure’ of
the situations in which they are used. This abstract structure
is derived from the multiple situations, which abstract items
can fit into, and it is similar to a script because it specifies
the relations linking the entities involved in a particular
situation (causal, temporal, and spatial relations). WiemerHastings, Barnard & Faelner (2003) identified the main
organizing principle of abstract knowledge in thematic
relations. They found that concrete and abstract concepts
differed in their exemplars’ degree of distinctiveness. That
is, the exemplars of abstract categories were judged as more
similar to the exemplars of other categories than the
concrete categories ones. They also found that, while
concrete concept similarity evaluations were based on
taxonomic relations, those provided for abstract concepts
were based on thematic relations. Moreover, the crucial role
of thematic knowledge in abstract concepts was also found
in children (Caramelli, Setti, & Maurizzi, 2004) as well as
in five groups of people differing in the type of expertise
(Setti, Borghi, Caramelli, submitted).
In this theoretical framework, Experiment 2 was carried
out in order to verify whether concrete and abstract concepts
are characterized by different patterns of conceptual
information as well as whether the different domains of

abstract concepts already studied in Experiment 1 differ in
the types of conceptual information they elicit.

Experiment 1
This study consisted in two parts. The first was aimed at
selecting the concept nouns belonging to distinct domains of
abstract knowledge and the second at verifying with rating
tasks whether these domains differed along the dimensions
usually assumed to discriminate abstract and concrete
concepts
(concreteness,
context
availability
and
imageability). Also the dimension “abstractness” was added,
as it was supposed to provide further information than that
provided by the concreteness dimension, and, thus, to better
discriminate the domains of abstract concepts. In fact, it
cannot be given for granted in advance that the abstractness
and concreteness dimensions are symmetrical.
We hypothesised that if the selected abstract concepts
belonged to different conceptual domains their ratings
should differ along the considered dimensions (cf Altarriba
et al., 1999).
Part 1. Abstract concepts selection and familiarity
assessment.
A wide set of abstract concept nouns was created, taken
from both Altarriba et al. (1999) and Oatley and JohnsonLaird (1987). Following their intuition, the two
experimenters divided all the collected abstract concept
nouns into ten different appropriately labelled categories.
Among these, only the four categories that included the
largest amount of items were retained for further study. In
order to corroborate the experimenters’ intuition, 3
independent judges, who were blind to the hypotheses, were
asked to part the stimuli into the four categories: cognitive
processes, states of the self, nominal kinds and emotions.
The judges substantially agreed with the experimenters’
partitions and the few cases of disagreement were solved
following brief discussion. The set of abstract concept
nouns thus obtained consisted of 135 items. The familiarity
assessment was carried out on this set of 135 concept nouns,
out of which 25 belonged to the domain of cognitive
processes (e.g. thought), 25 to that of states of the self (e.g.
childhood), 25 to that of nominal kinds (e.g. error), and 60
to that of emotions (e.g. fear). The 135 selected concept
nouns were divided into 2 lists with the number of each type
of concept balanced among the lists. In each list the concept
nouns were arranged in 2 random orders. Ten participants
for each one of the four lists rated “how much the meaning
of these words is familiar/known” on a 7-point scale. In
total the data of 20 super-subjects were collected. The most
familiar concept nouns belonged to the domain of cognitive
processes [M = 6; SD = 0.6], followed by that of states of
the self [M = 5.95; SD = 0.5], that of nominal kinds [M =
5.79; SD = 0.9] and that of emotions [M = 5.72; SD = 0.8].
Part 2. Assessment of concreteness, context
availability, imageability, and abstractness

Method

1998

Participants One hundred and sixty university students
took part in this experiment as volunteers. All of them were
Italian native speakers.

Discussion

Materials and Procedure From each of the four abstract
domains (cognitive processes, states of the self, nominal
kinds and emotions) 18 concept nouns, the familiarity of
which was balanced, were selected as the experimental set.
To these 72 concept nouns, 60 concrete concept nouns (30
natural kind and 30 artefacts) were added as fillers. The total
set of 132 concept nouns thus obtained was divided into two
lists, in each of which the types of concept nouns were
balanced. In each list the concept nouns were differently
randomized. This procedure was repeated for each one of
the four ratings. Eight different groups of participants were
asked to rate the imageability, or the context availability, or
the concreteness, or the abstractness degree of the items on a
7-point scale (e.g. “Please evaluate how concrete is x on the
scale, where 1 = not at all and 7 = very much. Please use
also the intermediate steps of the scale”). Thus, each
participant evaluated half of the experimental materials on
only one dimension.

The results of Experiment 1 verified the hypothesis that the
overall abstract concepts domain can be split into more
specific domains. Not only concreteness and abstractness
ratings showed an opposite trend, i.e. these dimensions are
symmetrical, but also the 4 selected abstract conceptual
domains were differentiated on the dimensions considered.
In particular, cognitive processes and emotion concept
nouns differed from both states of the self and nominal kind
concepts with the former rated as more abstract and less
concrete than the latter. Moreover, cognitive processes
concept nouns were rated as less imageable than states of
the self concept nouns, which were the most imageable and
obtained a relatively high concreteness rating. Since the
relevance of relations in conceptual knowledge has been
widely recognized as a means for distinguishing between
the kinds of concrete concepts (Barsalou, 1993; Lin &
Murphy, 2001; Markman, 1989; Borghi, Caramelli & Setti,
2005), Experiment 2 was carried out in order to identify
which relations are elicited by the 4 abstract conceptual
domains differentiated in the rating tasks. In fact, it is
possible to suppose that, if cognitive processes, emotions,
states of the self, and nominal kind concept nouns differ,
they should convey different patterns of conceptual
information as expressed by the relations upon which their
definitions rest.

Results

An Analysis of Variance was performed on the ratings with
Rating scale (concreteness, abstractness, context
availability, and imageability) as the within items variable
and Abstract conceptual domains as the between items
variable. The factor Rating scale was significant: F (3,204)
= 113.3; MSe = .41; p < .001, while the factor Abstract
concept domain showed only a trend toward significance: F
(3,68) = 2.3; MSe = .56; p < .08. The interaction was
significant: F (9,204) = 12.8; MSe = .41; p < .001. As for
the main effect of the Rating scale, context availability and
abstractness obtained the highest ratings (respectively M =
4.4 and M = 4.7), followed by imagery ratings (M = 3.7)
with concreteness obtaining the lowest ratings (M = 2.9).
All the differences were significant at the post hoc
Newman-Keuls analysis (p < .01).

Experiment 2
In this experiment a definition production task was used in
order to verify the following hypotheses: a.1. Abstract
concepts should differ from concrete ones as far as the
information their definitions rests on is concerned. a.2. As
the concrete concept domain is articulated in different subdomains characterized by eliciting specific types of
information, so should the abstract concept domain; b. In
the four sub-domains of the abstract concepts considered,
emotion concepts should elicit a different pattern of
relations from those elicited by the other abstract domains
as they were already shown to differ in both rating and
lexical decision tasks (Altarriba & Bauer, 2004).

Table 1: Mean rating for each kind of concepts on each
scale (Standard Deviation in brackets).
Kind of concept
Cognitive proc
Nominal kinds
States self
Emotions

Concr
2.5(.4)
3.3(.6)
3.5(.8)
2.3(.2)

Abstr
5(.7)
3.8(.8)
3.9(.6)
4.9(.4)

CA
4.7(.4)
4.4(.9)
4.8(.9)
4.9(.4)

Imag
3.2(.5)
3.6(1.1)
4(.6)
3.8(.5)

Method

As Table 1 shows, concreteness and abstractness ratings
displayed an opposite trend in the interaction, as expected.
Cognitive processes and emotion concept nouns were
judged as less concrete, and more abstract, than states of the
self and nominal kind concept nouns (Newman-Keuls, p <
.01). The abstract conceptual domains did not significantly
differ in their context availability, although, on average,
nominal kinds led to lower ratings (M = 4.4) than emotion
concepts (M = 4.9). Cognitive processes, that were judged
as the most abstract (and less concrete), were also less
imageable (M = 3.2) than states of the self concept nouns
(M = 4.07) (Newman-Keuls, p < .01). Thus, at least to
some extent and apart from context availability, each of the
abstract conceptual domains investigated was differently
characterized by the dimensions considered.

Participants Eighteen university students who did not take
part in the preceding experiment volunteered for this
experiment.
Materials and Procedure From the materials used in
Experiment 1, 10 concepts for each group were selected so
that familiarity was balanced (cognitive processes M = 6.3;
nominal kinds M = 6.1; states of the self M = 6.1; emotions
M = 6.3). Twenty concrete concepts (10 natural kinds and
10 artefacts) were added to these 40 concepts, bringing the
total set of materials to 60 concept nouns, arranged into two
differently randomised lists. Under each concept noun a few
blank lines were left free for responses. Participants were
asked to provide a definition for each concept noun.
Data coding The definitions produced were transcribed and
parsed into their constituent components (joy – mental
condition/ favourable and pleasant). The components of the
definitions thus obtained were coded according to the type
of relation linking the components to the given concept

1999

noun (in the preceding example ‘mental condition’ –
taxonomic superordinate; ‘favourable and pleasant’ –
attributive). The coded relations were the following:
1. Taxonomic relations: establishing the hierarchical
structure of conceptual knowledge. They included: the
Superordinate level (fear - feeling); the subordinate level
(mind - consciousness); and coordinate level (worry – state
of anxiety).
2. Thematic relations: linking objects that co-occur in the
same situation or event. They included: spatial relation
(mind – in the brain); temporal relation (impression – in one
moment); means relation (comprehension – the way we
understand); cause relation (disappointment – due to
someone or something); effect relation (hunger – look for
food), function relation (memory – for maintaining mental
information); action relation (attention – to concentrate);
event relation, i.e. the description of a situation resulting
from different actions, (for example: profit – to receive
something as compensation for an accomplishment).
3. Attributive relations: referring to the physical
characteristics or qualities of objects. They included
perceptual property relations referring to texture, shape,
colour, and evaluations (profit - advantageous).
4. Stereotypes: used for conventional associations (mindgenius) and idiosyncratic associations (creativity – to go
further).
5. Examples: used for objects/people considered by the
participant as an instantiation of the given concept (bother –
itchiness) (see Barsalou and Wiemer-Hastings, in press).
6. Other: This code was used for general comments and
simple repetitions of the concepts.

Data Analysis and Results

One participant’s data were excluded from analysis
because of failure in responding to most of the stimuli.
Overall, taxonomic relations were the most frequently
produced in participants’ definitions. This result was
expected as in their educational curriculum students are
trained to provide formal definitions such as “A is a kind of
B”. However, thematic relations were the second most
produced in all the conceptual domains considered.
Thematic relations were produced more often in abstract
concepts definitions (M = 29%) than in concrete concepts
ones (M = 26%). This result replicated in adults that
obtained with an associations production task in children
(Caramelli, Setti & Maurizzi, 2004).
In order to establish which relations characterized the
definitions of the different kinds of concepts, the
Correspondence Analysis was used. In Correspondence
Analysis the frequencies of the relations produced give rise
to a broad data matrix allowing the identification of their
weight and their graphical representation as points in a
multidimensional space. On the graph, the geometrical
proximity of the points shows the degree of their association
and the similarity of their distribution (Hair, Anderson,
Tatham & Black, 1992; Greenacre & Blasius, 1994). The
aim of the Correspondence Analysis is to represent the rows
and the columns of a two-way contingency table (profiles)
as points in corresponding low-dimensional vector spaces.
In order to project the observed points onto a lowdimensional subspace, it is necessary to define the Chi

square metric as the distance in the space of the profiles. In
fact, the distances between the points are the weighted
distances (Chi square) between the relative frequencies and
not the simple Euclidean distances (Hair et al., 1992). Thus,
the logic underlying the Correspondence Analysis is quite
similar to that of Factor Analysis. Similarly to Factor
Analysis, the first dimension explains a Total Inertia higher
than that explained by the further dimensions. The
maximum number of dimensions is the minimum between
the number of columns minus 1 and the number of rows
minus 1.
Two analyses were performed, one on all the types of
concepts studied and the other on the different domains of
abstract conceptual knowledge only.
(A) Analysis on all the concept types. A Correspondence
Analysis was performed, the variables of which were all the
kinds of concepts (cognitive processes, states of the self,
nominal kinds and emotion concepts natural kinds and
artefacts) and the sub-sets of the different kinds of the
relations produced (superordinate, subordinate and
coordinate levels of Taxonomic relations; spatial, temporal,
means, cause, effect, function, action, and event relations of
Thematic relations; Perceptual and Evaluative relations of
the Attributive relation; Stereotypes, and Examples). The
productions coded Other amounted only to 2.8%, thus they
were not further analysed.
As shown in Figure1, on the first dimension, explaining
53% of the total variance, natural kind and artefact
concepts, which yielded definitions based on super-ordinate,
perceptual, spatial and function relations differed from
states of the self and nominal kind concepts, which yielded
definitions based on event and coordinate relations and
examples. This dimension highlights the distinction between
concrete concepts (natural kinds and artefacts) and abstract
concepts (nominal kinds and states of the self). On the
second dimension, explaining 21% of the total variance,
emotion concepts and natural kinds, which yielded
definitions based on cause, evaluation and super-ordinate
relations, differed from artefacts, which yielded definitions
based on function, mean and subordinate relations. This
dimension highlights the relations that distinguish natural
kinds and emotions from artefacts. The former elicited
taxonomic information of the super-ordinate type, while the
latter elicited taxonomic information of the subordinate type
and information on their function. Moreover, while artefacts
are defined relying on their functions, this kind of
information is not involved in defining neither emotion nor
natural kind concepts. In this set of concepts, those referring
to cognitive processes are defined by a pattern of relations
that is not specific.

2000

(B) Analysis on abstract conceptual domains. A
Correspondence Analysis was performed, the variables of
which were the abstract conceptual domains (cognitive
processes, states of the self, nominal kinds and emotion
concepts) and all the sub-types of the relations produced, as
in Analysis (A).
As figure 2 shows, on the first dimension explaining 47% of
the total variance, emotion concepts, which yielded
definitions based on super-ordinate and cause relations,

differed from nominal kinds, which yielded definitions
based on coordinate relations and examples. On the second
dimension, explaining 41% of the total variance, emotion
concepts, which yielded definitions based on evaluative
relations differed from cognitive processes, which yielded
definitions based on spatial, function, means, perceptual and
subordinate relations.
Thus, while the domain of concepts referring to states of
the self is not defined by a specific pattern of relations
different from those of the other domains of abstract
conceptual knowledge, that of nominal kind, emotion, and
cognitive processes concepts were. The definitions of
nominal kinds were characterized by the coordination
taxonomic relation and by examples. That is why the
concept “travel” was defined as “a shift of position”
(coordinate) and the concept “flight” by “of the birds”, an
example. Emotions’ concepts were defined by reference to
their causes (“disappointment” was defined as “due to
unrealised expectations”) and to evaluations (“anxiety” –
was defined as “deep and strong”). The definitions of
cognitive processes concepts rested on a great variety of
relations mainly of the thematic kind (action, mean, function
and space relations) and, thus, they differed from those
provided for both nominal kind and emotion concepts.

widely explored the different types of conceptual
information shaping these two kinds. On the contrary,
abstract conceptual knowledge includes a heterogeneous set
of concepts, the differences among which, to our
knowledge, have been largely unexplored, with the
exception of emotion concepts. This study was an attempt to
reduce this gap by investigating four abstract conceptual
domains (states of the self, cognitive processes, nominal
kinds and emotions). Experiment 1, with a rating task on the
dimensions of concreteness, context availability,
imageability and also abstractness, shows that the domains
of abstract conceptual knowledge identified differ on these
dimensions. Thus, Altarriba et al., ’s (1999) and Altarriba &
Bauer ‘s (2004) results that emotion concepts give rise to a
knowledge domain independent from both concrete and
abstract knowledge domains were replicated.
Experiment 2 with a production task has specified these
differences as due to the specific conceptual information
underlying the definitions of emotion concept nouns as they
rest on their causes and on evaluations. Moreover, it has
also highlighted the different types of conceptual
information that characterize other sub-domains of abstract
concepts. The definitions of nominal kinds, which are
judged relatively highly concrete and imageable, were
characterized by examples and coordinate taxonomic
relations, which allow reference to concrete objects and
situations. Concepts referring to cognitive processes elicited
thematic information that refer to the specific contextualised
events in which they take place. States of the self concepts,
while characterized by events when contrasted with concrete
concepts, when contrasted with abstract concepts did not
show any specific pattern of information.

Figure 1. Dim.1 in bold, Dim. 2 in frame, types of concepts
in capital, relations in lowercase.

Discussion

Overall, analysis (A) and (B) have shown that the
definitions of the exemplars of both the concrete and the
abstract sub-domains of conceptual knowledge are shaped
by specific kinds of conceptual information. Moreover, they
also have shown that emotion concepts differ from concrete
concepts as well as from the other types of abstract concepts
considered, thus replicating Altarriba et al.’s (1999) and
Altarriba & Bauer’s (2004) findings with a different
methodology.

Conclusions
The domain of concrete concepts has been divided in
artefact and natural kind concepts, and many studies have
2001

Figure 2. Dim.1 in bold, Dim. 2 in frame, types of concepts
in capital, relations in lowercase.
In conclusion, besides replicating and extending Altarriba et
al. (1999) findings on emotion concepts, this study, has
begun to uncover the partitions that distinguish abstract
conceptual domains. Further research will allow to test
whether the domains of abstract knowledge we focused on
are differently processed in on line tasks. Moreover a larger

range of abstract concept will be taken into account. Overall
these results can be nicely accounted for by theories that
assume conceptual knowledge as a continuum in which
different types of concepts can be distinguished tank to the
different kind of information they elicit (Barsalou, 1987).

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Donatella D. Maurizzi for help in
data coding and three anonymous reviewers for their
insightful suggestions. This research was supported by a
grant of the University of Bologna (FRO-2002).

References
Altarriba, J., Bauer, L. M., & Benvenuto, C. (1999).
Concreteness, context availability, and imageability
ratings and word associations for abstract, concrete, and
emotion words. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments,
& Computers, 31, 578-602.
Altarriba, J., & Bauer, L. M. (2004). The distinctiveness of
emotion concepts: A comparison between emotion,
abstract, and concrete words. American Journal of
Psychology, 117, 389-410.
Barsalou, L.W. (1993). Challenging assumptions about
concepts. Cognitive Development, 8, 169-180.
Barsalou, L.W. (1987). The instability of graded structure:
Implications for the nature of concepts. In E. Neisser,
(Ed.) Emory symposia in cognition 1, concepts and
conceptual development: Ecological and intellectual
factors in categorisation (pp. 101-140). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Barsalou, L. W., & Wiemer-Hastings K. (in press). Situating
abstract concepts. In D. Pecher & R. Zwaan (Eds).
Grounding cognition: The role of perception and action in
memory, language, and thought. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Borghi, A. M. & Caramelli, N. (2003). Situation bounded
conceptual organization in children: From action to spatial
relations. Cognitive Development, 18, 49-60.
Borghi, A.M., Caramelli, N., & Setti, A. (2005). Conceptual
information on objects locations. Brain and Language, 93,
140-151.
Caramelli, Setti, Maurizzi (2004). Concrete and abstract
concepts in school age children. Psychology of Language
and Communication, 8, 17-32 .
Greenacre, M., & Blasius, J. (Eds.) (1994). Correspondence
analysis in the social sciences: Recent developments and
applications. London: Academic Press.
Hair, J. F., Anderson, R. E., Tatham, R. L., & Black, W. C.
(1992). Multivariate data analysis. New York:
MacMillan.

Hampton, J. A. (1981). An investigation of the nature of
abstract concepts. Memory & Cognition, 9, 149-156.
Lin, E. L., & Murphy, G. L. (2001). Thematic relations in
adults' concepts. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 130, 3-28.
Markman, E. (1989). Categorization and naming in
children. Cambridge: M.I.T. Press.
Nelson, D. L., & Schreiber, T. A. (1992). Word
concreteness and word structure as independent
determinants of recall. Journal of Memory and Language,
31, 237-260.
Oatley, K., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1987). Toward a
cognitive theory of emotion. Cognition and Emotion, 1,
29-50.
Paivio, A. (1971). Imagery and verbal processes. New
York: Holt Rinehart & Winston.
Paivio, A. (1983). The empirical case for dual coding. In J.
C. Yuille (Ed.), Imagery, Memory and Cognition (pp.
307-332). Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Paivio, A. (1986). Mental representations: A dual coding
approach. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Paivio, A., Yuille, J. C., Madigan, S. A. (1986).
Concreteness, imagery and meaningfulness values for 925
words. Journal of Experimental Psychology Monograph
Supplement, 76 (3, part 2).
Schwanenflugel, P. J., & Shoben, E. J. (1983). Differential
context effects in the comprehension of abstract and
concrete verbal materials. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: L. M. C., 9, 82-102.
Schwanenflugel, P. J., Harnishfeger, K. K., & Stowe, R. W.
(1988). Context availability and lexical decisions for
abstract and concrete words. Journal of Memory &
Language, 27, 499-520.
Setti, A., Borghi, A. M. Caramelli, N. (submitted). Abstract
concepts, situations, and expertise: a domain analysis.
Wiemer-Hastings, Barnard, K. K., & Faelnar, J. (2003).
Structural differences in abstract and concrete item
categories. in Proceedings of 25th Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society (internet source).
Wiemer-Hastings, K., Krug, J., & Xu, X. (2001). Imagery,
context availability, contextual constraints and
abstractness. In Proceedings of 23rd Annual Meeting of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1106-1111). Hillsdale,
N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Wiemer-Hastings, K., & Graesser, A. C. (2000).
Contextually representing abstract concepts with abstract
structures. In Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society. (pp. 983-988). Hillsdale,
N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

2002

