UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Does Gender Information Influence Early Phases of Spoken Word Recognition?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0qd1q147

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Mihalcea, Rada
Strapparava, Carlo

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Does Gender Information Influence Early Phases of Spoken Word Recognition?
Elsa Spinelli (elsa.spinelli@upmf-grenoble.fr)
Université Pierre Mendès France
Laboratoire de Psychologie et NeuroCognition
BP 48, 38040 Grenoble Cedex 9
FRANCE

Fanny Meunier (fanny.meunier@ish-lyon.cnrs.fr)
Laboratoire Dynamique du Langage
Institut des Sciences de l’Homme
14 avenue Berthelot, 69 363 Lyon Cedex 07
FRANCE

Alix Seigneuric (alix.seigneuric@u-bourgogne.fr)
Université de Bourgogne, UFR Sciences Humaines
2 bd Gabriel, 21000 Dijon
FRANCE

Abstract
In a cross modal fragment priming study, we tested the
hypothesis that gender information is used early to discard
gender-incongruent competitors during word comprehension.
In three experiments, we compared the lexical decision
performances on targets primed by phonological information
only (e.g. /kra/-CRAPAUD) or by phonological plus gender
information (e.g. un masc /kra/-CRAPAUD). In all experiments,
we found a phonological priming effect that was not
modulated by the presence of gender information, whether
gender was congruent with the target (Exp1 and Exp2) or
incongruent with the target (Exp3). Moreover, phonological
facilitation was not modulated by the presence of gender
information, whether gender allowed exclusion of less
frequent competitors (Exp1) or more frequent ones (Exp2).
We concluded that gender information extracted from a
gender-marked determiner is not used early in the process of
spoken word recognition.
Keywords : context effect, word recognition, gender

Introduction
In French, each noun is either feminine or
masculine. Determiners obey a gender agreement rule so the
gender of a noun following a masculine indefinite article
(e.g.”un”/E)/) is masculine, and a noun following a feminine
indefinite article (e.g. “une”/yn/) is feminine. Since articles
always precede nouns in French, the presence of such specific
markers in spoken utterances could aid listeners by providing
specific cues for decoding what they hear.
Number of studies have indeed shown effects of
gender on word recognition. Grosjean, Dommergues, Cornu,
Guillelmon, and Besson (1994) compared lexical decision
times to nouns preceded by an auditorily non gender-marked
adjective or preceded by a gender-marked determiner plus the
2056

same adjective (e.g., “jolie table” vs. “unefem jolie table”).
Faster responses were found for the gender marked context
condition. Recently, Bölte & Connine (in press) showed
faster lexical decision times to targets preceded by valid
gender-marked article (either feminine, masculine or neutral
in German) compared to targets preceded by a noise masked
article. Bates, Devescovi, Hernandez and Pizzamiglio (1996)
also showed robust gender priming.
Dahan, Swingley, Tanenhaus and Magnuson (2000)
assessed the impact of gender on lexical access in a study
where French participants were instructed auditorily to
mouse-click on pictures of objects displayed on a computer
screen while their eye movements were monitored. When
participants heard instruction sentences that did not include
gender information – e.g., “cliquez sur les...(boutons)”, “click
on the...”, where “the” is plural but not gender-marked – the
probability of fixation was higher for pictures with names that
shared initial phonemes with the target (“cohort” effect),
compared to pictures that had unrelated names. When a
gender-marked article preceded the target noun – e.g.,
“cliquez sur le bouton”, “click on the button”, where “the” is
marked for masculine gender – the members of the
phonological cohort that were not of the marked gender
received no more fixations than the unrelated competitors.
Spinelli and Alario (2002) examined whether gender
information could constrain the activation of fully ambiguous
words: homophones with two different genders (e.g., /sEl/
meaning salt masculine or saddle feminine). In a cross-modal
semantic priming study, they found that when homophones
were presented in isolation, facilitation was found for targets
related to both the masculine (e.g., “poivre”, pepper) and the
feminine (e.g., “cheval”, horse) meanings of the homophones.
However, when homophones were presented with a gendermarked definite article (e.g., /lasEl/, the saddle), facilitation
was found only for targets related to the meaning matching
the gender information given by the article (e.g., “cheval”).

These studies provide evidence for an influence of a
gender-marked context on the activation of lexical candidates.
However, it is unclear how gender context is used during the
recognition of the following word. It could be that activation
of lexical candidates is driven by the acoustic input only and
gender information is used later in the recognition process.
Hence, a cohort of potential candidates would compete for
recognition irrespective of their gender, and gender context
would act later in the recognition process to select the
appropriate candidate. For example, given the acoustic input,
« unmasc bou… » /E)bu…/ in French, the competition would
take place on all masculine and feminine words beginning
with /bu/, the gender information extracted from a
determiner– “un” –being used later to select the appropriate
candidate. Another account of gender effects would be that a
context marked for grammatical-gender influences the early
processes of lexical access. Note that the Dahan et al. study
suggests that this is the case. Then it could be that gender
information extracted from a determiner (e.g., feminine from
“la” /la/ -the-or “une” /yn/ -a/one- in French) is used to
discard the gender mismatching candidates (e.g. masculine).
That is to say, the cohort of phonologically related candidates
considered for selection would be restricted to those that have
a gender that matches the context.
In the present study, we tested the hypothesis that
gender information is used early in the process of lexical
access to discard gender incongruent candidates from the
competition process. In the series of experiment presented,
we used fragment priming in which the initial fragment of a
target was presented as prime either with or without gender
information. Fragment priming paradigm is known to tap into
early phases of word recognition and allows to evidence
multiple activation (Zwitserlood, 1989). Hence, if a context
marked for gender influences the early processes of lexical
access and constrain lexical activation to gender-congruent
candidates only, phonological fragment priming should be
modulated by the presence of gender. Moreover, the effect of
gender should be greater for candidates having more frequent
competitors of the opposite gender than for candidates having
no more frequent competitors of the opposite gender.
Therefore, associated with fragment priming, we manipulated
the position in the cohort given the frequency of the
masculine and the feminine candidates. For example, if the
candidate word “bouteille” fem in French ([butEj], bottle) is the
most frequent word of the cohort beginning with /bu/, this
candidate should weakly benefit from the exclusion of the
masculine, less frequent competitors. Contrarily, consider the
French word “bouton” masc ([but•)], button), which is less
frequent than “bouteille”, but is the most frequent masculine
word in the cohort activated by /bu/. The activation of such a
candidate (bouton), should be much greater given the input
“un masc bou…”, /E)bu/ than given “bou…”, /bu/ because in
the former, gender information allows exclusion of feminine
candidate words (thus “bouteille”, more frequent) hence
leaving “bouton” the most frequent of its cohort.
In summary, if gender information given by a gender-marked
context allows exclusion from the competition process of all
2057

related candidates with mismatching gender, (1) phonological
priming should be modulated by the presence of gender and
(2) gender information should benefit more to candidates that
have a more frequent competitor of the opposite gender. We
conducted a series of cross modal priming experiments in
which the initial fragment of a target was presented as prime
(e.g. /k{a/-CRAPAUD) either with or without gender
information (e.g. un masc /k{a/ or /k{a/ ). These conditions
were compared to unrelated control ones. In Experiment 1,
targets had no more frequent competitor whereas in
experiment 2, targets had one more frequent competitor of the
opposite gender. Hence in experiment 1, targets were the
most frequent words of the cohort (e.g. CRAPAUDmasc for the
cohort of “/k{a/”) whereas in Experiment 2, they were the
most frequent words of the other gender cohort (e.g.
CRAVATEfem , [tie], for the cohort of “unefem /k{a/”).

Pretests
In order to select the targets for the two first
experiments, we needed to find the most frequent word of a
given phonological cohort. Because frequencies given by
French database are obtained from written corpus, we chose
to assess frequency by the means of an auditory pre-test.
Hence, the term “frequency” refers to subjective frequency.
Three pre-tests were carried out on several groups of first year
psychology students (approximately fifty students in each
group). A first group was presented auditory syllables (e.g.
(/k{a/ or /bu/…) and had to write down the first word that
came to their mind beginning with this syllable (e.g.
“crapaud” –toad- or “bouteille” -bottle). This first pre-test
allowed us to establish a list of the most (subjectively)
frequent words of the cohort of a given auditory syllable
(/k{a/or /bu/…). A second group was presented the same
auditory syllables preceded by an article marked for
masculine gender (e.g. un masc /k{a/or un masc /bu/…). The
subjects had to write down the first masculine word that came
to their mind beginning with this syllable (e.g. “crapaud” –
toad- or “bouton” -button). This second pre-test allowed us to
establish a list of the most (subjectively) frequent masculine
words of the cohort of a given auditory syllable (/k{a/ or
/bu/…). Conversely, a third group was presented the same
auditory syllables preceded by an article marked for feminine
gender (e.g. unefem /k{a/or unefem /bu/…). The subjects had to
write down the first feminine word that came to their mind
beginning with this syllable (e.g. “cravate” –tie- or “bouteille”
-bottle). This last pre-test allowed us to establish a list of the
most (subjectively) frequent feminine words of the cohort of a
given auditory syllable (/k{a/or /bu/…).
Item selection for Experiment 1 : Targets of experiment 1 had
no more frequent competitor. Hence, for a masculine word to
be selected for the first experiment, it had to be the most
responded item in the first and the second pre-tests.
Moreover, it had to reach at least 17 %1 of the responses in
the first one. Similarly, a feminine word was selected for the
1

The fact that selected targets were the most given item but nevertheless
reached only 17% of the total responses reflects the productivity of the
syllables that could give rise to many different lexical items.

first experiment if 1) it was the most given in the first and the
third pre-test and 2) if it occurred at least in 17% of the
responses in the first pre-test. Altogether, these 3 pre-tests
allowed us to select 32 bi or trisyllabic words that were the
most frequent words of the cohort of a given syllable. They
served as targets in Experiment 1.
Item selection for Experiment 2 : Targets of experiment 2 had
one more frequent competitor of the opposite gender. Hence
for a masculine word to be selected for the second
experiment, it had to be the most responded item in the
second pre-test but not on the first one. Similarly, a feminine
word was selected for the second experiment if it was the
most given item in the third pre-test but not in the first one. In
other words, targets of Experiment 2 were the most frequent
of the cohort of the opposite gender. For example, if
“crapaud’ (toadmasc, selected for Experiment 1) was the most
frequent word of the cohort of /k{a/ (determined as described
above, on the basis that it was the most responded item given
both the auditory inputs /k{a/ and “un masc / k{a/”),
“cravate”fem was the most frequent words of the feminine
cohort of /k{a/ (determined on the basis that it was the most
responded item given the auditory input “unefem /k{a/ ).
“Cravate” was then selected for Experiment 2.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants. Sixty students of the University of Grenoble,
participated in the experiment for course credit. They were
native speakers of French, had normal or corrected vision and
reported no hearing impairment.
Stimuli and Procedure. Words : Thirty-two target words (12
masculine words and 20 feminine words) were selected such
as they were the most frequent words of the cohort of a given
syllable. They were selected by the means of the pre-tests
described above. The average frequency given by the French
database “Lexique” (New, Pallier, Ferrand & Matos, 2001)
for the targets of Exp1 was 44 occurrences per million. Four
primes were chosen for each target. One was a syllable
corresponding to the first two or three phonemes of the target
(e.g. /k{a/-CRAPAUD, beginning-overlap condition); a
second one corresponded to the syllable of the beginningoverlap condition preceded by an article marked for the target
gender (e.g. /E)k{a/-CRAPAUD, beginning-overlap + gender
condition), a third one was a syllable that was not
phonologically related to the target (e.g. /pli/-CRAPAUD,
unrelated condition), and the fourth one was a syllable that
was not phonologically related to the target preceded by a
gender marked article (e.g. /ynpli/-CRAPAUD, unrelated +
gender condition, see table1). Pseudowords : Thirty-two bi or
triyllabic pseudoword targets were constructed for the lexical
decision task. As for words, four primes were chosen for each
target. One corresponded to the first syllable of the target (e.g.
/b{e/-BREGOT, beginning-overlap condition); a second one
corresponded the first syllable of the target preceded by an
article (e.g. /E)b{e/-BREGOT, beginning-overlap + gender
condition), a third one was a syllable that was not
phonologically related to the target (e.g. /pla/-BREGOT,
unrelated condition), and the fourth one was a syllable that
2058

was not phonologically related to the target preceded by an
article (e.g. /ynpla/-BREGOT, unrelated + gender condition).
Examples of material used as primes and targets in all
experiments are presented in Table 1.
In order to
reduce the proportion of related items to 33 %, the
experimental lists also included 64 filler prime/target pairs,
half the targets being words and the other half being
pseudowords. The priming conditions for the filler targets
were the unrelated condition and unrelated + gender
condition.
All items were recorded in a soundproof room by a
female native speaker of French on a PC MITSUBISHI
DIAMOND PTO 900 U at a sampling rate of 16 kHz.
Participants were tested individually in a quiet room. The
prime was presented auditorily through Technics headphones.
At the end of the auditory prime the target was visually
displayed in lower case at the center of the computer screen
and remained on the screen until the participant’s response.
Participants were informed that they would first hear an
auditory sequence that could either be a syllable or a syllable
preceded by a gender marked article, then they would see
either a word or a pseudoword. They were required to
perform a lexical decision task on the visual targets. The
computer clock was triggered by the presentation of the target
on the screen and stopped by the response. Stimuli were
counterbalanced across four experimental lists so that each
participant received all conditions (beginning-overlap,
beginning-overlap + gender, unrelated and unrelated + gender
conditions) but saw each target only once. The order of
prime/target pairs presentation was randomized. Response
latencies and errors were collected.

Related
EXP1
EXP2
EXP3

Priming conditions
Without
With
gender
gender
[kra]
[E)kra]

Unrelated

[pli]

[ynpli]

Related

[kra]

[ynkra]

Unrelated

[pli]

[E)pli]

Related

[kra]

[ynkra]

Unrelated

[pli]

[E)pli]

TARGETS
CRAPAUD
[krapo]
CRAVATE
[kravat]
CRAPAUD
[krapo]

TABLE 1: Example of material used as primes and targets in
experiments 1, 2 and 3.

Results and Discussion
The results are presented in Table 2. Incorrect responses (2.3
% of responses), and RTs longer than 1500 ms and shorter
than 200 ms (0.2 %) were removed. The data of one subject
that gave rise to 30% of errors were also discarded from the
analyses. Two-way analyses of variance with relation (related
vs unrelated) and presence of gender (without gender, with
gender) were performed on the data. F values are reported by
subjects (F1) and by items (F2) and all significance tests have
associated p levels of less than .05.

Without
gender
With
congruent
gender

Related
(beginning
overlap)
531 ms
(81)
1.5 %

Unrelated

535 ms
(84)
1.5 %

555 ms
(99)
3.2 %

550 ms
(90)
3%

Priming
effect

19 ms

20 ms

TABLE 2: Mean Reaction Times in Milliseconds (ms),
Standard Deviation for correct responses to the word targets
and Error rates in the four priming conditions.
Analyses of RTs revealed a main effect of relation, significant
by subjects (F1 (1,58) = 10.2; p<.005), and by items (F2
(1,31) = 18.9; p<.001), target words being responded faster
when they were preceded by phonologically related primes
than when preceded by unrelated primes. However, analyses
of RTs revealed no main effect of the presence of gender
(Both Fs <1) and no interaction between these two factors
(Both Fs <1).
Analyses of errors revealed a main effect of relation
significant by subjects (F1 (1,58) = 5.38; p<.05; F2 (1,31) =
2.7; p<.1). This result is in line with the RTs data: there were
fewer errors for target words preceded by phonologically
related primes than for target words preceded by unrelated
primes. Moreover, analyses of errors revealed no main effect
of the presence of gender and no interaction between these
two factors (All Fs >1).
In this experiment, we found a phonological priming
effect suggesting that presenting the beginning of a word
(/k{a/ or un masc/k{a/) activates the lexical representation of
this word (CRAPAUD). This result is compatible with
previous ones on fragment priming (Spinelli, Segui &
Radeau, 2001; Zwitserlood, 1989; Marslen-Wilson, 1990).
However, no gender effect was found, “CRAPAUD” being as
much activated by phonological information only (/k{a/) and
by phonological plus gender information (un masc /k{a/). Note
however that targets in this experiment were the most
frequent candidates of the competition. Therefore, it may be
that no gender effect was found because gender information
allowed exclusion of less frequent competitors. On the
contrary, a stronger gender effect is expected in Experiment 2
in which all targets have one more frequent competitor of the
opposite gender. Gender information, in that case, should
strongly aid targets processing by excluding the higher
frequency competitors.

Experiment 2
Method
Participants. Forty-one students of the University Pierre
Mendes France, Grenoble, participated in the experiment for
2059

course credit. All participants were native speakers of French,
had normal or corrected vision and reported no hearing
impairment. None of them had participated in Experiment 1.
Stimuli and procedure. Words : Thirty-two target words (12
feminine and 20 masculine words) were selected such as they
were the most frequent words of a gender constrained cohort
(of a given syllable) but not the most frequent of the general
cohort (not constrained by gender). Hence, they had a more
frequent competitor of the opposite gender. They were
selected by the means of the pre-tests described earlier. The
average frequency given by the French database “Lexique”
(New et al. 2001) for the targets of experiment 2 was 25
occurrences per million. As for Experiment 1, four primes
were chosen for each target corresponding to the beginningoverlap condition (e.g. /k{a/-CRAVATE), the beginningoverlap + gender condition (e.g. /ynk{a/-CRAVATE), the
unrelated condition (e.g. /pli/-CRAVATE) and the unrelated
+ gender condition (e.g. /E)pli/-CRAVATE, see table 1).
Pseudoword and filler pairs were the same as those of
Experiment 1 except that the gender was swapped in order to
keep the proportion of masculine/feminine primes constant.
The procedure paralleled that of Experiment 1.

Results and Discussion
The results are presented in Table 3. The data of one subject
that gave rise to 47% of errors were discarded from the
analyses. Three items were discarded from the analyses for
the same reason (57,5%, 32.5 % and 40 % of errors).
Moreover, incorrect responses, RTs longer than 1500 ms and
shorter than 200 ms were removed, excluding 1.67 % of
responses. Two-way analyses of variance with relation
(related vs unrelated) and presence of gender (without gender,
with gender) were performed on the data.

Without
gender
With
congruent
gender

Related
(beginning
overlap)
535 ms
(81)
2.1 %
536 ms
(76)
1.1 %

Unrelated

545 ms
(73)
1.8 %
553 ms
(92)
1.7 %

Priming
effect

10 ms

17 ms

TABLE 3: Mean Reaction Times in Milliseconds (ms),
Standard Deviation for correct responses to the word targets
and Error rates in the four priming conditions.
Analyses of RTs revealed a main effect of relation, significant
by subjects (F1 (1,39) = 4.7; p<.05; F2 (1,28) = 3.3, p<.075).
As in Experiment1, target words were faster responded to
when they were preceded by phonologically related primes
than when preceded by unrelated primes. Moreover, analyses
of RTs revealed no main effect of the presence of gender
(Both Fs >1) and no interaction between these two factors
(Both Fs <1). Analyses of errors revealed no effect of

relation, no effect of the presence of gender and no interaction
between these two factors (All Fs <1).
As in Experiment 1, we found a phonological
priming effect suggesting that presenting the beginning of a
word (/k{a/ or unefem /k{a/) activates the lexical
representation of this word (CRAVATE). However, no
gender effect was found, “CRAVATE” being as much
activated by phonological information only (/k{a/) and by
phonological plus gender information (unefem /k{a/). Because
all targets had one more frequent competitor of different
gender, gender information was expected to help targets
processing by excluding the higher frequency competitors.
The absence of gender effect in the last fragment priming
experiment could be explained by the fact that contrary to our
hypothesis, gender information is not used to discard
mismatching candidates early in the competition processing.
Alternatively, it could be that targets of Experiment 2 are so
frequent that they do not benefit from the exclusion of their
competitor. Remember that they are the most frequent words
of their gender-based cohort even if they all have one more
frequent competitor of the opposite gender. A less elegant
(because it involves incongruency) but more direct way to test
our hypothesis is to present prime-target pairs that do not
share the same gender (e.g. “une” fem /k{a/-CRAPAUDmasc).
Then, if gender-mismatching candidates are discarded early
in the competition process, we should find no phonological
facilitation (or even inhibition) when the “wrong” gender
information is available on top of phonological information
(e.g. “une” fem /k{a/-CRAPAUDmasc). In the next experiment,
participants were presented to prime-target pairs that did not
share the same gender.

Experiment 3
Method
Participants. Forty-four students of the University Pierre
Mendès France, Grenoble, participated in the experiment for
course credit. All participants were native speakers of French,
had normal or corrected vision and reported no hearing
impairment. None had participated in the previous
experiments.
Stimuli and procedure In this experiment, the thirty-two
target words were the same as those of Experiment 1 (i.e. the
most frequent words of the cohort, e.g. CRAPAUD) and the
primes were those used for Experiment 2. It means that when
gender information was available in the prime on top of
phonological information, the gender was not congruent with
that of the target (e.g. “une” fem /k{a/-CRAPAUDmasc, see table
1).

Results and Discussion
The results are presented in Table 4. Incorrect responses and
RTs longer than 1500 ms and shorter than 200 were removed,
excluding 2.9% of responses. Two-way analyses of variance

2060

with relation (related vs unrelated) and presence of gender
(without gender, with gender) were performed on the data.

Without
gender
With
incongruent
gender

Related
(beginning
overlap)
514 ms
(64)
1.7 %

Unrelated

514 ms
(59)
3.4 %

530 ms
(54)
2.6 %

536 ms
(78)
4%

Priming
effect

22 ms

16 ms

TABLE 4 : Mean Reaction Times in Milliseconds (ms),
Standard Deviation for correct responses to the word targets
and Error rates in the four priming conditions.
Analyses of RTs revealed a main effect of relation, significant
by subjects (F1 (1,43) = 16.2 ; p<.001), and by items (F2
(1,31) = 6; p<.05), target words being responded faster when
they were preceded by phonologically related primes than
when preceded by unrelated primes. However, analyses of
RTs revealed no main effect of the presence of gender and no
interaction between these two factors (All Fs <1).
Analyses of errors revealed no effect of relation
(F1(1,43)=1.22, ns; F2<1), no effect of the presence of gender
(Both Fs <1), and no interaction between these two factors
(F1(1,43)=3.06, p<.08; F2(1,31)=3.52, p<.07).
As in all previous experiments, we found a priming effect
suggesting that presenting the beginning of a word activates
the lexical representation of this word, whatever gender is
given on top of phonological information. Targets were still
facilitated when they were preceded by phonologically related
primes with incongruent gender.

General discussion
In three experiments, we found a phonological priming effect
suggesting that presenting the beginning of a word activates
its lexical representation. This result is in line with previous
studies showing fragment priming (Spinelli et al, 2001;
Zwitserlood, 1989). However, this phonological facilitation
was not modulated by the presence of gender information,
whether this information was congruent with the target (Exp1
and Exp2) or incongruent with the target (Exp3). Moreover,
phonological facilitation was not modulated by the presence
of gender information, whether this information allowed
exclusion of less frequent competitors (Exp1) or more
frequent ones (Exp2 and Exp3).
This study was designed to test the hypothesis of an
early influence of gender on lexical activation, with gender
information acting as a means of excluding incongruent
competitors. Cross modal fragment priming was chosen to tap
into early processes of lexical access. With such a design, no
influence of gender was found suggesting that gender

information has no early influence on gender incongruent
competitors.
The fact that phonological facilitation was not
modulated by the presence of gender contradicts the results
obtained by Grosjean et al. (1994). They found faster
responses for the gender marked context condition (une jolie
fille) compared to the unmarked condition (jolie fille), a result
that was interpreted as an indication that gender marking on
the article serves as a cue to the recognition of the noun.
However, no indication of the timing of this process is given
and the discrepancy with our results suggests that gender is
not used in the early stages of activation. The same applies for
results observed by Spinelli and Alario (2002) who found that
the representation of the masculine candidate “sel” was not
activated given the input /lasEl/. Their results suggest that at
some point, gender incongruent competitors are discarded
from the competition process, but again no indication of the
exact timing is given.
However, Dahan et al.’ results suggested an early
influence of gender on lexical access. They showed that the
feminine cohort-competitor « bouteille » was not activated
given the input /l«but•)/ while our results suggested that
gender information has no influence on the activation of
competitors. However, this discrepancy can be explain by the
fact that the phonological cohort in Dahan study was
composed of only two competing candidates (bouton and
bouteille) whereas it was open to all phonologically related
candidates in our study. Then one might hypothesize that
gender information could efficiently be used when it allows to
select the right candidate among a restricted choice.
When the cohort is open to all related candidates,
gender information might not be used early to constrain the
activation process because it is not efficient enough to rapidly
narrow down the search space. Phonological information is
surely the most efficient information to do so.
The gender information could then take place during the
selection phase following the initial activation phase
constrained by phonological information only.
Because our interpretation of the data is so far
mainly based on no-differences, further research is needed to
evidence a late use of gender information distinct from an
early use of phonological information, for example with a full
priming (instead of fragment priming) design.

2061

Acknowledgments
This research has been funded by an “Action Concertée
Incitative Jeune Chercheur” of the Ministry of French
Research “Architecture du lexique mental : Morphologie et
Genre”.

References
Bates, E., Devescovi, A., Hernandez, A. & Pizzamiglio, L.
(1996). Gender priming in Italian. Perception &
Psychophysics, 58, 992-1004.
Bölte, J. & Connine, C. M. (in press). Grammatical gender in
spoken word recognition in German. Perception &
Psychophysics.
Dahan, D., Swingley, D., Tanenhaus, M. & Magnuson, J. S.
(2000). Linguistic gender and spoken-word recognition in
French. Journal of Memory and Language, 42, 465-480.
Friederici, A.D. & Jacobsen, T. (1999). Processing
grammatical gender during language comprehension.
Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 28, 467-484.
Grosjean, F., Dommergues, J-Y., Cornu, E., Guillelmon D. &
Besson, C. (1994). The gender-marking effect in spoken
word recogntion. Perception & Psychophysics, 56, 590598.
Marslen-Wilson, W.D. Activation, competition, and
frequency in lexical access. In G.Altmann (Ed.), Cognitive
models of speech processing: Psycholinguistic and
computational perspectives. Cambridge, Ma: MIT Press,
1990.
McClelland, J. L. and Elman, J. L. (1986). The TRACE
Model of Speech Perception. Cognitive Psychology, 18, 186.
New B., Pallier C., Ferrand L., & Matos R. (2001) Lexique :
Une base de données lexicales du français contemporain
sur internet. L’Année Psychologique, 101, 447-462.
Norris, D. (1994) . Shortlist: A connectionist model of
continuous speech recognition. Cognition ,52, 189–234.
Spinelli, E. &. Alario, F.X. (2002). Gender Context Effects
on Homophone Words. Language and Cognitive Processes,
17, 457-469.
Spinelli, E. Segui, J., & Radeau, M. (2001). Phonological
Priming in Spoken Word recognition With Disyllabic
Targets. Language and Cognitive Processes, 16, 367-392.
Zwitserlood, P. (1989). The locus of the effects of sententialsemantic context in spoken-word processing. Cognition,
32, 25-64.

