UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effects of Prosody on Conceptual Combination

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5rq7s9cn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Connell, Louise
Lynott, Dermot

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effects of Prosody on Conceptual Combination
Dermot Lynott (dermot.lynott@northumbria.ac.uk)
Louise Connell (louise.connell@northumbria.ac.uk)
Division of Psychology, Northumbria University
Newcastle-upon-Tyne, NE1 8ST, UK

2000; Competition Among Relations in Nominals, CARIN,
Gagné, 2000; Integrated Production and Comprehension
theory, Lynott, 2004; Concept Specialisation, Murphy,
1990; Dual-Process Theory, Wisniewski & Love, 1998).
For example, the compound aeroplane bed could refer to
either “a bed that is shaped like an aeroplane” or “a bed that
can be used in an aeroplane”. Each of the above theories
proposes different mechanisms for the generation of
different interpretations and also makes different predictions
as to how easy people arrive at interpretations for different
compounds. For example, the CARIN theory focuses on
relational interpretations of compounds, where a thematic
relation links the modifier (the first concept) and head
(second concept) in an interpretation (e.g., “a river
LOCATED in a mountain”, “a magazine ABOUT
restaurants”). The ease of comprehension for compounds
has also been predicted using the frequency with which
relations have occurred with specific concepts in the past
(see Gagné, 2000 etc.). The CARIN theory also argues for
the primacy of the modifier during the comprehension
process, suggesting that the modifying concept is the most
important component of the compound when making
predictions about people’s responses. This contrasts with
the other theories mentioned above. Constraint Theory and
Dual-Process theory place equal emphasis on both the head
and modifier concepts, while Concept Specialisation puts
much greater emphasis on the role of the head concept in the
interpretation process.
Other views (e.g., Lynott’s
Integrated Production and Comprehension account, 2004)
maintain that we cannot assume in advance which concept
is most important for interpreting a compound. Rather it is
dependent on each individual concept and that concept’s
internal structure. These latter theories also propose greater
interaction between the head and modifier concepts when
constructing interpretations, compared to the modifierdriven theory of Gagné.
Despite the range of views put forward to account for the
comprehension of novel word combinations, none of the
aforementioned theories specifies a role for suprasegmental
information (e.g., prosodic information) in this process.
This is a curious omission, in light of the fact that general
linguistic theories of language have noted the meaningaltering effects of prosody for a long time (Bresnan, 1971;
Chomsky & Halle, 1964; Ladd, 1980, 1996). Furthermore,
the frequency with which complex noun phrases occur only
adds to mystery of this oversight.
Broadly speaking, prosody refers to changes in aspects of
speech such as emphasis, pitch, intonation, rhythm and

Abstract
Previous theories of conceptual combination comprehension
have failed to address the possible role of suprasegmental
factors such as prosody and emphasis patterns. In this study,
we investigated the effect of prosody on the comprehension of
novel noun-noun compounds.
First, we formulate some
predictions based on existing theories of conceptual
combination and linguistic accounts of emphasis assignment.
We then present a study that examines the effects different
emphasis patterns on people’s comprehension of novel
compounds.
We found that emphasis influences the
comprehension of novel word combinations, affecting the
ease with which people can think of meanings. Overall we
found that people exhibited a preference for initial word
emphasis (Modifier emphasis) over equal (Dual) or final word
(Head) emphasis. We also observed that some of these
effects were dependent on the types of concepts being
comprehended. We argue that existing theories need to
incorporate suprasegmental factors to provide a fully-fledged
account of conceptual combination.

Introduction
Wrap rage, tunnel advertising and latte factor1 are all
examples of novel noun-noun compounds, generally
referred to as concept combinations.
These novel
combinations reflect a fundamental aspect of language
generativity, accounting for between 30% and 60% of new
terms in English (Cannon, 1987; McFedries, 2004). It often
happens that such compounds survive to become permanent
fixtures of the language and used everyday by the wider
language community (e.g., “soccer mom”, “laptop
computer”). Others may only be used in one specific
context and not become part of the language as term in its
own right (e.g., daisy cup as “a cup with a daisy pattern on
it”).
With these phrases occurring everywhere from
newspaper headlines to advertisements and novels, it is
clear that they represent an important aspect of language and
language growth.
Over the past 25 years there has been a wealth of research
on the comprehension of concept combinations, with a
number of different theoretical positions being proposed
(e.g., Clark & Hecht, 1982; Costello & Keane, 2000; Gagné
& Shoben, 1997; Hampton, 1987; Levi; 1978; Wisniewski,
1996). Most recent research acknowledges that for any
given novel combination there can be many possible
interpretations (e.g., Constraint Theory, Costello & Keane,
1

Definitions for these and many more combinations can be seen at
www.thewordspy.com (McFedries, 2004).
1361

timing. It is well known, that changes in prosody can affect
meaning. For example, words such as contract, refuse and
object, all change meaning depending on which syllable
emphasis is placed. Similarly, larger linguistic units can
have their meaning changed by a simple prosody alteration.
For example, there is a difference between “a BLUE bottle”
and “a bluebottle” – the first referring to the colour of a
bottle, the second referring to a type of fly.
From these general examples of prosody, the potential of
prosody to alter meaning is clear. However, the primary
question we address in this study is this: if prosodic changes
can affect meaning change in non-novel words and phrases
then can it not also effect meaning change in novel phrases
(i.e., concept combinations)?
To address this issue, we must look first at the prevailing
theories of conceptual combination to ascertain what
predictions, if any, they might make regarding the
influences of prosody on meaning. Second, we turn to
linguistic views of prosody and emphasis placement in
compounding to see whether they offer us an alternative
view when we apply those models to novel word
combinations.

Linguistic versus Psychological models of
compounds
In investigating the possible effects of prosody on novel
noun-noun compounds, there are essentially three possible
prosodic patterns that need to be considered; namely
Modifier emphasis (emphasis on the first word; e.g.,
CHOCOLATE cake), Dual emphasis (equal emphasis on
both words; e.g., CHOCOLATE CAKE) and Head Emphasis
(emphasis on the second word; e.g., chocolate CAKE). The
question is whether using these different patterns affects the
interpretation process in quantifiably different ways. We
consider this in two ways. First, can different emphasis
patterns facilitate comprehension by allowing people to
respond more quickly to novel combinations? Second, can
different emphasis patterns enable people to think of
meanings for novel combinations more readily?
In
answering these questions, we must first turn to the existing
theories of conceptual combination, followed by linguistic
views of prosody in compounds to see whether they can
shed light on the possible effects.
The CARIN theory makes the strongest claims as to which
of the constituents of a novel compound is more important
to a comprehender. Gagné and colleagues (e.g., Gagné,
2000, Gagné & Shoben, 1997) have shown repeatedly that
the relational information carried by the modifier has a
greater impact on the time course of interpretation compared
to the relational information carried by the head. For
example, tax magazine is responded to more quickly than
mountain magazine, because the ABOUT relation is used
more frequently with tax than with mountain. Although,
prosodic effects are not discussed by Gagné, the theory can
be viewed as predicting that compounds interpreted with
Modifier emphasis should be easier to comprehend than
those using Head or Dual emphasis. If the modifier is the
1362

most important aspect of the combination to attend to, then
emphasising it should facilitate the retrieval of information
from the modifier (i.e., relations) and so aid the process of
forming an interpretation. By contrast, emphasising the
head concept could in some way inhibit the comprehension
process by directing attention away from the modifier
concept.
Such clear predictions however, are not readily extractable
from the other theories. The Constraint Theory (and also
Dual-Process theory) does suggest that both modifier and
head concepts are of equal importance; this has been
encoded in a computational model of Constraint Theory, C3
(Costello & Keane, 2000). From this we would surmise that
perhaps Dual emphasis might be the greater facilitator for
comprehension. The Concept Specialisation approach sees
the head concept as being the driving force behind the
construction of interpretations. This would suggest that
Head emphasis should facilitate faster comprehension than
the alternative patterns. Finally, we have the IPAC theory
(Lynott, 2004; see also Lynott, Tagalakis & Keane, 2004)
which argues that we cannot know a priori whether the head
or modifier concept is going to contribute more to an
interpretation; it depends on what the specific concepts are.
In other words, there are no default rules which might allow
us to predict the effects of the different prosodic patters.
That said, Lynott et al, do note that existing evidence points
to the possibility of the modifier being the chief
differentiator of comprehension times.
While the previous psychological views of conceptual
combination have been silent on the effects of prosody,
there has been an amount of linguistic analysis that has
focussed on finding accurate ways of predicting emphasis
patterns in complex noun phrases (i.e., where there is a
string of two or more than nouns together. See Cinque,
1993; Selkirk, 1984), but these approaches have had limited
success. However, the problems of finding adequate rules
for prosody and emphasis prediction have also been of
particular interest to researchers working in the area of
speech synthesis technologies (see Hirschberg, 1990, 1994;
Monaghan, 1990; Sproat, 1990, 1994). The simple reason
for this interest is that poor prosody rules can lead to
synthetic speech sounding unnatural and reduce
intelligibility (Monaghan, 1991). Such studies can tell us
about the general patterns people use when pronouncing
complex noun phrases, which might provide us with some
insights into people’s preferences. We focus on one study
by Sproat (1994) that analysed a large number (approx
8,000) of common noun-noun combinations (e.g., animal
abuse, fellow actor) with the sole purpose of examining the
emphasis patterns that people generally use.
Sproat found that the majority of compounds (71%) took
Modifier emphasis (e.g., NEWS agency), but that a large
proportion (29%) took Head emphasis (e.g., invasion
AFTERMATH). Such analysis would suggest that Modifier
emphasis should work to facilitate comprehension compared
to Head emphasis. Connell (2000) also found that Modifier
emphasis was most common (68.2%), lending support to the

idea that Modifier emphasis may facilitate comprehension
to a greater extent. It should be noted, however, that Sproat
does not allow for Dual emphasis to play a role in his
model. This contrasts with Connell’s analysis where Dual
emphasis accounted for more compounds (22.3%) than
those taking Head emphasis (9.4%). Despite the fact that
there is disagreement over the frequency of dual and Head
emphasis, and that both studies admit there will be some
degree of inter-speaker variability, the overriding trend is
for Modifier emphasis as the dominant pattern of emphasis.
From these analyses of common and lexicalised compounds
it would seem that Modifier emphasis should facilitate faster
and more accurate comprehension. The one caveat with
both of these approaches is that these accounts have looked
at how to derive patterns for non-novel or lexicalised
compounds. They do not address the issue of how different
patterns might affect meanings in new word combinations.
An issue of real concern to us is whether prosody may
have an effect on the specific interpretations that people
generate. Connell (2000) observed that the same compound
with a different meaning description attached was read with
different emphasis patterns. For example when given the
compound kidnapper killer with the meaning “a person who
kidnaps and kills”, participants read the compound with dual
emphasis (i.e., KIDNAPPER KILLER). However, when
given the compound with the meaning “a person who kills
kidnappers” they read with modifier emphasis (i.e.,
KIDNAPPER killer). In this example, the meaning being
conveyed is influencing the emphasis people ascribe to the
same compound. When a person highlights one term above
the other it is with the goal of conveying specific
information by highlighting specific dimensions of the
concepts concerned that might not be immediately obvious
with an alternative emphasis placement2.
Therefore, it
might be reasonable to assume that prosodic effects can
work in the opposite direction, with different emphases
leading to different meaning activations and therefore
different response patterns.
Thus, while some current psychological theories make
strong cases for the precedence of either the head or
modifier concept over the other, they all remain silent on the
possible effects of prosody on the interpretation process.
Similarly, linguistic analyses have pointed to Modifier
emphasis as being the most prevalent, but they have failed
to address prosodic effects on novel noun-noun compounds.
Taken together, the strongest case is provided for the
modifier concept as being the focus in terms of facilitating
interpretation.
In the following section we present an experiment that
examines which patterns of emphasis facilitate or inhibit the
comprehension process to the greatest extent. We achieve
this by presenting people with novel noun-noun compounds
as auditory stimuli with different patterns of emphasis. The
speed of participant responses and the ease with which they

can arrive at interpretations are then analysed. We first
describe the construction and evaluation of the materials
followed by the details and analysis of the experiment
proper.

Experiment
The aim of the experiment is to examine whether the use of
different patterns of emphasis (Modifier, Dual or Head
emphasis) affect people’s ability to comprehend novel
noun-noun combinations. Because of the nature of the
experiment we felt that using human readers in the
recording of our stimuli would lead to unplanned cues, with
readers making subjective choices as to how words should
be read. There is also the problem of consistency, with
readers possibly altering their pitch and levels of emphasis
from one phrase to the next. Either of these issues could
lead to confounds in our results. Instead we chose to use a
high quality speech synthesis system that would provide us
with objective and consistent sound stimuli. We provide the
full details for the materials construction and evaluation
below.
Based on our review of previous research, it appears that
the strongest predictions point towards emphasis on
Modifier concepts as being the greatest facilitation of the
comprehension process. However, as Lynott (2004) points
out, we may not be able to make such general statements,
with interpretation being reliant on the specific concepts
involved or at the very least, specific types of concept. As
our materials contain a variety of concept types (e.g.,
abstract, artefact, natural kinds), it may be informative to
examine the effects of prosody within these subgroups.
Due to the difficulty of the task we expected a high
percentage of “No” responses for the judgement task. due to
stimuli being presented aurally, and due to the compounds
having been constructed in a random fashion.

Materials Preparation and Evaluation

2

To select the words for our stimuli we selected 100 concepts
used previously in the conceptual combination literature
from three sources - Costello & Keane (2001); Gagné &
Shoben (2001); Wisniewski (1996). The concepts used
were a mix of artefacts, natural kinds, abstract concepts,
object and non-object concepts (see Medin, Lynch &
Solomon, 2000). We randomly generated approximately
200 two-word combinations from this set. From this set we
removed any compounds where the same word was used for
both head and modifier. We took the remaining compounds
and input them into a speech synthesis system in order to
create audio files for each phrase, with each different pattern
of emphasis. The synthesis system we used was rVoice by
Rhetorical Systems (rVoice, 2005). We used rVoice’s
female, UK-English voice (F015) for all stimuli. In order to
create consistent emphasis patterns we used a speech
markup language known as SSML (Speech Synthesis
Markup Language, similar to HTML). We constructed
three templates to represent the different possible emphasis
patterns; Modifier, Dual or Head emphasis. In each of these
cases, emphasis was achieved by increasing the pitch and

In discourse, the given/new distinction will lead people to
emphasis new terms over previously mentioned terms (Ladd, 1996;
Sproat, 1994), but this is not the case here as there is no preceding
discourse. Cf. Fodor (2002).
1363

phrase is meaningful”. Once they had pressed a key, there
was a brief pause, then “Ready” appeared on the screen for
2000ms after which the next stimuli was played. There was
a short break halfway through the experiment. Each
judgement response was recorded via the keyboard. Before
the start of the experiment proper the participant proceeded
through a series of six practice trials without feedback. The
practice trials contained a mix of lexicalised and novel
compounds not featured in the main experiment. During the
practise trials participants had the opportunity to have the
volume level altered on their headphones.
For the text version of the experiment, the procedure was
the same, except compounds were presented onscreen and
participants pressed either the Yes or No keys to respond to
each compound. The experiment took approximately 10
minutes to complete.
Results Analysis of Yes/No responses were first carried out
on all responses, followed by a response time analysis
carried out on “Yes” responses to the judgement task.
Outliers greater than 3 SD from a participant mean per item
were excluded from this analysis.
Sense Judgements - Yes Responses
50

40.1%

43.87%
34.48%

40
%

reducing the speed of utterance for that portion of the phrase
(see Sproat, 1994). The appendix provides the specific tags
we used. The files were generated at high-quality, 32 kHz
sampling frequency at 16-bit resolution, with the volume
being normalised for all files. This gave us approximately
600 audio files (200 for each emphasis pattern).
In order to ensure the sounds were of good quality we had
three independent raters listen to the sound files and a) write
down the words they heard, and b) indicate whether the
clarity of the phrase was Good, Ok or Bad. This process
ensured that all of the sound files selected would be of good
clarity (i.e., if the words could be correctly identified) with a
high level of naturalness. Additionally, at this point some
phrases that contained homophones became apparent and so
were excluded from the candidate materials (e.g., bowl
kangaroo and bole kangaroo). Only phrases that were
correctly transcribed by all three judges, and that were also
judged as being of Good clarity by all three were selected.
From the compounds selected, there was no difference
between the number of compounds selected from each of
the emphasis groups (χ2= 3.88, df = 2, p > 0.1). From this
pool 27 compounds novel compounds were selected as test
items for the experiment. We also created a set of filler
compounds, which had also been judged as acceptable using
the same process.
During the experiment auditory stimuli were presented
through standard closed-ear headphones (Unitone HD-1010)
using a 16 bit sound card (Sound Master) with 16 kHz
digital sampling. The presentation of the stimuli and the
measurement of response latencies were controlled by the
Presentation experimental software package, with a submillisecond level of precision. We provide a list of the test
items used in the appendix.

26.4%

30
20
10
0
Text

Method
Participants 54 native English speakers from Northumbria
University were paid a nominal fee for their participation.
24 of these participants were assigned to a text version of
the experiment, while the remainder completed the audio
version. 2 participants were removed from analysis for
answering incorrectly to more than 50% of the filler items.
The mean error rate was 6.1%.
Design The experiment had a single factor design with
Emphasis as a within participant factor. Participants only
ever heard one version of a test item i.e., a participant would
hear the Modifier emphasis of antelope coconut, but not the
Dual or Head emphasis versions.
Materials Twenty-seven novel noun-noun compounds were
used as test items, with 14 additional lexicalised compounds
used as fillers using a mix of emphasis types. The
lexicalised compounds all had a frequency greater than 20 in
the British National Corpus (BNC, 2005).
Procedure Participants were seated in front of a Toshiba
Tecra M1 Laptop and told that they would be presented with
two-word phrases through their headphones; some of these
phrases would be familiar to them, while others would not.
They were instructed to press the key labelled “yes” to
indicate that “Yes, I can think of a meaning” or to push the
key labelled “No” to indicate that “No, I don’t think the

Modifier

Dual

Head

Condition

Figure 1 Percentage of Yes responses for the sense
judgement task in each condition.
In analysing response times we observed no main effect of
Emphasis, either by participants or by items (p’s > 0.1),
with mean response times being almost equal (Modifier =
2068ms, Dual = 1975ms, Head = 2031ms). Similarly, we
found no differences between the conditions when analysing
the proportion of “yes” responses for the judgement task
(χ2= 2.851, df = 2, p > 0.1), although there were more “Yes”
responses to compounds in the Modifier condition overall
(30.5%) when compared to the Head (25%) and Dual
(24.6%) conditions.
However, as mentioned previously, it may that the type of
concept in a compound may also impact people’s responses.
Thus, we categorised concepts as being natural kind,
artefact, or as other non-object. In the following analyses
we retained only concrete concepts (i.e., natural kind,
artefact). This resulted in a loss of 11.1% of responses (3
compounds – indicated by “*” in the Appendix).
This did not affect the pattern of results for response times
in analyses by participants and by items (p’s >0.1).

1364

However, we did find that people made significantly more
“Yes” responses to compounds heard with Modifier
emphasis (43.9%) than those with Head (34.5%) or Dual
(26.4%) emphasis (χ2= 5.42, df = 2, p = 0.067; see Figure
1). A Page’s L trend test revealed a reliable trend in this
response pattern - L(23) = 301.5, p = 0.026. There were
more Yes responses made for compounds with Modifier
Emphasis than those with Dual Emphasis (p = 0.02), but not
those with Head Emphasis (p = 0.25).
The pattern of the sensibility judgements seems to suggest
that people’s responses for Modifier emphasis were closest
to those of the text condition – 43.9% and 40.1% Yes
responses respectively.
To further examine this we
submitted the numbers of Yes responses for each item to
several Pearson’s correlations to examine which condition
was closest to that of the text condition. We found that the
correlation (Ns = 24) between the responses in the Modifier
condition and those of the text condition was considerably
higher (0.755) than the correlations between the Dual
emphasis compounds and the Text condition (0.355) or the
Head emphasis condition and the text condition (0.438).
Thus, our results suggest that while prosody can influence
the comprehension of novel word combinations, this effect
cannot be applied to all concept types. It may be that
differences in the internal structure of abstract concepts
make them less susceptible to the effects of prosody. Of the
previous theories mentioned, only CARIN has used abstract
concepts as part of the materials used to validate
hypotheses. It is clear that other views (e.g., Constraint and
Dual-Process theories) need to consider the ramifications of
such a distinction in light of these results. As our initial
material set was generated using a random process, further
research must be done to make specific comparisons
between concept types in such a task. Nevertheless, we
have observed that Modifier emphasis facilitates
comprehension of novel combinations of concrete concepts.

General Discussion
We have presented the first study to explicitly consider the
effects of prosody on the comprehension of novel nounnoun combinations. We found that while different patterns
of emphasis do not influence the time-course of people’s
judgements, they do influence the likelihood of people
judging a compound to be sensible. We found that for
novel combinations containing concrete concepts (artefacts
and natural kinds), people were more likely to judge
concepts sensible if emphasis was place on the modifier
concept than if it was placed on equally on both concepts, or
just on the head concept. This finding seems to fit with the
predictions generated from the CARIN account of
conceptual combination and the linguistic analysis of
emphasis patterns carried out by Sproat (1994). It is
important to bear in mind that this preference for Modifier
emphasis was only evident for concrete concepts, which
follows Lynott’s (2004) claim that individual concepts and
concept types may not rely on the same general rules that
have been proposed by existing theories of conceptual
combination. So we might ask why is it better to have

modifier emphasis? It may be the case that by emphasising
the modifier concept, relevant conceptual features that
facilitate meaning creation are highlighted. However, as we
observed, this does not necessarily speed the meaning
creation process. While it may be the case that conceptual
features from either concept may need to be highlighted for
successful meaning creation, it may be beneficial to adopt a
default modifier emphasis. However, that discussion is
beyond the scope of this paper.
With this study we have made the first step in identifying
a role for prosody in the interpretation of novel word
combinations. Now we need to consider whether the
alteration of prosodic emphasis patterns affects the specific
interpretations that people arrive at. Lynott and Connell (in
prep) suggest that there is at least some evidence that this
does occur. They found that different emphasis placement
can lead to different distributions of interpretation types.
One thing to bear in mind with this study and previous
analyses of emphasis patterns in compounds (e.g., Sproat,
1994), is that they have been based on British-English
prosodic patterns. It has been suggested by several
researchers that there are striking differences between
British-English and American-English speakers when it
comes to emphasis placement in compounds. Bauer,
Dienhart, Hartvigson and Jakobsen (1980) found that there
are many compounds in American English where people
apply Modifier emphasis, but that have Head emphasis in
British English (e.g., ice cream). Berg (2000) has found
however, that where differences occur between British and
American English, the pattern is consistent; where a
compound has modifier emphasis in American English it
does not in British English (e.g., world weary). Thus, it
may be fruitful to compare both American-English and
British-English speakers’ comprehension using a similar
paradigm to the one we have outlined here.
We have demonstrated that prosody can influence the
comprehension process for novel word combinations. This
study brings together previous research from the areas of
linguistics, speech processing and conceptual combination.
Apart from highlighting the role of prosody in determining
meaning, this study has ramifications for the development of
applications in the domain of speech processing where high
levels of accuracy are expected from supporting linguistic
models. These findings find relevance in each of the above
fields, providing supporting evidence for previous linguistic
analyses and identifying some deficiencies in current
theories of conceptual combination. It seems clear that for
existing theories to provide a complete picture of conceptual
combination, they will have to adopt a multimodal
approach, rather than using investigations that fixate solely
on textual or imagistic representations.

Acknowledgments

1365

This research was carried out under a grant from the
Division of Psychology, Northumbria University. We
would like to thank Benedict Singleton and Darren Dunning
for their help in collecting data for this study. A particular
thanks to Rhetorical Systems for providing us with an
evaluation copy of their speech synthesis software package.

References
Bauer, L., Dienhart, J. M., Hartvigson, H. H., & Jakobsen,
L. K. (1980).
American English Pronunciation.
Copenhagen: Gyldendal.
Berg, T. (1999). Stress variation in British and American
English. World Englishes, 18 (2), 123-143.
Bresnan, J. (1971).
Sentence stress and syntactic
transformations. Language, 47, 257-281.
BNC, (2005). http://www.natcorp.ox.ac.uk
Cannon, G. (1987). Historical change and English wordformation. New York: Lang.
Chomsky, N., & Halle, M. (1968). The Sound Pattern of
English. Harper and Row, New York.
Cinque, G. (1993). A null theory of phrase and compound
stress. Linguistic Inquiry, 24, 239-297.
Clark, E. V. & Hecht, B. F. (1982). Learning to coin agent
and instrument nouns. Cognition, 12, 1-24.
Connell, L. (2000) Compound stress: A conceptual
combination perspective.
Unpublished manuscript.
Division of Informatics, University of Edinburgh.
Costello, F. J., & Keane, M. T. (2001). Testing two theories
of
conceptual
combination:
Alignment
versus
diagnosticity in the comprehension and production of
combined concepts. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory & Cognition, 27 (1), 255-271.
Costello, F. J. &, Keane, M. T. (2000). Efficient creativity:
Constraints on conceptual combination.
Cognitive
Science, 24, 2, 299-349.
Fodor, J. D. (2002). Prosodic disambiguation in silent
reading. In M. Hirotani (Ed.), Proceedings of NELS 32,
pp.113-132. Amherst, MA: GLSA.
Gagné, C. L. (2000). Relation-based combinations versus
property-based combinations: A test of the CARIN theory
and dual-process theory of conceptual combination.
Journal of Memory and Language, 42, 365-389.
Gagné, C. L. & Shoben, E. J. (1997). Influence of thematic
relations on the comprehension of modifier-noun
combinations. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 23, 71-87.
Hampton, J. A. (1987). Inheritance of attributes in natural
concept conjunctions. Memory & Cognition, 15(1), 5571.
Hirschberg, J. (1990). Assigning pitch accent in synthetic
speech: the given/new distinction and deaccentability.
Proceedings of the Seventh National Conference, Boston,
1990. American Association for Artificial Intelligence.
Hirschberg, J. (1994) . Pitch accent in context: predicting
intonational prominence from text. Artificial Intelligence,
63 (1-2), pp.305-340.
Ladd, D. R., (1980). The structure of intonational meaning.
Indiana University Press, Bloomington, Indiana.
Ladd, D. R., (1996) Intonational Phonology. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Levi, J. N. (1978). The Syntax and Semantics of Complex
Nominals. New York: Academic Press.
Lynott, D. (2004). Comprehension and Production in
Conceptual Combination.
Unpublished Doctoral
Dissertation, University College Dublin.

Lynott, D., & Connell, L. (in prep). The effects of prosody
in the interpretations of novel word combinations.
Manuscript in preparation.
Lynott, D., Tagalakis, G., & Keane, M.T. (2004).
Conceptual Combination with PUNC. Artificial
Intelligence Review, 21(3-4), 353-374.
Medin, D. L., Lynch, E. B., & Solomon, K. O. (2000). Are
there kinds of concepts? Annual Review of Psychology,
51, 121-147.
McFedries, Paul. (2004). The Word Spy. Broadway Books.
Monaghan, A. I. C. (1990). Rhythm and stress-shift in
speech synthesis. Computer Speech and Language, 4, 7178.
Monaghan, A. I. C. (1991). Evaluation of the naturalness of
Prosody generated by the CSTR TTS system. In the
Proceedings of Eurospeech, Genoa, pp. 883-886.
rVoice
(2005).
http://www.rhetorical.com/ttsen/technical/rvoice.html . Retrieved February 1st, 2005.
Selkirk, E. (1984). Phonology and syntax: the Relation
between sound and structure. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Sproat, R. (1990). Stress assignment in complex nominals
for English text-to-speech. In Proceedings of ESCA
Workshop on Speech Synthesis, 129-132.
Sproat, R. (1994). English noun-phrase accent prediction
for text-to-speech. Computer Speech and Language, 8,
79-94.
Wisniewski, E. J., (1996). Construal and similarity in
conceptual combination.
Journal of Memory and
Language, 35, 434-453.

1366

Appendix
Airplane
chemical
Cabbage
cup
Pig
restaurant
Scarf
coconut
Drill tile

Test items used in our study
Whiskey Antelope Army*
giraffe
coconut decision
Whale
Celebrity Skunk
knife
spear*
tent
Termite
Lobster Monkey
frog
college
chisel
Spider
Piano
Tent
moth
cow
shirt
Steam
Seal
Snail
saxophone
viper
shark
Onion
bus

Bed
helicopter
Chocolate
clay
Octopus
apartment
Rhinoceros
cactus
Slug tree
Elephant*
complaint

SSML Templates for three emphasis patterns
Modifier <prosody rate="85%"><prosody pitch =
Emphasis "125%"> modifier </prosody></prosody> head
Dual
<prosody rate="85%"><prosody pitch =
Emphasis "125%">modifier-head</prosody></prosody>
Head
Head <prosody rate="85%"><prosody pitch
Emphasis ="125%">modifier</prosody> </prosody>

