UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effects of Experience on Relational Inferences in Children: The Case of Folk Biology

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1pb4g5f3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Coley, John D.
Seaton, Claire E.
Vitkin, Anna Z.
et al.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effects of Experience on Relational Inferences in Children:
The Case of Folk Biology
John D. Coley (jcoley@neu.edu)
Anna Z. Vitkin (vitkin.a@neu.edu)
Claire E. Seaton (seaton.c@neu.edu)
Jennelle E. Yopchick (yopchick.j@neu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northeastern University
360 Huntington Ave, Boston MA 02115 USA
Abstract

(e.g., birds) to share properties even in spite of dissimilar
outward appearances (Gelman & Coley, 1990). Moreover,
parental speech to preschoolers is rich in references to
taxonomic relations, and parents stress these relations more
for living things than for human-made artifacts (Gelman,
Coley, Rosengren, Hartman & Pappas, 1998).
But taxonomic relations are not the only candidate
relations for guiding inductive inferences. Recent studies
suggest that thematic relations–which emphasize external or
complementary interactions between entities that co-occur
in space and time–are also important for guiding induction.
Information known to be true of Class A can be projected to
Class B on the basis of causal or temporal interactions
between the classes, regardless of taxonomic similarity. For
instance, Ross and Murphy (1999) demonstrate that both
script categories (e.g., breakfast foods) and taxonomic
categories (e.g., meats) can support inductive inferences
among food categories, depending on the property being
inferred. Likewise, Lin and Murphy (2001) provide
convincing evidence for the importance of thematic
relations in adults’ categorization and inductive reasoning.
Finally, Medin, Coley, Storms and Hayes (2003) provide
evidence that relevant causal relations can outweigh
taxonomic relations in guiding inferences.
Such thematic reasoning seems especially pervasive
among individuals with relatively high levels of knowledge
and experience, at least in the domain of folk biology. For
example, López, Atran, Coley, Medin and Smith (1997)
found that the Itza’ Maya of Guatemala utilize causal and
ecological relations to guide inductive inferences about local
mammals, whereas North American university students used
taxonomic relations. Proffitt, Coley and Medin (2000)
report a pattern of results for Chicago-area tree experts
reasoning about trees that is virtually identical to that
observed for Itza’ reasoning about mammals, suggesting
that expertise, rather than culture, may be primarily
responsible for the salience of thematic relations in
reasoning. Shafto and Coley (2003) found that experts
reasoned more thematically than novices, and also found
that experts showed more inductive selectivity than novices.
Specifically, when reasoning about novel diseases,
commercial fishermen based projections among marine
species on predator-prey relations among species; however,
when reasoning about “property x,” experts relied on
taxonomic relations. In contrast, undergraduate novices

Recent research suggests that adults utilize thematic relations
as well as taxonomic relations for guiding inductive
inferences, and that thematic relations grow in salience with
experience in a given domain. The present study examines
the impact of experience on the salience of thematic versus
taxonomic inferences. 151 kindergarten through sixth-grade
children from urban, suburban, and rural communities in New
England were given a forced choice triad induction task
requiring them to project a novel internal substance or disease
from a base species to a taxonomically or ecologically related
target. Results indicate clear evidence of inductive selectivity;
children projected insides taxonomically and disease
ecologically, both at above-chance levels. Moreover,
ecological projections of disease were more likely for older
children and for children from more rural communities.
Overall, results suggest that for children, like adults,
experience renders non-taxonomic relations salient for
selectively guiding inductive inferences.

Introduction
Acts of inductive reasoning—“inferential processes that
expand knowledge in the face of uncertainty” (Holland,
Holyoak, Nisbett & Thagard, 1986, p. 1)—are ubiquitous in
everyday cognitive functioning and therefore a central issue
in cognitive science. We are constantly using what we know
to make inferences about what we don’t know. On what
basis do we extend knowledge from known to unknown?
Given the multitude of relations that exist among classes of
entities, which relations do we rely on to guide inductive
inferences? Most existing models of induction stress the
importance of taxonomic relations; information known to be
true of Class A is projected to Class B on the basis of
overall similarity, specific shared features, common
membership in the same superordinate class, or the
presumption of a shared underlying essence (e.g., Osherson,
Smith, Wilkie, López & Shafir, 1990; see Sloman, 1993 for
a model which explicitly avoids invoking category
membership but is based on featural similarity).
Taxonomic relations—in addition to being an important
guide for adult inferences—are also extremely important for
organizing knowledge and guiding inferences from early in
development. For instance, two-year-old children expect
objects that are similar in appearance (e.g., a bird and a
pterosaur) to share other less obvious properties; however,
when given information about category membership, twoyear-olds expect members of plant and animal categories
471

based their inferences exclusively on taxonomic similarity
regardless of the property being projected.
Although classic developmental research has emphasized
the importance of thematic relations in early categorization
(e.g., Smiley & Brown, 1979), few studies have explicitly
examined children’s use of thematic relations to guide
inductive inferences. In one such study, Nguyen and
Murphy (2003) found that by age 4, children could crossclassify food items (e.g., classify grapes as both a member
of the taxonomic category fruit and the thematic script
category snack). Moreover, by age 7, children could
selectively use taxonomic and script relations to guide
inductive inferences; children inferred that members of the
same taxonomic category were likely to share a biochemical
property, but that members of the same script category were
likely to share a situational property.
In sum, both children and adults use taxonomic relations
to guide inductive inferences. For adults, this may be
especially true when they have little domain-specific
knowledge. Adults also utilize thematic relations to guide
inductive inferences; indeed, with extensive knowledge and
experience in a domain, thematic relations not only augment
but may eclipse taxonomic relations. There is some
evidence that children are sensitive to thematic relations as
potentially useful guides for inductive inference, but there
has been little systematic exploration of the relation between
children’s experience in a domain and the salience of
thematic versus taxonomic inferences.
In one study that did directly address this question, Coley
and Blaszczyk (2003) examined the impact of informal
experience with nature on the relative salience of taxonomic
and ecological relations in folk biological categorization.
Six- to ten-year-old children living in urban and rural
communities in New England were given a sorting task that
examined their use of taxonomic and ecological relations to
group pictures of plants and animals. Participants were
presented with detailed realistic color depictions of 15 local
species, which fell into orthogonal taxonomic categories
(mammal, bird, insect, plant, tree) and ecological categories
(forest species, meadow species, wetland species), and
asked to put together the ones that went together best, and to
explain why they grouped the pictures as they did. Of
primary interest was whether rural children would find
ecological relations more salient than urban children.
Results suggested that both groups sorted the species in very
similar ways, primarily grouping taxonomically related
species together. However, rural and urban children differed
systematically in how they explained their groupings.
Although both groups provided taxonomic explanations
with equal frequency, rural children—like adult experts—
were much more likely to provide ecological explanations
for their groupings than urban children. These results
suggest that urban and rural children differed with respect to
the salience of thematic (in this case, ecological) relations,
but that taxonomic relations were equally salient to both
groups. This in turn suggests that general taxonomic
relations may provide a foundation for organizing biological

knowledge regardless of experience, and that children with
richer experience utilize alternative (e.g., ecological)
relations to augment taxonomic relations for organizing folk
biological knowledge.
Together, the findings reviewed above suggest that direct
experience with plants and animals may render thematic
(ecological) properties salient and facilitate the flexible use
of taxonomic and thematic relations in folk biological
thought. The present study builds on these findings by
taking an explicitly developmental approach; we examine
factors that may influence the relative salience of taxonomic
versus thematic relations in guiding children’s inductive
inferences. Because we examine these issues in the domain
of folk biology, we utilize ecological relations (shared
habitat or predator-prey relations) as thematic relations. We
hypothesize that if experience has the effect of increasing
the salience of ecological relations, then indices of
experience should predict higher levels of ecological versus
taxonomic reasoning. Specifically, we expect children from
less densely populated (i.e., more rural) areas, with more
opportunities for direct informal experience with plants and
animals in relatively intact ecosystems, to show higher
levels of ecological reasoning than children from more
urban, developed areas. We also expect children reasoning
about local species, with which they are more likely to have
direct experience, to show higher levels of ecological
reasoning than children reasoning about exotic species they
are unlikely to have encountered first-hand. Finally, we
expect older children to show higher levels of ecological
reasoning than younger children.
We are also interested in the issue of inductive selectivity.
Specifically, are children sensitive to the idea that different
relations might plausibly guide inferences about different
kinds of properties? If so, then properties that are plausibly
projected on the basis of spatio-temporal contiguity (e.g.,
disease) should be more likely to promote ecological
reasoning than properties plausibly projected on the bases of
shared physiological structure (e.g., internal substance).
Finally, to extend the findings of Coley and Blaszczyk
(2003) reported above, we expect experience-related
differences in patterns of induction to be clearest for
plausibly ecological inferences (i.e., those about disease).

Method
Participants
A total of 151 children in kindergarten through 6th grade
were recruited through elementary schools and after-school
programs in 8 communities in Massachusetts. Communities
were classified as Rural (population density 22 - 263 people
per square mile), Suburban (6851 - 8410 people/sq. mile) or
urban (13488 people/sq. mile). Details on the grade
distribution for each locale are given in Table 1.

Materials and Design
Stimuli consisted of 32 8.5 x 11 in. laminated cards. Each
card contained three realistic color drawings of plant and/or
472

animal species: a base at the top, and two targets below. One
target picture was taxonomically related to the base (from
the same superordinate category), and the other was
ecologically related by virtue of either sharing the same
habitat or preying on the base (see Table 2 for examples).
Sixteen cards depicted species native to Massachusetts, and
16 depicted exotic species. Children were randomly
assigned to the Local or Exotic condition.

Children were shown the 16 triads in random order. For
each triad, children were told (in the insides condition)
“There’s this stuff called X. Lots of things have X inside. In
fact, A’s have X inside. Now, do you think B’s have X
inside like A’s, or do you think C’s have X inside, like
A’s?” where A was the base, B and C were the targets, and
X the nonsense name for that triad. Appropriate wording
changes were made for the disease condition.

Table 1: Number of Children from each Grade in each
Community Type.

Results

Grade
Kind.
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
Total

Urban
9
9
22
10
8
9
2
69

Suburban
4
5
17
5
4
1
0
36

Rural
4
10
9
8
6
6
3
46

On each item, children could make either a taxonomic
choice or an ecological choice. Performance was scored by
summing the number of ecological choices made by each
child, yielding a score that could range from 0 (unanimous
taxonomic choices) to 16 (unanimous ecological choices).
For ease of analysis, children were classified as urban,
suburban, or rural as described above, and were also
grouped according to grade as described below. In order to
examine interactions among the various experimental
factors, a 2 Property (Disease, Insides) x 2 Item Type
(Local, Exotic) x 3 Locale (Urban, Suburban, Rural) x 3
Grade (Kindergarten and 1st, 2nd and 3rd, 4th through 6th)
factorial ANOVA was run on total number of ecological
inferences. Results showed clear evidence of inductive
selectivity: children were more likely to draw ecological
inferences when reasoning about disease (M=10.03) than
when reasoning about insides (M=5.93), F(1,115)= 56.88,
MSE= 11.30, p<.0001. Moreover, in the disease condition,
children drew ecological inferences at rates that were higher
than chance (t(79)= 4.90, p<.0001), and likewise, in the
insides condition, children drew taxonomic inferences at
rates that were higher than chance (t(70)= 4.42, p<.0001).
Results also showed a number of effects of experience on
reasoning. As predicted, ecological reasoning differed as a
function of the locale in which children lived (F(2,115)= 3.91,
MSE= 11.30, p=.023); overall, rural children (M=9.02) were
more likely to draw ecological inferences than urban
children (M=7.42), whereas suburban children (M=8.22)
fell between the two groups and differed from neither.
Likewise, as predicted, children who were questioned about
local species drew more ecological inferences (M=8.93)
than children who were questioned about exotic species
(M=7.17), F(1,115)= 6.77, MS E= 11.30, p=.010.
There was also evidence that experience influenced
ecological inferences (i.e., those about disease) rather than
taxonomic inferences (those about insides). First, rural and
suburban children made more ecological inferences than
urban children when reasoning about disease, but the groups
did not differ when reasoning about insides, as indicated by
a Locale x Property interaction (F(2,115)= 3.36, MS E= 11.30,
p=.038; see fig. 1). Second, older children (those in grades 4
– 6) made more ecological inferences than younger children
(in Kindergarten – 1st grade or 2nd – 3rd grade) when
reasoning about disease, but the groups did not differ when
reasoning about insides, as indicated by a Grade Level x
Property interaction (F(2,115)= 4.52, MSE= 11.30, p=.013; see
fig. 2).

Total
17
24
48
23
18
16
5
151

Table 2. Sample Stimulus Categories
Picture Type

Base

Taxonomic
Target

Ecological
Target

Predator/Prey

Field
Mouse

Moose

Snake

Habitat

Pelican

Blue Jay

Humpback
Whale

Lemming

Wombat

Snowy Owl

Jaguar

Kangaroo

Macaw

Local

Exotic
Predator/Prey
Habitat

In general, children were taught a new property about the
base species, and asked which of the two targets was most
likely to share that property. We manipulated the property
about which children made inferences. Children either
reasoned about an internal, physio-anatomical property
(“Has stuff inside called andro”) or a disease (e.g., “Has a
sickness called andro”). Item type and Property were
manipulated between subjects; triads were presented in
random order, and different nonsense names were used for
the property in each triad.

Procedure
Children who received parental permission to participate
were interviewed individually at their school or after school
program. Children were first given a warm-up task in which
they were asked about what kinds of things they liked to do
best. The triad induction task was presented along with two
other conceptual tasks (sorting and open-ended inductive
inference) in counterbalanced order across subjects.
Children were never queried about the same species or
relations in different tasks.
473

Mean Ecological Inferences

Table 3: Standardized Regression Coefficients and P-values
for Predicting Ecological Inferences

16

Urban
Suburban
Rural

12

Predictor
Age
Property
(Disease, Insides)
Item Type
(Local, Exotic)
Population Density
(log people/sq. mile)

8
4
0

Disease

Insides

Mean Ecological Inferences

Figure 1: Differences in Ecological Inferences about
Disease and Insides as a function of Locale

16

.0938
.0001

.213

.0021

-.206

.0034

Taken together, these results constitute clear evidence for
pervasive effects of experience on children’s developing
folk biological reasoning. Children from less densely
populated communities, with more opportunities for direct
informal experience with plants and animals in relatively
intact ecosystems, showed reliably higher levels of
ecological reasoning than children from more urban areas.
Children were also more likely to reason ecologically about
familiar, local species than unfamiliar, exotic species. We
also observed clear evidence for inductive selectivity;
children reasoned ecologically about disease, and
taxonomically about an internal, physiological property.
Finally, we observed a remarkable interaction of inductive
specificity and effects of experience, such that locale and
age led to significantly different patterns of ecological
reasoning about disease, but no experience-related factor
influenced taxonomic reasoning about insides. These results
persisted whether measures of experience were continuous
or categorical.
The fact that experience showed specific effects on
ecological reasoning about disease but did not influence
taxonomic reasoning about insides is important for a
number of reasons. First, it argues against some global
correlate of population density (e.g., quality of education,
SES) as being responsible for the differences we observed in
inductive reasoning. Rather than suggesting that urban,
suburban, and rural children differ across the board in how
they reason about nature, it suggests that although
differences do exist, they are primarily involved the
utilization of thematic relations to guide induction.
Second, this interaction suggests differences in the
developmental trajectories of different kinds of relational
knowledge and reasoning. Taxonomic relations appear to be
universally salient and accessible, and to exert their
influence on inductive reasoning relatively early and in a
developmentally stable manner. In this study, we find no
evidence of age- or experience-related differences in
children’s tendencies to utilize taxonomic relations to guide
inferences about living things’ insides. In contrast to the
stability of taxonomic reasoning, thematic reasoning—in
this case, guided by ecological relations—was clearly
influenced by experience in terms of both age and the
general nature of the child’s surroundings. This pattern is

8
4
0

Disease

P-value

Discussion

K-1st
2nd-3rd
4th-6th

12

Standardized
Regression
Coefficient
.116
.490

Insides

Figure 2: Differences in Ecological Inferences about
Disease and Insides as a function of Grade
In order to insure that decisions about combining grades
or communities did not unduly influence the results, we also
conducted a multiple regression analysis construing these
variables continuously rather than categorically. We used
community population density (log transformed), age,
property (disease or insides), and item type (local or exotic)
as predictors of number of ecological inferences. Overall,
the regression was significant (F(4,146)= 17.72, MSE= 12.91,
p<.0001.). The adjusted R2 value was .308. Standardized
regression coefficients and their associated p-values are
given in Table 3. The results of this analysis reinforce the
ANOVA. Frequency of ecological inferences was strongly
related to the property being projected and item type. Age
did not reliably predict ecological reasoning in either
analysis. In contrast, population density was negatively
related to ecological reasoning; the less densely populated a
child’s community was, the more likely the child was to
draw ecological inferences, whether population density was
represented as a continuous or as a categorical variable.

474

consistent with the view that taxonomic relations may
represent a more basic, all-purpose system for organizing
biological knowledge that is relatively impervious to
differences in experience or input. Children might initially
organize biological knowledge primarily on the basis of
taxonomic relations regardless of experience, and only later,
given sufficiently rich environmental input, augment this
foundational taxonomic structure with specific ecological
relations derived from experience.
Finally, although this developmental account is currently
speculative, it shows remarkable convergence with findings
from the adult literature on expert-novice differences in folk
biological reasoning, in at least two important ways. First,
adult experts differ from novices in that they are more likely
to base inferences on ecological relations, as we have shown
rural children differ from urban children. Second,
differences between adult experts and novices are most
evident on reasoning tasks where causal and spatio-temporal
relations are potentially most relevant (e.g., reasoning about
diseases of marine creatures, rather than unspecified
properties). It is on precisely such tasks (reasoning about
disease rather than insides) that we find effects of age and
locale on children’s relational inferences. This convergence
suggests a mechanism for optimizing relational inferences
that may be in place early in development, and may function
similarly across the lifespan.

year-old children. Developmental Psychology, 26, 796804.
Gelman, S. A., Coley, J. D., Rosengren, K. R., Hartman, E.
E., & Pappas, A. S. (1998). Beyond labeling: The role of
parental input in the acquisition of richly-structured
categories. Monographs of the Society for Research in
Child Development, 63, Serial No. 253.
Holland, J.H., Holyoak, K.J., Nisbett, R.E., & Thagard P.R.
(1986). Induction: Processes of inference, learning and
discovery. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lin, E.L., & Murphy, G.L. (2001).Thematic relations in
adults' concepts. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 130, 3-28.
López, A., Atran, S., Coley, J. D., Medin, D. & Smith, E.E.
(1997). The tree of life: Universal and cultural features
of folkbiological taxonomies and inductions. Cognitive
Psychology, 32, 251-295.
Medin, D., Coley, J.D., Storms, G. & Hayes, B. (2003). A
relevance theory of induction. Psychonomic Bulletin and
Review, 10, 517-532.
Nguyen, S.P. & Murphy, G.L. (2003). An apple is more
than just a fruit: Cross-classification in children’s
concepts. Child Development, 6, 1783-1806.
Osherson, D.N., Smith, E.E., Wilkie, O., Lopez, A. &
Shafir,
E.
(1990).
Category-based
induction.
Psychological Review, 97, 185-200.
Proffitt, J.B.., Coley, J.D. & Medin, D.L (2000). Expertise
and category-based induction. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory & Cognition, 26, 811828.
Ross, B.H. & Murphy, G.L. (1999). Food for thought:
Cross-classification and category organization in a
complex real-world domain. Cognitive Psychology, 38,
495-553.
Shafto, P. & Coley, J.D.
(2003). Development of
categorization and reasoning in the natural world:
Novices to experts, naïve similarity to ecological
knowledge. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory & Cognition, 29, 641-649.
Sloman, S.A. (1993). Feature-based induction. Cognitive
Psychology, 25, 231-280.
Smiley, S.S. & Brown, A.L. (1979). Conceptual preference
for thematic or taxonomic relations: A nonmonotonic age
trend from preschool to old age. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 28, 249-257.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported by NSF Grant # BCS-0236338 to
J.D. Coley. We gratefully acknowledge the support of the
teachers, staff, parents, and students of the numerous
schools and after school programs that have participated in
this project. We also thank Robin Kane and numerous
members of the Categorization and Reasoning Laboratory
for their hard work and dedication, without which this
research would not be possible.

References
Coley, J.D. & Blaszczyk, K. (2003). Salience of Taxonomic
versus Ecological Relations in Urban and Rural
Children's Folk Biology. Paper presented at the Biennial
Meetings of the Society for Research in Child
Development, Tampa, FL.
Gelman, S. A., & Coley, J.D. (1990). The importance of
knowing a dodo is a bird: Categories and inferences in 2-

475

