UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Emotional Faces Modulate Spatial Neglect: Evidence from Line Bisection

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/64q5g5zp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Corazzini, Luca Latini
Geminiani, Giuliano
Gionco, Maurizio
et al.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Emotional Faces Modulate Spatial Neglect: Evidence from Line Bisection
Marco Tamietto (tamietto@psych.unito.it)
Luca Latini Corazzini (latini@psych.unito.it)
Lorenzo Pia (l_pia@psych.unito.it)
Giuliano Geminiani (geminian@psych.unito.it)
Department of Psychology and Center for Cognitive Science, Via Po 14, 10123
Torino, Italy

Marina Zettin (marinazettin@virgilio.it)
Puzzle Center for Neurocognitive Rehabilitation, Via Cimabue 2
Torino, Italy

Maurizio Gionco (neurologia@mauriziano.it)
Department of Neurology and Rehabilitation, Mauriziano Hospital Umberto I, Largo Turati 62, 10128
Torino, Italy

Abstract
One patient with left spatial neglect (FM) and four right-brain
damaged controls without neglect were tested on a line
bisection task with pictures of neutral and emotional faces of
the same size as unilateral cues. Our aim was to investigate
whether bisection biases induced by cuing can be better
explained as the result of a direct perceptual lengthening of
the cued part of the line or, alternatively, because cues draw
spatial attention thereby increasing the salience of that side.
We thus manipulated the attentional salience of the cues
(higher for emotional faces and lower for neutral faces) while
keeping physical dimensions and perceptual characteristics of
the stimuli constant. Our findings showed that left emotional
faces were more effective than left neutral faces in reducing
bisection errors in patient FM. These data indicate that in the
left neglected hemispace cues bias attention rather than
simply altering the perceptual point of balance of the line in
the horizontal plane.
Keywords: emotion; neglect;
attention; face processing.

line

bisection;

cueing;

Introduction
Patients with unilateral spatial neglect tend to ignore (i.e.,
do not react to and do not search for) stimuli in the
contralesional hemispace. A typical clinical test for the
diagnosis of neglect is the line bisection task where subjects
are asked to mark the midpoint of a horizontal line
(Schenkenberg, Bradford, & Ajax, 1980). Generally, the
rightward bisection bias shown by neglect patients tends to
decrease with unilateral left cues and is enhanced with
unilateral right cues (Riddoch & Humphreys, 1983). This
effect is usually obtained by placing either numbers or
letters at the left or right end of the line and asking subjects
to pay attention to them (reading them out) prior to
bisection. Despite its empirical consistency, the explanation
for the cueing effect is still the subject of debate. Indeed,
several authors explained cueing effects in terms of
attentional mechanisms, whereas other authors have

challenged this view proposing a perceptual account. The
former hypothesis posits that a cue draws attention to that
side, thereby rendering the cued side more salient. As a
result of this increased salience, the cued side is
overestimated in length and the mark is placed toward that
side (Milner, Brechmann & Pagliarini, 1992; Olk & Harvey,
2002). Conversely, the latter interpretation points out that
since cues are placed beyond the true endpoint of the line,
they extend the line’s horizontal extent by several
millimetres. This misperception of line’s length, induced by
the alteration in the perceptual point of balance of the
stimulus in the horizontal plane, explains the cueing effect
without the need of postulating any attentional shift
(Fischer, 1994; Mattingley et al., 1993).
Disentangling attentional from perceptual interpretations
has been particularly problematic with unilateral cueing as it
is impossible to separate the relative contributions of an
attentional manipulation from those caused by the alteration
of the perceptual point of balance when the same cue is
used. One way to empirically contrast attentional and
perceptual accounts in a line bisection task with unilateral
cues is to vary the attentional salience of the cues while
keeping their physical extent constant.
Previous studies showed that emotional faces have a
special advantage over neutral faces in summoning spatial
attention (Hansen & Hansen, 1988; Öhman, Lundqvist &
Esteves, 2001; Vuilleumier et al., 2001; Vuilleumier &
Schwartz, 2001). This is probably due to the high biological
and social and value of emotional stimuli. In the present
study we used neutral and emotional faces of the same size
as unilateral left or right cues to address the issue of the
underlying mechanisms, attentional or perceptual,
responsible for the cueing effect in neglect. By considering
the foregoing alternative explanations of the cueing effect,
we can formulate the following hypotheses: if the cueing
effect works through biasing attention we should observe a
modulation of the line bisection error as a function of the
salience conveyed by the cues. That is; emotional cues

2151

should be more effective than neutral face cues and this
should be true for contralesional cues in particular. If,
conversely, the cueing effect is caused by a perceptual
alteration of the point of balance we should expect a
comparable influence of all cues, whatever their specific
content, as they all have the same dimensions.

Method

paper. Black-and-white photographs of 8 different actors
taken from Ekman’s series (4 males; 60 X 40 mm) with
either a neutral, happy, or angry expression served as cues
and could be present at the right or left end of the line, or
absent. When present, the cues were of three different types:
a picture of a neutral, happy or angry face. The neutral faces
provided an appropriate and extremely conservative control
condition because, like emotional faces, they belong to the
same stimulus category, have the same personal identity (as
the same actors presented with a neutral expression were
also shown with an emotional expression), and share the
same dimensions, elementary components and global
configuration. Overall there were seven possible stimulus
conditions: three different cue types on the left, three on the
right, and the no cue condition where only the lines were
present.
The midpoint of each line was aligned with the patient’s
mid-sagittal plane. The task was to mark the midpoint of the
line using the right hand. Before doing so, patients were
asked to pay attention to either sides of the line and to put a
mark under the cues, if any, whatever was depicted. Thus,
emotional content in cues was completely irrelevant to the
task and could be ignored. Each patient bisected 20 lines per
condition for a total of 140 lines randomly presented and
divided into 4 subsequent blocks of 35 lines each.
Errors in line bisection for each patient and condition
were measured to the nearest millimeter. Errors to the right
of the objective midpoint were given a positive and those to
the left a negative value.

Patients
We studied patient GF, a 73-year-old woman with chronic
unilateral right brain damage from neoplasia (Figure 1). FM
showed severe left neglect in all the tasks in a battery for the
diagnosis of neglect. Four patients with unilateral right brain
damage and no sign of neglect in any of the tasks served as
control group (Table 1). All patients provided written
informed consent approved by the Ethical Committee of the
University of Turin, Italy.

Figure 1: Lesion reconstruction in patient FM using
MRIcro software (Rorden & Brett, 2000).
Table 1: Demographic, clinical, and neuropsychological
1
data of the patients
Patient FM
Sex
F
Age
73
Lesion T-O-P
Etiology
Onset (d)
VFD
SRT
LBT
Diller
Albert

N
10
2-3
1/5
45.6
0-23
0-11

FG
F
77
Fr-T
I
22
0-0
5/5
0.7
48-50
18-18

Results
Figure 2 reports the performances of patient FM (a) and of
the control group (b) as a function of the seven cue
conditions.

MD
MG
BN
M
M
M
71
60
62
BG-EC- Fr-T-P IC-InsIns
BG
I
I
I
13
213
21
0-0
0-0
0-0
5/5
5/5
5/5
3.15
3.1
2.5
52-52 47-49 52-51
18-18 18-18 18-1

Stimuli and procedure
Black lines (180 X 1 mm) were used as stimuli. Each line
was placed horizontally and centrally on a separate sheet of
1

Abbreviations: I = Ischemia, N = Neoplasia; LBT = line bisection
test (10 lines); Lesion: BG= basal ganglia; EC = external capsule;
Fr = frontal; IC= internal capsule; Ins= insula; O = occipital; P =
parietal; T = temporal; SRT = sentence reading test; VFD = visual
field defects within the contralesional hemispace (upper-lower
quadrants), 0=normal vision, 3=severe defect; Diller = cancelled
targets in the left – right hemispace; Albert = cancelled lines in the
left – right hemispace.

2152

Figure 2: Mean error (mm) in the line bisection task for
patient FM (a) and the Control Group (b) by cue position
and cue type. Rightward errors are coded as positive,
leftward as negative.

rightward bias. Importantly, no specific effect due to the
emotional value of the cues was found.

Cueing Effect
Patient FM In order to evaluate whether the cueing
manipulation was effective in FM, all three left cue
conditions were collapsed into a single left cue condition,
and vice-versa for the right cue conditions. An ANOVA was
then performed on error scores with the within-subjects
factor of Cue Position (no cue (NC), left cue (LC), and right
cue (RC)).
There was a significant main effect of Cue Position
(F(2,38)=146.54, p<.001). Post-hoc tests (Newman-Keuls
for all comparisons henceforth) revealed that the rightward
bias shown with no cue decreased in the LC condition and
increased in the RC condition (p<.0002 and p<.007,
respectively).
Control Group We performed an ANOVA on mean error
scores for the control group with the same factors and levels
considered for FM. The main effect of Cue Position was
statistically significant (F(2,6)=24.36, p<.001). Post hoc
tests revealed that bisections were placed significantly to the
left in the left cue condition compared with no cue and right
cue conditions (p<.014 and p<.002, respectively). Similarly,
right cues resulted in increased rightward errors as
compared to the no cue and left cue conditions (p<.013).
These results show that the cueing manipulation was
effective in modulating bisection performance in patient FM
as well as in the control group. Obviously, the absolute
rightward error and effect size was much greater in the
neglect patient than in the control group.

Emotional effect
Patient FM A 2 X 3 ANOVA was computed with the
within-subjects factors of Cue Position (left vs. right) and
Cue Type (neutral (NF), happy (HF), and angry face (AF)).
The emotional effect was thus tackled by comparing the
performance in the NF condition with that in the emotional
face conditions (i.e., HF and AF).
The effect of Cue Position was significant
(F(1,19)=412.7, p<.001), further indicating an efficient
cueing manipulation. The effect of Cue Type was not
significant but the Cue Position X Cue Type interaction
clearly was (F(2,38)=6.77, p<.003). Post-hoc tests on the
interaction showed that bisections with left HF and AF cues
were placed significantly further to the left by reference to
the left NF condition (p<.005 for both comparisons). The
left HF and AF conditions did not differ each other (p>.5).
In contrast, there was no significant difference among right
cues ( p>.25 for all comparisons).
Control Group The ANOVA on mean errors showed only
a significant effect of Cue Position (F(1,3)=57.89, p<.004)
indicating a comparable influence of all left cues in shifting
bisections leftward and of all right cues in increasing

Discussion
Prior studies testing neglect patients with the line bisection
task documented an influence of left cues in reducing the
rightward bias, and an enhancement of the rightward
bisection error with unilateral right cues (Nichelli, Rinaldi
& Cubelli, 1989; Riddoch & Humphreys, 1983). The
mechanisms responsible for this cueing effect are, however,
still unclear. The two major theoretical accounts have
proposed both an attentional and a perceptual explanation.
Attentional explanations assume that cues call for attention,
thereby increasing the salience of the cued side. This
modulation of spatial attention ‘pulls’ the patients’ bisection
behavior to the cued side (Milner et al., 1992; Olk &
Harvey, 2002). Perceptual interpretations, on the other hand,
consider that cueing effects might best be explained by the
alteration of the perceptual point of balance of the stimulus
toward the cued side (Fischer, 1994; Mattingley et al.,
1993).
In the present study, we have addressed the issue of the
mechanisms underlining cueing effects by varying the
attentional salience of the cues while keeping their physical
dimensions constant. This cuing paradigm has not earlier
been used with neglect patients. Nor has a comparison
between right brain-damaged patients with and without
neglect been performed before. In keeping with previous
studies, control patients without neglect showed a weak
bisection bias to the right in the no cue condition, whereas
the neglect patient FM revealed a larger rightward bias in
the same condition (Machado & Rafal, 1999; Olk &
Harvey, 2002). The cuing manipulation per se was also
evident in both, patient FM and control group, with left cues
reducing and right cues increasing the bisection bias.
More interestingly, the various cueing conditions affected
the subjectively perceived length of the lines in different
ways depending on the type of patients and on the side
where cues appeared. In control subjects with right
hemisphere lesions, the specific content of the cues did not
affect line bisection either with left of right cues. Indeed, the
Cue Type factor and the Cue Position X Cue Type
interaction were both non-significant. In patient FM, by
contrast, left happy and angry faces were more effective
than left neutral faces in reducing the rightward directional
bias. Importantly, the modulation of emotional faces on line
bisection was confined to the left (neglected) hemispace and
occurred even though the content of the cues was irrelevant
to the task. This is unlikely to result from some low-level
perceptual differences among stimuli. Indeed, all stimuli
shared the same dimensions, and had the same elementary
components and global configuration. Our findings are also
unlikely to result from differences in the personal identity of
the faces, as the same actors presented with a neutral
expression were also shown with an emotional expression.

2153

The different influence of the left cues in a neglect patient
as a function of their emotional and attentional value,
clearly supports the idea that the cueing effect works
through biasing attention rather than by altering the
perceptual point of balance (at least in the contralesional
hemispace). These findings are also in line with other
studies that used invisible (Harvey et al., 2000; Olk &
Harvey, 2002) or symmetrical cues (Jeerakathil & Kirk,
1994; Kashmere & Kirk, 1997). Conversely, an
interpretation based on the alteration of the perceptual point
of balance would predict a comparable influence of all
unilateral left cues in reducing the rightward bias, whatever
their specific content, which was not the case. Arguably, in
the left (contralesional) hemispace of neglect patients,
where the systems for normal length perception and cueing
effects may have been damaged by right parietal lesions, the
attentional manipulation becomes apparent. Conversely, in
the right (ipsilesional) hemispace of neglect patients, and in
patients without neglect where the attentional system is
relatively preserved, the attentional call due to the salience
of emotional faces may be overridden by perceptual factors.
An alternative, and less likely, interpretation might be that
the enhanced influence of left as compared to right
emotional cues might indicate that cueing effects work
differently depending on whether they are concomitant with
lateralized attentional deficits. An attentional mechanism for
contralesional cues in neglect patients could thus be
hypothesized, whereas a perceptual mechanism could
account for the influence of ipsilesional cues in neglect
patients and for both left and right cues in subjects with
right hemisphere lesions without neglect. This latter
interpretation, however, is much less parsimonious than the
former and needs further empirical supports to be taken into
consideration.
Prior behavioral findings suggested that the distribution of
spatial attention in patients with visual extinction and spatial
neglect may be influenced by emotional faces (Vuilleumier
& Schwartz, 2001). Here we show for the first time in a line
bisection task that this influence on spatial attention has
additional behavioural consequences in promoting salience
and access to action in the contralesional hemispace. The
privileged processing of emotional faces, even when taskirrelevant, suggests that: (a) the emotional content of the
faces can be encoded in the neglected hemispace (b) the
results of such encoding can shift the attentional focus (c)
this modulation of spatial attention guides subsequent
orienting behaviours and motor outputs to salient left-sided
events.
The involvement of specific limbic structures (amygdala,
cingulate, and orbitofrontal cortex) in processing emotional
information has been repeatedly demonstrated with different
techniques and in various neurological conditions (Adolphs,
2002). Interestingly, even in neglect patients, unattended
and unseen affective facial expressions underwent
substantial neural processing and activated the amygdala
(Vuilleumier et al., 2002). Thus, such limbic activation is
the most probable candidate for the attentional enhancement

due to emotional stimuli observed here and, more
specifically, suggests the role of the amygdala in regulating
cortical processing. Indeed, the amygdala might be activated
by information from the contralesional hemispace through
direct pathways from the thalamus bypassing the primary
visual cortex or via ventral occipito-temporal pathway (de
Gelder et al., 1999; Morris et al., 1999; Morris et al., 2001).
Then, the amygdala might exert its modulatory role by
direct projections to visual areas, or via reciprocal
connections to the anterior attentional network in the
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (Pessoa, Kastner &
Ungerleider, 2002). This dual involvement of limbic
structures in both emotional processing and spatial attention
might have yielded a stronger weight to emotional faces in
competition for attention and action. In this context, it is
worth noting that the foregoing limbic areas were bilaterally
intact in patient FM.
Overall, our findings support the neuro-functional model
of spatial attention put forth by Mesulam (1999, 2002)
where the salience of extrapersonal events encoded by
limbic areas is regarded as particularly influent on
attentional shift. In the model, spatial attention depends on a
neural network including, mainly, the posterior parietal,
dorsolateral frontal, and cingulated cortex. Although all
these components are collectively engaged in specifying
whether an external event will attract attention, the parietal
cortex is more involved in providing a sensory
representation of the extrapersonal space, the dorsolateral
frontal cortex subserves exploratory motor plans, and the
cingulated and limbic components play a critical role in
identifying the motivational relevance of extrapersonal
events. Even though the role of limbic areas is the least well
understood, our results suggest that intact limbic and frontal
structures might still mediate attentional shift and motor
planning in spite of parietal damage and spatial neglect.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a grant from the Ordine
Mauriziano di Torino to Marco Tamietto.
We are grateful to Anna Berti for valuable comments to
an earlier version of this manuscript. Thanks also to Patrizia
Gindri for help in testing patients.
Special thanks to Tiziana Zilli for her technical support in
mapping brain lesions with MRIcro.

References
Adolphs, R. (2002). Recognizing emotion from facial
expressions: Psychological and neurological mechanisms.
Behavioral and Cognitive Neuroscience Reviews, 1, 2161.
de Gelder, B., Vroomen, J., Pourtois, G., & Weiskrantz, L.
(1999). Non-conscious recognition of affect in the
absence of striate cortex. NeuroReport, 10, 3759-3763.
Fischer M. H. (1994). Less attention and more perception in
cued line bisection. Brain and Cognition, 25, 24-33.

2154

Hansen, C. H., & Hansen, R. D. (1988). Finding the face in
the crowd: An anger superiority effect. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 917-924.
Harvey, M., Pool, T. D., Robertson, M. J., & Olk, B. (2000).
Effects of visible and invisible cueing procedures on
perceptual judgements in young and elderly subjects.
Neuropsychologia, 38, 22-31.
Jeerakathil, T. J., & Kirk, M. A. (1994). A representation
vertical bias. Neurology, 44, 703-706.
Kashmere, J. L., & Kirk, M. A. (1997). The complex
interaction of normal biases in line bisection. Neurology,
49, 887-889.
Machado L., & Rafal, R. D. (1999) Ipsilesional line
bisection bias in patients with chronic parietal lesions.
NeuroReport, 10, 3143-3148.
Mattingley, J. B., Pierson, J. M., Bradshaw, J. L., Phillips, J.
G., & Bradshaw, J. A. (1993) To see or not to see: the
effects of visible and invisible cues on line bisection
judgements in unilateral neglect. Neuropsychologia, 31,
1201-1215.
Mesulam, M. (1999). Spatial attention and neglect: parietal,
frontal and cingulated contributions to the mental
representation and attentional targeting of salient
extrapersonal events. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society of London Series B-Biological Sciences,
354, 1325-1346.
Mesulam, M. (2002). Functional anatomy of attention and
neglect: from neurons to networks. In H. O. Karnath, D.
Milner, & G. Vallar (Eds.), The cognitive and neural
bases of spatial neglect. Oxford:Oxford University Press.
Milner, A. D., Brechmann, M., & Pagliarini L. (1992). To
halve and to halve not: an analysis of line bisection
judgements in normal subjects. Neuropsychologia, 30,
515-526.
Morris, J. S., de Gelder, B., Weiskrantz, L., & Dolan R. J.
(2001). Differential extrageniculostriate and amygdala

responses to presentation of emotional faces in a
cortically blind field. Brain, 124, 1241-1252.
Morris, J. S., Öhman, A., & Dolan, R. J. (1999). A
subcortical pathway to the right amygdala mediating
“unseen” fear. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States Of America, 96, 1680-1685.
Nichelli, P., Rinaldi, M., & Cubelli, R. (1989). Selective
spatial attention and length representation in normal
subjects and in patients with unilateral spatial neglect.
Brain and Cognition, 9, 57-70.
Öhman, A., Lundqvist, D., & Esteves, F. (2001). The face in
the crowd revisited: a threat advantage with schematic
stimuli. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
80, 381-396.
Olk, B., & Harvey, M. (2002). Effects of visible and
invisible cueing on line bisection and Landmark
performance in hemispatial neglect. Neuropsychologia,
40, 282-290.
Pessoa, L., Kastner, S., & Ungerleider, L. G. (2002).
Attentional control of the processing of neutral and
emotional stimuli. Cognitive Brain Research, 15, 31-45.
Riddoch, M. J., & Humphreys, G. W. (1983). The effect of
cueing on unilateral neglect. Neuropsychologia, 2, 589599.
Rorden, C., & Brett, M. (2000). Stereotaxic display of brain
lesions. Behavioural Neurology, 12, 191-200.
Schenkenberg, T., Bradford, D. C., & Ajax, E. T. (1980).
Line bisection and unilateral visual neglect in patients
with neurological impairments. Neurology 30, 509-517.
Vuilleumier, P., & Schwartz, S. (2001). Emotional facial
expressions capture attention. Neurology, 56, 153-158.
Vuilleumier, P., Armony, J. L., Driver, J., & Dolan, R. J.
(2001). Effects of attention and emotion on face
processing in the human brain: an event-related fMRI
study. Neuron, 30, 829-841.

2155

