UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
ERP Evidence for an Interaction between Phonological and Semantic Processes in Masked
Priming Tasks

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3j92w6gr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Hoen, Michel
Jacquier, Caroline
Rouibah, Aicha

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

ERP Evidence for an Interaction between Phonological and Semantic Processes
in Masked Priming Tasks
Caroline Jacquier (jacquier@isc.cnrs.fr)
Aïcha Rouibah (rouibah@isc.cnrs.fr)
Institut des Sciences Cognitives, 67 boulevard Pinel
69500 Bron, France

Michel Hoen(hoen@isc.cnrs.fr)
Laboratoire Dynamique Du Langage, 14 avenue Berthelot
69007 Lyon, France
Thus, phonological processing would be both automatic and
obligatory during visual word recognition.

Abstract
Two masked priming experiments investigated the timecourse of phonological and semantic processes implicated in
visual word recognition as well as their possible interaction,
using event-related brain potentials (ERPs). Participants read
target words which were phonologically related, semantically
related, both phonologically and semantically related or
unrelated to a masked prime word. In experiment 1,
participants performed a phonological task (decide whether
targets rhymed with a previously heard rhyme). The
phonological relation elicited a frontal negativity whereas the
semantic relation elicited a left anterior negativity, both
followed by an N400 at centro-parietal sites. In experiment 2,
participants performed a semantic task (decide whether
targets belonged to a previously presented semantic category).
In contrast to experiment 1, phonological and semantic
relations elicited an N400 over frontal sites. Together, these
results demonstrate that phonological and semantic processes
interact during visual word recognition.

Phonology: a Mediator to Meaning Access

Keywords: Word Recognition; Masked Priming; Phonology;
Semantic; Event-Related brain Potentials (ERPs).

Introduction
Phonology: an Obligatory Stage
Although many studies were interested in the determining of
cognitive processes implicated in printed word recognition,
there have yet been few studies dedicated to phonological
information processing and its potential interaction with
semantic information processing. For a long time,
phonological processing was considered as an optional stage
during word recognition.
But recent studies (Berent & Perfetti, 1995; Van Orden,
1987; Hillinger, 1980) have shown much clearer that
phonology might well be an obligatory stage during the
processing of visual words. For instance, Berent and Perfetti
(1995) have observed that non-word primes, phonologically
related to target words, induced better identification rates
than non-word primes that were orthographically related to
target words. Moreover, phonological processing seems
unavoidable because it appears even if phonological
manipulations are unconscious and alter subject’s
performance (Tanenhaus, Flanigan, & Seidenberg, 1980).

Over the past 20 years, the direct access view has been
strongly called into question.
Van Orden (1987) has reported clear evidence for
phonological mediation during meaning access. In a
semantic decision task, homophones of words belonging to
a semantic category (e.g., MEET the homophone of MEAT),
were more often incorrectly classified as belonging to the
category FOOD than orthographically similar but non
homophone words (e.g., MELT). The false-positive
responses suggest that phonological information was
activated and used to access meaning.
Lesch and Pollatsek (1993) and Lukatela and Turvey
(1994) have extended this homophone effect in the context
of masked priming paradigms. They have reported that the
phonological facilitation effect appeared at short prime
exposure durations. And they concluded: “The data thus
provide support for a model of word recognition in which
meaning is rapidly and automatically accessed through a
phonological code” (Lesch & Pollatsek, 1993, p.291).
Perfetti, Bell, and Delaney (1988) have suggested that the
phonological form of a word is activated automatically and
at a very early stage in processing.
According to Plaut, McClelland, Seidenberg, and
Patterson (1996), an orthography-phonology (OP) and an
orthography-semantic-phonology (OSP) pathways would
exist. It is generally accepted that at least two pathways
exist for reading words, but their exact nature and their
mode of interaction are still actively discussed.

Interaction between Phonology and Semantic
As such, phonological priming effects should generally be
observed in masked priming experiments, for tasks such as
naming or lexical decision. Thus, the question is whether the
same is true in a task for which phonological processing of
the target is completely irrelevant.
Rouibah, Tiberghien and Lupker (1999) have shown that
priming effects based on phonological similarity can be
obtained even when the task itself does not require the
retrieval of phonological information. They have also tested

1030

the hypothesis that phonological and semantic processes
may interact. They reported phonological priming effects in
a semantic task, but also semantic priming effects in a
phonological task. Thus, their results are in accordance with
the hypothesis of an interaction between phonological and
semantic processing.
More recently, Farrar, Van Orden and Hamouz’s (2001)
results substantiated this conclusion. Indeed, they observed
phonological priming effects mediated by semantic
processing (e.g., the prime SOFA facilitates the processing
of the target TOUCH via COUCH which is semantically
related to SOFA). This facilitation effect underlines the fact
that semantic processing can take part in the access to
phonological representations. However, mediation does not
seem to be the adequate relation between the two processes.
It seems clear then that semantic and phonological processes
interact during printed word recognition even
unconsciously.
However, the exact nature and the mode of this
interaction are still actively discussed. The lack of
information on the nature of processes which take part in
visual word recognition and the bad-known organization of
the processing units in lexical representation constitute two
aspects decreasing the truthfulness of a cognitive
conceptualization of reading models. That is, in the current
study, we attempted to provide some information on
phonological and semantic information processing
interactions using event-related potentials (ERPs).
Indeed, reaction times, used in behavioral studies, only
display a final picture of cognitive events. Thus, ERPs may
help identify electrophysiological markers which correspond
to particular cognitive processes and the modulation of
markers may correspond to interactions between different
experimentally manipulated processing stages.

Phonological and Semantic Priming Effects in ERP
Studies
In this article, we focused on phonological and semantic
markers. Electrophysiological correlates of phonological
processing have been studied by a large amount of authors
in different tasks (Bentin, Mouchetant-Rostaing, Giard,
Echallier, & Pernier, 1999; Niznikiewicz & Squires, 1996).
A negative wave was reported in a time window lasting
from 200 to 350 ms which would reflect early phonological
processing. For instance, Bentin et al. (1999) in a
phonological decision task observed a left temporal negative
wave peaking at 320 ms (N320). This marker was elicited
by pronounceable but not by unpronounceable letter strings.
In a phonological priming experiment, Connolly, Service,
D’Arcy, Kujala, and Alho (2001), have reported a
phonological mismatch negativity (PMN) peaking around
330 ms. They suggested that the PMN would reflect
subprocesses preceding contextual integration as indicated
by the manifestation of the N400.
Thus, this early negative wave is elicited in priming
condition and would reflect an early stage of phonological
processing during word recognition.

In the domain of semantic processing, most of the
electrophysiological studies on language processing have
reported a negative wave peaking at 400 ms (N400) after
word onset that is sensitive to semantic variations.
Kutas and Hillyard (1980) have shown that the evoked
potential to semantically incongruent sentence final words
elicited a negative wave peaking around 400 ms relative to
words providing a semantically congruent ending. However,
the N400 is also elicited in non semantic violation contexts,
for modulations in semantic expectancy of correct words
(see for review: Kutas & Federmeier, 2000).
Brown and Hagoort (1993) have reported that no N400
priming effect was obtained in a masked priming situation.
According to these authors, the mask would prevent
conscious identification of the prime and therefore, no
semantic expectancy strategy would be possible. The N400
would reflect a post-lexical process. But, Deacon, Hewitt,
Yang, and Nagata (2000), have reproduced Brown and
Hagoort’s experiment and observed an N400 priming effect
in non masked conditions as well as in masked conditions.
Hence, these authors concluded that the N400 does not
reflect post-lexical processes and is modulated even
unconsciously. Interestingly, the N400 wave was shown to
be sensitive to semantic priming effects, both in the visual
and auditory modalities (Radeau, Besson, Fonteneau, &
Castro, 1998) as well as for cross-modal presentation of
prime and target. Others studies (Perrin & Garcia-Larrea,
2003; Kramer & Donchin, 1987) have demonstrated that the
N400 is not only sensitive to semantic modulation but also
to phonological modulations. For instance, Kramer and
Donchin (1987) reported that the N400 amplitude was lower
for rhyming words than for non rhyming words in a rhyme
matching task.
To sum up, the N400 component can be observed in
masked priming conditions and it can be modulated by
semantic but also by phonological processing.

Paradigm and Hypothesis
In the aim of supplying some information about the nature
and the mode of interaction between phonological and
semantic processes, we performed two complementary
masked priming tasks (a phonological and a semantic one)
in which prime-target relations (phonological, semantic,
phonological and semantic or unrelated word pairs) were
tested. The first one consisted in a rhyme matching task
which a priori did not require any semantic processing and
the second one a semantic categorization task which a priori
did not require any phonological processing.
If phonological and semantic processes are early,
automatic, and if they interact, phonological and semantic
priming effects should be observed in both tasks on reaction
times. For ERPs, phonological and semantic processes
should elicit two distinct electrophysiological markers.
Their time course as well as their spatial distribution should
vary. An early negativity should reflect phonological
processing and the classical semantic marker N400 should
be also observed. N400 should be modulated by
phonological and semantic relationships.

1031

Target

Method
Prime

Experiment 1: Rhyme Matching Task
Subjects Sixteen right-handed volunteers participated in the
experiment. They were all native French speakers with
normal or corrected-to-normal vision and without any
established hearing disorder.
Stimuli We selected 144 prime-target word pairs. The
nature of the relationship between prime and target defined
the four experimental conditions: (1) phonologically
related¹, (2) semantically related (e.g., “tortue/bélier”
(turtle/ram)), (3) both phonologically and semantically
related (e.g., “action/mission” (action/mission)) and finally
(4) unrelated word pairs (e.g., “secours/cosmos”
(help/cosmos)).
Procedure Participants sat in a dimly lit room facing a
computer monitor. The screen was at a distance of
approximately 70 cm from subject’s eyes. First, a sound
(rhyme) was emitted that lasted for 2500 ms. Second, a
fixation point appeared at the center of the screen for 500
ms, after which the screen remained blank for 250 ms. The
mask (##########) was then presented for 500 ms and the
prime appeared immediately after and lasted for 60 ms.
Finally, the target was presented until the subject’s
response. Figure 1 illustrates this procedure. The list was
divided in two blocks (72 trials) so that subjects could take a
break. Subjects performed a training list before beginning
the experimental list.
Subjects had to decide whether targets rhymed, or not,
with the previously heard rhyme. Volunteers were asked to
make this decision as fast and as accurately as possible.
They gave their responses by pressing a key on the
computer keyboard with one hand when the response was
“yes” and a different key with the other hand when the
response was “no”. Keys were switched over for 50% of
subjects to avoid motor biases in ERPs.

Experiment 2: Semantic Categorization Task
Subjects Sixteen right-handed volunteers participated in the
experiment. They were all native French speakers with
normal or corrected-to-normal vision. None of them was
included in experiment 1.
Stimuli The same 144 prime-target word pairs that were
used in Experiment 1 were used again. However, target
words were listed in 22 semantic categories (e.g., “tortue”
(turtle) as belonging to the semantic category “ANIMAL”).
_________________________

¹In order to avoid well-known orthographic priming effects,
50% of the pairs were orthographically similar to the rhyme (e.g.,
“accueil/cercueil” (reception/coffin)) and 50% of the pairs were
orthographically dissimilar to the rhyme (e.g., “chimie/fourmi”
(chemistry/ant)).

Mask

Blank Screen

ISI=2000 ms

tortue

STATUT

#########

Until response

60 ms

Fixation Point

Category

Rhyme

500 ms

+
ANIMAL

250 ms

/tu/

or

500 ms
2500 ms

Figure 1: Illustration of both experimental procedures.
Procedure The experimental procedure was generally the
same as the one in Experiment 1. The main exception was
that, at the beginning of each trial, subjects saw the name of
a semantic category instead of hearing a sound. Subjects’
task was to decide whether targets belonged to the category
they previously saw on the screen (Figure 1).

ERP Recording
The electroencephalogram (EEG) was continuously
recorded from 65 scalp sites using Ag/AgCl electrodes
mounted on a geodesic net and the electrode Cz was used as
reference. Scalp voltages were amplified with a high input
impedance amplifier (200 MΩ, Net AmpsTM, Electrical
Geodesics Inc.). Amplified analogue voltages (0.1-200 Hz
bandpass) were sampled at 500 Hz. Electrode impedance
was kept below 30 kΩ during complete recording (Tucker,
1993).

Data Analysis
EEG recordings were segmented from 100 ms before to 900
ms after the onset of the prime. Segments were then filtered
by a low-pass filter of 30 Hz, re-referenced to an average
reference, and a baseline correction was applied based on
the first 100 ms. Computerized artifact rejection was
performed before averaging and trial contaminated by eye
movements, eye blinks or transient amplitude shifts were
rejected from further analyses. ERPs were averaged within
each condition for each participant. In order to facilitate
statistical analyses of scalp effects, three different locations
were defined (frontal, left anterior and centro-parietal), each
composed of six electrodes corresponding to the 10–20
coordinates AF2/AF4, F1/F2, FCz, Fr (frontal); F7, FC5,
C3, C5, FT7, T7 (left anterior); and CP1/CP2, P1/P2, Cz,
CP (centro-parietal), respectively. For all analyses in both
tasks, scalp voltages were obtained in a time window lasting
from 350 to 450 ms after the onset of the prime. ERP
amplitudes were analyzed by repeated-measures ANOVAs.
Factors were experimental conditions, electrode sites,
spatial domains and tasks. For all repeated measures with
more than 1 degree of freedom, the Greenhouse-Geisser
correction was applied (Greenhouse & Geisser, 1959).

1032

Results
Behavioral Results
Prime/Target Relation × Task within-subject ANOVA
performed on mean reaction times showed two significant
main effects for factors task and experimental conditions
(F(1, 15) = 9.55, MSE = 22476.18, p < 0.01, and F(3, 45) =
90.25, MSE = 214.03, p < 0.01). The second level
interaction was also significant (F(3, 45) = 5.84, MSE =
345.83, p < 0.01). Reaction times in the semantic
categorization task were longer (mean: 762.88 ms) than the
ones observed in the rhyme matching task (mean: 680.88
ms).
810

Mean Reaction Time (ms)

795
780
765
750
735
720
705
690
675
660
Phonological

Semantic

PHONO+SEM

Figure 3: Grand-averaged voltage data (n = 16) from central
electrode as a function of task: phonological task (in top
part) and semantic task (in bottom part).
The components are indicated by the long vertical line. The
3D interpolations show amplitude maps (left) and current
source (right). Negative potentials are plotted upwards.

Unrelated

Prime/Target
Relation
Phonological
Task
Semantic Task

Figure 2: Mean reaction time (ms) for each condition in
each task. Note phonological, semantic and phonologicosemantic priming effects in both tasks (p < 0.05).
Moreover, reaction times were faster when primes and
targets had a relation than when they were unrelated and
reaction times were also faster when primes and targets had
a combined relation (phonological and semantic) than when
they had a simple relation (Figure 2).
Thus, we observe phonological and semantic priming
effects and also a stronger combined priming effect in both
tasks.

Electrophysiological Results
Average scalp voltage amplitude were calculated between
350 and 450 ms. Visual inspection of grand average waves
(Figure 3) showed two distinct negative components that
differed in peak latency, spatial distribution and
manifestation according to the nature of the task. In the
phonological task, an early negative wave peaking at about
320 ms (N320) is observed at central sites, followed by a
negative wave peaking around 400 ms (N400). In the
semantic task, the N320 is not distinguished but the N400 is
highly observed at centro-parietal sites.
First, we compared scalp distribution and conditions effect
across tasks. Then, we focused on spatial domains for each
task.

Task Comparison ERPs data were analyzed in a 4-way
repeated-measure ANOVA including factors Task (2),
Spatial Domain (3), Prime/Target Relation (4) and Electrode
(6). The analysis revealed a significant main effect for
Spatial Domain (F(2, 30) = 10.24, MSE = 16.76, p < 0.01),
average scalp voltages in the left anterior domain being
globally more negative than in other domains. The main
effect for Task remained at the level of a tendency (F(1, 15)
= 3.62, MSE = 13.44, p = 0.076). No significant main
effect for experimental conditions was observed (F(3, 45) =
1.03, MSE = 1.13, p = 0.39). Though, a Task × Domain
interaction and a Task × Experimental Conditions
interaction effects were significant (F(2, 30) = 7.94, MSE =
15.14, p < 0.01 and F(3, 45) = 3.24, MSE = 1.02, p < 0.05),
suggesting that the effects of spatial location and
experimental conditions were highly depending on the task
considered.
In the phonological task, the peak of amplitude was
observed at around 320 ms over the left anterior domain
whereas in the semantic task, the peak of the negative
component was observed around 400 ms over the centroparietal domain. Thus, these two electrophysiological
markers would correspond to phonological and semantic
processes involve in visual word recognition. The N320

1033

component seems to reflect a phonological effect whereas
the N400 seems sensitive to the semantic expectancy.
A triple Task × Domain × Experimental Conditions
interaction was also significant. In order to break down this
interaction, Electrode × Experimental Conditions ANOVAs
were performed for each spatial domain in each task.
Conditions Effect In the phonological task, a significant
main effect for factor condition was observed (F(3, 45) =
2.64, MSE = 0.74, p = 0.061) in the left anterior area. N320
amplitude for the semantic condition was significantly more
negative than for the phonologico-semantic and control
conditions. But the semantic condition did not differ from
the phonological condition. The centro-parietal area’s
analysis also showed a significant main effect for condition
(F(3, 45) = 2.76, MSE = 0.72, p = 0.053). In this area, the
N400 amplitude of the phonological condition was
significantly less negative than the ones observed for the
semantic and control conditions. Finally, over the frontal
domain, a significant main effect for condition was also
observed (F(3, 45) = 3.34, MSE = 2.18, p < 0.05). In this
domain, the N320 amplitude of the phonological condition
was significantly more negative than for mixed and control
conditions.
In the semantic task, the only domain for which a
significant main effect for conditions was observed is the
frontal domain (F(3, 45) = 3.88, MSE = 1.43, p < 0.05). For
this domain, the N400 mean amplitude for the phonological
condition and for the semantic condition were significantly
less negative than the ones for mixed and control conditions
(p < 0.05). In fact, the N400 amplitude was larger for
unrelated and totally related pairs than for phonologically or
semantically related pairs.

Discussion
In both tasks, behavioral data underline two facilitation
effects: phonological and semantic ones. Moreover, a
significant facilitation effect is emphasized for the
phonologico-semantic double link. These results are in
accordance with those observed in former studies (Perrin &
García-Larrea, 2003; Rouibah et al., 1999) and are in
agreement with the hypothesis of an interaction between
phonological and semantic processes during visual word
recognition. Masson’s distributed memory model (1995)
could explain this interaction. According to this model,
presentation of a prime automatically creates a pattern of
activation across semantic and phonological processing
units. If the prime is phonologically or semantically similar
to the target, the pattern of activation of the phonological or
semantic units is similar to that of the upcoming related
target. When the target is presented, activation of its pattern
across the phonological and semantic units is then
facilitated. This faster activation of the target’s phonological
and semantic pattern speeds up any response about this
target. Besides it, because of the full connection between
phonological and semantic processing units, the pattern of

activation across the semantic units can help driving the
phonological units to the target’s pattern and vice versa.
Electrophysiological data in Task comparison have shown
no significant effect of task, whereas a Task × Domain
effect was observed. Thus, different distributed cognitive
processes were implicated during visual word recognition.
And, their modulations by conditions were task dependent.
On the one hand, a phonological priming effect was
observed in the phonological task over centro-parietal sites,
whereas a phonological effect was elicited at frontal sites.
Our frontal negativity contradicts the phonological
mismatch negativity (PMN) described by Connolly et al.
(2001). They have reported a wave more negative for non
rhyming than for rhyming words. We observe the opposed
modulation. Otherwise, it appears that in the phonological
task, an N400, at centro-parietal sites, is essentially sensitive
to the phonological processing and that a semantic effect, at
left anterior sites, is induced by subject’s expectations.
Indeed, over left anterior sites, a semantic effect was
observed but in the way that semantic condition elicited a
more negative wave. Thus, semantic effect would emerge in
conditions where this processing is probably automatic and
in a phonological task. This last observation highly comforts
the hypothesis that semantic information plays a role during
phonological access. An alternative explanation is possible
according to Hill, Strube, Roesch-Ely, and Weisbrod’s
(2002) results. They have reported an N310 component
sensitive to semantic relations. Contrary to our data, this
N310 was more negative for the non-related prime–target
condition and could be differentiated from the N400 because
of its temporal and spatial pattern. We still observe the
opposed modulations.
On the second hand, in the semantic task, a semantic
priming N400 effect was observed but also a phonological
priming N400 effect over frontal sites. These results suggest
that the N400 is sensitive to semantic as well as
phonological relations and that meaning access implicates a
phonological processing stage. To explain these differences
between the two tasks, we refer to Masson’s distributed
memory model. Indeed, we suggested that semantic
processing was not expected in the phonological task thus
semantic relation would induce an additional matching over
pre-activated semantic units. That is, semantic congruence
was not the pertinent information and associated with
phonological incongruence induced a more negative
potential. However, reaction times were not affected. While
in semantic task, semantic processing probably deeper was
obligatorily mediated by phonological level thus
phonological and semantic priming effect have been
established. Explicitly, spreading activation in both tasks
would pursue different pathways.
Generally, our results reflect the N400 literature’s data
(Hill et al., 2002; Deacon et al., 2000; Radeau et al., 1998;
Niznikiewicz & Squires, 1996). Deacon et al. (2000) have
showed that N400 amplitude was larger for unrelated
stimuli than for related stimuli regardless to conditions:
masked or not. However, Radeau et al. (1998) have

1034

underlined that phonological and semantic priming
influenced the N400. Nevertheless, in our rhyme matching
task, semantic priming is not highlighted. Perrin and GarcíaLarrea (2003) have suggested that semantic N400 is a
powerful N400 appearing also when no explicit instructions
was done and when subjects are instructed for a task of a
different nature. Furthermore, they have observed a smaller
phonological N400 in a mix context. Consequently, we
suggest that phonological and semantic processes are in
competition. But this hypothesis seems task’s dependent.
An explanation for our phonological effect in the
phonological task over frontal sites would be that processing
of surface would be earlier accomplished and thus would
influence also an earlier component like the N320 (Connolly
et al., 2001). On the contrary, in the semantic task,
phonological processing would be accomplished later and
thus would influence the N400.
To sum up, we showed two fundamental points: (i) a
semantic processing in the phonological task and (ii) a
phonological processing in the semantic task. Thus, we have
shown a task independent interaction of phonological and
semantic information processing during visual word
recognition. Moreover, these processes were reflected by
two distinct, automatic, and obligatory electrophysiological
markers (N320 and N400).

Acknowledgments
Authors would like to thank Guy Tiberghien that
contributed to this study.

References
Bentin, S., Mouchetant-Rostaing, Y., Giard, M. H.,
Echallier, J. F., & Pernier, J. (1999). ERP manifestations
of processing printed words at different psycholinguistic
levels: time course and scalp distribution. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 11(3), 235-260.
Berent, I., & Perfetti, C. A. (1995). A rose is a REEZ: the
two-cycles model of phonology assembly in reading
English. Psychological Review, 102, 146-184.
Brown, C.M., & Hagoort, P. (1993). The processing nature
of the N400: evidence from masked priming. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 5, 34-44.
Connolly, J. F., Service, E., D’Arcy, R. C. N., Kujala, A., &
Alho, K. (2001). Phonological aspects of word
recognition as revealed by high-resolution spatio-temporal
brain mapping. NeuroReport, 12(2), 237-243.
Deacon, D., Hewitt, S., Yang, C. M., & Nagata, M. (2000).
Event-related potential indices of semantic priming using
masked and unmasked words: evidence that the N400
does not reflect a post-lexical process. Cognitive Brain
Research, 9, 137-146.
Farrar IV, W. T., Van Orden, G. C., & Hamouz, V. (2001).
When SOFA primes TOUCH: interdependence of
spelling, sound, and meaning in « semantically
mediated » phonological priming. Memory and Cognition,
29(3), 530-539.
Greenhouse, S. W., & Geisser, S. (1959). On methods in the
analysis of profile data. Psychometrika, 24, 95-112.

Hill, H., Strube, M., Roesch-Ely, D., & Weisbrod, M.
(2002). Automatic vs. Controlled processes in semantic
priming – differentiation by event-related potentials.
International Journal of Psychophysiology, 44, 197-218.
Hillinger, M. L. (1980). Priming effects with phonemically
similar words: the encoding-bias hypothesis reconsidered.
Memory and Cognition, 8, 115-123.
Kramer, A. F., & Donchin, E. (1987). Brain potentials as
indices of orthographic and phonological interaction
during word matching. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 13, 76-86.
Kutas, M., & Hillyard, S. A. (1980). Reading senseless
sentences: brain potentials reflect semantic incongruity.
Science, 207, 203-205.
Kutas, M., & Federmeier, K. D. (2000). Electrophysiology
reveals semantic memory use in language comprehension.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 4(12), 463-470.
Lesch, M. F., & Pollatsek, A. (1993). Automatic access of
semantic information by phonological codes in visual
word recognition. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 19, 285-294.
Lukatela, G., & Turvey, M. T. (1994). Visual lexical access
is initially phonological: 1. Evidence from associative
priming by words, homophones, and pseudohomophones.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 123(2),
107-128.
Masson, M. E. J. (1995). A distributed memory model of
semantic priming. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 21, 3-23.
Niznikiewicz, M., & Squires, N. (1996). Phonological
processing and the role of strategy in silent reading:
behavioral and electrophysiological evidence. Brain and
Language, 52, 342-364.
Perfetti, C. A., Bell, L., & Delaney, S. (1988). Automatic
phonetic activation in silent word reading: Evidence from
backward masking. Journal of Memory and Language,
27, 59-70.
Perrin, F., & García-Larrea, L. (2003). Modulation of the
N400 potential during auditory phonological/semantic
interaction. Cognitive Brain Research, 17, 36-47.
Radeau, M., Besson, M., Fonteneau, E., & Castro, S. L.
(1998). Semantic, repetition and rime priming between
spoken words: behavioral and electrophysiological
evidence. Biological Psychology, 48, 183-204.
Rouibah, A., Tiberghien, G., & Lupker, S. J. (1999).
Phonological and semantic priming: evidence for taskindependent effects. Memory and Cognition, 27(3), 422437.
Tanenhaus, M. K., Flanigan, H. P., & Seidenberg, M. S.
(1980). Orthographic and phonological activation in
auditory and visual word recognition. Memory and
Cognition, 8, 513-520.
Tucker, D. M. (1993). Spatial sampling of head electrical
fields: The Geodesic Sensor Net. Electroencephalography
and Clinical Neurophysiology, 87, 145-163.
Van Orden, G. (1987). A ROWS is a ROSE: spelling, sound
and reading. Memory and Cognition, 15, 181-198.

1035

