UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Evaluating the Relationships Instantiated by Semantic Associates of Verbs

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/90z7r5nm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Mercier, Hugo
Van der Henst, Jean-Bapiste

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Evaluating the Relationships Instantiated by
Semantic Associates of Verbs
Alissa Melinger and Sabine Schulte im Walde
Psycholinguistics and Computational Linguistics
Saarland University
Saarbrücken, Germany

Abstract
This work is concerned with an investigation of semantic
associations. We performed an elicitation task where native speakers were asked to spontaneously list semantic
associations for German verbs. The elicited conceptual
knowledge was then given ontological structure based on
codes from the psycholinguistic taxonomy GermaNet as
well as linguistic functions obtained from statistical corpus parses. The investigation is directed towards discovering and specifying the structural and conceptual
types of verb associations, stemming from an interest in
better characterizing semantic associates.

Introduction
In psycholinguistic research, a fundamental goal is to understand how linguistic meaning is represented and accessed in the course of language understanding and production. To this end, several paradigms have been developed over the years to investigate the nature of semantic
or conceptual networks. Early results demonstrated that
word recognition is sped up by the prior presentation of a
semantically related word. For example, the recognition
of the target word bread is faster when it is preceded by
the semantic associate butter compared to the unrelated
doctor (Meyer and Schvaneveldt, 1971). Likewise, unrelated primes which share conceptual neighbours with
the target can also influence response times, e.g., winter
facilitates the recognition of swim, mediated via summer
(Seidenberg et al., 1984). These results implicate an intricate network of semantic relations that are activated
in the course of word recognition, cf. Collins and Loftus
(1975).
In the literature on semantic priming, several types
of relationships can be distinguished, such as semantic associates (bread-butter), unassociated category type
relations (pig-dog), functional relations (broom-floor),
etc. Associative relatedness reflects the likelihood that
a word is called to mind by another word. It is assumed to reflect word co-occurrence probabilities rather
than the organization of semantic memory, cf. Plaut
(1995); McKoon and Ratcliff (1992). This assumption is
supported by observed correlations between associative
strength and word co-occurrence in large language corpora (Spence and Owens, 1990). These findings have
therefore been taken as an argument against the use
of associates in investigations of semantic memory, e.g.,
McRae et al. (1997).

A further argument against the use of associates in
the investigation of semantic memory is that free association elicits a wide variety of association types, including synonyms (sofa - couch), category coordinates (sofa
- chair ), words with high transitional probabilities in
text corpora (private - property), personal recollections
(bicycle - dad ), super- and subordinate relations (sofa
- furniture), etc. (McRae and Boisvert, 1998; McKoon
and Ratcliff, 1992). This heterogeneity of response type
makes it difficult to determine what aspects of meaning
might be relevant to the priming effect.
These objections to the use of association norms raise
interesting questions. Specifically, exactly what types
of relations are evoked by the free association task and,
if associations reflect co-occurrence frequencies, do associates correspond to particular functional roles of the
target verb? To address these questions, we combine
an investigation of semantic associates with lexical resources from computational linguistics, with a first goal
of determining the semantic relations and linguistic functions of speakers’ elicited concepts with respect to the
target verb.
In the following section we present a method for eliciting associated concepts which will serve as the data
source for the feature exploration to follow. The elicitation procedure asked participants to provide their associations to German verbs.

Associate Elicitation Method
Participants: 298 native German speakers participated
in the elicitation procedure. They received no monetary
compensation but one individual was randomly selected
to receive a 25Euro gift certificate for Amazon.
Materials: 330 verbs were selected for the study. They
were drawn from a variety of semantic classes including verbs of self-motion (e.g., gehen ‘walk’, schwimmen ‘swim’), transfer of possession (e.g., kaufen ‘buy’,
kriegen ‘receive’), cause (e.g., verbrennen ‘burn’, reduzieren ‘reduce’), experiencing (e.g., lachen ‘laugh’,
hassen ‘hate’, überraschen ‘surprise’), communication
(e.g., reden ‘talk’, beneiden ‘envy’), etc. Drawing verbs
from different categories was intended only to ensure
that the elicitation covered a wide variety of verb types;
the inclusion of any verb into any particular verb class
was achieved in part with reference to prior verb classification work, e.g., Levin (1993) but also on intuitive

1489

Table 1: Most frequently provided responses (and their
response frequencies) for two sample target verbs.

grounds. It is not critical for the subsequent analyses.
The frequencies of the verbs were checked using a German statistical grammar trained on 35 million words
(Schulte im Walde, 2003). The 330 verbs were divided
into 6 separate presentation lists of 55 verbs each. Each
list contained verbs from each grossly defined semantic
class. The verbs were also divided such that the lists had
equivalent overall frequency distributions.
Procedure: The elicitation study was administered
electronically over the Internet. The program was compatible with most browsers and platforms. When participants loaded the elicitation page, they were first asked
for their biographical information, such as linguistic expertise, age and regional accent. Next, the participant
was presented with instructions for the elicitation study
and an example item set. Participants clicked on an ‘ok’
button to indicate that they had understood the instructions and that they were ready to proceed.
Each trial consisted of a verb presented in a box at
the top of the screen. Below the verb was a series of
data input lines where participants could type their associations. They were instructed to type at most one
word per line and, following German grammar, to distinguish nouns from other parts of speech with capitalisation. Participants had 30 sec. per verb to type as
many associations as they could. After this time limit,
the program automatically advanced to the next trial.
There was a 2 sec. pause between trials to prevent response spillover between trials. In total, we collected
data for 16,445 trials; each trial elicited an average of
5.16 associate responses with a range of 0-16. In sum we
collected over 80,000 non-unique target-response pairs.
Once the study began, it could not be stopped or
paused, nor could participants return to prior trials with
the ‘back’ button. At the end of the study the data was
automatically saved to an individually named file and
e-mailed to the first author.

The verb associations were investigated on three linguistic issues. We were interested in the type of relationship typical associates established with the target verb:
whether verb responses refer to particular semantic relations (such as synonyms, antonyms, hypernyms), and
whether noun responses are typical argument holders of
verb valency. To address these questions, we conducted
the following three analyses:

12
12
10
10
9
6
6
6

Gericht
jammern
weinen
Anwalt
Richter
Klage
Leid
Trauer

klagen
court
moan
cry
lawyer
judge
complaint
suffering
mourning

19
18
13
11
9
7
6
6

1. In a preliminary step, we distinguished the responses
with respect to the major part-of-speech tags: nouns,
verbs, adjectives and adverbs.
2. For each response classified as a verb, we looked up
the semantic relation between the target and response
using the lexical taxonomy GermaNet (Kunze, 2000).
3. For each response classified as a noun, we investigated
the kinds of linguistic functions that are realized by
the associate with respect to the target verb. The
analysis is based on an empirical grammar model.

Morpho-Syntactic Analysis on
Part-of-Speech Tags

Data Preparation: Each completed data set contains
the background information of the participant, followed
by the list of target verbs. Each target verb is paired
with a list of associations, in the order in which the participant provided the associates. For the analyses to follow, we pre-processed all data sets in the following way:
For each target verb, we quantified over all responses
in the study, disregarding the participant’s background
and the order of the associates. Table 1 lists the most
frequent responses for the verbs abhauen ‘walk off’, and
klagen ‘complain’.

Linguistic Analysis of Elicited Concepts

abhauen
Flucht
escape
weglaufen
run away
Angst
fear
fliehen
escape
wegrennen run away
rennen
run
flüchten
escape
schnell
quickly

Each associate of the target verb was assigned its (possibly ambiguous) part-of-speech. The assignment was
based on a machine-readable dictionary with information
on word forms, parts-of-speech tags and lemmas. Whenever a word in the dictionary is morphologically ambiguous with respect to its part-of-speech or lemma, it constitutes a separate dictionary entry. Originally, the dictionary distinguished approximately 50 morpho-syntactic
categories, but we only considered the major categories
verb (V), noun (N), adjective (ADJ) and adverb (ADJ),
disregarding case, number and gender features. Ambiguities between these categories arise e.g., in the case
of nominalized verbs (e.g., Rauchen ‘smoke’, Vergnügen
‘please/pleasure’), where the participant could have intended either a verb or noun, or in the case of past
participles (e.g., verschlafen ‘slept/sleep’) or infinitives
(e.g., überlegen ‘consider/superior’), where the participant could have intended either a verb or an adjective.
Having assigned part-of-speech tags to the associates,
we can distinguish and quantify the morpho-syntactic
categories of the responses. When the response was
non-ambiguous, the unique part-of-speech received the
total target-response frequency; when the response was
ambiguous, the target-response frequency was split over
the possible part-of-speech tags. As the result of this
first analysis, we can specify the frequency and probability distributions for the part-of-speech tags for each
verb and also in total. Table 2 presents the total numbers and specific verb examples. Participants produced
noun associates in the clear majority of instances, 62%;
verbs are given in 25% of the responses, adjectives in
11%, adverbs almost never (2%). This average pattern
varies, of course, with respect to specific verbs.

1490

Table 2: Total frequencies and proportions of all elicited
concepts classified into the four major parts-of-speech.
Proportions for specific target examples also provided.

Total Freq
Total Prob
aufhören ‘stop’
aufregen ‘be upset’
backen ‘bake’
bemerken ‘realize’
dünken ‘seem’
flüstern ‘whisper’
nehmen ‘take’
radeln ‘bike’
schreiben ‘write’
wundern ‘be surprised’

V
19.863
25%
49%
22%
7%
52%
46%
19%
60%
8%
14%
30%

N
48.905
62%
39%
54%
86%
31%
30%
43%
31%
84%
81%
35%

ADJ
8.510
11%
4%
21%
6%
12%
18%
37%
3%
6%
4%
31%

ADV
1.268
2%
6%
0%
1%
2%
1%
0%
2%
2%
1%
1%

Semantic Relations of Verb Associates
To determine which types of relationships are typically
instantiated between target and response verbs, we used
the lexical semantic taxonomy GermaNet (Kunze, 2000),
the German counterpart of WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998).
The lexical database is inspired by psycholinguistic research on semantic memory. The resource organizes
nouns, verbs, adjectives and adverbs into classes of synonyms (synsets), which are connected by lexical and conceptual relations. The GermaNet version from October
2001 contains 6,904 verbs and defines the semantic relations synonymy, antonymy, hypernymy/hyponymy, entailment, cause, and also see between verbs or verb
synsets. (Also see is an underspecified association which
captures relationships other than the preceding standard
ones. For example, sparen ‘save’ is related to haushalten
‘budget’ by also see.) The hypernym-hyponym relation
imposes a multi-level hierarchical structure on the taxonomy. Words with several senses are assigned to multiple
classes.
Based on the GermaNet relations, we could distinguish
between different kinds of verb associations elicited from
speakers. For example, the response hetzen for hasten
(both meaning: ‘rush’) are synonyms of each other, but
the response bewegen ‘move’ is a hypernym for verbs such
as rennen ‘run’, rollen ‘roll’, fließen ‘float’. With these
distinctions, we can identify the relations established by
the verb concepts evoked by the target verbs.
Our analysis proceeded as follows. For each verb associate, we looked up the semantic relation between the
target and response verbs as coded in GermaNet: For
each pair of target and response verbs, we looked up
whether any semantic relation is defined between any
of the synsets the verbs belong to. For example, if the
target verb rennen is in synsets a and b, and the response verb bewegen is in synsets c and d, we determined whether there is any semantic relation between
the synsets a and c, a and d, b and c, b and d. Two
verbs belonging to the same synset are synonymous. The
semantic relations are quantified by the target-response
pair frequencies, e.g., if 12 participants provided the association bewegen ‘move’ for rennen ‘run’, the hyper-

nymy relation is quantified by the token frequency 12. If
the target and the response verb are both in GermaNet,
but there is no relation between their synsets, then the
verbs do not bear any kind of semantic relation. If either
of them is not in GermaNet, we cannot make any statement about the verb-verb relationship. Nine percent of
our data falls into this unknown category. Table 3 shows
the number of semantic relations encoded in the 2001
GermaNet version, and the token frequencies and probabilities of their instantiations in our data. For example,
there are 19,424 cases of hypernymy-hyponymy defined
between the verbs in GermaNet. Among our target-verb
response pairs, 2,807 corresponded to this defined set of
related verbs, which accounts for 14% of all our verb responses. Again, the distributions vary with respect to
the individual verbs. For example, the aspectual verb
aufhören ‘stop’ was mostly associated with antonyms
such as anfangen ‘begin’, and weitermachen ‘go on’, and
hypernyms such as enden ‘end’; schreiben ‘write’ was
mainly associated with hyponyms such as tippen ‘type’,
aufschreiben ‘write down’ and kritzeln ‘scribble’; aufregen ‘be upset’ was mainly associated with synonyms such
as ärgern ‘be angry’ and nerven ‘annoy’.
Table 3 shows that a remarkable number of the verbverb associations elicited in our study (54%) do not correspond to a semantic relation defined in GermaNet.
This failure to capture elicited verb relations stems from
two main sources; on the one hand, we find a larger variety of verb relations among the associates than the classical relations defined in GermaNet (e.g., implication,
causality, temporal relation, see the General Discussion
for more details), and on the other hand work on the
GermaNet taxonomy is not yet finished.
Table 3: Total frequency of each semantic relation type
in GermaNet, token frequency of each relation in our
data set and the proportion of our data captured by
each relation type.
Synonymy
Antonymy
Hypernymy
Hyponymy
Cause
Entailment
Also see
No relation
Unknown cases

GermaNet
4,633
571
19,424
19,424
236
15
2
-

Freq
1,194
252
2,807
3,016
49
0
0
10,509
1,726

Prob
6%
1%
14%
16%
0%
0%
0%
54%
9%

A more detailed inspection of the semantic relations
provides some insight into target verb properties. For example, target verbs with synonym associates are rather
high frequency verbs (and therefore conceptually more
general), such as bekommen ‘receive’, gehen ‘go’, laufen
‘run’; target verbs with antonym associations tend to
be aspectual or change of state verbs, such as anfangen ‘begin’, einfrieren ‘freeze’, schmelzen ‘melt’. Target verbs with hypernym associates tend to be rather
specific, such as eintüten ‘bag’, hüpfen ‘hop’, schlurfen ‘scuffle’, while target verbs with hyponym associates

1491

tend to be rather general, such as denken ‘think’, sagen
‘say’, wahrnehmen ‘observe’; target verbs with cause associates are transfer and change of state verbs, such as
formen ‘form’, legen ‘place’, töten ‘kill’. So far, these
insights are based rather on intuitive comparisons; correlation analyses are planned to further investigate the
generalizability of these impressions. However, it appears that the obtained ontological data could be very
useful for conducting controlled priming studies in which
different types of associative relations are contrasted.
The analysis with GermaNet is consistent with the
view that normed associates reflect word co-occurrence
frequencies. Indeed, if many unrelated verb-verb pairs
reflect implications, cause/effect and temporally linked
events, we may well find that verb-verb pairs often cooccur in texts, for example in adjacent clauses. To investigate this possibility, we returned to our 35 million word
corpus and searched for target-response co-occurrences
in three search windows of 5/20/50 words to the left and
right of the target word. Note that this is a weak estimate of co-occurrence as a target-response pairs need
only co-occur one time in the corpus to positively contribute to the analysis. We also evaluated co-occurrence
likelihood for just the first response provided to each
verb, rather than the entire set of responses. Table 4
shows the percentage of verb responses that co-occur
with their respective target verbs in the moderate window of 20 words. For responses which were captured
by GermaNet (positive cases), 75% of all verb responses
appeared in the search window. For responses not expressing GermaNet relations (negative cases), 46% were
found in the search window. Thus, 43% of all verb associate responses were not found in the search window.
Furthermore, a full third of the verb responses were not
captured by either the analysis with GermaNet or the
search window. As Table 4 shows, this pattern persists
if we consider only the first response provided to each
target rather than the entire response set, which includes
idiosyncratic singleton responses. Even the strongest associates reflect GermaNet relations only 55% of the time
and they occur in the search window only 64% of the
time.
Table 4: Percentage of verb responses captured (positive) and not captured (negative) by GermaNet found
in a 20 word search windows.
All Responses
First Response

positive (37%)
75%
positive (55%)
79%

negative (63%)
46%
negative (45%)
46%

all
57%
all
64%

This result presents a challenge to those researchers
who hold that associate elicitation reflects word-form
co-occurrences. However, the majority of research into
semantic memory and word recognition has investigated
noun-noun relationships, e.g., Spence and Owens (1990);
Moss et al. (1995); McRae et al. (1997); Meyer and
Schvaneveldt (1971). It could be assumed that verb-

1492

noun pairs would co-occur textually if associates reflect
typical argument fillers of the verbs. We investigate this
point in the next section.

Syntax-Semantic Functions
of Noun Associates
We investigated the kinds of linguistic functions that are
realized by noun associates of the target verbs. This
analysis utilizes a German statistical grammar framework: Schulte im Walde (2003) developed a context-free
grammar for German, with the goal of obtaining reliable lexical information on verbs. Work concentrated on
defining linguistic structures which are relevant to lexical verb information, especially subcategorisation. The
manually defined grammar was trained by lexicalized parameter estimation, using 35 million words of a large
German newspaper corpus from the 1990s. The resulting grammar model contains quantitative information on
lexicalized linguistic functions, and head-head relationships.
With respect to verb subcategorisation, the empirical grammar contains frequency distributions of verbs
for 178 subcategorisation frame types, including prepositional phrase information and frequency distributions
of verbs for nominal argument fillers. For example, the
verb backen ‘bake’ appeared 80 times with an intransitive frame and 109 times with a transitive frame, subcategorising for a direct object. With a total corpus
frequency of 240, this corresponds to 33% for the intransitive and 45% for the transitive frame. The most
frequent nouns subcategorized as direct object in the
transitive frame are Brötchen ‘rolls’ (37%), Brot ‘bread’
(17%), Kuchen ‘cake’ (14%), Plätzchen ‘cookies’ (8%),
and Waffel ‘waffle’ (5%).
We used the grammar information to look up the syntactic relationships which exist between a target verb
and a response noun. For example, the noun associates Kuchen ‘cake’, Brot ‘bread’, Plätzchen ‘cookies’
and Brötchen ‘rolls’ associated with backen ‘bake’ appeared not only as the verb’s direct objects (as illustrated above), but also as intransitive subjects; Pizza
appeared only as a direct object, and Bäcker ‘baker’,
Bäckerei ‘bakery’ and Mutter ‘mother’ appeared only as
transitive subjects. The verb-noun relationships which
were found in the grammar were then quantified by
the verb-noun association frequency, and divided by the
number of different relationships found in the grammar
for the specific lexeme pair (to account for the ambiguity
represented by multiple relationships). For example, the
noun Kuchen was elicited 45 times as response to bake,
the grammar contains the noun both as direct object and
as intransitive subject for that verb, so both functions
were assigned a frequency of 22.5.
We then accumulated the verb-association frequencies
for all nouns with a specific relationship, e.g., for the intransitive subjects, we summed over the empirical association evidence for Kuchen, Brot, Plätzchen, Brötchen.
The result is frequency and probability distributions for
the linguistic functions for each target verb, i.e. for each
verb we can determine which linguistic functions were ac-

20 word window. However, 31% of the strongest associates are not in the search window which contradicts the
claim that association norms reflect word co-occurrence
frequencies.
Table 5: Percentage of all noun responses, both encoding a grammatical function (positive) and not (negative)
found in a 20 word search window.
All responses
First response

positive (28%)
95%
positive (26%)
96%

negative (72%)
37%
negative (74%)
48%

all
54%
all
69%

Discussion and Outlook
Figure 1: Frequencies of associates as slot fillers.

tivated by how many nouns. Abstracting over the verbs
provides the distributions for the general case, i.e. it
provides an empirical measure of the linguistic functions
of our noun associations.
Examining the overall frequency distribution for
linguistic relationships, we discovered that only 11
frame-slot combinations were represented by more than
1% of the noun tokens: subjects in the intransitive, transitive (with direct object, indirect object,
or prepositional phrase) and ditransitive frames; the
direct object slot in the transitive and ditransitive
frames as well as in the direct object plus PP frame;
the indirect object in the ditransitive frames and the
object of the preposition Dat:in for dative (locative) ‘in’
frames. The frequency proportions are illustrated in Figure 1, with the x-axis referring to the frame-slot combinations and the y-axis to the association frequencies. As
this Figure shows, there was a strong tendency for speakers to produce associates which are fillers of either the
direct object of the transitive frame or the subject of the
intransitive frame. The overlap of noun associates with
corpus-based verb preferences illustrates that to a certain extent speakers had conceptual roles for the target
verbs in mind when they provided the associates.
As with the verb responses, we now investigate
whether the noun responses typically co-occur with the
target verb. We apply the same window analysis described for the verb responses, looking again at all noun
responses and only the first provided response in separate analyses. Table 5 shows that, contrary to the received view, only half of the noun responses co-occur
with their target verb in the 20 word window. Furthermore, for those responses which do not correspond to
an argument role filler, only 37% of the responses are
found in the search window. The coverage of the search
window improves somewhat when only the first noun response for each target verb is considered, as shown in
Table 5. Here, overall coverage increases to 69%, and
half of the non-argument noun responses are found in the

This paper was concerned with an investigation of spontaneous semantic associations. Our aim was to identify which conceptual roles are captured by speakers’
elicited concepts. To this end, we used existing lexical resources to determine semantic relations and linguistic functions of response words with respect to the
target verbs. The analyses resulted in ontological and
functional structure for approximately 40%/30% of the
target-response pairs. Additionally, an examination of
the co-occurrence of target-response pairs in a large corpus of written German revealed that the received wisdom about what normed associates reflect may be wrong.
The insights into the kinds of related concepts elicited by
free association norms should prove useful for researchers
interested in further distinguishing types of relatedness
in a non-ad hoc fashion.
Insight into the nature of normed associations can
also be gleaned from an examination of which kinds
of responses are not captured by our analyses. For
example, do the majority of missing links in our GermaNet analysis correspond to classic semantic relations
(which are not yet instantiated), or more interestingly,
does free association produce non-classic semantic relations? As already mentioned, some missing links in
our data refer to causal relations between verbs (e.g.,
the target verb abstürzen ‘crash’ evokes the associate
fallen ‘fall’, schwitzen ‘sweat’ evokes stinken ‘stink’),
implications (e.g., setzen ‘seat’ → sitzen ‘sit’), or synonyms/hypernyms of infrequent verbs (e.g., glucksen
‘chortle’ → lachen ‘laugh’, paddeln ‘paddle’ → rudern ‘row’). A large number of missing relations refer to a temporal order of states and events, (e.g.,
adressieren ‘address’ → schreiben ‘write’ and schicken
‘send’, abstürzen ‘crash’ → klettern ‘climb’). Thus, while
some relations could be integrated into the current GermaNet framework (excluding from consideration the potential purview of the also see relation), many fall outside the scope of traditional semantic relations.
Matching noun associates with conceptual roles in the
statistical grammar only covered 28% of all elicited nominal associations (quantified by response frequency) and
only 26% of the first responses. For the remaining 72%
of all responses, the grammar does not provide linguistic functions. On the one hand, this is due to the fact

1493

that the grammar is trained on newspaper data, and
therefore biased to use newspaper-related words, subcategorisation frames, and conceptual roles.1 More importantly, the conceptual roles of the noun associates
are obviously not restricted to arguments of the target
verbs. For example, frequent nouns for the verb backen
‘bake’ are Ofen ‘oven’ (referring to the typical device for
baking), Mehl ‘flour’ (referring to a typical substance for
baking), Weihnachten ‘Christmas’ (referring to a typical occasion for baking), and Teig ‘dough’ (referring to
a typical stage of the baking product). These kinds of
noun associates fulfill conceptual roles which are not captured by subcategorisation.
Although our analyses do not provide complete coverage even of our strongly associated pairs, we do not
view our results as directly conflicting with prior findings
which showed that associates co-occur in texts. Rather,
our analyses provide another measure which suggests a
more conservative relationship between associates and
lexical co-occurrence. For example, prior work focused
on noun-noun associations (Spence and Owens, 1990;
McKoon and Ratcliff, 1992), while we examined both
verb-verb and verb-noun pairs. Spence and Owens’ prior
results were also based on an investigation of a small set
of optimized stimulus-response pairs consisting largely of
near synonyms (e.g., house-home) and noun pairs which
conjoin into single NPs (e.g., bread & butter). For such a
small optimized set of associates, it is not surprising that
they found their pairs co-occurred more often than unrelated words. In our study, we examined the functional,
ontological and co-occurrence relations of all stimulusresponse pairs provided by our participants. Our results
point to the possibility that prior findings do not generalize to other associates. In sum, our results are not
directly comparable to prior approaches but do point
to a very different conclusion, namely that lexical cooccurrence and association norms do not index the same
relationship.
To conclude, our analysis provides a detailed breakdown of the types of relations that are evoked by target
verbs during a association elicitation task. Furthermore,
contrary to the commonly held view that speakers produce associates which co-occur with the target word in
linguistic contexts, our analyses reveal that the majority of responses did not occur in the extended linguistic context. This finding poses a challenge to the view
that associative priming effects are driven by spreading
activation between commonly co-occurring lexical items
rather than due to spreading activation at the conceptual
level between related concepts.

References
Collins, A. M. and Loftus, E. F. (1975). A spreadingactivation theory of semantic processing. Psychological
Review, 82:407–428.
1
Roland and Jurafsky (1998) showed that word senses and
subcategorisation frames strongly vary with respect to the
corpus.

1494

Fellbaum, C., editor (1998). WordNet – An Electronic
Lexical Database. Language, Speech, and Communication. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Kunze, C. (2000). Extension and use of GermaNet, a
lexical-semantic database. In Proceedings of the 2nd
International Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation, pages 999–1002, Athens, Greece.
Levin, B. (1993). English Verb Classes and Alternations.
The University of Chicago Press.
McKoon, G. and Ratcliff, R. (1992). Spreading activation versus compound cue accounts of priming: Mediated priming revisited. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 18:1155–
1172.
McRae, K. and Boisvert, S. (1998). Automatic semantic
similarity priming. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 24:558–572.
McRae, K., de Sa, V. R., and Seidenberg, M. S. (1997).
On the nature and scope of featural representations of
word meanings. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 126:99–130.
Meyer, D. and Schvaneveldt, R. (1971). Facilitation in
recognizing pairs of words: Evidence of a dependence
between retrieval operations. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 90:227–235.
Moss, H., Ostrin, R., Tyler, L., and Marslen-Wilson, W.
(1995). Accessing different types of lexical semantic
information: Evidence from priming. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 21:863–883.
Plaut, D. (1995). Semantic and associative priming in
a distributed attractor network. In Proceedings of the
17th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, pages 37–42.
Roland, D. and Jurafsky, D. (1998). How verb subcategorization frequencies are affected by corpus choice.
In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics, Montreal, Canada.
Schulte im Walde, S. (2003). Experiments on the Automatic Induction of German Semantic Verb Classes.
PhD thesis, Institut für Maschinelle Sprachverarbeitung, Universität Stuttgart.
Seidenberg, M. S., Waters, G. S., Sanders, M. E., and
Langer, P. (1984). Pre- and post-lexical loci of contextual effects on word recognition. Memory and Cognition, 12:315–328.
Spence, D. P. and Owens, K. C. (1990). Lexical cooccurrence and association strength. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 19:317–330.

