UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Example-Based Learning with Multiple Solution Methods: Effects on Learning Processes and
Learning Outcomes

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2kt9p9zx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Große, Cornellia S.
Renkl, Alexander

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Example-Based Learning with Multiple Solution Methods:
Effects on Learning Processes and Learning Outcomes
Cornelia S. Große (cornelia.grosse@uni-bremen.de)
University of Bremen, Pedagogy and Educational Sciences
P. O. Box 330440, 28334 Bremen, Germany

Alexander Renkl (renkl@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Department of Psychology, Educational Psychology
Engelbergerstr. 41, 79085 Freiburg, Germany
strated two different solution methods. The results provided
first evidence that this example feature fosters learning.
In the following, some models and findings relevant to the
topic of multiple solutions are discussed, and research on
learning from worked examples is briefly reviewed. Then, a
study which analyzed learning with multiple solutions in
detail is presented.

Abstract
Many mathematical problems can be solved by different solution methods. A previous study showed that learning with
multiple solutions fosters learning outcomes. However, the
number of solution methods and the number of representational codes were confounded. In order to separate the effects
of learning with multiple solution methods from those resulting from learning with multiple representations, the present
experiment was conducted. The participants (N = 53) learned
to solve probability problems in one of three groups (multiple
solution methods with multiple representations vs. multiple
solution methods sharing one representation vs. uniform solution method). The superiority of learning with multiple solutions could not be replicated; however, the results show that
learning with multiple solutions which share one representation is more effective than learning with multiple solutions
and multiple representations. Differences in the learning
processes are described and discussed.

Learning with Multiple Solutions
The following aspects underline the effectiveness of learning with multiple solution methods:
Fostering understanding and improving flexibility. It is
assumed that the consideration of different solution methods
can help the learners to apply them more flexibly and effectively. For example, Tabachneck, Koedinger, and Nathan
(1994) found that in order to solve algebra problems a combination of strategies was more effective than the employment of only one strategy; according to their explanation, a
combination of strategies helps to overcome disadvantages
and weaknesses of single strategies. Spiro and his colleagues (e.g., Spiro et al., 1991) propose in their Cognitive
Flexibility Theory that learning environments should be
designed flexibly so that learners have the opportunity to
consider learning contents from different perspectives which
in turn deepens their understanding and fosters transfer
performance. The theory accentuates the use of multiple
approaches and multiple representations. As it can be argued
that reflecting on multiple perspectives resembles the consideration of multiple solutions, it can be concluded that
multiple solutions should foster learning outcomes.
Individualization. Some researchers (e.g., Sjuts, 2002)
claim that many learners have preferences for specific solution methods. Thus, it is argued that performance can be
enhanced by giving learners a variety of methods from
which they can choose a strategy they comprehend well.
Motivation. According to Deci and Ryan (1993), three
components are essential for motivation: experience of
competence, autonomy, and social integration. Considering
multiple solutions gives the learners degrees of freedom,
which should have positive effects on autonomy and experienced competence and, consequently, on motivation.
Multiple solution methods in mathematics allow for the
use of different representations. As Ainsworth, Bibby, and
Wood (2002) point out, multiple representations can con-

Keywords: learning with multiple solution methods; learning
with worked examples.

Introduction
Currently, learning with multiple representations and learning from multiple perspectives is a very prominent research
area. In their Cognitive Flexibility Theory, Spiro and his
colleagues (e.g., Spiro, Feltovich, Jacobson, & Coulson,
1991) argue that the consideration of different perspectives
deepens understanding and fosters learning outcomes. Thus,
they propose that learners should be given the opportunity to
explore learning contents from different perspectives, for
example, by using multiple representations or multiple approaches. Similarly, it can be argued that mathematics
learning and deep understanding can be fostered by presenting learners different possible solution methods for
solving a problem – though many people think that mathematical problems can always be solved with only one
method, in most cases different methods can be applied.
A very effective instructional approach is learning with
worked examples. However, worked examples only show
one solution which stands in contrast to the "multiple solutions" approach. Taking this into consideration, it appeared
worthwhile to explore the effectiveness of a combination of
both approaches, that is, to test worked examples with different possible solution methods. In a study of Große and
Renkl (2003), learners were given examples which demon839

tribute to the understanding of each single representation
and can help to avoid misinterpretations. In addition, connecting multiple representations is suitable for gaining a
deeper understanding of the learning contents, as complex
interdependencies can be interpreted in new ways and generalization can be fostered. According to de Jong et al.
(1998), multiple representations can have several functions:
specific information can best be conveyed in a specific representation; a specified sequence of learning material is
beneficial for learning; and expertise is often seen as the
possession and coordinated use of multiple representations.
Thus, it can be concluded that learning with multiple representations (or multiple solutions) may foster understanding.
However, learning with multiple representations is also very
challenging, as the learners not only have to understand each
single representation, but they also have to integrate them in
order to establish coherence. As learners rarely map different representations onto each other, the positive effects that
were intended by the use of multiple representations often
do not occur to the expected extent (cf. de Jong et al., 1998).
To sum up, it can be concluded that the consideration of
multiple solution methods is very promising and challenging
at the same time. As different solution methods can be presented by means of worked examples, the following section
outlines some basic findings of this branch of research.

ment of worked examples reduces extraneous cognitive
load. This enables the learners to use "free" cognitive capacity for the integration of multiple solution methods,
which in turn may bring to bear the advantages of learning
with multiple perspectives. Große and Renkl (2003) combined these two branches of research and tested the effectiveness of example-based learning with multiple solutions.
It was explored whether the presentation of different solution methods fosters learning outcomes compared to the
presentation of only one solution method, and whether
learning is enhanced by the provision of textual instructional
explanations or by prompting the learners to write down
self-explanations. The participants (N = 170) learned to
solve combinatorics problems under six conditions that
constituted a 2x3-factorial design (factor "multiple solutions": multiple vs. uniform; factor "instructional support":
no support vs. prompting self-explanations vs. instructional
explanations). In the learning phase, the learners were given
two sets of worked examples; each set contained two examples which shared the same structure and many elements of
the surface story. In the "multiple solutions" conditions, the
two nearly identical examples of a set were solved using
different solution methods (a diagram and an arithmetic
solution); thus, the participants learned that more or less the
same problem could be solved by using two different solution procedures. In the "uniform" conditions, both examples
of an example set were solved with the same solution
method (i.e., the two examples of the first set were solved
using diagrams, and the two examples of the second set
were solved arithmetically). Independently of the experimental condition, each solution method was presented twice
to each learner (see table 1).

Learning with Worked Examples
A worked example consists of a problem, the solution steps
and the final solution itself. Learning with worked examples
is primarily used in well-structured domains (e.g., mathematics) and means that multiple examples are given to students before they try to solve problems on their own. In
comparison to learning by problem solving, learning with
worked examples is very effective (for an overview see
Atkinson, Derry, Renkl, & Wortham, 2000). The effectiveness of worked examples can be explained with the Cognitive Load Theory (e.g., Paas, Renkl, & Sweller, 2003). As
worked examples relieve the learners from finding a solution on their own, extraneous cognitive load is reduced;
thus, the learners can concentrate on understanding the solution and the underlying principles.
However, the employment of worked examples does not
guarantee good learning results. Learning outcomes depend
on design features (cf. Atkinson et al., 2000) and on the
learner's activity. Chi et al. (1989) noted that worked examples typically do not include all of the reasons why a certain
step in the solution is performed. They found that some
learners attempted to establish a rationale for the solution
steps by trying to explain the examples to themselves, and
that these learners learned more than those who did not
generate explanations – a phenomenon they termed selfexplanation effect. A number of studies (e.g., Renkl, 1997)
could replicate this finding of Chi et al. (1989).

Table 1: Sequence of worked examples and solutions.

Set 1
Set 2

Example 1
Example 2
Example 3
Example 4

Multiple solutions
diagram
arithmetic
diagram
arithmetic

Uniform solution
diagram
diagram
arithmetic
arithmetic

The learning outcomes were assessed through a post-test
that required the flexible application of solution methods
and the explication of advantages and disadvantages of
different methods. The results showed that learning with
multiple solutions was very effective, irrespective of any
instructional help. Actually, no positive effect was found for
instructional support.
However, the number of solution methods and the number
of representations were confounded, as the participants
either learned with multiple solutions which were realized
by multiple representations (arithmetical and graphical), or
they learned with only one solution method and thus with
only one representation (arithmetical or graphical) in one
example set. The present experiment was conducted in order
to separate the effects of multiple solutions from the effects
of multiple representations. In addition, it was not clear

Worked Examples with Multiple Solutions
A combination of worked examples and multiple solutions
might be very effective as it can be argued that the employ840

sentations, different representations were used (i.e., the first
problem was solved using a diagram, the second one was
solved arithmetically); in the case of multiple solutions
sharing one representation, both solutions used the same
representation (for example, two very similar problems were
solved using two different arithmetic solutions). The learners in the "multiple solutions" conditions should easily detect that different procedures were employed for more or
less the same problem. In the "uniform solution method"
group, both examples of a set were solved using the same
method. Thereby, the number and the type of the presented
worked-out solutions were held constant, that is, independently of the experimental condition, the eight worked examples demonstrated each of the four solution methods twice.
Thus, differences between the experimental groups can not
be attributed to the type or to the number of different
worked-out solutions in the learning phase. The experimental variation focused on whether it was shown that the same
problem can be solved by different methods.

whether the self-explanation prompts used by Große and
Renkl (2003) focused on the "right" cognitive processes –
possibly, other prompts would have had stronger effects on
learning outcomes. Thus, in-depth analyses were conducted
in order to identify the relevant processes in learning from
multiple solutions.

Research Questions
The following research questions were addressed:
(1) Can the effect be replicated that learning with multiple
solutions is more effective than learning with one solution
method? Is the number of representations of importance?
(2) In which way are learning processes, especially selfexplanations, affected by the presentation of multiple solution methods with or without multiple representations?

Methods
Sample and Design
The participants of this study were 37 female and 16 male
students of the University of Freiburg, Germany. The mean
age was 23 years (M = 22.98, SD = 3.34). The study took
place in individual sessions. A design with three groups was
implemented. Participants in the group "multiple solution
methods with multiple representations" (n = 18) were presented different solution methods which were based on
different representational codes (i.e., graphical and arithmetical). Learners in the group "multiple solution methods
sharing one representation" (n = 17) also received multiple
solutions which, however, shared the same representation
(i.e., graphical or arithmetical). In the third group "uniform
solution method" (n = 18), the participants were presented
worked examples with only one solution method.

Procedure
First, the participants read a short text (488 words) which
addressed basic principles of probability in order to enable
them to understand the following worked examples. Afterwards, the learners worked on the pretest, which was followed by the learning phase (presentation of worked examples), where the experimental variation took place. The
participants were told to verbalize everything that comes to
mind while studying the worked examples, and to simultaneously relay each of their thoughts as they appear in their
minds (according to the guidelines of Ericsson & Simon,
1993). This think-aloud procedure was trained with some
brain-teasers. Due to technical problems, the thinking aloud
data of 3 learners are missing. Finally, they worked on the
post-test. The duration of the experiment was approximately
80 minutes (M = 80.58, SD = 16.42).

Materials
Probability calculation was chosen as the learning domain.
The learning materials contained four sets of problems
which could be solved by four different solution methods (a
diagram based on whole numbers, a diagram based on rational numbers, an arithmetic solution based on whole numbers, and an arithmetic solution based on rational numbers).
Each set contained two structurally identical problems (e.g.,
"Three different balls are in an urn. Three times, you take a
ball and put it back into the urn. What is the probability for
taking a different ball each time?" and "Three different candies are in a glass. Three times, you take a candy and put it
back into the glass. What is the probability for taking a different candy each time?"). Thus, eight examples were presented. The two examples of an example set shared not only
the same underlying structure but also a number of surface
features in order to make the correspondence salient to the
learners. In the "multiple solutions" groups ("multiple solution methods with multiple representations" and "multiple
solution methods sharing one representation"), each set of
analogical problems was presented with two different solutions. In the case of multiple solutions with multiple repre-

Analysis of Example Processing
For the coding of example processing, the scheme of Renkl,
Atkinson, and Große (2004; cf. also Renkl, 1997) was employed in an adapted version. The following categories were
assessed:
(1) Principle-based explanations. The number of times
that participants refer to the principles of probability was
counted (e.g., "This is the multiplication rule"). In addition,
this category was scored if participants verbalized principlebased elaborations concerning the construction of diagrams.
(2) Noticing inter-example coherence. This category assesses the extent to which coherence between examples is
perceived. Each statement was coded in which the worked
example presently being studied is related to an earlier one.
(3) Comparisons and connections between solution methods. This category was coded if the learners compared solution methods (e.g., with respect to advantages and disadvantages), or if they elaborated on connections and interrelations between solution methods.

841

ous variable) were computed. With respect to computational
skills, a comparison of the "uniform" group with both "multiple" groups revealed neither a significant group difference
nor a significant interaction with prior knowledge, both F <
1. As to be expected, prior knowledge substantially influenced computational skills, F(1, 49) = 19.92, p < .001, η² =
.289. With respect to conceptual skills, a comparison of the
"uniform" group with both "multiple" groups again revealed
neither a significant group difference nor a significant interaction with prior knowledge, both F < 1. As to be expected,
prior knowledge substantially influenced the acquisition of
conceptual skills, F(1, 49) = 3.94, p = .053, η² = .074. Thus,
the consideration of multiple solution methods did not foster
learning outcomes.

(4) No connection between solution methods. This category was coded if learners stated that different solution
methods did not share any connections or interrelations
(e.g., "This arithmetic solution does not have anything to do
with the diagram presented above").
(5) Anticipative reasoning. If learners elaborated on the
next solution step in advance (i.e., without looking at the
next worked step) this category was coded.
Each thinking-aloud protocol was coded independently by
two raters. The interrater agreement was fair (kappa coefficient: .66). In cases of disagreement between raters, the
final code was determined by discussion.

Instruments
Pretest: Assessment of prior knowledge. A pretest containing 6 relatively simple problems examined the probability knowledge of the participants before the presentation of
the worked examples. The maximum score was 6 points.
Post-test: Assessment of learning outcomes. The learning
outcomes were measured with a post-test containing 12
problems. According to the number of required single answers they were awarded 1 to 3 points. Computational skills
were assessed by 2 problems which were similar to the examples presented in the learning phase and 5 problems
which required the application and adaptation of solution
methods presented in the learning phase. A maximum score
of 14 points could be achieved. Conceptual skills were
tested by 5 items which asked the learners to give verbal
elaborations on the correctness or universal validity of given
solution methods. A maximum score of 10 points could be
achieved.

Table 3: Means (and standard deviations) of the selfexplanations in the experimental groups.

Principle-based
explanations
Noticing
coherence
Comparisons and
connections
No connection
between solutions
Anticipative
reasoning

Results
Tables 2 and 3 show means (and standard deviations) of
pretest and post-test scores and self-explanations in the
experimental groups. Concerning the pretest, an ANOVA
did not reveal significant group differences, F < 1.

Pretest
Computational skills
Conceptual
skills

Multiple
solutions
sharing one
representation
4.21 (1.21)

4.56 (1.19)

9.58 (2.01)

9.03 (3.28)

10.17 (3.33)

5.47 (1.16)

5.85 (1.18)

5.47 (1.19)

Multiple
solutions
sharing
one representation

Uniform
solution
method

3.65 (3.32)

3.13 (2.55)

3.53 (3.43)

2.35 (2.09)

3.31 (3.18)

5.94 (4.15)

2.24 (1.82)

1.31 (1.62)

2.00 (2.50)

.00 (.00)

.13 (.50)

.29 (.59)

.65 (.93)

.19 (.54)

1.29 (1.21)

In order to gain insight into the significance of the number
of representations when learning with multiple solutions,
ANOVAs comparing the two "multiple" groups were computed. Concerning computational skills, no significant group
difference and no significant interaction with prior knowledge were found, both F < 1. As to be expected, a significant influence of prior knowledge was found, F(1, 31) =
10.19, p = .003, η² = .247. With respect to conceptual skills,
the groups differed significantly, F(1, 31) = 4.57, p = .041,
η² = .128. Multiple solutions sharing one representation
were more effective than multiple solutions with multiple
representations. In addition, a tendency was found that for
learners with low prior knowledge, learning with only one
representation was more effective, whereas learners with
good prior knowledge profited from learning with multiple
representations, F(1, 31) = 3.50, p = .071, η² = .102. As to
be expected, the influence of prior knowledge was significant as well, F(1, 31) = 6.01, p = .020, η² = .162.

Table 2: Means (and standard deviations) of the pretest and
post-test scores in the experimental groups.
Multiple
solutions
with multiple
representations
4.36 (1.26)

Multiple
solutions
with multiple representations

Uniform
solution
method

Computational and conceptual skills. In order to test the
effects of the experimental variation and interaction effects
with prior knowledge, ANOVAs with the factor "experimental group" and the factor "prior knowledge" (as continu-

Self-explanations. Concerning principle-based self-explanations, no significant correlations with post-test measures
were obtained. In addition, no significant group differences
were found, F < 1, thus, multiple solutions did not influence
842

skills; multiple solutions which shared one representation
led to better learning outcomes than multiple solutions with
multiple representations. However, for learners with good
prior knowledge, the employment of multiple solutions and
multiple representations seems to be beneficial. Possibly, for
learners with low prior knowledge, instructional support
with respect to the integration of multiple representations
could lower the demands and foster learning outcomes.
In this experiment, solution methods which shared one
representation differed with respect to their mathematical
basis, whereas solution methods which used different representations shared the same mathematical basis. Thus, it can
be concluded that possibly not only the number of representations is of importance but also the degree of mathematical dissimilarity: Learning with multiple solutions may
be especially effective when, from a mathematical point of
view, the presented solution methods differ to a great extent.
Learning with multiple solutions caused some interesting
changes in the learning processes. The "uniform" learners
anticipated substantially more compared to the learners in
the "multiple" groups and this was associated with good
learning results with regard to conceptual skills. Maybe
learning with multiple solutions is so demanding that learners do not try to anticipate solutions on their own. In the
group "multiple solutions sharing one representation", anticipative reasoning correlated negatively with conceptual
skills. It is possible that a strong tendency to anticipate solutions may implicate that the presented solutions – which
looked quite similar as they were based on the same representation – were not processed attentively by the learners,
which may have led to lower learning outcomes.
The "uniform" learners stated similarities between problems more often than the "multiple" learners. It is likely that
the uniform solutions were easier to process which may
have given the learners more opportunities to think about
similarities between problem types; in addition, solving
isomorphic problems using the same solution method may
have helped the learners to find commonalities between
problems. When learning with multiple solutions and multiple representations, noticing inter-example coherence seems
to be crucial for the acquisition of conceptual skills. This
may be explained by the fact that in this group, inter-example coherence was the least salient, thus, in order to acquire
general problem-solving schemata, an active elaboration on
commonalities may be very important. Possibly, learning
outcomes can be further enhanced by asking the learners to
compare the presented examples attentively.
Against our intention, in the "uniform" group, the "multiplicity" of the solution methods was recognized in some
cases, and comparing different solution methods (across
example sets) correlated with learning outcomes with respect to computational skills. Thus, the consideration of
multiple solutions seems to be effective even if the solution
methods are not contrasted explicitly. These findings can
explain the result that no substantial superiority of the "multiple" groups was found with respect to learning outcomes.

principle-based self-explanations. With respect to noticing
inter-example coherence, significant group differences were
found, F(2, 47) = 5.54, p = .007, η² = .191; the learners in
the "uniform" group stated similarities between examples
more often than the learners in the other groups. Significant
correlations with learning outcomes were only found in the
group "multiple solutions with multiple representations", in
which noticing coherence correlated with conceptual skills,
r = .53, p = .028. No significant group differences were
found with respect to comparisons and connections between
solutions, F < 1. In the "uniform" group, comparing and
connecting solution methods across example sets was associated with computational skills, r = .42, p = .091. In the
"multiple" groups, no substantial correlations were found.
Statements expressing that different solution methods did
not share connections or interrelations did not occur with
different frequencies, F(2, 47) = 1.88, p = .165. However, a
comparison between the "uniform" group on the one hand
and both "multiple" groups on the other hand revealed that
learners in the "uniform" group tended to believe more often
that solution methods did not have anything in common,
F(1, 48) = 3.12, p = .084, η² = .061. A substantial correlation with learning outcomes was only found in the group
"multiple solutions sharing one representation", as to be
expected, computational skills correlated negatively with
expressing that different solution methods did not share any
commonalities, r = -.45, p = .083. With respect to anticipative reasoning, significant differences between the experimental groups were found, F(2, 47) = 5.75, p = .006, η² =
.196; the "uniform" learners anticipated more compared to
the learners in the other groups. In the "uniform" group,
anticipative reasoning correlated positively with conceptual
skills, r = .42, p = .096. Contrary to expectation, in the
group "multiple solutions sharing one representation",
anticipative reasoning correlated negatively with conceptual
skills, r = -.45, p = .080, thus, in this group, anticipations
were not associated with good learning outcomes.
In summary, learning with multiple solutions seems to
foster the insight in the interrelations between different
solution methods. However, it reduces the awareness of
similarities between problem types. In addition, when
learning with multiple solutions, the number of spontaneous
problem solving activities (anticipations) is reduced.

Discussion
Despite the promising results of Große and Renkl (2003),
the superiority of learning with multiple solutions could not
be replicated. However, in order to overcome the weakness
of this study, where the number of presented solution methods and the number of representations were confounded,
each participant – irrespective of the experimental condition
– learned four different solution methods. Strictly speaking,
the experimental variation only took place with respect to
the order of the presentation of the solution methods; therefore, the experimental variation was rather "small".
The variation of the number of representations in one example set led to differences with respect to conceptual
843

Chi, M. T. H., Bassok, M., Lewis, M. W., Reimann, P., &
Glaser, R. (1989). Self-Explanations: How students study
and use examples in learning to solve problems. Cognitive
Science, 13, 145-182.
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1993). Die Selbstbestimmungstheorie der Motivation und ihre Bedeutung für die Pädagogik [The self-determination theory of motivation and its
relevance for pedagogy]. Zeitschrift für Pädagogik, 39,
223-238.
De Jong, T., Ainsworth, S., Dobson, M., van der Hulst, A.,
Levonen, J., Reimann, P., Sime, J.-A., van Someren, M.
W., Spada, H., & Swaak, J. (1998). Acquiring knowledge
in science and mathematics: The use of multiple representations in technology-based learning environments. In
M. van Someren, P. Reimann, H. Boshuizen, & T. de
Jong (Eds.), Learning with multiple representations. Oxford: Elsevier Sciences.
Ericsson, K. A., & Simon, H. A. (1993). Protocol analysis.
Verbal reports as data. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Große, C. S., & Renkl, A. (2003). Example-based learning
with multiple solution methods fosters understanding. In
F. Schmalhofer, R. M. Young, & G. Katz (Eds.), Proceedings of EuroCogSci 03. The European Cognitive Science Conference 2003 (pp. 163-168). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Paas, F., Renkl, A., & Sweller, J. (2003). Cognitive load
theory and instructional design: Recent developments.
Educational Psychologist, 38, 1-4.
Renkl, A. (1997). Learning from worked-out examples: A
study on individual differences. Cognitive Science, 21, 129.
Renkl, A., Atkinson, R. K., & Große, C. S. (2004). How
fading worked solution steps works - A cognitive load
perspective. Instructional Science, 32, 59-82.
Schoenfeld, A. H. (1992). Learning to think mathematically:
Problem solving, metacognition, and sense-making in
mathematics. In D. Grouws (Ed.), Handbook for Research
on Mathematics Teaching and Learning. New York:
McMillan.
Sjuts, J. (2002). Unterschiedliche mentale Konstruktionen
beim Aufgabenlösen – Eine Fallstudie zur Mathematik als
Werkzeug zur Wissenspräsentation [Different mental constructions when solving problems – A case study on
mathematics as a tool for knowledge presentation]. Journal für Mathematik-Didaktik, 23, 106-128.
Spiro, R. J., Feltovich, P. J., Jacobson, M. J., & Coulson, R.
L. (1991). Cognitive flexibility, constructivism, and hypertext: Random access instruction for advanced knowledge acquisition in ill-structured domains. In T. Duffy, &
D. Jonassen (Eds.), Constructivism and the technology of
instruction. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Tabachneck, H. J. M., Koedinger, K. R., & Nathan, M. J.
(1994). Toward a theoretical account of strategy use and
sense-making in mathematics problem solving. Proceedings of the 16th Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

In order to reach good learning outcomes, it seems to be
important that interrelations between solution methods are
not neglected. Especially in the group "multiple solutions
sharing one representation", where different solution methods looked similar, neglecting interrelations between them
was associated with lower learning outcomes with respect to
computational skills. Statements expressing that different
solution methods have nothing in common tended to occur
more often in the "uniform" group compared to the "multiple" groups; thus, the presentation of multiple solution
methods seems to be suitable in order to foster insights in
commonalities and analogies between different solution
methods. Possibly, learning outcomes could be further enhanced if the learners are explicitly prompted to compare
and integrate the presented solution methods.
In the following, some hypotheses on factors that enhance
learning outcomes from multiple solutions are outlined.
These hypotheses should be addressed in further research:
(1) Providing instructional support with respect to the integration of multiple solutions (or multiple representations,
respectively) may enhance learning outcomes.
(2) Certain combinations of solution procedures may be
more helpful than others. For example, a combination of
informal methods with sophisticated ones may especially
enhance learning outcomes, as the informal methods may
help the learners to better comprehend the more sophisticated ones.
(3) Many students think that mathematical problems can
have only one solution (Schoenfeld, 1992). Thus, the effectiveness of learning with multiple solutions may be enhanced if learners are informed that there are several different correct approaches to solving a problem. Only then,
may students be willing to "accept" different methods. Beyond this, results in the long term may differ from those in
the short term. It is likely that students have to get used to
considering multiple solutions before substantially profiting
from them.
(4) Presenting different solution methods by means of
worked examples is not the only possibility; in contrast, it
may also be very effective to encourage the learners to develop them on their own.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Eva-Maria Maier, Isabel
Braun, and Imke Ehlbeck for their assistance in conducting
the experiment and analyzing the think-aloud data.

References
Ainsworth, S., Bibby, P., & Wood, D. (2002). Examining
the effects of different multiple representational systems
in learning primary mathematics. The Journal of the
Learning Sciences, 11, 25-61.
Atkinson, R. K., Derry, S. J., Renkl, A., & Wortham, D.
(2000). Learning from examples: Instructional principles
from the worked examples research. Review of Educational Research, 70, 181-214.

844

