UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Eye-Movements and Reasoning: Evidence for Relevance Effects and Rationalisation
Processes in Deontic Selection Tasks

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8xh0p57k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Ball, Linden J.
Lucas, Erica J.
Philips, Peter

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Eye-Movements and Reasoning: Evidence for Relevance Effects and Rationalisation
Processes in Deontic Selection Tasks
Linden J. Ball (l.ball@lancaster.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Lancaster University,
Lancaster, LA1 4YF, UK

Erica J. Lucas (erica.lucas@ntu.ac.uk)
Faculty of Economics and Social Sciences, Nottingham Trent University,
Nottingham, NG1 4BU, UK

Peter Phillips (phillips@comp.lancs.ac.uk)
Department of Computing, Lancaster University,
Lancaster, LA1 4YF, UK
variants. To this end we begin with an overview of findings
relating to indicative and deontic selection tasks as well as a
discussion of theories that have attempted to generalise their
core assumptions across both task formats.

Abstract
Evans’ (e.g., 1996) Heuristic-Analytic theory of reasoning in
Wason’s selection task proposes the existence of implicit
processes that direct attention to ‘relevant’ aspects of the
problem and thereby determine card selections. This account
also proposes that people pursue explicit rationalisations of
relevance-determined choices. Our recent studies (e.g., Ball et
al., 2003) have measured aspects of on-line attentional
processing using eye-movement tracking and have supported
the idea that card selections are driven by relevance and then
subjected to rationalisation processes. For example, eyemovement data have revealed a reliable inspection-time
imbalance between selected and non-selected cards. Our
results, to date, however, have related to selection tasks with
indicative contents. Here we report an eye-tracking study that
involved deontic selection tasks. Various eye-movement
measures revealed predicted differences in inspection times
between selected and non-selected cards, with the magnitude
of the effect being similar to that observed in studies of the
indicative task. We discuss our results in relation to current
theories of processing in the selection task.

Indicative Selection Tasks and Matching Bias
In its typical indicative form participants are presented with
an array of four cards, and are told that each card has a letter
on one side and a number on the other side (only the facing
sides are visible). Participants are then given a conditional
rule that they are told applies to the cards, and their task is
to decide which cards need to be turned over in order to
determine whether the rule is true or false. For example, the
rule might be If there is an A on one side of the card then
there is a 3 on the other side of the card, and the cards
might be ‘A’ ‘J’, ‘3’ and ‘7’. These are referred to as the p,
not-p, q and not-q cards, respectively. The logically correct
response for a conditional reading of the rule is to turn the A
(p) and the 7 (not-q) cards, as these could provide a letternumber combination that would show the rule to be false.
Most people select either A (p) alone, or A (p) and 3 (q).
Evans and Lynch (1973) proposed that people’s selections
indicate a systematic matching bias, that is, they simply
choose cards that are named in the given rule. Matching bias
is a robust phenomenon in selection tasks employing
abstract rules and generalised across various connectives,
such as: if p then q, q if p, p only if q, and there is not both p
and q (e.g., Evans, Clibbens, & Rood, 1996; Evans,
Legrenzi, & Girotto, 1999). Despite the generality of the
matching phenomenon there remains some contention as to
how best to account for it. We will examine theories of the
matching effects on indicative selection tasks below, but
first we describe some key phenomena associated with
deontic versions of the selection task that form the focus of
our current experiment.

Keywords: Wason Selection Task; eye movements;
inspection times; deontic rules; relevance; rationalisation.

Introduction
Reasoning has long been of interest to cognitive scientists,
and one task continues to attract research attention: Wason’s
four-card selection task (Wason, 1966). It has become
increasingly apparent that there are, in fact, two distinct
forms of selection task - ‘indicative’ and ‘deontic’ depending on what kind of conditional rule and instructions
are used in studies. Indicative conditionals express factual,
scientific or common-sense knowledge, whereas deontic
conditionals specify social regulations, laws and moral
rules. Our interest in the present paper relates primarily to
people’s reasoning with deontic variants of the selection
task. However, the fact that theories strive for a generic
account of responding that cuts across both indicative and
deontic versions means that it is valuable to begin by
surveying key phenomena associated with both task

Deontic Selection Tasks and Pragmatic Effects
Johnson-Laird, Legrenzi, and Legrenzi (1972) were the first
to study a deontic selection task using the rule If a letter is
sealed then it has a 50 lire stamp on it. Participants played
196

Furthermore, any analytic processing that is applied to cards
serves merely to rationalise decisions that have already
been made on the basis of relevance (Evans, 1995). This HA account of the indicative task is clearly attentional in
emphasis. Linguistic cues draw attention toward certain
cards and away from others; the former get selected and the
latter get rejected. In this way, the H-A account can readily
make sense of findings (Evans & Wason, 1976) that the
retrospective verbal reports people provide when asked to
explain card selections reflect attempts to justify choices in
terms of either verification or falsification (depending on the
nature of the rule), with no apparent insight into the logical
basis of selections (see also Lucas & Ball, 2005).
What, however, about a H-A account of selection patterns
on deontic variants of the selection task? Evans and Over
(1996) argue that in explaining deontic task performance it
is important to appreciate that the notion of heuristicallydetermined relevance is related to the current goal that the
participant is pursuing. As they say, “Information will be
more relevant, the greater extent to which it bears upon the
chances of achieving the current goal” (Evans & Over, p.
81). Thus, in deontic tasks, any card that could reveal an
outcome costing the participant something (e.g., extra
money for a sealed letter or prevention from playing out)
will have high ‘goal relevance’. Evans and Over propose
that heuristic processes mean that these costly outcomes
become the focus of attention, such that individuals choose
cards that could reveal whether such an outcome holds.
Instructional and scenario changes can, of course, alter what
the participant will see as costly outcomes for a task. Thus,
perspective effects can be accommodated within this
extended notion of heuristically-cued relevance. Under a HA account of deontic task performance, rationalisation
processes would be employed to justify choices in an
equivalent manner to that which arises in the indicative
paradigm (Evans, 1996)

the role of postal workers, sorting mail and checking for rule
violations. Presented ‘cards’ were real envelopes: a sealed
letter - p; an unsealed letter - not-p, a letter with a L50
stamp - q, and one with a L40 stamp - not-q. The violating
p, not-q instance was a sealed letter with a lower-value
stamp on it, and 21 of 24 participants selected cards that
could reveal this combination compared with 2 of 24 in the
indicative letter-number version.
Although this effect was dubbed ‘thematic facilitation’ (as
thematic content appeared to enhance logical performance)
it is now known that the effect of thematic material is more
complex. There are two reasons for this complexity (Evans,
1996). First, it is not the case that thematic content always
alters selection frequencies. When materials are ‘arbitrarily
realistic’ participants seem to succumb to the same
matching bias as seen with indicative rules (see Manktelow
& Evans’, 1979, study using rule such as Every tine I eat
haddock then I drink gin). Second, even when thematic
content does change card-selection patterns it does not
always produce more logical choices. Studies using ‘social
contract rules’ with shifted perspectives have shown that a
not-p, q pattern can be induced instead (e.g., Cosmides &
Tooby, 1989; Gigerenzer & Hug, 1992). Manktelow and
Over (1991), for example, used a rule given by a mother to a
son: If you tidy your room then you may go out to play. The
four cards represented different days - showing on one side
whether the room was tidied and on the other whether the
son played out. When participants adopted the role of the
son checking whether the rule had been followed they
selected logically correct ‘Room tidied’ (p) and ‘Did not go
out to play’ (not-q) cards. However, when asked to check
the rule from the perspective of the mother, the typical
response was to select ‘Room not tidied’ (not-p) and ‘Went
out to play’ (q). Manktelow and Over (1991) propose that
people may be selecting cards because of pragmatic
influences rather than because they are reasoning logically
(e.g., striving to satisfy personal goals such as detecting
whether cheating is arising in a social-contact situation).

Mental Models Theory Johnson-Laird and Byrne’s (e.g.,
1991) mental models theory (MMT) proposes that reasoning
is based around the construction of models in which the
premises of a rule are represented as being true. To explain
selection-task performance with indicative rules, MMT
assumes that people: (1) only think about cards that are
explicitly represented in their models of the rule, and (2)
only select those cards for which the hidden value could
bear on the truth or falsity of the rule. So, for example, the
failure to select the not-q card on If p then q reflects the fact
that this term is not explicitly represented in the reasoner’s
models of the conditional, thereby resulting in the common
selection of just the p card. Those people who represent this
rule as a biconditional would select p and q (the other
dominant selection combination) as both of these cards are
explicitly represented in models and could bear on the rule’s
truth or falsity. To account for matching bias on rules that
contain negations, Johnson-Laird and Byrne (1991) argue
that negated components promote the expansion of models
to include the affirmative counterparts of negated terms.

Theories of the Selection Task
Three key reasoning theories have been applied to selection
tasks involving both indicative and deontic conditionals.
Heuristic-Analytic Theory Evans’ (e.g., 1996) heuristicanalytic (H-A) theory is a general theory of reasoning, It
proposes that reasoning typically involves two processing
stages. First, implicit, pre-conscious, heuristics determine
which aspects of a task are of psychological relevance,
thereby enabling attention to be selectively focused on these
task features. Second, explicit, conscious, analytic processes
are applied to these relevant task features to enable an
inference or judgment to be made.
Evans’ (1998) specific account of matching bias on the
indicative task is that it arises from the operation of a
linguistically-based ‘matching heuristic’ that reflects the
way that negative terms are used in natural language to deny
suppositions rather than to assert new information.
197

outcomes. In deontic selection tasks the instructions cue
people to place a high value on instances of unfairness (e.g.,
taking a benefit without paying a required cost, such as
posting a sealed letter without having placed a higher-value
stamp on the envelope). It turns out that cards with the
greatest expected utilities in deontic selection tasks are also
those that tend to get picked.
Overall, the ODS account of the indicative selection task
can accommodate evidence for matching bias, as well as the
growing body of evidence for probabilistic influences on
card selections (cf. Oaksford & Wakefield, 2003). Oaksford
and Chater’s decision theoretic account of deontic tasks is
closely related to Evans’ relevance account (although it does
not embody an analytic rationalisation process), and also
makes equivalent predictions to the MMT.

The MMT also accounts for why deontic selection tasks
facilitate not-q selections (Johnson-Laird, 1995). According
to MMT, selection of this card will only occur if the models
of the conditional are fleshed out to represent it explicitly. It
is proposed that real-world knowledge can promote such
explicit modelling of the not-q case. This ‘pragmatic
modulation’ effect (Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 2002) can arise
from rule contents triggering memories of violations or
analogous events, or through provision of a familiar deontic
framework for interpreting the rule. Perspective effects with
deontic rules can likewise be explained by the idea that such
rules tend to get represented as bi-conditionals, and that
contextual cues will determine which counterexample
model the reasoner will focus their attention on.
The MMT of the selection task has some similarities to
the H-A account. For example, the concept of explicit
representation in models overlaps with the H-A notion of
relevance (i.e., what is explicitly represented in a model is
what is perceived to be relevant to the task at hand).
However, MMT differs critically from the H-A account in
its assumption that a degree of analytic processing does
determine card selections (i.e., the only cards that end up
being chosen are those explicitly represented ones that are
deemed to bear on the rule’s truth or falsity).

Tests of Selection-Task Theories
Roberts (1998) noted that only limited attempts have been
made to test theories of selection-task performance using
converging evidence beyond card-selection patterns. What
effort has been made in this respect has primarily been by
those working within the H-A tradition. For example,
Evans, Ball and Brooks (1987) used computer-presented
indicative tasks and recorded the order in which ‘selectdon’t select’ decisions were made about each card. As
predicted by the H-A account, people made decisions about
matching cards before mismatching ones, and a correlation
was found between card selection frequency and card
decision order (i.e., selected cards were decided about
earlier than rejected ones). However, it is possible that these
results merely reflect a preference for people to register
‘select’ before ‘don’t select’ choices, and that what is being
shown is a response bias as opposed to an attentional bias.
Evans (1996) provided stronger evidence for the H-A
account in studies using a mouse-pointing methodology to
record card-inspection times. Participants tackled computergenerated selection tasks (both indicative and deontic) and
indicated a card they were ‘thinking about’ by holding the
mouse pointer over it. Cards were selected via a mouseclick; no action was required for non-selected cards. The
computer logged cumulative inspection times for each card.
Evans argued that if heuristic processes were cueing card
selections, then only heuristically-cued cards would be
subjected to analytic rationalisation aimed at justifying their
selection. Inspection times would, therefore, be higher for
selected cards than rejected cards. Evans (1996) found good
support for this novel prediction.
Evans’ (1996) inspection-time prediction is both risky
(i.e., it could have readily been falsified) and derives solely
from the H-A framework (cf. Ball et al., 2003). The MMT,
for example, argues that people should consider (i.e.,
inspect) cards that they end up rejecting because they have
no bearing on the rule’s truth or falsity - even though they
were represented in models. Rejecting considered cards
should break the link between card selection and increased
inspection time, undermining any possible emergence of an
inspection-time effect seen by Evans (1996). Likewise,

Optimal Data Selection Theory Oaksford and Chater’s
(e.g., 1994, 1996) theory of indicative selection-task
performance is framed within a rational-analysis approach
to human reasoning, and is referred to as the optimal data
selection (ODS) account. Oaksford and Chater propose that
selections are based on the information value of cards in
relation to their potential support for the rule, estimated in
the form of expected information gain. Their mathematical
analysis of the information value of cards shows, for
example, that the selection of the matching q card for the
indicative conditional can be more useful than the selection
of the non-matching (but logically appropriate) not-q card.
In this way, the ODS model proposes that supposedly
illogical matching choices on indicative rules may, in fact,
be deemed to be rational in terms of a probabilistic standard.
The ODS theory presents a persuasive account of the
matching effects observed on affirmative, indicative rules
within the selection task. Moreover, because the ODS
theory capitalises on Oaksford and Stenning’s (1992)
arguments that negations typically define high-probability
contrast sets, it is also able to explain antecedent and
consequent matching effects observed for conditional rules
containing negated constituents (e.g., Oaksford, 2002). A
version of ODS theory has also been formulated to explain
effects seen with deontic selection tasks (e.g., Oaksford &
Chater, 1994, although in the case the theory adopts a
‘decision-theoretic’ framework (cf. Manktelow & Over,
1991; and see also Evans & Over’s H-A account of deontic
tasks, described above). This framework refers to selections
being determined by judgements of expected utility rather
than of expected information gain. The concept of utility in
decision theory reflects the value that people place on

198

presented with general instructions as to the requirements of
the study and an example of the task format based on
Manktelow and Evans’ (1979) If I eat haddock then I drink
gin rule. They then tackled four target selection tasks. Each
involved presentation of the task scenario and associated
rule in the top third of the screen, with the cards depicted in
a two-by-two arrangement in the lower two-thirds of the
screen. Under each card were ‘yes’ and ‘no’ radio buttons as
participants had to make decisions for all cards using the
mouse pointer. The location of cards was randomised for
each presentation, as was the order of tasks for participants.
To avoid confounding our results we standardised the
amount of information appearing on all cards across all rules
so that it was exactly two items. For each task an on-screen
reminder was also given of the task requirements.
The tasks used in the study were derived from Evans
(1996) as follows: (1) A ‘weak facilitator’ task based on a
‘town and transport’ problem - If I go to Burton, then I go
by train – and showing the cards ‘To Burton’, ‘To Ashby’,
‘By Train’ and ‘By Car’; (2) A ‘strong facilitator’ task
based on a ‘drinking age’ rule - If a person is drinking
alcohol, then that person must be over 18 years old - with
cards showing the words ‘Drinking Beer’, ‘Drinking Coke’,
‘22 Years’, and ‘16 Years’; (3) A ‘social contract’ rule - If
you tidy your room, then you may go out to play – with the
request to reason from the child’s perspective and the cards
showing the words ‘Room Tidied’, ‘Room Left’, ‘Played
Out’, and ‘Kept In’); and (4) a ‘switched social-contact’ rule
- If a customer spends over £100, then they may take a free
gift – with the request to reason from a store-detective’s
perspective and with the cards showing the words ‘Took
Gift’, ‘Left Gift’, ‘Spent £120’, and ‘Spent £90’.
Whilst participants tackled the computer-presented
selection tasks their eye movements were recorded using an
LC Technologies EyeGaze system that determines gaze
direction using the pupil-centre/corneal-reflection method.
The tracker consists of a standard desktop computer running
Windows NT/2000, an infrared camera mounted beneath the
monitor, and software to process the resulting data. The
tracker is accurate to within 0.45 degrees of visual angle,
which, at 50 cm from the screen, covers approximately
0.38cm (12.8 pixels). Eye movements are sampled at 60 Hz
and participants used a chin-rest to minimise data loss.
Fixations were detected at a threshold of 100 ms or above.

Oaksford and Chater’s probabilistic approach does not, a
priori, predict an inspection-time effect, since, presumably,
the computation of expected information gain values (in
indicative tasks) or expected utilities (in deontic tasks)
should take a similar amount of time for selected or nonselected cards. Without the addition of an analytic
rationalisation component, Oaksford and Chater’s
probabilistic framework, although extremely compelling,
seems unable to accommodate Evans’ (1996) evidence for
inspection-time effects in indicative and deontic tasks.
Despite this converging evidence for the H-A account,
Roberts (1998) noted a need for caution in interpreting
findings from the inspection-time paradigm. He argued that
there are potential sources of bias inherent in this paradigm
that could have led to artefactual support for the claim that
people are spending time rationalising choices that have
been cued by relevance-determining heuristics. For
example, participants might pause the mouse pointer briefly
over a card before making an active ‘select’ decision (by
clicking on it). This would lead to inflated inspection times
for selected cards relative to non-selected ones. Roberts
(1998) manipulated the presence of such task-format biases
across a series of experiments, and demonstrated that the
magnitude of the inspection-time effect was closely related
to the number of sources of bias present. With all sources
removed the inspection-time effect was also eradicated.
Recently, Ball, Lucas, Miles and Gale (2003) critiqued
inspection-time studies using mouse-pointing because of
their use of an inherently insensitive technique for
monitoring the second-by-second transitions in attentional
processing that arise during selection-task performance. Of
particular concern is the fact that mouse pointing is an
indirect measure of attentional processing since participants
have actively and effortfully to move the mouse pointer to
cards that they are thinking about. Ball et al. advocate the
use of eye-movement tracking as a more precise approach
for measuring moment-by-moment attentional shifts that
underlie cognitive performance with highly display-based
problems like the selection task. Ball et al. report three
experiments that systematically eradicated the sources of
artefact discussed by Roberts (1998) by combining careful
task constructions with eye-movement tracking to measure
directly on-line processing. All three experiments produced
good evidence for the robustness of the inspection-time
effect, so supporting the predictions of the H-A account.
Despite the general support for key tenets of the H-A
account of selection task that derive from Ball et al.’s (2003)
eye-tracking research, it is noteworthy that their
experiments focused solely on indicative selection tasks. It
remains therefore, to clarify whether similar inspection-time
effects can be observed in deontic tasks.

Results and Discussion
Card Selection Frequencies
Our first concern was whether card selection frequencies
(Table 1) conformed to established selection patterns seen in
the literature. For the weak facilitator we would expect
relatively high p and q selections, and this is exactly what
was observed. For the strong facilitator and the social
contract rules a p, not-q selection pattern should dominate;
this indeed seemed to be the case for the strong facilitator.
However, for the social contract rule, although selection of
not-q was higher than that seen for the weak facilitator, it

Method
Participants were 43 undergraduates at Lancaster University
who received payment for taking part in the study. None had
received teaching on reasoning or logic. The study involved
computer-based presentation of problems. Participants were
199

Ball (2005) have argued that rationalisation may actually
take place rapidly as the explicit consideration of what may
be on the reverse sides of to-be-selected cards seems also to
be cued by relevance processes (e.g., secondary matching
bias can guide rationalisation in indicative selection tasks).

was the q card that dominated consequent choices. This is
not entirely consistent with the literature, and suggests a
remaining susceptibility to matching bias on this rule.
Finally, on the switched social contract task we would
expect an not-p, q choice pattern; this is what was observed.
Overall, these tasks produced broadly similar response
patterns to those found by others (e.g., Evans, 1996).

Other Measures of On-Line Processing
In addition to logging cumulative card inspection times we
were also able to use the eye-tracker to monitor aspects of
on-line processing relating to the number of fixations on
cards. Of particular interest in the context of the H-A theory
of the selection tasks were measures of: (1) the frequency of
fixations on each card; and (2) the frequency of
‘revisitations’ to a previously fixated card. Such measures
have not previously been analysed in the study of the
selection task, although one would predict that they should
reveal a similar imbalance between selected versus nonselected cards to that observed in the case of the standard
inspection-time measure. This is because it should only be
those cards (i.e. selected ones) that are subjected to
rationalisation that should receive more fixations (and,
potentially, more revisitations) during the process of
justifying heuristically-determined choices.

Table 1. Percentage frequencies of selections across rules.
Logical case
Rule
Weak facilitator
Strong facilitator
Social contact
Switched contract

p

not-p

q

not-q

100
91
81
35

9
12
33
70

61
21
64
93

37
77
49
16

Card Inspection Times
Cumulative inspection-time scores were positively skewed
such that inferential analysis was conducted on logtransformed data. The critical prediction underpinning our
analysis was that there should be a difference in the mean
inspection times for participants’ selected versus nonselected cards, with the former showing longer inspections
times than the latter. This prediction derives from the H-A
account of relevance effects and rationalisation processes in
the selection task (Evans, 1996). We assessed this prediction
at the participant level (i.e., by comparing participants’
mean inspection times for cards that they selected versus
those that they rejected). This participant-level analysis
affords the advantage of increased test power (Roberts,
1998; see also Ball et al., 2003; Lucas & Ball, 2005) relative
to an equivalent item-based analysis that Evans (1996)
pursued in his original mouse-based inspection-time study.

Table 3: Mean fixation frequency and revisitation frequency
by participants for selected and non-selected cards.

Fixation frequency
ND
TD(log)
TD
Revisitation frequency
ND
TD(log)
TD

Table 2: Mean inspection times (in seconds) by participants
for selected and non-selected cards.

ND
TD(log)
TD

Selected

Non-selected

Mean
4.14
0.57
3.52

Mean
3.62
0.51
3.04

SD
1.64
0.15

Selected

Non-selected

Mean

SD

Mean

SD

13.50
1.10
11.59

4.47
0.13

12.05
1.05
10.22

4.50
0.14

5.75
0.78
5.03

1.88
0.12

5.37
0.76
4.75

1.89
0.12

Note. ND = natural data; TD(log) = transformed data (in log10 units);
TD = transformed data (in original units).

SD
1.55
0.17

Mean data for these fixation-based measures are shown in
Table 3. Again, since scores were positively skewed for all
cards we pursued ANOVAs on log-transformed data. These
analyses revealed a reliable difference for selected versus
non-selected cards on the fixation frequency measure, F(1,
42) = 9.01, MSE = 0.0063, p = .005, and a near significant
difference on the revisitation frequency measure, F(1, 42) =
3.37, MSE = 0.004, p = .074. These data seem interesting in
that they indicate that processing differences between
selected and rejected cads impact not only on the duration of
card processing but also on the tendency for people to refixate and revisit cards that end up being selected. This
observation, again, can perhaps best be interpreted as arising
from the application of rationalisation processes that serve
to justify heuristically-cued selection decisions.

Note. ND = natural data; TD(log) = transformed data (in
log10 units); TD = transformed data (in original units).

Mean inspection times (before and after transformation)
are presented in Table 2. ANOVA revealed a significant
inspection-time difference for selected versus non-selected
cards, F(1, 42) = 13.33, MSE = 0.08, p < .001, lending good
support to H-A predictions in the context of the present
thematic and deontic selection tasks. It is noteworthy,
however, that the magnitude of the inspection time
imbalance is small, at around 0.5 s. This inspection time
effect is, in fact, very similar to that seen in studies of the
indicative selection task (Ball et al., 2003), and Lucas and
200

Evans, J. St. B. T., & Wason, P. W. (1976). Rationalization
in a reasoning task. British Journal of Psychology, 67,
479-486.
Gigerenzer, G., & Hug, K. (1992). Domain-specific
reasoning: Social contracts, cheating and perspective
change. Cognition, 31, 127-171.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1995). Inference and mental models.
In S. E. Newstead and J. St. B. T. Evans (Eds.),
Perspectives on thinking and reasoning: Essays in honour
of Peter Wason (pp. 115-146). Hove: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M .J. (1991). Deduction.
Hove: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Johnson-Laird, P. N, & Byrne, R. M. J. (2002).
Conditionals: A theory of meaning, pragmatics, and
inferences. Psychological Review, 109, 646-678.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., Legrenzi, P., & Legrenzi, M. M.
(1972). Reasoning and a sense of reality. British Journal
of Psychology, 63, 395-400.
Lucas, E. J., & Ball, L. J. (2005). Think-aloud protocols and
the selection task: Evidence for relevance effects and
rationalisation processes. Thinking and Reasoning, 11, 3566.
Manktelow, K. I., & Evans, J. St. B. T. (1979). Facilitation
of reasoning by realism: Effect or non-effect? British
Journal of Psychology, 70, 477-488.
Manktelow, K. I., & Over, D. E. (1991). Social roles and
utilities in reasoning with deontic conditionals. Cognition,
39, 85-105.
Oaksford, M. (2002). Contrast classes and matching bias as
explanations of the effects of negation on conditional
reasoning. Thinking and Reasoning, 8, 13-151.
Oaksford, M. & Chater, N. (1994). A rational analysis of the
selection task as optimal data selection. Psychological
Review, 101, 608-631.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (1995). Information gain
explains relevance which explains the selection task.
Cognition, 57, 97-108.
Oaksford, M. & Chater, N. (1996). Rational explanation of
the selection task. Psychological Review, 103, 381-391.
Oaksford, M. & Chater, N. (2003). Optimal data selection:
Revision, review and re-evaluation. Psychonomic Bulletin
and Review, 10, 289-318.
Oaksford, M., & Stenning, K. (1992). Reasoning with
conditionals containing negated constituents. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 18, 835-854.
Oaksford, M., & Wakefield, M. (2003). Data selection and
natural sampling: Probabilities do matter. Memory and
Cognition, 31, 143-154.
Roberts, M. J. (1998). Inspection times and the selection
task: Are they relevant? Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 51A, 781-810.
Roberts, M. J., & Newton, E. J. (2001). Inspection times, the
change task, and the rapid response selection task.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 54A,
1031-1048.
Wason, P. C. (1966). Reasoning. In B. M. Foss (Ed.), New
horizons in psychology, Vol. I. Harmondsworth: Penguin.

Conclusion
Our eye-movement data have demonstrated that the
inspection-time imbalance between selected and rejected
cards that is observed with indicative selection tasks (Ball et
al., 2003) generalises to deontic versions of the task. This
inspection-time effect is directly as predicted under Evans’
(e.g., 1986) heuristic-analytic account of the selection task,
where implicit heuristic processes direct attention to
relevant aspects of the problem and determine card
selections, whilst analytic processes only serve to rationalise
choices that have been cues by relevance. Although we
believe that mental-models theory can explain such an effect
in relation to deontic selection tasks we remain concerned
about its capacity to explain the effect in indicative tasks (cf.
Lucas & Ball, 2005). The probabilistic approach advanced
by Oaksford and Chater (1994, 2003), whilst very
impressive in its capacity to predict selection patterns
across a range of indicative and deontic manipulations,
seems curiously silent as to how to account for inspectiontime effects. We would welcome the development of this
powerful theory to accommodate such observations (see
Lucas & Ball, 2005, for some initial steps in this direction).

References
Ball, L. J., Lucas, E. J., Miles, J. N. V., & Gale, A. G.
(2003). Inspection times and the selection task: What do
eye-movements reveal about relevance effects? Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 56A, 1053-1077.
Cosmides, L., & Tooby, J. (1989). The logic of social
exchange: Has natural selection shaped how humans
reason? Studies with the Wason selection task. Cognition,
31, 187-276.
Evans, J. St. B. T (1995). Relevance and reasoning. In S.E.
Newstead and J. St. B. T. Evans (Eds.), Perspectives on
thinking and reasoning: Essays in honour of Peter Wason
(pp. 147-172). Hove: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Evans, J. St. B. T. (1996). Deciding before you think:
Relevance and reasoning in the selection task. British
Journal of Psychology, 87, 223-240.
Evans, J. St. B. T. (1998). Matching bias in conditional
reasoning: Do we understand it after 25 years? Thinking
and Reasoning, 4, 45-82.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Ball, L. J., & Brooks, P. G. (1987).
Attentional bias and decision order in a reasoning task.
British Journal of Psychology, 78, 385-394.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Clibbens, J., & Rood, B. (1996). The role
of implicit and explicit negation in conditional reasoning
bias. Journal of Memory and Language, 35, 392-409.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Legrenzi, P., & Girotto, V. (1999). The
influence of linguistic form on reasoning: The case of
matching bias. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 52A, 185-216.
Evans, J. St. B. T., & Lynch, J. S. (1973). Matching bias in
the selection task. British Journal of Psychology, 64, 391397.
Evans, J. St. B. T., & Over, D. E. (1996). Rationality and
reasoning. Hove: Psychology Press.

201

