Storms, Malt & Sloman, in press). In that study, speakers of different language groups, Belgian monolingual
speakers of Dutch and French and Dutch-French bilinguals, named two sets of objects, bottles and dishes.
For the present study, only four categories were selected
from the linguistic category names generated by Dutchspeaking monolinguals for the bottles set. The bottles
set contained 73 objects that were selected to be likely
to receive the name bottle or jar in American English, or
else to share one or more salient properties with bottles
and jars. The selection of the categories was based on
the criterion of most frequent dominant name, where the
dominant name of an object is the name that was most
frequently generated for that object. The four linguistic
categories selected were fles, bus pot and brik. Figure 1
shows examples of each of the four categories.

1

to sort the objects into piles based on overall similarity
(for more details, see Ameel et al., in press). To obtain typicality ratings, the subjects were asked to rate
on a 7-point scale the degree to which each of the objects was a good example of the linguistic categories fles,
bus, pot and brik. The scale ranged from 1 to 7 with 1
labeled very atypical and 7 labeled very typical. The
task was done on a computer and the objects were presented randomly on the screen. At the top of the screen
appeared the category name. At the bottom of each
picture appeared the 7-point scale. The subjects filled
in one scale number for each object. This procedure
was repeated three times, once for each category. The
order of presentation of the categories was counterbalanced across subjects. Finally, in the feature generation
task, constructed to derive a measure of family resemblance according to Rosch and Mervis (1975), subjects
were asked to list attributes of the four linguistic categories fles, bus, pot and brik. Following the procedure
introduced by Hampton (1979), a set of questions was
used for each category in order to encourage subjects to
generate as many different properties as they could (for
more details, see Hampton, 1979).

2

Results
3

The results are presented in three sections. Each section
describes a different determinant of typicality.

4

Family resemblance To derive a measure of family
resemblance, we followed the Rosch and Mervis (1975)
procedure: For each category, we listed all attributes
that were generated at least twice for that category in the
feature generation task. A judge assessed for each object
whether each of the listed features was applicable to the
object. Each attribute received a weight, corresponding
to the number of objects that possessed that attribute.
The basic measure of family resemblance for an object
was the sum of the weighted applicability scores of all
the features that had been generated for its category.
To examine how well family resemblance predicts typicality, Spearman rank-order correlations between the
ranks of the obtained measures of family resemblance
and the ranks of the typicality ratings averaged across
subjects were performed separately for each of the categories. Note that this measure of family resemblance
does not take into account an object’s dissimilarity to
members of contrast categories. Verbeemen, Vanoverberghe, Storms and Ruts (2001) showed that contrast
categories generally do not make an independent contribution to within-category structure. The resulting rankorder correlations between family resemblance and typicality for fles, bus, pot and brik were respectively 0.71,
0.14, 0.77 and 0.49. All were significant (p < .01), except
for the correlation for bus 1 . The result for fles is comparable to the correlations reported by Rosch and Mervis

Figure 1: Black-and-white versions of some of the color
photographs used in the experiment. Object 1 is a very
typical example of the category fles, object 2 of the category bus, object 3 of the category pot, and object 4 of
the category brik.
Subjects We used the naming and sorting similarity
data for the objects of the bottles set that were gathered
from thirty-two undergraduate students at the Psychology Department of the University of Leuven as part of
the naming study of Ameel et al. (in press). Twentyeight undergraduate students provided typicality ratings. Finally, 10 undergraduate students participated
in a feature generation task. All subjects were Dutchspeaking monolingual Belgians. They participated for
course credit.
Procedure In the naming task, the experimenter
asked subjects to name the 73 objects, presented on individual pictures. They could give whatever name seemed
like the best or most natural name, and they were told
that they could give either a single-word name or a name
with more than one word (for more details, see Ameel et
al., in press). In the sorting task, we asked the subjects

1
The reason for the low correlation of bus might be found
in the feature generation task. Some subjects generated features of brik in the feature generation task of bus, since the
name bus is sometimes used for objects with brik as the dominant name. As a result, the set of features generated for bus
does not reproduce an unequivocal representation of bus.

110

for basic level categories (between 0.69 and 0.94, average of 0.84), while the other correlations are lower. The
lower correlations might be due to the lower number of
generated frequencies. Except for bus, these significant
positive correlations confirm that the more attributes an
object has in common with other objects of the category,
the more it is a representative or typical member of the
category.
Centroid prototypes in an M -dimensional space
unweighted and weighted for name frequencies
The second determinant assumes an underlying M dimensional geometrical representation in which the exemplars of a category are embedded. Each exemplar is
represented by a vector of M coordinates, one on each
of the M dimensions. The coordinates of the objects
were obtained by performing multidimensional scaling
(Borg & Groenen, 1997) on the similarity sorting data
that were first transformed to pairwise similarity data.
Pairwise similarity was recovered by counting for each
of the 2628 ( 73∗72
2 ) possible pairs of objects how many
subjects placed that pair of objects in the same pile. A
large number of subjects placing the two objects in a pile
indicates high perceived similarity between the objects
of the pair. Two- to 6-dimensional MDS solutions were
computed.
In the category-learning tradition (Nosofsky, 1984,
1992; Minda & Smith, 2001), the prototype of a category is assumed to be a single point in the space representation. As mentioned earlier, this point could be the
centroid of all category exemplars, a vector of modal values over all category exemplars, a vector of ideal values,
etc (Barsalou, 1985). In the case of an assumed underlying M-dimensional space, these different definitions are
reflected in the way the coordinates of the prototype are
computed: as the mean of the coordinates of all category
exemplars on each dimension, as the modal coordinate
on each dimension, as the ’ideal’ coordinate on each dimension, etc. The closer an instance is to the prototype,
the more typical it is of its category.
The coordinates of the centroids for fles, bus, pot and
brik were calculated as follows. Two different versions of
the centroid prototypes were computed: an unweighted
version and a weighted version. In the unweighted version the coordinates of the centroid of the category are
based on the average coordinates of all the objects with
the category name as dominant name. For instance,
the coordinates for the centroid of fles were the average
of the coordinates of all the objects with fles as dominant name. However, by looking at the dominant names,
some information present in the data might be lost. Only
five objects were unanimously called by the same name.
The remaining objects were named by at least two different names. An object that has been called bus more
often than fles, is assigned to the category bus and will
not be taken into account in the computation of the coordinates of the centroid prototype of fles. Therefore,
in the weighted version of centroids all the objects that
were at least called once with the category name were
involved in the computation of the coordinates of the
centroids of the four categories. This was done by av-

eraging over the coordinates of each object weighted for
the frequency with which each object was called by the
category name concerned. Thus, the more an object was
called fles, the larger was its effect on the averaged coordinates of the centroid of fles. The same holds for the
other centroids.
To examine how well typicality can be predicted by
the two geometrical prototype models, the euclidean distances to the weighted and unweighted centroids of each
category, calculated in 2 to 6 dimensions, were correlated with the mean typicality ratings of the objects.
The euclidean distance is computed by formula 1:
v
u n
uX
t (xij − x )2 ,
(1)
ip
i=1

with n the number of dimensions, xij the coordinate of
object j on dimension i and xip the coordinate of prototype p on dimension i. Table 1 shows the correlations
between the mean typicality ratings and the distances
calculated in 2 to 6 dimensions for the unweighted centroids. Table 2 contains the corresponding correlations
for the weighted centroids.
Table 1: Correlations between typicality and distance to
the unweighted centroids.
Number of
dimensions
2
3
4
5
6

fles
-0.76
-0.76
-0.83
-0.85
-0.87

prototypes
bus
pot
-0.58 -0.66
-0.67 -0.76
-0.69 -0.79
-0.66 -0.79
-0.75 -0.85

brik
-0.67
-0.89
-0.91
-0.93
-0.94

Table 2: Correlations between typicality and distance to
the weighted centroids.
Number of
dimensions
2
3
4
5
6

fles
-0.75
-0.75
-0.85
-0.85
-0.87

prototypes
bus
pot
-0.57 -0.59
-0.62 -0.69
-0.66 -0.79
-0.61 -0.71
-0.67 -0.74

brik
-0.67
-0.89
-0.93
-0.93
-0.94

As seen in Table 1 and 2, all correlations are negative:
the smaller the distance from an object to the centroid
of a category, the more typical the object is for the category. The correlations between typicality and the distance to the centroid generally increase from two to six
dimensions for the four categories. The correlations between typicality and distance to the unweighted centroid
do not differ significantly from the corresponding correlations between typicality and distance to the weighted
111

centroid for the four categories. Apparently, the extra
information provided by the name frequencies does not
help to construct a better prototype.
When comparing the correlations for these centroids
to the family-resemblance-based correlations, it is clear
that the correlations for the centroids exceed the familyresemblance-based correlations, except for fles where
only the correlation in six dimensions is slightly though
not significantly higher than the family-resemblancebased correlation. In general, a centroid prototype represented in a multidimensional space appears to explain
more of the graded structure of categories than a familyresemblance-based prototype.

as well as their optimal points, respectively, FLES opt,
BUS opt, POT opt and BRIK opt.
For fles, the optimal correlation between typicality
and distance to the best predicting point in two dimensions was -0.81. This correlation is significantly higher
than the correlations found for the weighted and unweighted centroids of fles in two dimensions (see Table
1 and 2, p < .05).
9,5

5,5

Optimal prediction The centroid conception of a
prototype described above may not be the optimal prototype location in the multidimensional representation
to account for the rated typicality. Therefore, we looked
for the prototype that guarantees a maximal or optimal (negative) correlation between the typicality ratings
and the distances to that prototype. This optimization problem was solved by using the steepest ascent
method. This method is shortly explained. M coordinates need to be estimated, corresponding to the number
of dimensions of the geometrical representation. So, the
vector Θ of ’parameters to be estimated’ can be written
as {x1p , .., xnp } with n the number of dimensions. The
vector of coordinates of the category centroid is taken
as the starting point x (0) . Next, the correlation is computed between typicality and the distance to point x (0)
as well as the gradient of the function at point x (0) . From
that point, as the name of the algorithm suggests, a step
is taken in the direction of the steepest ascent, which is
the direction of the gradient of the function at the point.
This results in a vector x(1) , with a higher correlation
than the starting vector. This procedure is repeated (K
times), until vector x(K+1) does not produce a higher
correlation than vector x(K) .
The method of the steepest ascent generates iterating
points x(k+1) with formula 2:
x(k+1) = x(k) + β ∗ ∇(f (x(k) )).

BUS_opt

7,5

BRIK_opt BRIK_ct

3,5

POT_ct

Dimension 2

BUS_ct
1,5
-0,5

POT_opt

-2,5

FLES_ct

-4,5

Fles
Bus
Pot
Brik
Other

-6,5
-8,5

FLES_opt

-10,5
-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

Dimension 1

Figure 2: 2-dimensional MDS representation of the bottles. FLES ct, BUS ct, POT ct and BRIK ct represent the central tendencies for fles, bus, pot and brik.
FLES opt, BUS opt, POT opt and BRIK opt represent
the optimal prototypes for fles, bus, pot and brik.
Figure 2 shows that the optimal point of fles,
FLES opt, moves away from the centroid FLES ct and
from the set of objects. It is situated outside the cloud
of points representing the objects. Its coordinates on the
two dimensions reach more extreme values than the coordinates of the exemplars of the category fles, indicated
with a black diamond in Figure 2. It seems that people
are using a caricature (more extreme on the dimensions
than the usual typical objects) to judge typicality.
For bus, the optimal correlation reached -0.65, again
higher than the correlations between typicality and distance to the centroids of bus (see Table 1 and 2, marginally significant, p < .1). Like for fles, the optimal
point for bus, BUS opt, seems to be a caricature of the
category with more extreme values on the two dimensions (see Figure 2) than the typical exemplars, indicated
by a white square in Figure 2. Also for MDS solutions
in 3- to 6-dimensions, the highest correlations for fles
and bus were obtained with optimal points located far
outside the set of objects (e.g. a correlation of -0.95 for
the 5-dimensional solution of fles).
For pot and brik, the optimal correlations reached 0.73 and -0.68. Again these values exceed the values
found for the centroids of pot and brik in two dimensions (see Table 1 and 2). This time, the optimal points,
POT opt and BRIK opt are not situated outside the
cloud of objects. However, compared to the position
of their respective centroids POT ct and BRIK ct, they

(2)

The variable β indicates the length of the step.
∇(f (x(k) )) is the gradient of the function f, where f is the
correlation between typicality and distance to x (k) . The
length of the step β is chosen such that f(x(k+1) )>f(x(k) ).
Iterating points x (k+1) are generated until the gradient
of ∇(f (x(k+1) )) equals zero. At that point, the maximum has been reached, the optimal estimated parameters have been found.
This optimization algorithm was performed for prototypes in 2 to 6 dimensions. We only discuss the results of
the 2-dimensional optimal points, since the results in two
dimensions are similar to the results in more dimensions
and since the solution in two dimensions can easily be
visualized in contrast to solutions in more dimensions.
Figure 2 shows the 2-dimensional MDS solution. Each
of the four categories is represented. Further, the
weighted centroids for the four categories, respectively,
FLES ct, BUS ct, POT ct and BRIK ct are pictured,
112

do move somewhat away from the object set. The mean
distance of the objects to the optimal point POT opt
is significantly larger than the mean distance of the objects to the centroid POT ct (t(72) = 8.10, p < .0001).
The same holds for brik (t(72) = 19.49, p < .0001). Although the optimal prototypes for pot and brik do not
seem to occupy an extreme position away from the complete set of objects, both POT opt and BRIK opt lie at
the boundary of the convex hull that covers the exemplars of their category. Similar results were obtained for
MDS representations in 3- to 6-dimensions.
A plausible reason for the fact that POT opt and
BRIK opt did not move to an extreme position, while
FLES opt and BUS opt did so, might be the difference
in representativeness of the object set for the different
categories. There are two indications for this difference
in representativeness. First, overall, the set of objects is
significantly more typical for the categories fles and bus
than for the categories pot and brik. This can be seen in
the fact that there are more objects with fles (n = 25)
or bus (n = 16) as the dominant name than there are
objects with pot (n = 13) or brik (n = 4) as the dominant name. Second, for fles and bus, the stimulus set
represents the complete continuum of typicality, ranging
from very good exemplars to intermediate to very bad
exemplars. In contrast, for pot or brik, the stimuli in the
set are either extremely good exemplars, or extremely
bad exemplars with no intermediate cases. For instance,
the few objects with brik as the dominant name receive
extremely high mean typicality ratings (average of 5.83
on a scale of 1 to 7, SD = 0.48), while the other 69
objects -the nonmembers- receive extremely low mean
typicality ratings (1.68 on average, SD = 0.79). This
means that the four exemplars of the category brik will
have a relatively large influence on the computation of
the optimized correlation, in contrast to the exemplars
of the contrast categories (i.e. all 69 objects named by a
dominant name different from brik ). The optimization
algorithm will focus on the four objects called brik and
try to find the point for which the distances to these four
objects are minimal. This results in a point that comes
very close to the central tendency of the four objects,
since this point guarantees that the squared deviations
from it are minimal. A similar reasoning explains why
the optimal point for pot does not move farther away
from the cloud of data points.
For fles and bus, the mean typicality ratings of the
nonmembers are significantly larger than the means of
the nonmembers for pot and brik (1.91 for fles and 1.96
for bus versus 1.68 for pot and brik, t(288) = 3.71, p <
.01). These larger mean typicality ratings of nonmembers have an extreme influence on the position of the
optimal point: They ’catapult’ the point away from the
centroid that is fully determined by the position of the
members.
Figure 3 visualizes the effect of the mean typicality of
the nonmembers of a category on the position of the optimal point relative to the centroid. The mean typicality
ratings of nonmembers for the four categories are plotted against the observed distances between the optimal

point and the centroid. The (regression) line connects
the distances predicted by the mean typicality of nonmembers for the different categories.

Distance between optimal point and central tendency

12

BUS

10

FLES
8

6

4

2

POT

observed distance
predicted distance

BRIK
0
1,65

1,7

1,75

1,8

1,85

1,9

1,95

2

Mean typicality of non-members

Figure 3: Plot of mean typicality ratings of nonmembers
for fles, bus, pot and pot against observed distances between optimal point and central tendency and distances
predicted by the mean typicality of nonmembers.
As can be seen from Figure 3, the mean typicality ratings of nonmembers do a very good job in predicting
the shift of the optimal prototype. The larger the mean
typicality rating of nonmembers, the larger is the shift
away from the central tendency. However, the number of
data points (n = 4) on which this regression is based, is
too small to draw reliable conclusions. Many more categories are needed to test this regression effect. Also the
possible additional contribution of other factors (e.g. the
mean typicality of the nonmembers relative to the mean
typicality of members, that might explain the somewhat
larger shift for pot compared to brik and for bus compared to fles) can only be tested on a larger set of data.
Further analyzes are planned with the typicality data of
French-speaking monolinguals and French-Dutch bilinguals in order to get a more considerable data set size
and to allow us to test these effects in a more reliable
way.
A set of ’more typical’ nonmembers for brik and pot
would probably lead to an optimal point outside the
cloud of points. However, in real life, people might
also exclusively encounter very typical members and very
atypical nonmembers of brik and pot. Objects of these
categories have a specific shape determined by only a
few covarying features (e.g. for brik : rectangular shape,
specific proportion of height to width; for pot: specific
proportion of height to width). Intermediate positions
(atypical members and typical nonmembers) are rather
rare. In contrast, for fles and bus there does exist a
considerable group of objects occupying the intermediate positions on the continuum of typicality. So, the
position of the optimal prototype depends on the degree
of graded structure inherent to the category, which is
expressed in the typicality of nonmembers.
113

Conclusion

Malt, B. C., Sloman, S. A., Gennari, S., Shi, M., &
Wang, Y. (1999). Knowing versus naming: Similarity
and the linguistic categorization of artifacts. Journal
of Memory and Language, 40, 230-262.
Minda J.P., & Smith, J. D. (2001). Prototypes in category learning: The effects of category size, category
structure and stimulus complexity. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition,
27, 755-799.
Nosofsky, R.M. (1984). Choice, similarity and the context theory of classification. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 10,
104-114.
Nosofsky, R.M. (1992). Exemplars, prototypes, and similarity rules. In A. Healy, S. Kosslyn, and R. Shiffrin
(Eds.), From learning theory to connectionist theory:
Essays in honor of William K. Estes, Volume 1. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Rips, L. J., Shoben, E. J., & Smith, E. E. (1973). Semantic distance and the verification of semantic relations.
Jorunal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 12,
1-20.
Rosch, E. H. (1973). On the internal structure of perceptual and semantic categories. In T. E. Moore (Ed.),
Cognitive development and the acquisition of language.
New York: Academic Press.

The present study examined different determinants of
the graded structure of categories. We found that geometrical centroids (unweighted and weighted for name
frequencies) in higher-dimensional spaces did a better
job in predicting typicality than family resemblance.
However, an even better prediction was obtained with an
external prototype whose position was based on the typicality ratings of nonmembers of the category. Further
research is required to examine whether these findings
can be generalized to other categories.

Acknowledgments
The first author is a research assistent of the Fund for
Scientific Research-Flanders.

References
Ameel, E., Storms, G., Malt, B., & Sloman, S. A. (in
press). How bilinguals solve the naming problem.
Journal of Memory and Cognition.
Barsalou, L. W. (1985). Ideals, central tendency and
frequency of instantiation as determinants of graded
structure in categories. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 11 (4),
629-654.
Borg, I., & Groenen, P. (1997). Modern Multidimensional Scaling: Theory and applications. New York:
Springer-Verlag, New York.

Rosch, E. H. (1978). Principles of categorization. In E.
Rosch & B. B. Lloyd (Eds.), Cognition and categorization. Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.

Gardenfors, P. (2000). Conceptual spaces: The geometry
of mind. Bradford Books: MIT Press.
Goldstone, R. L. (1996). Isolated and interrelated concepts. Memory and Cognition, 24 (5), 608-628.

Rosch, E. H., & Mervis, C. B. (1975). Family resemblances: Studies in the internal structure of categories.
Cognitive Psychology, 7, 573-605.
Smith, E. E., Shoben, E. J., & Rips, L. J. (1974). Structure and process in semantic memory: A featural
model for semantic decisions. Psychological Review,
81, 214-241.

Hampton, J. A. (1979). Polymorphous concepts in semantic memory. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 18, 441-461.
Hampton, J. A. (1993). Prototype models of concept
representations. In I. Van Mechelen, J. A. Hampton,
R. S. Michalski & P. Theuns (Eds.), Categories and
concepts: Theoretical views and inductive data analysis. London: Academic Press

114

