UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Fluency in Similarity Judgements

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0m82f7ps

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Blok, Sergey V.
Markman, Arthur M.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Fluency in Similarity Judgments
Sergey V. Blok
(blok@psy.utexas.edu)

Arthur B. Markman
(markman@psy.utexas.edu)

Department of Psychology,
University of Texas at Austin

Department of Psychology,
University of Texas at Austin

Abstract

commonalities (and differences) between two concepts
along a set of dimensions. That is, current theories postulate
a single process bridging stimulus and judgment. It is, of
course, possible that this unitary perspective is too narrow
and judgments are informed by a set of processes, only one
of which being the discovery of commonalities and
differences.
More specifically, we believe that it is important to
distinguish between comparison and judgments of
similarity. Comparison of mental representations gives rise
to the commonalities and differences for a set of objects.
These commonalities and differences are combined into an
assessment of similarity. A final judgment may be affected
by a set of additional factors. These processes may come
into play before, alongside or after the comparison
(Markman & Gentner, 2005).
One important processing component that may affect
similarity judgments is the fluency of processing a pair of
concepts. Roughly speaking, fluency is the perceived ease
of processing a pair of items. Obviously, a central factor that
affects the feeling of fluency is the success of the
comparison process itself. Comparison of a pair of similar
items gives rise to a stronger feeling of fluency than does
comparing a pair of very dissimilar (nonalignable) items.
Here we focus primarily on fluency processes that are not
related to alignment per se.
Another factor that may give rise to a feeling of fluent
processing is the presence of an association between the
concepts being compared. For example, a coffee cup and
coffee are commonly found together but share relatively few
features. Several studies have shown that such pairings
receive higher similarity ratings than would be expected on
the basis of matching attributes (Bassok & Medin, 1997;
Wisniewski & Bassok, 1999). Interestingly, such thematic
associations do not extend to generalizations. Gentner and
Brem (1999) asked participants to extend a novel linguistic
label (e.g. “dax”) between a source and a target object.
While participants gave high similarity ratings for
thematically related concepts, they were unwilling to project
the novel label between them. This finding is consistent
with the hypothesis that associations and similarity
contribute to similarity judgments but not to related
cognitive activities, such as inductions.
A central aspect of our proposal is that the source
processes that give rise to the feeling of fluency are not
immediately available to consciousness. The implication of
this assumption is that the feeling of fluency can sometimes

Similarity judgments have traditionally been assumed to arise
from an alignment process that seeks correspondences
between the objects and relations for two entities. Several
recent studies have shown that thematic relationships between
items (e.g. bowl and spoon) can influence people’s
assessments of similarity above and beyond the effect of
feature match and mismatch. We suggest that thematic
similarity responses can be accounted for in terms of
perceived processing fluency. We propose and test a general
framework for the role of fluency in similarity that is related
to work by Jacoby and Whittlesea. In Study 1, participants
assigned higher similarity ratings to word pairs previously
encountered in a study list than to new pairs. In Study 2,
participants assigned higher similarity ratings to word pairs
that comprised familiar noun compounds (e.g. "garbage
truck") than to corresponding reverse-ordered pairs ("truck
garbage"). In Study 3, lower similarity ratings were observed
for word pairs under low-contrast rather than normal viewing
condition.

Components of Similarity Judgments
Similarity is arguably the most influential single construct in
the history of cognitive science. It informs leading theories
of concepts, reasoning and choice (e.g. Medin, Goldstone,
& Gentner, 1993). One reason for the prevalence of
similarity-based theories of cognition is similarity’s explicit
availability in a person’s metacognitive experience. For
example, undergraduate participants in inductive reasoning
tasks often use similarity as a justification for inferences
(Bailenson, Shum, Atran, Medin, & Coley, 2002).
The prevalence of similarity in cognitive theories raises
important related questions about the nature of similarity
judgments themselves. Proposals based on spatial
representations (Shepard, 1957) and feature-matching
(Tversky, 1977) provide computationally straight-forward
accounts of judgments with relatively few assumptions.
Recent advances in understanding the way relational
information plays a role in similarity led theorists to view
similarity judgments in terms of structural alignment
(Markman, 1996). In this framework, the process of
comparison involves the discovery of both relational and
object-level commonalities.
Despite important differences between spatial, featural
and structural approaches, all theories assume that a
similarity judgment is based on an assessment of

280

associate the words, although the instructions did not
preclude this strategy. After the study and the similarityrating portions of the experiment, participants were given an
intervening task, followed by a paper-and-pencil recall test.
Two analyses were of particular interest. First, we
predicted that a pair of words would be rated as more
similar if they appeared on a study list. Presumably,
encoding the words for a later memory test increases their
processing fluency when similarity is probed. This
heightened fluency should then be misattributed to
similarity.
A related question is about the relationship between the
recall performance and the magnitude of the fluency effect.
Would the fluency effect be stronger or weaker for pairs that
were successfully recalled than for those that were not
recalled? An intuitive answer might be that there is a
positive relationship between the fluency effect and the
strength of the memory trace. This view predicts that the
stronger the memory, the more likely fluency is to be
misattributed to similarity.
Whittlesea’s theory is more nuanced, suggesting that
once the source of the fluency has been established, it will
be discounted. Thus, explicit awareness that words were
presented in a study list may in fact get rid of the possible
misattribution of fluency for similarity, because the increase
in fluency has been (correctly) accounted for. This view
predicts that fluency effects should be stronger for notrecalled pairs than for recalled ones.

be mistaken for structural similarity. For example, when
presented with “cup” and “coffee”, people will experience
activation of the associative system but the source of this
activation will not be immediately “known.” A person’s
metacognitive system may thus erroneously attribute that
activation to similarity, which would subsequently inflate
ratings.
The idea that fluency can be used in cognitive processing
is not entirely new. There is evidence in the memory
literature demonstrating fluency effects in familiarity
judgments. For example, Jacoby and colleagues (Jacoby,
Woloshyn, & Kelley, 1989) showed that unfamiliar names
that appeared on a study list were significantly more likely
to be judged as famous than unfamiliar names that did not
appear on the list. Participants may have expected greater
ease of processing for famous names than for novel ones.
Consequently, the fluency that arose due to a name’s
appearance on a study list was misattributed to the fluency
arising from the name being famous (see Whittlesea &
Williams, 2001 for a theory of recognition memory based
on the same principle).
In this paper, we explore the generality of fluency
effects on similarity judgments. In the first study, we
increase the fluency for pairs of items by presenting them on
an earlier study list. In the second study we test whether
fluency can exert an influence in cases where concepts have
a linguistic association but do not typically have any
taxonomic of thematic relationships. For example, when
judging the similarity of a pair such as “garbage” and
“truck”, will people be influenced by the fact that the two
words frequently occur together in the form of a noun-noun
compound “garbage truck”?
In our third study, we introduce a manipulation that
lowers the ease of perceptual processing by lowering the
contrast of the stimulus display. Making words harder to
read presumably should not affect similarity judgments
under the unitary view. Alternatively, the low-contrast
display may reduce fluency, which, in turn, may lower the
judged similarity of the items when compared to normalcontrast display.

Results and Discussion
In order to test for a fluency effect on similarity judgments,
we computed the mean similarity for list A and list B items
for each participant. We then subjected these means to a 2x2
ANOVA with List Source (A or B) as a within-subject
factor and Study List (A or B) as a between-subject factor.
There was no main effect of List Source, F(1,34) = .006,
n.s., indicating that pairs from the two lists were equally
similar. There was also no main effect of study list, F(1,34)
= .001, n.s., suggesting that the particular list studied did not
impact similarity ratings overall. Importantly, there was a
reliable interaction between the list source and the study list,
F(1,34) = 12.82, p < .001. Figure 1a shows the mean
similarity ratings as a function of the words tested on (List
A or List B) and the words studied (List A or List B). When
tested on words from List A, participants who had
previously seen words from that list gave higher similarity
ratings than participants who saw list B. Analogously, when
tested on words from list B, participants who were exposed
to list B gave higher ratings than those who studied list A.
We interpret this pattern as being consistent with an effect
of processing fluency on similarity.
We also performed an analysis of recall data in order to
test whether it was predictive of the magnitude of the
fluency effect. As discussed above, the recall data can shed
light on the extent to which explicit awareness of having
studied the words would moderate the fluency effect.
Specifically, we expect conscious awareness of having seen

Study 1: Fluency from Prior Exposure
In this experiment, we tested whether prior exposure to pairs
of words increased their perceived similarity. Thirty-six
University of Texas students rated the similarity of 32 pairs
of words on a seven-point scale. The pairs were of medium
similarity (e.g. “ROSE—PINE TREE”). About 30 minutes
before the similarity task, participants were presented with a
study list for a later memory test. The study list was
constructed by randomly assigning pairs in the forthcoming
similarity task to two possible study lists, each consisting of
16 pairs. Thus, each participant studied either list A or list
B, and then rated pairs from both list A and list B.
The study portion of the experiment was presented on a
computer. Participants were instructed that study words will
be presented in pairs and that they can remember each word
by forming its mental image. Participants were not told to

281

the words to allow participants to discount, or “explain
away” the source of the additional fluency without it
affecting similarity judgments. Consequently, the fluency
effect should be stronger for words were not recalled than
words that were recalled.
Each participant studied a total of 32 words. The mean
recall performance was 15.4 words (48%). The mean
number of words recalled for List A and List B did not
differ reliably (MA = 17.0; MB = 14.2, t(34) = 1.53, n.s.).
Each participant provided similarity ratings associated with
a total of 64 words (i.e. 32 pairs). Each word in a similarity
comparison received a similarity score derived from that
comparison. For example, if a participant gave ROSE—
PINE TREE a similarity of 4.0, then the word ROSE and
PINE TREE would both be assigned a score of 4.0. For each
participant, we computed the mean similarity score for
words that were recalled, not recalled, or not seen on a study
list at all. Figure 1b presents the mean similarity ratings as a
function of whether the words were studied previously,
studied without recall, or studied and successfully recalled.
Overall, the studied words exhibited higher similarity
ratings than those that were not studied. This is consistent
with the previous analysis showing an overall effect of
having seen a word pair previously. Importantly, this gain in
perceived similarity is highest for words that were not
recalled. The studied-not-recalled mean (3.59) is reliably
higher than the studied-recalled mean (3.34), t(63) = 2.30, p
< .05. The studied-not-recalled mean is also reliably higher
than the not-studied mean (3.23), t(63) = 5.12, p < .001. It is
also worth noting that the studied-recalled words were not
reliably different in their similarity from the not-studied
words, suggesting that the fluency effect only manifested
itself for words that were not recalled.
This experiment provided direct evidence for the role of
fluency in similarity judgments. One possible alternative
explanation for the present finding is that presenting people
with pairs of words at study allowed for deeper processing
of these items, leading to discovery of a greater number of
possible commonalities as compared with only seeing the
pair during the similarity judgment. For example, while
CLASS and GAME may not strike one as similar initially,
deeper processing can suggest structural or analogical
commonalities that may translate into higher similarity
judgments (Goldstone & Medin, 1994). While this
possibility is worth considering, it is not consistent with our
second finding – that the similarity judgments were higher
when the strength of explicit memory was weaker.
Presumably, words that are easy to associate would appear
more similar than those that are difficult to associate. At the
same time, words that are successfully associated should
also be more likely to be to be recalled. Contrary to our
findings, this predicts a positive relationship between
similarity and recall success. It is fair to say that we do not
yet know whether the increase in fluency arose due to the

(a)

(b)

5.0

5.0
Study list
List A
List B
4.0

similarity

4.0

*
*

3.0

3.0

2.0

2.0
List A
List B
words
words
Tested on words

ns

s-nrec s-rec
type of word

Figure 1: (a) Mean similarity for word pairs as a function of
study list in Study 1; (b) Mean similarity (Study 1) as a
function of recall performance: ns = not studied, s-nrec =
studied but not recalled, s-rec = studied and recalled
(* p < .05).
association of the words in a pair at study or from the
memory activation of individual words in the pair. A study
using only single words in the study phase is currently
underway.

Study 2: Fluency from Noun Compounds
Like the previous experiment, this study also examined
whether the ease of processing of a pair of concepts affects
their judged similarity. We assumed that processing a pair
that comprised a familiar noun-noun compound would be
easier than processing pairs that did not form a familiar
compound. In particular, we contrasted similarity judgments
for compounds such as “garbage truck” and “chicken hawk”
with their respective reversals (i.e. “truck garbage” and
“hawk chicken”). If fluency of processing arising from the
familiar association does not play a role in similarity
judgments then we should not expect a difference in judged
similarity between the target (forward) versions of the
compounds and their reverse variants.

Method
Thirty undergraduates at the University of Texas at Austin
participated for course credit. Participants rated the
similarity of 40 familiar noun-noun compounds and their
reverse-ordered counterparts. Some examples of the
compounds are: beach/blanket, school/bus, trap/door and
home /work1. On each trial, a participant was presented with
two words positioned horizontally 60mm apart. We used a
1

The complete set can be obtained at

http://homepage.psy.utexas.edu/homepage/staff/Blok/nnstim.txt

282

1976). We examine categories that share a basic level (e.g.
robin—sparrow), superordinate level (e.g. robin—wolf) and
object-level matches (e.g. robin—shirt). The motivation
behind manipulating similarity in this way is to examine the
role that expectations about comparability may play in
judgment. We assume that people will expect that pairs of
objects at the basic level would be easier to compare than
those at super-ordinate and object levels (E. Markman,
1986; Rosch et al. 1976).
What role do expectations about similarity play in
judgments? One possibility is that expected comparability
does not affect judgments. In this case, we should observe
just a main effect of fluency, without interaction with item
similarity. The difficulty due to a low-contrast display may
simply subtract from the fluency across items leading to
lower similarity judgments. A more sophisticated possibility
is based on the logic of models by Jacoby and Whittlesea,
discussed in the introduction. When presented with a pair of
objects to compare, people will use the difference between
expected and actual processing difficulty in their assessment
of similarity. For items which are difficult to compare (i.e.
those containing pairs from distant categories), there is an
expectation of low fluency. Consequently, reducing fluency
experimentally should not have an effect on judgments. By
contrast, for items that are easy to compare (those that come
from related categories), expected fluency should be high.
In this case, artificially reducing fluency should lead to a
lower perceived similarity. This predicts an interaction
between the size of the fluency effect and the overall
similarity of the items, such that the fluency effect should be
larger for related items than for unrelated items.

seven-point rating scale anchored at 1 (“highly dissimilar”)
and 7 (“highly similar”).

Results and Discussion
As expected, the forward versions of target item pairs
received significantly higher mean similarity ratings than
their reversed counterparts (MFWD = 3.75; MREV = 3.60; t(39)
= 3.00, p < .01). We interpret this difference as evidence for
the role of fluency in similarity judgments. Specifically,
participants misattributed the greater ease of processing that
comes with familiar compounds to featural similarity. This
led them to give higher judgments to the compounds than to
their reversed counterparts.
One may notice that the manipulation of word order is
conceptually related to a number of earlier studies of
symmetry in similarity judgment. For example, Tversky
(1977) has shown that participants in the 1970’s rated Cuba
as more similar to China than China to Cuba (though see
Aguilar & Medin, 1999). Tversky accounted for the
asymmetries in terms of differences in prominence
(salience) between the entities being compared. Low to high
salience comparisons should generate higher similarity
judgments than high to low comparisons. While “salience”
in this context has never been sufficiently specified, we
addressed this objection by analyzing frequency information
for each word in the stimulus set (Francis & Kucera, 1982).
Presumably, word frequency is related positively to
conceptual saliency. Each pair was coded as a positive
asymmetry difference if the frequency of the second word
was higher than the frequency of the first. We should expect
a positive relationship between a pair having a positive
asymmetry difference and the size of the fluency effect.
Results indicated that exactly ½ of our items predicted
positive asymmetry, so no word frequency asymmetry bias
existed in our stimuli.

Method
Twenty-four members of the University of Texas
community were paid for participating. On each trial, a pair
of words was presented followed by a similarity rating scale
ranging between 0 (“not at all similar”) and 1 (“virtually
identical”). The participant moved the slider to indicate a
two-digit decimal value. After selecting a value, the
participant advanced the trial. The design consisted of all
pairwise judgments for the set of objects in Table 1.
The design generated 24 judgments at the basic level, 32 at
the superordinate and 64 object-level matches. The direction
of comparison was randomized for each item and
participant. All trials were randomly ordered.

Study 3: Fluency from Perceptual Processing
In the previous study, we showed that the feeling of fluency
due to a familiar word association was attributed to
perceived similarity. In other words, we were able to raise
similarity judgments by raising fluency. In the current study,
we lower fluency by decreasing the ease with which items
are processed perceptually. Oppenheimer (2004) conducted
a similar study with exemplar typicality judgments. He
showed that exemplars presented in a smaller type font
exhibited lower typicality judgments with respect to a superordinate category.
In the current experiment, we decreased fluency by
lowering the contrast of the word-pair display. If perceptual
fluency plays no role in similarity judgments, then we
should not see a difference between normal and lowcontrast items. If, on the other hand, perceptual fluency is
misattributed to similarity, we should see lower similarity
judgments for low-contarst than for normal items.
In addition to fluency, we manipulate the overall level of
similarity for our items by varying the taxonomic
relationship between the objects in the pairs (Rosch & et al.,

Table 1: Stimuli used in Study 3
Bluebird, Eagle, Tiger, Car, Airplane, Jacket, Sandal, Wolf,
Robin, Lion, Fox, Motorcycle, Shirt, Shoe, Hawk,
Helicopter
Each participant received the same 120 stimuli under
normal and degraded viewing conditions. The degraded
stimuli were generated by reducing the contrast of the words
(but not the similarity scale). Participants reported that the
resulting words were readable but with some effort.

283

scale was .29 under normal viewing and .30 under LOW
CONTRAST reading (n.s.). It remains to be seen whether
the reversal at the lower end of the similarity continuum is a
reliable phenomenon.

Results and Discussion
We performed an analysis of the results by creating
similarity bins from the data under normal viewing
condition. We categorized a pair as having low, medium or
high similarity if the mean judgment in the normal condition
fell within the first, middle or upper thirds of the rating
scale, respectively. We then plotted mean similarity ratings
within these categories as a function of viewing condition
(see Figure 2). The highest similarity level (.66 to 1.00)
exhibited a strong effect of the contrast manipulation
(MNORMAL = .81; MLOW CONTRAST = .72, t(23) = 3.80, p <
.001). The middle level (.33 to .66) showed a moderate
effect (MNORMAL = .53; MLOW CONTRAST = .49, t(23) = 2.58, p
< .05) while the lowest level showed a slight reversal
(MNORMAL = .10; MLOW CONTRAST = .14, t(23) = 3.55, p < .01).
It is worth noting that the numbers of observations in each
bin were unequal, and we can only make comparisons with
caution.
1.00

General Discussion
We began this paper by suggesting that similarity judgments
contain a mixture of component processes. Some are
distinct from the processes that uncover structural
commonalities and differences. Here we address whether
ease of processing of a word pair affects its judged
similarity. In the first study, we showed that perceived
similarity for a pair of words can be elevated by presenting
those words on an earlier study list. We interpret this
finding in terms of perceived processing fluency – being on
a study list raised the perceived fluency for processing the
pair which was, in turn, erroneously attributed to similarity.
Importantly, this fluency effect only held for pairs that were
present on a study list but were NOT recalled successfully.
This finding is consistent with the hypothesis that explicit
awareness of having seen the words earlier allowed
participants to discount the elevated processing fluency
without it spilling over to similarity judgments. We note that
this interpretation is entirely consistent with research on the
role of perceived fluency in memory judgments (e.g. Jacoby
and Whitehouse, 1989).
In our second and third studies, we manipulated fluency
though linguistic association and ease of perceptual
processing, respectively. We found that familiar noun-noun
compounds were rated as being more similar when the
association between the words was made salient. The
findings from the study on perceptual fluency were mixed:
while we discovered an effect of perceptual fluency on
highly similar word pairs, low-similarity items revealed a
pattern inconsistent with the predictions of the fluency view.
A central concept of our framework is comparability, or
the immediate sense of whether two items are sufficiently
similar to warrant further processing. This assessment of
initial similarity is likely to occur early in processing,
perhaps with the goal of allocating further cognitive
resources. There is reason to believe that comparison
involves local-to-global processing which begins with
simple feature-matching and progresses to the application of
structural consistency constraints (Falkenhainer, Forbus, &
Gentner, 1989; Goldstone & Medin, 1994). For example,
Goldstone and Medin (1994) found that structural
consistency was more likely to be respected in judgments of
similarity if the comparison was given sufficient time to be
carried out. These studies are consistent with the idea that
similarity judgments involve a “fast and frugal” early
assessment which may be followed by a more in depth
structural comparison (Markman & Gentner, 2005).
Another important concept in our theory is the
metacognitive expectation of fluency. Perhaps the best
illustration of this principle is provided by Whittlesea and
Williams (2001). They investigated the role that fluency
and familiarity played in a recognition task. These authors

normal contrast

similarity

0.75

low contrast

0.50

0.25

0.00
0.00--.33

.33--.66

.66--1.00

similarity range

Figure 2: Similarity as a function of viewing condition.
Error bars are standard errors.
We interpret this pattern of data as providing evidence for
the role of fluency in similarity judgments, albeit under
somewhat circumscribed conditions. The fact that the
fluency effect occurred only for the most similar pairs is
consistent with the aforementioned theory of the role of
expectations in judgments.
One puzzling finding is the slight reversal of the effect
for low-similarity matches. That is, items under LOW
CONTRAST viewing actually exhibited somewhat higher
similarity ratings than those under normal conditions. One
possible explanation rooted in this observation is that the
LOW CONTRAST condition led people to use the middle
of the scale more than under normal condition. This
propensity may have been caused by a lower level of task
effort for LOW CONTRAST items. In order to address this
hypothesis, we tabulated the number of responses in the .5
range (between .4 and .6) and found no differences as a
function of viewing condition. The mean probability of a
participant giving a response in the middle range of the
284

showed that people rarely relied on processing fluency of a
familiar concept in their “old” judgments because there was
already a high expectation of fluency. However, unfamiliar
concepts that elicited a high level of fluency were deemed
as having been stored in memory because fluency was
unexpected and no alternative explanation for the fluency
was easy to generate.
It is also worth noting that the feeling of fluency is a
feeling, the source of which is rarely available to
consciousness. In order to ascertain the source of the
feeling, people need to engage in attribution processes
(LeDoux, 1996). This attribution process can be mistaken,
leading the decision maker to make metacognitive errors. In
the classic study of such misattribution, Dutton and Aron’s
(1974) participants misattributed anxiety for sexual arousal
while crossing a perilous bridge. Perhaps in the same
fashion, our participants were misattributing fluency for
similarity.
Finally, while our perspective accounts for some effects
of thematic relatedness, we do not claim that any pattern of
similarity responses not accounted for by a process of
structural comparison reflects a mistake on the part of
research participants. In fact, dissimilar entities often
participate in causal scenarios, yielding potential for rich
inductions between them (e.g. Medin, Ross, Atran, Burnett,
& Blok, 2002).

relatedness. Paper presented at the Twenty-first Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Goldstone, R. L., & Medin, D. L. (1994). Time course of
comparison. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 20(1), 29-50.
Jacoby, L. L., & Whitehouse, K. (1989). An illusion of
memory: False recognition influenced by unconscious
perception. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 118, 126–135.
Jacoby, L. L., Woloshyn, V., & Kelley, C. (1989).
Becoming famous without being recognized:
Unconscious influences of memory produced by divided
attention. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
118(2), 115-125.
Jacoby, L. L.,LeDoux, J. (1996). The emotional brain. New
York: Touchstone.
Markman, A. B. (1996). Structural alignment in similarity
and difference judgments. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 3(2), 227-230.
Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (2005). Nonintentional
similarity processing. In R. R. Hassin, J. S. Uleman & J.
A. Bargh (Eds.), The New Unconscious. (pp. 107-137).
New York: Oxford University Press.
Markman, E. (1986). Categories and Induction in Young
Children. Cognition, 23, 183-209.
Medin, D. L., Goldstone, R. L., & Gentner, D. (1993).
Respects for similarity. Psychological Review, 100(2),
254-278.
Medin, D. L., Ross, N., Atran, S., Burnett, R. C., & Blok, S.
V. (2002). Categorization and reasoning in relation to
culture and expertise. In B. H. Ross (Ed.), Psychology of
learning and motivation: Advances in research and
theory, Vol. 41. (pp. 1-41): Academic Press.
Oppenheimer, D. M. (2004). Fluency in Categorization.
Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society, Chicago, Illinois.
Rosch, E., & et al. (1976). Basic objects in natural
categories. Cognitive Psychology, 8(3), 382-439.
Shepard, R. N. (1957). Stimulus and response
generalization: A stochastic model relating generalization
to distance in psychological space. Psychometrika, 22,
325-345.
Tversky, A. (1977). Features of similarity. Psychological
Review, 84(4), 327-352.
Whittlesea, B. W. A., & Williams, L. D. (2001). The
discrepancy-attribution hypothesis: I. The heuristic basis
of feelings and familiarity., Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition (Vol. 27,
pp. 3-13): American Psychological Assn.
Wisniewski, E. J., & Bassok, M. (1999). What makes a man
similar to a tie? Stimulus compatibility with comparison
and integration. Cognitive Psychology, 39(3-4), 208-238.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by NIDA grant R21 DA 15211
given to the second author and a NIH MH68889 to the first
author. We thank the Similarity and Cognition Lab at UT
Austin.

References
Aguilar, C. M., & Medin, D. L. (1999). Asymmetries of
comparison. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 6(2),
328-337.
Bailenson, J. N., Shum, M. S., Atran, S., Medin, D. L., &
Coley, J. D. (2002). A bird's eye view: Biological
categorization and reasoning within and across cultures.
Cognition, 84(1), 1-53.
Bassok, M., & Medin, D. L. (1997). Birds of a feather flock
together: Similarity judgments with semantically rich
stimuli. Journal of Memory & Language, 36(3), 311-336.
Dutton, D. G., & Aron, A. P. (1974). Some evidence for
heightened sexual attraction under conditions of high
anxiety. Journal of Personality & Social Psychology,
30(4), 510-517.
Falkenhainer, B., Forbus, K. D., & Gentner, D. (1989). The
structure-mapping engine: Algorithm and examples.
Artificial Intelligence, 41(1), 1-63.
Francis, W., & Kucera, H. (1982). Frequency Analysis of
English. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company.
Gentner, D., & Brem, S. (1999). Is snow really like a
shovel? Distinguishing similarity from thematic

285

