UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Form-Priming of Language: Inhibition and Facilitation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9r56s3xc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
d'Ydewalle, Gery
Van Lommel, San

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Form-priming of Language: Inhibition and Facilitation
Sven Van Lommel (sven.vanlommel@psy.kuleuven.ac.be)
Laboratory of Experimental Psychology, Tiensestraat 102
B-3000 Leuven, Belgium

Géry d'Ydewalle (gery.dydewalle@psy.kuleuven.ac.be)
Laboratory of Experimental Psychology, Tiensestraat 102
B-3000 Leuven, Belgium

Abstract
In various priming paradigms, segmental overlap (i.e.
phonological or orthographical overlap) between the target
and prime word has been demonstrated to facilitate picture
naming. But features extending over several segments are
rarely controlled for in stimulus selection. Some attention has
been paid to such suprasegmental features, but inconsistent
findings have been obtained. The presented studies took up
this issue and the combination of word stress and vowel
quality was investigated in a picture-word task. In the pictureword interference task, pictures are named while attempting
to ignore simultaneously presented distractors words. A series
of three experiments presented Dutch target and distractor
words of three possible suprasegmental patterns while
controlling for a manifold of variables. Distractor words
inhibited picture naming for picture targets of a fully related
suprasegmental pattern. A fourth experiment obtained a
facilitatory main effect of segmental overlap, whereas the
suprasegmental effect dissipated when suprasegmental
features are manipulated in the presence of segmental overlap.
This observation clarifies results of Experiment 3 in which
segmental overlap was an artefact of the manipulation of
suprasegmental overlap. Inhibitory form priming has been
observed in other picture naming paradigms and variants of
the picture-word task. An account was extrapolated from
these instances, as an attempt to cover both facilitatory,
inhibitory, and null effects of suprasegmental overlap.

Introduction
Many theories have adopted a frame-content approach to
speech production in which language structure (‘frames’)
and content (‘fillers’) are distinguished as separate
representations. In line with a frame-content approach, a
phonological representation could comprise a separate
suprasegmental representation that is independent of the
segmental content and might be susceptible to priming.
Generally, segmental overlap between target and
distractor word has been demonstrated to facilitate speech
production in various paradigms, such as the picture-word
interference task (e.g., Posnansky & Rayner, 1978), the
translation naming task (e.g., La Heij et al., 1990), and the
implicit priming paradigm (e.g., Meyer, 1990). Thus far,
little attention has been paid to features extending over
several segments, especially word stress and vowel quality,
and suprasegmental features are rarely controlled for in
stimulus selection. Nevertheless, some suprasegmentals are

(reasonably) fixed word properties, such as word stress and
vowel quality.
Attempts to prime the stress pattern of a word led to
diverse findings and interpretations. Depending on the
particular stress pattern, the effect of stress overlap ranges
from facilitation to inhibition, or no effect is produced
unless in combination with segmental overlap (Meijer,
1994; Roelofs & Meyer, 1998; Schiller, Fikkert, & C.C.
Levelt, 2004). The picture word-interference task led to
facilitatory effects of overlap in word-initial stress and
inhibitory effects of overlap in word-final stress (Schiller et
al., 2004, Experiments 1, 2, and 3).
Mixing both stress types, Meijer (1994, Experiment 1)
obtained facilitatory effects of stress overlap and of
segmental overlap, that did not interact. In a subset of
Experiment 1 however, the stress effect was restricted to the
conditions with segmental overlap. Using the word
translation task, Meijer (1994, Experiment 2 and 3)
confirmed the latter pattern, but the segmental overlap
yielded inhibition instead of facilitation. Meijers (1994)
Experiments 7 and 8 manipulated stress overlap within
segmental overlap and mismatching syllable number:
monosyllabic targets were combined with disyllabic primes
carrying initial versus non-initial stress. A facilitatory effect
of stress overlap was obtained in Experiment 8 only.
Experiment 9 crossed stress overlap and segmental overlap
within mismatching syllable number. A facilitatory effect of
stress overlap was found regardless of segmental overlap
whereas segmental overlap yielded inhibition within
different stress and facilitation within same stress. Stress
overlap in implicit priming experiments (Roelofs & Meyer,
1998) resulted in no effect (Experiment 5 with initial and
non-initial stress targets put together) or an inhibitory effect
(Experiment 2, using non-initial stress on second and third
syllable). Experiment 2 crossed stress overlap with
segmental overlap. A facilitatory effect of stress overlap was
obtained in the conditions with segmental overlap, but only
for the subset of targets bearing stress on the second
syllable. Segmental overlap also facilitated production
latencies but the effect was restricted to the conditions with
stress overlap.
Summarizing, some experiments showed a facilitatory
effect of stress overlap (Meijer, 1994, Experiments 1 and 9).
But such facilitation could also be restricted to overlap in
word-initial stress whereas overlap in word-final stress led

2265

to inhibitory effects (Schiller et al., 2004, Experiments 1, 2,
and 3; see also Roelofs & Meyer, 1998, Experiment 2). Yet
other experiments failed to obtain an effect of stress overlap
(Meijer, 1994, Experiment 7; Roelofs & Meyer, 1998,
Experiment 5; Schiller et al., 2004, Experiment 4). And
some experiments seem to indicate the (facilitatory) effect
of stress overlap appears only in combination with
segmental overlap (Meijer, 1994, Experiments 1, 2, 3, and
8; Roelofs & Meyer, 1998, Experiments 2 and 5).
As an attempt to tackle the full scope of these findings,
certain mechanisms have been suggested to restrict
suprasegmental priming. Meijer (1994) proposed
suprasegmental priming might occur only in the presence of
segmental overlap (i.e. the parallel independence
hypothesis). In addition, Levelt et al. (1999) assume no
suprasegmental representation is composed when stress is
default (and default is defined as stress assignment to the
first stressable syllable of the word: Levelt & Schiller,
1998). Therefore, stress priming would be limited to nondefault stress. And despite consistent stress effects in three
experiments, Schiller et al. (2004) consider stress
assignment to be fully computational and therefore unable
to produce coherent stress priming. In general, the
mechanisms of stress assignment remain unclear (e.g.,
Colombo, 1992; Daelemans, Gillis, & Durieux, 1994; Levelt
et al., 1999; Rastle & Coltheart, 2000; Schiller et al., 2004).
Concluding, stress priming experiments yielded
inconclusive evidence and the mechanisms of stress
assignment remain unclear. The present study took up these
issues and the combination of word stress and vowel quality
were investigated as one possible component of a
suprasegmental representation. Word stress was chosen
because of the importance it has been awarded in the issues
mentioned above. Linguistically, the assignment of word
stress is influenced by other structural word properties such
as vowel quality (Kelly, 2004): word stress cannot be
assigned to a syllable with a reduced vowel (Chomsky &
Halle, 1968). Vowel quality is either full or neutral, the
latter stemming from reduction (i.e. mostly schwa). A
neutral vowel defines a weak, unstressable syllable whereas
a full vowel defines a strong, stressable syllable. As such,
vowel quality was included in the definition of default stress
("first stressable syllable"), but also received attention in the
study of visual and auditory word recognition (e.g., Norris,
McQueen, & Cutler, 1995; Rastle & Coltheart, 2000).
Experiments 1, 2, and 3 examined whether either word
stress or vowel quality, or both features are part of a
suprasegmental representation in phonological encoding,
and whether such representation can be primed. In the
picture-word interference task, pictures are named as
quickly as possible while attempting to ignore
simultaneously presented distractors words. In one subject
group, target and distractor onset coincided (0-ms SOA),
and in another subject group target onset preceded distractor
onset by 100 ms (+100-ms SOA). Picture naming would be
more susceptible to form related distractor words at positive
SOAs (Schriefers, Meyer, & Levelt, 1990).

Experiments 1 - 2 - 3
Method
Participants
A total of 68 undergraduate psychology students from the
University of Leuven participated in each experiment as part
of a curriculum-based credit system. All participants were
native speakers of Dutch and had normal or corrected-tonormal vision. None of the participants said to suffer from
reading disorders. Participants with prior experience with
the stimulus set were excluded.
Materials
If a syllable carries word stress, its vowel cannot be reduced.
As a consequence stressed weak syllables do not exist, and
word stress (stressed, unstressed) and vowel quality (full,
reduced) cannot occur fully crossed in a syllable, restricting
the possible stress patterns in disyllabic words. Stressed
strong syllables (and unstressed weak syllables) are
common in Dutch. But also unstressed strong syllables
occur frequently, which is not the case in English (Cutler &
van Donselaar, 2001). The CELEX lexical database
provided all Dutch disyllabic words whose two syllables
contain the same number of characters. Four different
suprasegmental patterns emerged according to stress
position and vowel quality (see Table 1). For practical
reasons, these four patterns will be referred to as ‘SS
(trochaic stress with a strong unstressed syllable), S’S
(iambic stress with a strong unstressed syllable), ‘SW
(trochaic stress with a weak unstressed syllable), and W’S
(iambic stress with a weak unstressed syllable).
Table 1: Stress patterns in disyllabic words with syllables
of equal graphemic size.
1st syllable 2nd syllable Occurrence Example
‘strong
strong
5707
‘balpen
strong
‘strong
519
bal’kon
‘weak
weak
NA
weak
‘weak
NA
‘strong
weak
2378
‘jongen
strong
‘weak
NA
‘weak
strong
NA
weak
‘strong
25
ver’gif

Referred to
as
‘SS
S’S

‘SW

W’S

The to be named pictures depicted ‘SS words in
Experiment 1, S’S words in Experiment 2, and ‘SW words
in Experiment 3. Each target picture had distractor words of
‘SS, S’S, and ‘SW superimposed. As, target words of the
same three suprasegmental patterns were used, a varying
degree of suprasegmental relatedness between target and
distractor was obtained. Fully related, partly related (either
in stress pattern or vowel quality pattern), and fully
unrelated conditions were compared. Target and distractor

2266

words were not related segmentally (neither phonologically,
nor
orthographically),
nor
semantically
(neither
categorically, nor associatively, as rated in a pilot study).
Distractors words paired with a particular target were
matched on word frequency, imageability, familiarity, age
of acquisition, number of neighbours, and summated bigram
frequency. Compound words were excluded as much as
possible.
Procedure
Participants were tested individually, seated in a dimly
illuminated room, at a 60 cm viewing distance in front of a
computer screen. A series of practice trials was run in which
six randomly presented practice drawings were named as
quickly as possible. Next, the experimental drawings were
shown in random order with their corresponding names
written underneath to familiarize participants with the
upcoming targets.
In the experimental trials, a fixation cross was presented
during 600 ms in the middle of the screen, followed by the
onset of a target picture. In one subject group the target
onset coincided with the onset of the distractor word within
the picture. In the other subject group the distractor onset
was delayed for 100 ms (a +100-ms Stimulus Onset
Asynchrony). The target remained on screen for 4000 ms or
until the voice key was triggered by a response. The
participants named each picture as quickly as possible while
avoiding any mistakes. They were to mind the picture only,
ignoring any word appearing within. The experimenter then
pressed one of three keys on the computer keyboard to
register the accuracy of the participant's response or a voice
key malfunction. In case the participant failed to name the
picture, the correct name was presented for 1500 ms,
introduced by a short error sound. Otherwise a blank screen
appeared instead, also for 1500 ms. The intertrial interval
lasted 500 ms.

word interference effect was also obtained in Experiment 2
(p1 < .0001; p2 < .0001). Further, fully related distractors
produced a significantly larger mean compared to partly
unrelated distractors: p1 < .0005, p2 < .05 for ‘SS versus
S’S distractors, and p1 < .0007, p2 < .05 for ‘SS versus ‘SW
distractors. And in Experiment 2, fully related distractors
produced a larger mean compared to stress unrelated
distractors (p1 < .0009, p2 < .05) and fully unrelated
distractors (p1 < .05 but not significantly in the Item
analysis). Summarizing, reaction times increased from
unrelated to fully related conditions, contrary to the
facilitatory effects provided by the picture-word paradigm in
case of segmental overlap.

Figure 1. Mean vocal latencies for ‘SS target pictures with
suprasegmentally related distractors and their baseline
conditions.

Results and Discussion of Experiments 1-2
Two separate analyses of variance were conducted on the
reaction times, one by Subjects (F1 and p1) and one by
Items (F2 and p2), with Relatedness (within-subjects and
within-items) x SOA (between-subjects and within-items).
In Experiment 1, the main effect of target-distractor
relationship was significant, F1(5, 330) = 188.58, MSE =
2192, p1 < .0001 and F2(5, 115) = 107.13, MSE = 2852, p2
< .0001. SOA was also significant, F1(1, 66) = 10.74, MSE
= 36129, p1 < .002 and F2(1, 23) = 126.75, MSE = 2053, p2
< .0001. SOA did not interact with Relatedness. Analysis of
Experiment 2 led to similar effects of Relatedness [F1(5,
325) = 103.79, MSE = 3010, p1 < .0001 and F2(5, 45) =
49.26, MSE = 1974, p2 < .0001] and of SOA [F1(1, 65) =
19.16, MSE = 31379, p1 < .0001 and F2(1, 9) = 258.23,
MSE = 692, p2 < .0001].
Post hoc comparisons of the Relatedness means indicated
that each of the baseline means (nonword, label, or blank
distractor) significantly differed from each of the
experimental means (p1 < .0001; p2 < .0001). The picture-

Figure 2. Mean vocal latencies for S’S target pictures with
suprasegmentally related distractors and their baseline
conditions.
In Experiment 1, the suprasegmental effect occurred only
when both suprasegmental features overlapped, and
comparison with a fully unrelated baseline in Experiment 2
confirmed combined overlap as necessary for
suprasegmental form priming. Lacking control of vowel

2267

quality might therefore hinder the detection of a stress
overlap effect. For instance, Meijer (1998, Experiments 1, 2,
and 3) selected ‘SS as well as ‘SW words as stress-related
distractors for both ‘SS and ‘SW targets (S’S words served
as stress-unrelated distractors). No effect of suprasegmental
overlap (in the absence of segmental overlap) was obtained.
Further, the combined manipulation of word stress and
vowel quality in the picture-word task offered no evidence
for mechanisms restricting the influence of suprasegmental
overlap. The suprasegmental overlap effect is not confined
to a particular suprasegmental word type, nor to segmental
overlap.
The form overlap appeared to increase the weight of the
distractor word, thus adding to its interference with the
production of the target word. Inhibitory mechanisms have
been suggested at various levels of phonological encoding:
competition in phonetic encoding (Levelt et al., 1999, p64),
competition in (sub)lexical selection (Dell, 1986, 1988), and
lexical inhibition (Sternberger, 1985).
Inhibitory form priming (due to segmental overlap) has
been observed before in the picture-word task (Jerger,
Martin, & Damian, 2002; Jescheniak & Schriefers, 1998;
Jescheniak, Schriefers, & Hantsch, 2003). Also, Experiment
2 replicated the inhibitory effect of overlap in non-initial
(i.e. non-default) stress as found by the few studies
manipulating non-default stress separatedly (unconfounded
with default stress). Roelofs and Meyer (1998, Experiment
2) used targets bearing stress on the second or third of three
strong syllables, and by Schiller et al. (2004, Experiments 1,
2, and 3) had targets with stress on the second of two strong
syllables.
For Experiment 1 using ‘SS targets (stress on the first of
two strong syllables), results turned out harder to compare.
Experiment 9 of Meijer (1994) obtained facilitation for
default stress, although targets were monosyllabic. Other
studies yielding facilitatory or null effects of stress overlap
(Meijer, 1994, Experiments 1, 2, and 3; Roelofs & Meyer,
1998, Experiment 5) were not analysed separately for
default and non-default stress. Schiller et al. (2004,
Experiments 1, 2, and 3) found facilitation for initially
stressed (default) targets, although with ‘SS and ‘SW
confounded. In addition to Experiment 1 with ‘SS targets,
Experiment 3 aimed to clarify the effects of default stress,
using ‘SW targets.

Results and Discussion of Experiment 3
The suprasegmental overlap effect was not obtained for ‘SW
target words. The main effect of Relatedness was
significant, F1(5, 330) = 164.44, MSE = 2092, p1 <.0001
and F2(5, 75) = 122.49, MSE = 1359, p2 < .0001. But no
significant differences were found between the means of
fully related, vowel quality unrelated, and fully unrelated
distractors, neither at 0 ms nor at 100-ms SOA.
Stress effects might occur only in the presence of
segmental overlap (Meijer, 1994). Or possibly, word stress
is not encoded in case of default stress (stress placement at
the first stressable syllable) and hence default stress priming

cannot occur (Levelt et al., 1999). Earlier, such mechanisms
were devised to account for similar null effects (Meijer,
1994, Roelofs & Meyer, 1998). Yet, a suprasegmental
overlap effect was obtained for both default stress targets
(‘SS in Experiment 1) and non-default stress targets (S’S in
Experiment 2).
Moreover, in Experiment 3, segmental overlap was an
artefact of the manipulation of suprasegmental overlap and
could account for the absence of a suprasegmental overlap
effect. The majority of ‘SW words ends in '-el' or '-er'.
Consequently, in Experiment 3, segmental overlap
inevitably arises in the suprasegmental overlap condition,
where target and distractor are both ‘SW words. Facilitation
due to such segmental overlap could neutralize interference
due to suprasegmental overlap. In order to shed light on how
the suprasegmental and segmental effects relate to each
other, Experiment 4 included manipulation of segmental
overlap.

Figure 3. Mean vocal latencies for ‘SW target pictures with
suprasegmentally related distractors and their baseline
conditions.

Experiment 4
Method
Experiment 4 applied the method of the previous
experiments, but segmental and suprasegmental overlap
were factorially crossed (‘SS or S’S targets were combined
with ‘SS and S’S distractors). For instance, the target
'walvis (‘ marking the stressed syllable) was paired with
distractors pon’ton (no overlap), ‘bospad (suprasegmental
overlap only), nar’cIS (segmental overlap only), and ‘thesIS
(combined suprasegmental and segmental overlap).

Results of Experiment 4
A main effect of segmental overlap was observed, F1(1, 37)
= 124.93, MSE = 6575, p1 < .0001 and F2(1, 12) = 10.19,
MSE = 2877, p2 < .01. It also interacted with
suprasegmental overlap, F1(1, 37) = 7.55, MSE = 6917, p1
< .01 and F2(1, 12) = 9.17, MSE = 427, p2 < .02 . The
suprasegmental effect arose only in the absence of
segmental overlap. The suprasegmental effect dissipated

2268

when suprasegmental features are manipulated in the
presence of segmental overlap.

fully related condition (12-ms advantage). And reaction
times decreased from stress and vowel quality unrelated to
fully related (39-ms advantage)

Implications for Experiment 1
Schiller et al. (2004) is the only other study using disyllabic
targets and distinguishing between initial and non-initial
stress. The results for non-initial stress correspond with the
results of Experiment 2, but the inhibition in Experiment 1
and the null effect in Experiment 3 contrast with the
facilitation for initial stress overlap in Schiller et al. (2004).
However, Schiller et al. included both ‘SS and ‘SW
targets in the initial stress condition. Eight of 12 ‘SS targets
were matched with ‘SW words as stress-related distractors.
Yet, Experiments 1 and 2 indicated suprasegmental form
priming requires the overlap to include the pattern of vowel
quality. Further, 11 of 12 ‘SW targets were matched with
‘SW distractors sharing a penultimate -e-, of which six
shared the full word ending (-el or -er). Experiment 4 and
the subset of Experiment 3 showed a facilitatory effect by
the combination of segmental and suprasegmental compared
to a fully unrelated baseline (i.e. word-final stress targets in
Schiller et al.).

Figure 4. Mean vocal latencies in function of segmental and
suprasegmental overlap.

Discussion of Experiment 4
Implications for Experiment 3
The null effect in Experiment 3 was hypothesized to arise
from a confound between suprasegmental and segmental
overlap in ‘SW distractors. But Experiment 4 found a main
effect of segmental overlap, dismissing the neutralization
account: combined segmental and suprasegmental overlap
led to significantly lower latencies than the
suprasegmentally and segmentally unrelated condition.
However, the absence of a suprasegmental main effect
offers an alternative explanation for the missing
suprasegmental effect in Experiment 3. The segmental
overlap arising in Experiment 3 had been controlled for,
whenever possible. Therefore, five out of 16 target words in
Experiment 3 shared a penultimate -e- with the ‘SW
distractor word only. But a majority of 11 out of 16 target
words shared a penultimate -e- with all three distractors
words. Consequently, the majority of trials compared
segmentally and suprasegmentally related distractors with
segmentally related but suprasegmentally unrelated
distractors, where Experiment 4 did not obtain a
suprasegmental overlap effect.
Experiment 4 also pointed out that the segmentally and
suprasegmentally related ‘SW distractors should facilitate
picture naming, compared to the segmentally and
suprasegmentally unrelated ‘SS and B distractors. Thus,
when analyzing a subset of Experiment 3 containing the five
items that share the penultimate character with the ‘SW
distractor only, an effect should arise that is exactly the
opposite of the originally expected effect. This was
confirmed at 100-ms SOA, using planned comparisons.
Reaction times decreased from vowel quality unrelated to

The suprasegmental inhibitory effect has been replicated
and again offers no evidence for mechanisms restricting the
influence of suprasegmental overlap. A suprasegmental
effect arose in the absence of segmental overlap whereas
segmental overlap would be a prerequisite for stress effects
according to the parallel independence hypothesis. Quite the
opposite was found: a suprasegmental effect occuring only
without segmental overlap. Also, the suprasegmental
overlap effect is not modified by the suprasegmental word
type.
However, there is no immediate explanation available for
how segmental overlap could foil an inhibitory effect of
stress overlap. Such explanation should not only account for
the suprasegmental null effect, but also for facilitatory
effects of stress overlap in the presence of segmental
overlap, as well as the inhibition found for pure stress
overlap (without any segmental overlap). An extension of
the competition approach by Dell (1986, 1988) might
provide the most suitable account.
The corresponding suprasegmental representations of
target and distractor additionally activate the distractor
phonemes. But when target and distractor phonemes do not
correspond segmentally (only suprasegmentally), the
activated (segmentally) mismatching phonemes hamper the
generation of the target phonemes. When target and
distractor phonemes do correspond segmentally (and
suprasegmentally), the additionally activated phonemes
match the target phonemes segmentally as well, and do not
hamper but facilitate the generation of the target phonemes.
Similar findings were obtained in manipulations of
orthographic (cfr. suprasegmental) overlap and phonological
(cfr. segmental) overlap (O'Seaghdha, Dell, Peterson, &

2269

Juliano, 1992; Peterson, Dell, & O’Seaghdha, 1989; Sevald
& Dell, 1994)
Depending on the ratio of matching and mismatching
segments, the observed effect of suprasegmental overlap
could range from facilitation to inhibition. Further research
is required to identify which factors determine the ratio. But
for instance, overlap in the pattern of vowel quality was
necessary for the inhibitory effect of pure suprasegmental
overlap, and it might be equally important in the presence of
segmental overlap. If stress position and the pattern of
vowel quality compose one stress-related suprasegmental
template, the combined overlap might enhance the miscuing
mechanism. Otherwise the matching phonemes could be
prevalent, replacing an inhibitory or null effect by
facilitation as observed in experiments lacking matching of
vowel quality (Meijer, 1994; Roelofs & Meyer, 1998).

Acknowledgements
Preparation of this manuscript was supported by grants from
the Fund for Scientific Research-Flanders (FWO).

References
Chomsky, N., & Halle, M. (1968). The sound pattern of
English. New York: Harper & Row.
Colombo, L. (1992). Lexical stress effect and its interaction
with frequency in word pronunciation. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 18, 987-1003.
Cutler, A., & van Donselaar, W. (2001). Voornaam is not
(really) a homophone: Lexical prosody and lexical access
in Dutch. Language and Speech, 44, 171-195.
Daelemans, W., Gillis, S., & Durieux, G. (1994). The
acquisition of stress: A data-oriented approach.
Computational Linguistics, 20, 421-451.
Dell, G. (1986). A spreading activation theory of retrieval in
language production. Psychological Review, 93, 283-321.
Dell, G. S. (1988). The retrieval of phonological forms in
production: Tests of predictions from a connectionist
model. Journal of Memory and Language, 27, 124-142.
Jerger, S., Martin, R. C., & Damian, M. F. (2002). Semantic
and phonological influences on picture naming by
children and teenagers. Journal of Memory and
Language, 47, 229-249.
Jescheniak, J. D., & Schriefers, H. (1998). Discrete serial
versus cascaded processing in lexical access in speech
production: Further evidence from the coactivation of
near-synonyms. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 24, 1256-1274.
Jescheniak, J. D., Schriefers, H., & Hantsch, A. (2003).
Utterance format effects phonological priming in the
picture-word task: Implications for models of
phonological encoding in speech production. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 29, 441-454.
Kelly, M. H. (2004). Word onset patterns and lexical stress
in English. Journal of Memory and Language, 50, 231244.

La Heij, W., Bruyn, E. de, Elens, E., Hartsuiker, R., Helaha,
D., & van Schelven, L. (1990). Orthographic facilitation
and categorical interference in a word-translation variant
of the Stroop task. Canadian Journal of Psychology, 44,
76-83.
Levelt, W. J. M. & Schiller, N. O. (1998). Is the syllable
frame stored? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 21, 520.
Levelt, W. J. M., Roelofs, A., & Meyer, A. S. (1999). A
theory of lexical access in speech production. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 22, 1-38.
Meijer, P. J. A. (1994). Phonological encoding: The role of
suprasegmental structures. Doctoral dissertation,
Department of Psychology, Nijmegen University, the
Netherlands.
Meyer, A. S. (1990). The time course of phonological
phonological information during speech production
encoding in language production: The encoding of
planning: evidence from vowel errors in spontaneous
successive syllables of a word. Journal of Memory and
Language, 29, 524–545.
Norris, D., McQueen, J. M., & Cutler, A. (1995).
Competition and segmentation in spoken-word
recognition. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21, 1209-1228.
O'Seaghdha, P. G., Dell, G. S., Peterson, R. R., & Juliano,
C. (1992). Modelling form-related priming effects in
comprehension and production. In R. Reilly & N.E.
Sharkey (Eds.), Connectionist approaches to language
processing (Vol. 1). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates Inc.
Peterson, R. R. Dell, G. S., & O’Seaghdha, P. G. (1989). A
connectionist model of form-related priming effects.
Proceedings of the eleventh annual conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp196-203). Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Posnansky, C. J., & Rayner, K. (1978). Visual vs. phonemic
contributions to the importance of the initial letter in word
identification. Bulletin of the Psychometric Society, 11,
188-190.
Rastle, K., & Coltheart, M. (2000). Lexical and nonlexical
print-to-sound translation of disyllabic words and
nonwords. Journal of Memory and Language, 42, 342364.
Roelofs, A., & Meyer, A. S. (1998). Metrical structure in
planning the production of spoken words. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 24, 922-939.
Schiller, N. O., Fikkert, P., & Levelt, C. C. (2004). Stress
priming in picture naming: An SOA study. Brain and
Language, 90, 231-240.
Schriefers, H., Meyer, A. S., & Levelt, W. J. (1990).
Exploring the time course of lexical access in language
production: Picture word interference studies. Journal of
Memory and Language, 29, 86-102.
Sevald, C. A., & Dell, G. S. (1994). The sequential cuing
effect in speech production. Cognition, 53, 91–127.
Sternberger, J. P. (1985). An interactive model of language
production. In A. W. Ellis (Ed.), Progress in the
psychology of language. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

2270

