UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Grammar in Phonological Cognition: A Symposium in Honor of Paul Smolensky, Recipient of
the Fifth David E. Rumelhart Prize/Phonological Contrast in Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3wn879kr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
Tesar, Bruce

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Grammar in Phonological Cognition:
A Symposium in Honor of Paul Smolensky,
Recipient of the Fifth David E. Rumelhart Prize
Géraldine Legendre (legendre@cogsci.jhu.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science, Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218-2685 USA

This symposium will feature four of Smolensky’s students,
representing the next generation of researchers addressing
phonology from various cognitive science perspectives. The
focus is on the role of grammar in linguistic cognition.
Spanning the spectrum encompassed by Smolensky’s
research from low-level processing to abstract symbolic
computation, the speakers address the emergence of discrete
categories from continuous dynamical variables (Gafos), the
interaction between articulatory coordination and higherlevel units such as syllable positions in a phonological
grammar (Davidson), the nature of inductive biases as
revealed in learning of novel sound patterns (Wilson), and
the role of sound changes in learning the covert sound
structure of lexical items (Tesar).

on how the organization of gestures into syllables interacts
with phonotactic restrictions, or constraints on how sounds
may be sequenced in a language. Two types of data
pertaining to phonotactics are investigated: (1) experimental
evidence demonstrating that English speakers manipulate
gestural coordination in surprising ways when faced with
non-native (phonotactically illegal) sequences, and (2) the
positional distribution of consonant clusters in English. The
analysis of this data illustrate that the tools of Optimality
Theory, such as alignment and local conjunction (McCarthy
and Prince 1993, Smolensky 1997), contribute to a
comprehensive account of gestural coordination in a
phonological grammar.

Locality and similarity in phonological
learning

Nonlinear links between continuity and
discreteness: transparency in vowel harmony

Colin Wilson

Adamantios Gafos & Stefan Benus

Linguistics Department, UCLA

Linguistics Department, New York University

A long-standing issue is the nature and strength of the
preferences, or inductive biases, that guide the learning of
sound patterns. Experiments on the learning of artificial
grammars containing novel patterns reveal biases in favor of
local conditioning and alternation between perceptually
similar sounds. Constraint-based models incorporating these
factors provide a more principled account of the human data
than general learning algorithms that lack such biases.

A fundamental problem in spoken language is the duality
between the continuous aspects of performance and the
discrete aspects of phonological competence. We study a
specific instance of this problem in Hungarian vowel
harmony. We present a model where continuous phonetic
distinctions uncovered by our experiments are linked to
discrete phonological form using the mathematics of
nonlinear dynamics.

Phonological Contrast in Learning
Phonotactics and gestural coordination in
phonological grammar

Bruce Tesar
Linguistics Department, Rutgers University

Lisa Davidson

The interdependence of mappings and phonological
underlying forms creates a large and complex search space
for the phonological learner. This talk will argue that the
learner can significantly constrain their search within that
space by attending to contrasts in the surface realizations of
morphemes. By looking at pairs of morphemes that surface
differently in the same environment, the learner can
determine things about the underlying form of each of the
morphemes that cannot be determined by considering either
morpheme by itself. By considering only such pairs at a
time, the number of underlying forms that must be
simultaneously considered is restricted, so that the learner
can test different possible underlying forms for a few
morphemes, avoiding the prospect of simultaneously
varying the underlying forms for all of the morphemes
attested in the data.

Linguistics Department, New York University
Research in Articulatory Phonology, which takes dynamical
articulatory gestures as the basic units of phonological
representation, has demonstrated that the temporal
coordination of these gestures is sensitive to syllable
structure (e.g. Browman and Goldstein 1995, Byrd 1996,
Kochetov to appear). While these studies have determined
the coordination relationships that exist between articulatory
gestures within the same syllable, they do not discuss how
syllabic affiliations are determined nor how languages
impose restrictions on syllable formation. A gestural theory
of syllable structure (Gafos 2002) requires a mechanism for
determining when multiple gestures can be combined into
syllabic constituents like onsets or codas. This talk focuses
31

