UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Grounding Scientific Inquiry and Knowledge in Situated Cognition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8c06z1rf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Bond-Robinson, Janet
Stucky, Amy Preece

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Grounding Scientific Inquiry and Knowledge in Situated Cognition
Janet Bond-Robinson (jrobinso@ku.edu)
Department of Chemistry, 1251 Wescoe Hall Drive
Lawrence, KS USA

Amy Preece Stucky (apreece@ku.edu)

Department of Chemistry, 1251 Wescoe Hall Drive
Lawrence, KS USA

the way graduate researchers’ thinking and learning
(cognitive processes) are influenced by the research
environment as they learn how to carry out scientific inquiry,
reason scientifically, and acquire scientific knowledge. We
propose that the development of graduate researchers is a
closer parallel to the learning of science students than studies
of science as an institution.
We theorize that situated cognition is plausible and fruitful
as a theoretical framework for understanding scientific
reasoning and growth of scientific knowledge in day-to-day
scientific inquiry; that is, that a research laboratory follows
the literature conceptions of situated learning in terms of
communities of practice, cognitive apprenticeship,
scaffolded learning, affordances, constraints, and the
production of valued products, through a social
epistemology.

Abstract
We used ethnographic methods to study the cognitive
processes and the social environment in an organic synthesis
laboratory for its particular kind of human problem solving in
scientific discovery (Klahr & Simon, 1999). Current work in
situated cognition fills the fissure between problems posed by
psychologists, both cognitive and behavioral, which have
tended to focus on individual learning and learning of
academic tasks, and the problems posed by sociologists of
science who examine social influences on knowledge
production within organizations. Further, Greeno (1998)
asserts that the situative perspective, as it examines intact
activity systems, can provide a synthesis that subsumes the
cognitive and behaviorist perspectives on learning. We
hypothesized that a research laboratory follows the literature
conceptions of situated learning in terms of communities of
practice, cognitive apprenticeship, scaffolded learning,
affordances, constraints, and the production of valued
knowledge and other products via a social epistemology. We
found that researchers adapted their reasoning to performing
effective organic synthesis research, which is an attuning
process in a type of cognitive apprenticeship. The researchers
were guided and constrained in their reasoning by the organic
research community’s practices utilizing particular objects and
processes. Aspects of any problem to solve attuned them to
perception of new affordances, thus stimulating learning in
emergent intention and attention. Each field in science has
different things to reason about, different consequences to
gauge, and thus, different criteria for justifying the conclusions
drawn (Toulmin, 1977). We conclude that the thinking and
acting occurring over time by apprentice researchers in the
organic COP molded everyday thinking into the scientific
reasoning required to be “certified” in this field as a research
scientist.

Situated Cognition

Recent work in situated cognition fills the gap between (a)
the problems posed by psychologists that have tended to
focus on individual learning and learning of academic tasks,
and (b) the problems posed by sociologists of science who
examine social influences on knowledge production within
organizations. Situated cognition examines how humans
learn, remember, and understand as a result of sense making
that occurs from physical and mental interactions with the
objects and events of an everyday setting (Lave & Wenger,
1991); that is, the learning that develops in close relationship
to doing. Our study explores a research group performing
organic synthesis of novel molecules. We are interested in

310

There is now more recognition within science studies that
researchers learn as they are immersed in a world of people,
environments, and objects (Gooding, 1992). Participants
must adapt, reflect, judge, compare and make seemingly
appropriate decisions (Clancey, 1997) from the work and
concrete interactions within a meaningful social setting.
Therefore, conditions for situated learning concern (a) the
level of concrete interactions of individuals who act in a
meaningful social environment, and (b) transactional
relationships composed of back and forth interactions with
environmental resources, tools, people, and constraints to
carry out daily tasks. Theories of situated experience focus
on agency and intentions of people, existing on a day-to-day
basis within the community. Situated experience requires
coordination with others and with activities; it requires
improvisation; it requires negotiation through interactions
and flexible change; it builds identity for the group and its
members.

Practices and Epistemology
Historically, people interact and work collectively for
particular goals. In doing so, they develop practices
(Wenger, 1998). In Cognition in the Wild Hutchins (1995)
describes Navy navigation as it is done on the bridge of a
ship as, “human cognition in its natural habitat—that is
culturally constituted human activity” (p. xiii). Hutchins

interprets the cognition required for navigational prowess in
terms of a system of practices that have evolved over
centuries. In summary, tools and practices develop within
the framework of situated work on a problem. A particular
use of a tool is a simple example of a social practice.
Practices are actions of members of a community who are
accomplishing valued work there. Practices require knowing
as well as doing. Practice occurs because there is work to be
done, e.g., “relationships worked out, processes invented,
situations interpreted, artifacts produced, conflicts resolved”
(Wenger, 1998, p. 49). The community participation is not
simple. As the community is mutually engaged, the work
itself requires analysis, evaluation, negotiation, dissent,
justification, as well as incorporating others’ points of view.
Epistemology evaluates intellectual practices that produce
knowledge, according to Goldman (l998). Further, social
epistemology evaluates social practices that product
knowledge, he says. The epistemology of situated learning
depends on knowledge production and distribution in social
processes and interactions. Cognition, therefore, is
understood to encompass the interactions between agents
and environment, not simply the potential representations
and processes in the head of a participant. Reasoning is
distributed among workers who utilize a specific tool’s
knowledge, for example. Nersessian, Kurz-Milcke,
Newstetter, & Davies (2003) have written about the
biomedical engineering research laboratories as “evolving
distributed cognitive systems in which the environment
provides the rich structure that continues to evolve to support
emergent problem solving.
Goldman (1999) explains that social epistemology depends
on how, when, and by whom new knowledge is transmitted
to others. This is in contrast to an individual epistemology,
which focuses on “the mental operations of individual
cognitive agents in isolation or abstraction” (p. 4). He
classified the following three social dimensions of
distributing knowledge (p. 4): (a) Social paths or routes to
knowledge, (b) Social groups made of knowing individuals,
and (c) A collective group as a potential knowing agent.
Social routes to knowledge are composed of interactions
with other agents in a kind of specialized location. We
propose that apprenticeship is the social route to knowledge
in which a novice spends time with experts to learn a highly
skilled profession. Since an apprentice is immersed in a
situation in which knowledgeable others are also working to
produce similar types of products, situated learners are in a
proficient environment where expertise is commonly seen.
Apprenticeship is a socialization process in which the novice
learns from implicit modeling and explicit guidance of more
experienced others to master valuable skills, which produce
significant products. Cognitive apprenticeship gradually
leads the researcher into more of the central practices as well
as to creating more of the community’s products. Finally, in
a cognitive apprenticeship, researchers become sensitized to
the specialized and detailed conditions of activity in the
community designed for particular purposes.

311

A social group of knowing individuals. We put forward
that a specific research laboratory is a production-based
community of practice (COP) in which scientific knowledge
is generated, thus making the research group an epistemic
culture. For a common understanding of lab work, we will
use Clarke's (1997) breakdown of work organization from
her grounded theory work. “Production-based social world”
described scientific research, other scholarly work, or the
commercial enterprises of manufacturing and industry, all
based on activities that produce something. A line of work
in science is “all activities that address a given set of
coherent and cohesive problems” (Clarke, 1997, p. 72). A
line of research is broken down into several programs of
research to address a group of related questions, and which
usually use a characteristic set of techniques, equipment and
instrumentation. Each research program is separated into a
set of related projects having shorter-term goals that lead in
the direction advocated by the program. A project is often
the work of one researcher while fellow researchers are
involved in interrelated projects. Clarke describes projects as
composed of activities (experiment or experimental system).
Activities mature through completed tasks or some
improvisation of the task that enable the experiment to work.
Wenger (1998) specified three commonalities among
COPs. One commonality is mutual engagement, which
hinges on the purpose of what COP members are supposed
to accomplish, which is the joint enterprise. They learn in
joint connection with each other how to accomplish the joint
enterprise as they continue to work in achieving those goals,
implying that learning emerges throughout work. Since each
COP has, as its enterprise, particular types of research
programs, each COP has its own shared repertoire of
standardized procedures to tackle research programs. Each
COP has its own infrastructure dedicated to its own-shared
repertoire of standardized practices.
A collective group as a potential knowing agent.
Goldman (1999) classifies the third arena of social
epistemology as collective or corporate entities, such as
juries, which are capable of knowing. In science we
propose that these are a research field. The knowing
collective research field is the group of COPs, each using
similar practices. Research fields are capable of “selecting
the social practices that would most advance the cause of
knowledge” (p. 4). Notice Goldman’s emphasis on the
practices rather than the knowledge per se. If COPs hold
practices in common, then their communication can be
fluent and global. Star (1999) found that important
practices are fairly coherent across local sites and different
communities. They create the common denominators for
comparisons and contrasts in knowledge. Infrastructure is
the feature that enables and stabilizes efficient and flexible
utilization of important practices.
According to Goldman (1999), justification of social
practices is the result of strategic distribution of knowledge
and reasoning where they are socially transmitted in a

enable humans to generate the hallmarks of science, in
which they quote Einstein saying were (a) precise
definitions, (b) systematic choice of experimental material,
and (c) logical economy (in terms of reasoning with domainspecific representations).
Our methodology is the
observation of daily work and problem solving in organic
synthesis laboratories as others have done in biomechanical
engineering (Nersessian et al., 2003) and molecular biology
(Dunbar, 1995). Ethnography is a more time-consuming
approach, Klahr and Simon noted, but they gave it high
marks for face validity, construct validity, short and finegrained temporal resolution, ability to find new phenomena,
high rigor and precision, and capable of explicating social
and motivational factors (p. 8).
The research environment is composed of four laboratories
and one computer office. This particular chemistry research
group contained participants of varying levels of expertise.
Arnold Hjelle (a pseudonym) is the research director and a
chemistry professor. The majority of researchers (10) are
graduate students while three are postdoctoral and three are
undergraduate researchers. Over 100 hours of video data
were collected, including footage of researchers working in
the research lab, gathering and interpreting data, interacting
with peers and mentors, and attending weekly group
meetings. Informal and semi-structured interviews, detailed
field notes collected by the field researcher, copies of
laboratory notebook pages, and copies of experimental
evidence were collected.

series of four social processes leading to an accepted
knowledge claim: discovery; message production and
transmission (distribution); message reception; and
message acceptance (as in peer review). Absolute
objectivity would imply that all standards for justification
will be the same (Megill, 1991), but justification in science
is reliant on its material, intellectual, and social contexts,
and thus discipline-based requiring different criteria for
justifying the conclusions drawn (Toulmin, 1977; Megill,
1991; Goldman, 1999). Therefore, the investigation of the
field of organic synthesis requires that we look for the
manner in which specific types of justificatory reasoning
are communicated in this research field.

Constraints and Affordances on Reasoning
Greeno (1998) points out that a substitute for model
simulation to explain aspects of activities is using an
attunement of constraints and affordances, to explain
activities. ‘To constrain’ has many connotations Particular
norms, practices, and other emphases constrain by affecting
reasoning and actions in the following possible
connotations:
Limit, bound, set parameters
Frame, define, require, propose conditions, set criteria
Moderate, regulate, judge, keep within limits or bounds
Emphasize, leave none or few alternatives
Constraints are regularities in social practices and
interactions that affect reasoning and actions associated
with the community’s participants, objects, and processes.
Affordances for reasoning are those aspects of an
environmental system (objects, processes, people, etc.) that
an individual or group of individuals recognizes and utilizes
to reach the current goal (Gibson, 1977). The infrastructure
provides a large proportion of the affordances, as do
scaffolding practices. The individual researcher, or in
league with a mentor, learns to perceive and utilize it to
reach a current goal--which may be continuing progress or
solving an emergent problem. Gibson’s definition specifies
that a complementary relationship exists between the
person and the resource. In order to be a true affordance the
person must perceives it as relevant and then utilize the
resource. Young et al. (2002) explain the learning process
as explicit attunement of attention. A new attentional focus
leads to appraisal of unutilized resources that fit the new
situation. So tuned attention prompts a resultant intention to
do something new. A new action further prompts
attentional cues.

Results and Discussion
Infrastructure

Methodology
This ethnographic study took place in an organic synthesis
laboratory at a large, research I university. We use methods
endorsed both by the psychology and sociology of science,
based on ethnography. Klahr & Simon (1999) described and
critiqued complementary methods to study discovery in
science by specifying how ordinary cognitive processes

312

Each research COP designates the physical spatial
boundaries, organization of individual and group space,
and the type and use of materials and equipment. The
support for practices is the infrastructure and is
commonplace to the workers.
We simplified the three basic ontological categories of
entities, processes, and mental states that psychological
linguists have identified (Keil, 1989). We placed all
animate, inanimate, visible substances and artifacts,
including humans, under the heading of Object (BondRobinson & Stucky, submitted). Subcategories are given
in Table 1. We placed all processes, including chemical
and physical, human actions and mental states (emotions
and ideas) under the category of Process as seen in Table
2. Scientific concepts are theoretical objects, which are
created as tools to conceptualize a character and name,
e.g., atoms, electricity, and mass (Blumer, 1931).
Theoretical explanations are seemingly appropriate
organizations of theoretical concepts. Scientific
representations include unique ways of illustrating
concepts and processes.

Table 1: Objects Found in the Laboratory
ARTIFACT
Environmental structure
Space planning
Fume hoods
Lines of Research
Projects, Activities
Environmental resources
Equipment
Instruments
Scientific Products: Data

VISIBLE
SUBSTANCE
Chemicals by function
Substrates
Reagents
Solvents
Atmospheres
States of Matter
Solids
Liquids
Gases

HUMAN
Research Group
Scientific Public
Individual Researcher
Research Director
Graduate Researcher
Post doctoral researcher
Undergraduate researcher
Mentee, relative novice
Mentor, relative expert

THEORETICAL
OBJECT
Atoms, molecules, ions
Molecular structures
Chemical symbols
Charge; polarity
Functional groups
Molecular agents

Table 2: Processes Found in the Laboratory
CHEMICAL &
PHYSICAL
Synthesis
Reactions
Solubility
Bonding, Intra- &
Intermolecular
Procedures, e.g.,
General Synthesis
Separations
Identifications

HUMAN
ACTION
MECHANICAL WORK
Researcher-built system
1. Troubleshoot mechanical sys.
2. Feedback of mechanical sys
3. Interpret mechanical data
Instrument system purchased
2. Feedback of mechanical sys
3. Interpret instrument’s data
MENTORING
Nested apprenticeship
Group Meeting

MENTAL
STATE
CONSCIOUS
Frustration
Having a goal
Having a problem
Metacognition
Explicit reasoning
Mechanical reasoning
UNCONCIOUS
Implicit learning
Tacit knowledge

THEORETICAL
EXPLANATION
Organic reaction mechanisms
Functions of molecular groups
Functions of acids and bases
Most data interpretation

The COP’s Joint Enterprise
This group’s goal is to engineer novel organic molecules that
should possess particular kinds of medicinal properties. The
basic structure of organic molecules is a carbon chain. In the
simplest molecule there is only one carbon atom, CH4 (called
methane), and it is bonded to four hydrogen atoms. Large
organic molecules have more carbon atoms, each bonded to
other carbon atoms on either side and two hydrogen atoms.
Other kinds of atoms or a group of atoms bonded together can
substitute for a hydrogen atom. When an oxygen atom, -O, or
sulfur atom, -S, or a group of atoms (such as -NO2) pushes out
a hydrogen atom to take its place in the molecule, such a
substitution reaction alters molecular structure and resulting
function. Hydrogen atoms can also be removed from
somewhere within a chain of carbons, creating C=C, a carbonto-carbon double bond, in that location. Researchers engineer
novel organic molecules by adding or subtracting functional
groups in organic reactions. In strategic chemical reactions they
add or remove a functional group selectively, i.e., removed
from one or two places on a molecule rather than all the
positions occupied by that functional group. They can use
‘recipes’ found from the literature, called literature preps,
which describe reactions yielding similar molecules. Members
of the group attempt to optimize a wide range of variables such
as reagents, temperature, solvent, and catalyst to prepare the

desired molecule efficiently and gain insights into the
processes upon which further decisions can be based. The
project begins from a basic starting molecule until the
engineered molecular goal, with its specific and valuable
medicinal properties, is indubitably synthesized (i.e.,
instrument feedback is interpreted and then justified as the
desired molecule). The major reaction technique in Hjelle’s
lab currently is a special kind of polymerization. It is a
versatile and dependable reaction in which a catalyst breaks a
small ringed hydrocarbon into the chain version of its
structure, thus opening the ring. The catalyst is now attached
to one end of the molecule; it reacts with another starting
molecule and adds it to the chain.

Mutual engagement in the COP
Mutual engagement is supported by the COP’s infrastructure of
objects and processes. Infrastructure is rooted in common
practices and stabilizes them. Visible substances were stocked.
Shelves with safety lips hold bottles of starting materials,
catalysts, and reagents. Cartridges of solvents such as hexane,
methylene chloride and ethyl acetate are attached to the walls.
Metal cabinets house amine and acidic compounds.
Strategically placed gas cylinders contain species such as argon,
hydrogen, helium, and air.
313

All researchers run reactions in their own fume hood. A
fume hood is an enclosed workspace whose atmosphere is
exhausted to the outside of the building. Toxic vapors
generated inside the hood are captured before they enter the
lab space. A glass sash is the sliding door that pulls down from
the top of the hood. Glass sashes attained functionality as
transparent “whiteboards” where structural formulas of
reagents in reactions, reagent amounts, and reaction times and
dates are written with markers.
Common equipment is stored around the workbenches.
Prongs on the walls hold clean glassware, while dirty
glassware sits in washtubs at the ends of workbenches. On the
surface of workbenches lie analytical balances, ovens, rotary
evaporators, heat lamps, and gas chromatography (GC)
systems. Chromatography columns and separatory funnels
used to purify reaction products are in use on workbenches
and in fume hoods. Pipettes, ring stands, clamps, larger
glassware and other tools and equipment used in this
community are stored in drawers and cabinets beneath the
workbench surface. Manuals and instructions for common
procedures hang in transparent sheet protectors around the lab.
Instruments were proximally available in separate rooms or
in communal instrument labs for all chemical researchers for
example, Infrared (IR), Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
Mass Spectrometers, and an X-ray diffraction for revealing
crystal structures.
Constraints support mutual engagement. The intention to
meet hallmarks in a scientific culture doing organic synthesis
leads to four necessary constraints. (a) Mastering objects and
processes toward community goals is a necessity; (b) Working
while aligning with the norms and standards of the COP; (c)
Using and further developing mechanical reasoning, which is
used to build systems for generating feedback and evidence to
reach goals; and (d) expressing oneself fluently in the
appropriate language of the COP.
Mechanical reasoning is a constraint. It is clear from our
observations that constructing mechanical systems is essential
in the science of organic synthesis. Mechanical reasoning is a
key part of each practice in the repertoire
Using appropriate symbolic language is a constraint on
reasoning. A necessary constraint is expressing scientific work
in terms of the standard symbolic language of the community.
Molecular structures written out in terms of elements and spatial
correlations would be considered perceptual symbols to those
initiated in the community. But an amodal symbol bears no
resemblance to the object or phenomenon it represents, e.g.,
instrument feedback is amodal; the symbols must be interpreted
before they represent chemical species.
Affordances support mutual engagement. Researchers are
enabled in a specialized laboratory environment with sets of
unique artifacts, substances, people, and theoretical concepts to
facilitate production of significant research goals. Although
basic practices to pursue lines of research and projects exist, the
actual methods to reach new goals are adaptations and are not
trouble free; consequently they require judgment and decision-

314

making. The work itself consists of chemical and mechanical
processes facilitated by human actions, appropriate mental
states, and theoretical explanations as community researchers
make progress and solve problems on their project.
Progress, barriers, and anomalies are addressed publicly at
the Group Meeting each week. Features of a problem that
needs to be solved affect perception of environmental
affordances,
stimulating
intention
and
attention.
Circumventing or breaking barriers is essential. Weekly
formal meetings provided opportunities for researchers to
make suggestions to other researchers about their barriers and
anomalies; and gain experience presenting their work to other
researchers. Sally, a novice researcher comments that the
action of preparing to present at the group meeting allowed
her to see her project work in terms of the big picture and the
gaps. The presenter described his/her reactions; reagents used,
conditions applied, and report on methods used from the
literature. Molecular species and structural representations to
represent reagents and desired products of the reactions, were
written on chalkboards all around the room for discussion.
Each reaction was followed by a description of whether it did
or did not work (e.g., no reaction, messy), the chemical
structures and ratio of products in the resultant mixture). The
group and research advisor discussed problems that arose,
quickly but in detail. Consequently, opportunities for
developing research strategies to fill identified gaps arose, so
the researcher had some alternatives to try back in the lab.
New attunement changes the researcher’s immediate intention,
such as trying to put a system together in a different way.

Shared Repertoire of Standard COP Practices
The organic synthesis research group has its own set of norms,
rules, and standards of action that are imposed by the synthesis
community’s standards for performance and products.
Fujimura (1997) defines standardized procedures as routinized
and conventionalized procedures to reach valued goals.
Standardized procedures are practices that members utilize
again and again. The relationship of standardized practices to
reasoning in a COP is a crucial one because the purpose and
reward structure in a production-based COP is based on
production of valued products. Ultimate valued products in
organic synthesis are a new reagent to synthesis a target
molecule and a less complex or less expensive procedure to
accomplish valued work.
Numerous consistent procedures are used in the same way
from organic lab to organic lab, thus stabilizing the knowledge
gained from these methods. Standardized procedures exist for
running reactions, separating desired molecules from a
reaction mixture, and identification of the molecular product
separated from the reaction mixture. Separation techniques
include
solvent
removal,
distillation,
extraction,
crystallization, filtration, and chromatography.
Standard
knowing exists for safe operation. Philip, a graduate
researcher, summarized safety issues in the practices as
knowing what you’re doing, knowing the reagents and what
they can do to you, and knowing how reagents react with
others.

Determining the identification of a produced molecule utilizes
instrumentation. Instrumental practices incorporate disciplinary
knowledge into their performance of separation and/or
identification. They can be manufactured with high sensitivities
for particular kinds of molecules. The resultant output data is
often paper feedback that acts as evidence of synthesis of a
particular molecule; it tells researchers if the reaction yielded the
product they expected. Instrument feedback is amodal; the
symbols must be interpreted before they represent chemical
species. Compare the instrument’s output data with the
molecular structure that must be interpreted from it in Figure 1.

O

H
H

O
N

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

Br

O

PPM

Figure 1

Conclusions
A successful researcher meets project goals or redefines them as
a result of persistent effort over time, solving problems and
finding out more about the fundamental nature of the research
project. The graduate research experience is one where
researchers are apprentices interacting to practice organic
synthesis in a specialized laboratory. The prescribed activities
were practices developed for the sustained pursuit of synthesis of
novel organic compounds. Thus, organic research practice has
developed standards, norms, and resources that that define their
concepts and explanations, gather materials and practices, and
develop shared representations to communicate salient features
efficiently and effectively. Constraints are the standards for work
and normal behaviors that new researchers must emulate to be
successful.
While not devaluing individual cognitive processing and
personal behaviors, our study of scientific inquiry describes the
daily kinds of interactions of researchers with objects and
processes. Mentors are more experienced community members
who provide scaffolding for novices as they are immersed in new
practices. Practice is ungraded on an everyday basis in that
researchers work to solve problems until they get the project to
work. The learning environment in organic synthesis clearly
models proficiency. The apprentice organic researchers were
guided in their reasoning in a type of cognitive apprenticeship in
which the researcher worked to complete many steps to a final
goal in their projects (a project aligned with others in the same
line of research); and they adapted reasoning in attuning to the
constraints and affordances of organic synthesis research. Over
time the community’s ways of thinking and acting molded the
everyday thinking of graduate students into the scientific thought
required to be “certified” in this organic synthesis field as a
research scientist.
The theoretical understanding of daily
scientific practice provides a vision of how learning actually
develops in a situated community designed for specific purposes.
We argue that aspects of a problem, which affect perception of

315

affordances in the community’s environment, stimulate
intention and attention. New attunement causes a change in the
researcher’s immediate intention, such as trying to put a system
together in a different way. Situated scientific inquiry is then an
education of intention and attention toward shared scientific
goals in which researchers gain the sensitivity to become
attuned, thus aligning their views of the molecular world.

Acknowledgments
NSF-REC 0093319 for funding this work.
Blumer, H. (1931). Science without concepts. The American Journal
of Sociology, 36, 515-533.
Bond-Robinson, J., & Stucky, A. P. (submitted ). A grounded theory
of scientific inquiry in the research laboratory: Day-to-day work.
Clancey, W. J. (1997). Situated cognition: On human knowledge and
computer representations. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Clarke, A. E. (1997). A social worlds research adventure: The case of
reproductive science. In Corbin, J. & Strauss, A. (Eds.),
Grounded theory in practice (pp. 63-94). Thousands Oaks: Sage..
Dunbar, K. (1995). How scientists really reason: Scientific reasoning
in real-world laboratories. In Sternberg & Davidson (Eds.), The
nature of insight (pp. 365-396). Cambridge: MIT Press.
Fujimura, J. H. (1997). The molecular biological bandwagon in
cancer research: Where social worlds meet. In Strauss & Corbin,
(Eds.), Grounded theory in practice. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Gibson, J. J. (1977). The theory of affordances. In Shaw, R. E. &
Bransford, J. (Eds.), Perceiving, acting, and knowing. Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Goldman, A. I. (1999). Knowledge in a social world. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Gooding, D. (1992). The procedural turn; or, why do thought
experiments work? In Giere, R. N. (Ed.), Cognitive models of
science (pp. 45-76). Minneapolis: Univ. of Minnesota Press.
Greeno, J. G. (1998). The situativity of knowing, learning, and
research. American Psychologist, 53(1), 5-26.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Keil, F. C. (1989). Concepts, kinds, and cognitive development.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Klahr, D., & Simon, H. (1999). Studies of scientific discovery:
Complementary
approaches
and
convergent
findings.
Psychological Bulletin, 125(5), 524-543.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate
peripheral participation. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Megill, A. (1991). Four senses of objectivity. Annals of Scholarship,
8, 301-320.
Nersessian, N. J., Kurz-Milcke, E., Newstetter, W. C., & Davies, J.
(2003, July, 2003). Research laboratories as evolving distributed
cognitive systems. Proceedings of The 25th Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society, Boston.
Star, S. L. (1999). The ethnography of infrastructure. American
Behavioral Scientist, 43(3), 377-391.
Toulmin, S. (1977). Uses of argument (Updated ed.). Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and
identity. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Young, M., Guan, Y., Toman, J., DePalma, A., & Znamenskaia, E.
(2002). Agent as detector: An ecological psychology perspective
on learning perceiving-acting systems. Proceedings of Fourth
International Conference of the Learning Sciences.

