UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How to Go from Nest to Home: Children's Learning of Relational Categories

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4388m8dz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Anggoro, Florencia K.
Gentner, Dedre
Klimbanoff, Raquel S.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How to Go from Nest to Home:
Children’s Learning of Relational Categories
Florencia K. Anggoro (f-anggoro@northwestern.edu)
Dedre Gentner (gentner@northwestern.edu)
Raquel S. Klibanoff (raquel@stanfordalumni.org)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 Sheridan Rd., Evanston, IL 60208 USA

more entities (for example, “used to work with” for a
hammer). Rehder and Ross (2001) investigated the related
notion of abstract coherent categories in which membership
depends on relations rather than on specific attributes.
Markman and Stilwell (2001) distinguished categories that
name common relations or relational roles from those
defined by common feature sets. Kurtz and Gentner (2001)
contrasted relational categories with entity categories
(defined by intrinsic features), goal-derived categories, and
thematic clusters. Kloos and Sloutsky (2004) made a related
contrast between nominal kinds (primarily relational
categories) and natural kinds (primarily entity categories).
Another relevant line of research is Barsalou’s (1983)
investigation of goal-derived categories, such as “things to
take out of the house in case of fire”; such categories can
often be characterized as relational categories.
As noted above, relational categories play a key role in
abstract thought. Therefore it is important to know how such
categories are learned by children. There is considerable
evidence that children find relational categories difficult to
learn. First, names for relational categories are acquired
later than names for object categories. Second, when novel
words are introduced, children appear to take them as names
for objects (Gentner, 1982; Gentner & Boroditsky, 2001;
Goldin-Meadow, Seligman, & Gelman, 1976; Landau,
Smith, & Jones, 1998; Markman, 1989, 1990; Waxman,
1991), even as early as 13 months of age (Waxman &
Markow, 1995). Names for entities—especially names for
animate beings—are learned early in many languages, as
evidenced by findings from English, Italian, Korean,
Mandarin, Navajo, and Tzeltal (Gentner & Boroditsky,
2001; in preparation). For example, the MacArthur
Communicative Developmental Inventory for 8-16-montholds has 296 nouns, of which 93% are entity nouns (objects,
animals and people) and 7% are mixed entity-relational
nouns (there are no purely relational nouns). The MCDI for
17-30-month-olds has 411 nouns, of which 79% are entity
nouns, 13% are mixed, and 8% are relational nouns.
Early on, not only do children learn more entity terms
than relational terms, but when they do learn relational
terms, they often initially treat them as entity terms (Gentner
& Rattermann, 1991). For example, kinship terms are often
understood initially in terms of entity characteristics, and
only later in terms of relational roles (E. Clark, 1993). A
brother may be described as “a boy about 12 years old”,

Abstract
How do children learn relational categories such as gift,
barrier, or dwelling-of? In this research we explore two
means of promoting relational abstraction: comparison
processes and relational labels. In Experiment 1, 6-, 4-, and 3year-old children compared pairs of cards depicting analogous
situations. We either labeled the relations underlying the
analogies (Relational Word condition) or simply provided the
analogous pairs without labeling the relation (Analogy Only
condition). Four- and six-year-olds in both conditions were
able to learn the relations, but performed better if relational
labels were added. Three-year-olds were unsuccessful both
with and without relational words. In Experiment 2 we used a
progressive alignment training method with three-year-olds.
We first gave them closely similar pairs, and then progressed
to analogous pairs similar to those used in Experiment 1.
Three-year-olds who received a combination of progressive
alignment and relational labels during training were able to
successfully learn the relation. Implications for the acquisition
of relational concepts are discussed.

Introduction
Relational categories are categories whose membership is
determined by a specific relation (either temporary or
enduring) that category members have with another entity or
category. For example, all barriers conform to the
relationship: BLOCKS (X, Y). Members of a relational
category can differ widely in their intrinsic properties. For
example, the barrier category can include a fence, a river, a
canyon, and even poverty and lack of education (Kurtz &
Gentner, 2001; Gentner & Kurtz, in press). In this respect,
relational categories resemble analogies. Relational
categories are prominent in mathematics and science (e.g.,
denominator, result, carnivore, pressure, magnetic
attraction). They are also frequent in everyday life (pet,
parent, winner, accident). Indeed, Asmuth and Gentner (in
preparation) found that relational nouns made up about half
the nouns in a representative corpus of adult vocabulary.
Although much of the research on categories has focused
on object categories (e.g., horse, mammal, animal), there is
some prior work on relational categories. Barr and Caplan
(1987) distinguished between intrinsically represented and
extrinsically represented categories. They defined an
intrinsic feature as one that is true of an entity considered in
isolation (such as “has wings” for a bird) and an extrinsic
feature as one expressing the relationship between two or

133

helps children to abstract the relation and transfer it to new
situations. This kind of facilitation occurs with object
categories: labeling a disparate set of objects with a
common name invites children to form a category based on
their commonalities.
At first glance, it seems implausible that this facilitative
effect will hold for relational labels. Compared to the
acquisition of names for object categories, the acquisition of
relational labels poses a significant challenge, as noted
above. This is in part because relations are often non-salient
in the environment, and, more pervasively, because it is
often not obvious which relation is relevant to the meaning
of the word (Gentner, 1982; Gentner & Boroditsky, 2001).
One strong reason to doubt that relational nouns can readily
alert children to relational concepts is children’s strong
tendency to take words as names of objects, as reviewed
above (Gentner, 1982; Markman, 1989; Waxman, 1999).
However, there is research indicating that under some
circumstances, relational labels can help invite relational
abstractions. We hypothesize that this is especially likely to
occur when learners are able to compare situations and
abstract the common relation (Gentner & Namy, 1999;
Kotovsky & Gentner, 1996). In such cases, the relational
label may serve to consolidate the common relations derived
from the comparison process (Gentner, 2003; Gentner &
Medina, 1998).
In the studies that follow, we investigated these questions
by using cards that illustrate two analogous situations and
asking children to transfer the analogy to a third situation.
More specifically, each of the two situations modeled
involved a relational category, and in the third situation the
child was asked to determine the appropriate member of the
relational category for that situation. Half the children
heard a novel word that labeled the relational category in
each set of analogous situations, and half received the
analogous situations alone. In this way we aimed to
examine children's ability to make use of a combination of
comparison and relational labels to extract relational
categories and transfer them to novel situations.

rather than as any male co-sibling, or an uncle as “a nice
man with a pipe” rather than any male in a sibling
relationship with one’s mother or father (Keil & Batterman,
1984). Likewise, Keil and Batterman found that 4-year-olds
conceive of an island as “a place with sand and palms.”
Only later do they learn the relational meaning of “land
surrounded by water.” In a training study, Hall and Waxman
(1993) found that 3 ½ -year-olds had difficulty learning
novel nouns denoting concepts like passenger (“situationspecific nouns”). Even when they were explicitly told (for
example) "This one is a blicket BECAUSE IT IS RIDING
IN A CAR," children asked to find another blicket chose a
similar-looking doll, rather than another doll also riding in a
car. In other words, they did not interpret the new word in
terms of the intended relational concept (passenger) but
rather as referring to a concrete object category (Hall &
Waxman, 1993).
This pattern is consistent with prior developmental
research indicating a relational shift from a focus on
concrete objects to a focus on relations in the interpretation
of analogy and metaphor. For example, when asked to
interpret the metaphor A tape recorder is like a camera, 6year-olds produced object-based interpretations (e.g., Both
are black), whereas 9-year-olds and adults produced chiefly
relational interpretations (e.g., Both can record something
for later) (Gentner, 1988). Similarly, Billow (1975)
reported that metaphors based on object similarity could be
correctly interpreted by children of about 5 or 6 years of
age, but that relational metaphors were not correctly
interpreted until around 10 to 13 years of age.
Given all the difficulties outlined above, one might
wonder how relational categories are acquired at all.
Gentner (2003) hypothesized two mechanisms that promote
the acquisition of relational categories: comparison and
relational language.
Comparison. There is abundant evidence that comparison
across instances can facilitate noticing and encoding
common relational structure (e.g., Catrambone & Holyoak,
1989; Gentner & Namy, 1999; Loewenstein & Gentner,
2001; Kotovsky & Gentner, 1996). Comparison is not a
low-level feature-matching mechanism, but a process of
structural alignment and mapping that is powerful enough to
acquire structured knowledge and rules (Gentner & Medina,
1998; Gentner & Wolff, 2000). The act of carrying out a
comparison promotes alignment relations and renders the
common structure more salient (Gentner & Namy, 1999;
Gick & Holyoak, 1983; Markman & Gentner, 1993; Wolff
& Gentner, 2000). There is considerable evidence that
mutual alignment promotes learning and transfer. That is,
when a learner is induced to compare two things — for
whatever reason, be it common labels, perceptual similarity,
or similar roles in pretend play — the alignment process
tends to render the common relational structure more salient
and prompt its re-representation at a more abstract level.
Relational language. The second candidate for promoting
the learning of relational categories is relational labels. In
this research we ask whether hearing a label for a relation

Experiment 1a
Participants Twenty-four 6-year-olds (range = 6;0 to 6;6,
M = 6;2) participated. Children were randomly assigned to
the Relational Word condition or the Analogy Only control.
Materials 72 colored line drawings of objects (nine sets of
eight cards each) were used as stimuli. Each set included
four example cards and four test cards. The example cards
were divided into two pairs; each consisting of a base card
(e.g., a man; a bird) and a same-relation card (e.g., a house;
a nest). The test cards consisted of a base card (e.g., a dog)
and three choice cards: a same-relation choice (e.g., a
doghouse), a taxonomic choice (e.g., a different dog), and a
thematic choice (e.g., a bone).

134

Procedure In the Relational Word condition, the child was
told that we would play a game about figuring out what
words mean. The experimenter presented the two sets of
example cards and said, “The first word is blick. The house
is the blick for the man, and the nest is the blick for the
bird.” Then, putting down the test trial base card she said,
“Now it’s your turn. What would be the blick for the dog?”
After the child responded verbally, she put down the three
choice cards, and said, “Can you pick which of these cards
would be the blick for the dog?”. In the Analogy-Only
condition, children heard instead, “The house goes with the
man, and the nest goes with the bird the same way. Now
it’s your turn. What would go with the dog the same way?”
As in the Relational word condition, after the verbal
response children were asked to choose among the three
cards.

Experiment 1b
Participants Thirty-two 4-year-olds (range = 4,6-5,3, M =
4,10) and thirty-two 3-year-olds (range = 3,0-3,6, M = 3,2)
participated. At each age, children were randomly assigned
to the Relational Word condition or the Analogy Only
control.
Materials and Procedure The materials and procedure
were identical to those used in Experiment 1a.

Results
The results suggest that the benefit derived from a
combination of making comparisons and hearing a novel
relational word helps 4-year-olds to focus on the relevant
relation and recognize it in other contexts, as it did for 6year-olds in Experiment 1a.
Proportion of trials on which children chose the samerelation card were submitted to an ANOVA with Condition
(2: Relational Word, Analogy Only) and Age (2: 4 years, 3
years) as between-subject factors. A main effect of Age,
F(1, 60) = 27.356, p < .001, revealed that 4-year-olds (M =
.57, SD = .24) chose the same-relation cards more often than
did 3-year-olds (M = .30, SD = .19). A main effect of
Condition, F (1, 60) = 4.434, p < .05, reflected that
participants in the Relational Word condition (M = .49, SD
= .28) chose the same-relation cards significantly more
often than those in the Analogy Only condition (M = .38,
SD = .21). There was also a marginally significant Age x
Condition interaction, F (1, 60) = 3.364, p = .07,
demonstrating that whereas 4-year-olds in the Relational
Word condition (M = .67, SD = .24) chose the same-relation
cards more often than 4-year-olds in the Analogy-Only
condition (M = .47, SD = .19), 3-year-olds' performance did
not differ from chance in either condition. See Figure 2.

Results
The results suggest that having a novel word label a
relation across different situations helps children to focus on
the relevant relation and recognize it in other contexts.
Participants in the Relational Word condition (M = .82, SD
= .13) chose the same-relation cards significantly more
often than those in the Analogy Only condition (M = .65,
SD = .15), t (12) = 3.09, p < .01. Further, in both conditions,
children chose the same-relation cards at above-chance (.33)
rates, and at a significantly higher rate than that for either
the thematic or the taxonomic cards, all p's < .0001. See
Figure 1. Thus, structural alignment supports abstracting a
common relation, but hearing a label strengthens the effect.

(6-year olds)

0.90

*

0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50

Experiment 1b

0.40

(3- and 4-year-olds)

% same relation choice

% same-relation choice

Experiment 1a
1.00

0.30
0.20

Relational Word

Analogy Only

Figure 1: Results from Experiment 1a.

Discussion
The results of Experiment 1a suggest that children can
form analogies across situations and transfer them to new
situations. Further, that performance was higher in the
Relational Word condition than in the Analogy-Only
condition suggests that hearing a novel relational noun that
labels a common relation serves to boost this ability.
These results demonstrate that relational categories are
accessible to 6-year-olds. This led us to ask whether
younger children would also be able to form relational
analogies, and whether novel relational language would
facilitate this process.

1.00
0.90

Relational Word

0.80

Analogy Only

0.70
0.60

*

0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20

4-year-olds

3-year-olds

Figure 2: Results from Experiment 1b.

Discussion
The results suggest that 4-year-olds, like the 6-year-olds
in Experiment 1, can form analogies between situations and
transfer them to new situations. Further, as with the older
children, hearing a novel word that labels the relation helped
4-year-olds focus on the relation and recognize it in other
contexts. However, we saw no evidence that 3-year-olds
could learn the relation in either condition.

135

The failure of the 3-year-old group could result from a
maturational limitation, such as insufficient processing
capacity to carry out the mapping. However, another
possibility is that what the 3-year-olds lack is a sufficiently
firm knowledge of the domain relations to be able to align
the common relational structure and profit from the analogy.
Gentner and Rattermann (1991) showed that young
children’s poor performance on analogies can result from a
lack of sufficient relational knowledge.
One way to bootstrap analogical comparison in a domain
is to begin with concrete literal similarity comparisons
(Gentner & Namy, 1999). The idea is that in a literal
similarity comparison, the close object matches--which are
easy for the child to grasp—can help the child to notice the
relational correspondences. For example, a child who cannot
see the match between watermelon/knife and log/ax may
easily match watermelon/knife with orange/knife. Carrying
out this concrete alignment can help the child see the
common relation of cutting. If the child is then given the
more distant match with log/ax, she may then be able to
perceive the common cutting relation (Of course, she may
have to perform a further re-representation to align the
specific kind of cutting done by a knife with that done by an
ax.)
In the next study we tested whether progressive alignment
can help 3-year-olds to grasp relational categories.
Specifically, we enriched the comparison element of the
task used in Experiment 1: we began with two highsimilarity pairs, and then progressed to two low-similarity
pairs much like those used in Experiment 1. Based on the
Gentner and Namy results, we predicted that making
concrete (literal similarity) comparisons will help highlight
relational commonalities. We also predicted, based on the
results of Experiment 1, that receiving the relational label
will help children extract and retain the common relation.

blick. We’re going to teach him what blick means.” Then
she showed the child the first close-pair base card and said,
“Here’s a watermelon. See?” As she showed the child the
relational match (e.g., a knife for cutting relation), she said,
“Here is the blick for the watermelon.” Then she picked up
the second close-pair base card and said, “You know what
this is? Yes, an orange.”, and as she pointed to the relational
match (e.g., a knife), she said, “Here is the blick for the
orange.” Then she made a sweeping gesture across these
two close-pair base cards and their matches and said, “You
see how these [across the base cards] are blicks for these
[across the matches]?” Then the experimenter continued to
the far-pairs (tree/saw; log/ax), and used the same
instructions as those for the close-pairs. Finally, the
experimenter concluded the examples section by showing
all cards on the table and said, “Now let’s look at all of
them. You see how these [sweeping gesture across all four
base cards] are all blicks for these [sweeping gesture across
all four matches]?”
In the Analogy Only condition, the procedure was similar
to that in the Relational Word condition, except for the
language used when the experimenter pointed to the
relational matches of the base cards. On the first pair, she
said, “This [pointing to the knife] goes with the
watermelon.” On subsequent pairs she said, “This [pointing
to the knife/saw/ax] goes with the (orange/log/tree) in the
same way.”
At Test, the child saw the test base card (e.g., paper) and
the three choice pictures (e.g., pencil, scissors, paper) and
was asked, “Can you teach Sammy which one of these is the
blick for the paper?” (Relational Word condition) or “Can
you teach Sammy which one of these goes with the paper in
the same way?” (Analogy Only condition).
Close pair:

Far pair:

Experiment 2
Participants 40 3-year-olds (range = 3;0 - 3;8, M = 3;2)
participated. They were randomly assigned to the Relational
Word condition or the Analogy Only control.
Test:
Materials 72 colored line drawings of objects (6 sets of 12
cards each) were used as stimuli. Each drawing was
displayed on a laminated card. Each set included eight
example cards and four test cards. The example cards were
divided into four pairs; each pair consisted of a base card
and a same-relation card. The base cards in the first two
pairs (close-pair) are closer in similarity (e.g., a watermelon
and an orange), than the base cards in the second two pairs
(far-pair; e.g, a log and a tree). The test cards consisted of a
base card and three choice cards: a same-relation choice, a
taxonomic choice, and a thematic choice. See Figure 3.

base

thematic same-rel. taxonomic

Figure 3: Sample set depicting a cutting relation.

Results
As predicted, the proportion of same-relation choices in
the Relational Word condition (M = .54, SD = .22) was
greater than chance (p < .001), and also greater that in the
Analogy Only condition (M = .41, SD = .26), t (38) = 1.76,
p = .04, one-tailed. (See Figure 4.) Thus, having a novel
relational word applied across progressively alignable
situations can help 3-year-olds focus on the relevant relation
and recognize it in other contexts.

Procedure As in Experiment 1, in the Relational Word
condition, the experimenter said, “In this game we are going
to teach Sammy (a puppet sitting on the table) the word

136

% relational response

1.00
0.90
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00

investigate children’s construal of what they are supposed to
learn. For example, we could test the range of extension of a
given relational category across several new contexts that
represent different possible interpretations of the novel
word.
Children’s initial representations are often described as
highly conservative. Their knowledge is described as
“concrete,” “situated” or “contextually embedded.” We
suggest that progressive alignment processes allow learners
to see that the same relational patterns may apply across
specific situations. In this way comparison promotes the
abstraction or disembedding of relations from their initial
concrete contexts. This gradual abstraction of initially
conservative, context-specific representations can give rise
to more abstract relational representations (Forbus &
Gentner, 1986; Medin & Ross, 1989).
Learning relational terms may have benefits for later
learning (Loewenstein & Gentner, in press). Possessing
relational language may increase the likelihood that the
learner will be reminded of the prior situation when a new
instance of the relation occurs (Clement et al, 1994; Son &
Goldstone, 2005). This in turn will increase the likelihood
of encoding relations in the same way across different
situations (Forbus, Gentner, & Law, 1995). When relational
concepts become part of our mental store, they may
facilitate the application of the concepts they embody to
new experiences.

Experiment 2

*
Relational Word

Analogy Only

Figure 4: Results from Experiment 2.

Discussion
Results from Experiment 2 suggest that 3-year-olds can
make use of the combination of relational language and
progressive alignment to pick up common relations and
transfer them to new situations. It may be the case that close
alignments in the form of object similarity help them pick
up the relation by an initial noticing of a more specific
version of the relation.

General Discussion
Taken together, the results of these studies demonstrate
that both comparison and relational language can help
children to see relational commonalities among analogical
situations. Older children—four- and six-year-olds—were
able to notice these common relations and transfer them to
new situations readily, with or without relational language.
However, both age groups performed significantly better
when relational labels were present. These findings suggest
that the relational abstraction process can be promoted by
relational labels. That is, the capacity to see consistent
mappings between structures across different surface
contexts is promoted both by direct experiential
comparisons and by hearing relational language.
We suggest two reasons that relational labels may
contribute to relational learning. First, when a comparison
has already taken place, the label may provide a kind of
consolidating effect that helps the learner retain the
relational structure for later use. Second, a common label
may itself invite comparison among the things so labeled;
Gentner and Loewenstein (2002) termed this “symbolic
juxtaposition.” Applying a common label across two
situations is a signal that there are important commonalities
to be discovered. By giving two things the same name, we
invite children to compare them regardless of their surface
similarity—an important requirement for learning relational
categories, whose members are superficially unlike.
For the younger children, the combination of analogical
comparison and relational labels in Experiment 1 was
insufficient to achieve relational insight. However, when we
made the basis for comparison more clear by beginning with
close literal alignments, 3-year-olds were able to reap the
benefits of comparison and relational language.
These results invite further exploration. Future work
should investigate the potential facilitative role of relational
labels using unknown categories. It would also be useful to

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by NSF ROLE/REC 0087516,
ONR/N0014-92-J-1098, and NSF ROLE/REC 0337360
(awarded to D. Gentner). We thank Kathleen Braun, Steve
Flusberg, Jennifer Palmer, and Robin Rios for their
assistance with stimuli, data collection, and other stages of
this project.

References
Asmuth, J., & Gentner, D. (in prep.) Context sensitivity in
relational nouns.
Barr, R. A., & Caplan, L. J. (1987). Category
representations and their implications for category
structure. Memory & Cognition, 15, 397-418.
Barsalou, L. W. (1983). Ad hoc categories. Memory &
Cognition, 11, 211-227.
Billow, R. M. (1975). A cognitive developmental study of
metaphor comprehension. Developmental Psychology, 11,
415-423.
Clark, E. V. (1993). The lexicon in acquisition. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Clement, C. A., Mawby, R., & Giles, D. E. (1994). The
effects of manifest relational similarity on analog
retrieval. Journal of Memory and Language, 33, 396-420.
Catrambone, R., & Holyoak, K. J. (1989). Overcoming
contextual limitations on problem-solving transfer.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
& Cognition, 15, 1147-1156.
Forbus, K. D., & Gentner, D. (1986). Learning physical

137

defining shift in the development of word meaning.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 23,
221-236.
Kloos, H, & Sloutsky, V. (2004). Are natural kinds
psychologically distinct from nominal kinds? Evidence
from learning and development. Proceedings of the
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, Chicago, IL.
Kotovsky, L., & Gentner, D. (1996). Comparison and
categorization in the development of relational similarity.
Child Development, 67, 2797-2822.
Kurtz, K. J., & Gentner, D. (2001). Kinds of kinds: Sources
of category coherence. Proceedings of the Twenty-third
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 522527.
Landau, B., Smith, L. B., & Jones, S. S. (1988). The
importance of shape in early lexical learning. Cognitive
Development, 3, 299-321.
Loewenstein, J., & Gentner, D. (2001). Spatial mapping in
preschoolers: Close comparisons facilitate far mappings.
Journal of Cognition and Development, 2(2), 189-219.
Loewenstein, J., & Gentner, D. (in press). Relational
language and the development of relational mapping.
Cognitive Psychology.
Markman, E. M. (1989). Categorization in children:
Problems of induction. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Markman, E. M. (1990). Constraints children place on word
meanings. Cognitive Science, 14, 57-77.
Markman, A. B., & Stilwell, C. H. (2001). Role-governed
categories. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical
Intelligence, 13, 329-358.
Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (1993). Structural
alignment during similarity comparisons. Cognitive
Psychology, 25, 431-467.
Medin, D. L., & Ross, B. H. (1989). The specific character
of abstract thought: Categorization, problem-solving, and
induction. In R. J. Sternberg (Ed.), Advances in the
psychology of human intelligence. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Rehder, B. & Ross, B.H. (2001). Abstract coherent
concepts. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 27, 1261-1275.
Son, J. Y., & Goldstone, R. L. (in press). Relational words
as handles: They bring along baggage. Proceedings of the
Twenty-seventh Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society. Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Waxman, S. R. (1991). Convergences between semantic and
conceptual organziation in the preschool years. In S. A.
Gelman & J. P. Byrnes, (Eds.), Perspectives on language
and thought: Interrelations in development, (pp. 107145). London: Cambridge University Press.
Waxman, Sandra R. (1999). Specifying the scope of 13month-olds’ expectations for novel words. Cognition, 70,
B35-B50.
Waxman, S. R., & Markow, D. B. (1995). Words as
invitations to form categories: Evidence from 12- to 13month-old infants. Cognitive Psychology, 29, 257-302.

domains: Toward a theoretical framework. In R. S.
Michalski, J. G. Carbonell, & T. M. Mitchell (Eds.),
Machine learning: An artificial intelligence approach.
Los Altos, CA: Kaufmann.
Forbus, K. D., Gentner, D., & Law, K. (1995). MAC/FAC:
A model of similarity-based retrieval. Cognitive Science,
19, 141-205.
Gentner, D. (1982). Why nouns are learned before verbs:
Relativity vs. natural partitioning. In S.A Kuczaj (Ed.),
Language Development: Syntax and Semantics.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gentner, D. (1988). Metaphor as structure mapping: The
relational shift. Child Development, 59, 47-59.
Gentner, D. (2003). Why we’re so smart. In D. Gentner and
S. Goldin-Meadow (Eds.), Language in mind: Advances
in the study of language and thought. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Gentner, D., & Boroditsky, L. (2001). Individuation,
relativity and early word learning. In M. Bowerman & S.
Levinson (Eds.), Language acquisition and conceptual
development. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Gentner, D., & Kurtz, K. (2005). Learning and using
relational categories. In W. K. Ahn, R. L. Goldstone, B.
C. Love, A. B. Markman & P. W. Wolff (Eds.),
Categorization inside and outside the lab. (pp. 151-175).
Washington, DC: APA.
Gentner, D, & Loewenstein, J. (2002). Relational language
and relational thought. In J. Byrnes & E. Amsel (Eds.),
Language, Literacy, and Cognitive Development.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gentner, D., & Medina, J. (1998). Similarity and the
development of rules. Cognition, 65, 263-297.
Gentner, D., & Namy, L. (1999). Comparison in the
development of categories. Cognitive Development, 14,
487-513.
Gentner, D., & Rattermann, M. J. (1991). Language and the
career of similarity. In S. A. Gelman & J. P. Byrnes
(Eds.), Perspectives on language and thought:
Interrelations in development (pp. 225-277). London:
Cambridge University Press.
Gentner, D., & Wolff, P. (2000). Metaphor and knowledge
change. In E. Dietrich & A. Markman (Eds.), Cognitive
dynamics: Conceptual change in humans and machines
(pp. 295-342). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema induction
and analogical transfer. Cognitive Psychology, 15, 1-38.
Goldin-Meadow, S., Seligman, M. E. P., & Gelman, R.
(1976). Language in the two-year old. Cognition, 4, 189202.
Hall, D. G., & Waxman, S. R. (1993). Assumptions about
word meaning: Individuation and basic-level kinds. Child
Development, 64, 1550-1570.
Keil, F. C., & Batterman, N. (1984). A characteristic-to-

138

