UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Improving Category Learning Through the Use of Context Items: Compare or Contrast?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7695n58q

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Andrews, Janet K.
Kurtz, Kenneth J.
Livingston, Kenneth R.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Improving Category Learning Through the Use of Context Items:
Compare or Contrast?
Janet K. Andrews (andrewsj@vassar.edu)
Program in Cognitive Science, 124 Raymond Avenue, Box 146
Poughkeepsie, NY 12604 USA

Kenneth R. Livingston (livingst@vassar.edu)
Program in Cognitive Science, 124 Raymond Avenue, Box 479
Poughkeepsie, NY 12604 USA

Kenneth J. Kurtz (kkurtz@binghamton.edu)
Department of Psychology, P.O. Box 6000
Binghamton, NY 13902 USA

conduct: 1) comparative evaluation of within-category
examples; 2) contrastive evaluation of between-category
examples; or 3) both. Other variables that are also
manipulated are the explicitness of information given about
the nature of the item triples and the nature of the category
definitions. Effects of context may only occur when
learners are made aware of the nature of the context, or with
certain kinds of category structure. An important further goal
is to continue efforts to advance a more naturalistic basis for
the study of category learning by using multiply-instantiated
feature values (Markman & Maddox, 2003) of concrete
perceptual
stimuli,
and
three-way
rather
than
binary classification (Homa & Vosburgh, 1976; Kurtz &
Boukrina, 2004). An argument can also be made that in
naturally-occurring category learning and categorization
situations, it is not uncommon for instances of the same
and/or contrast categories to be available at one time.
The project is novel in the following ways: 1) The ability
of learners to leverage valuable information contextually
embedded in coordinated sets of training instances has, to our
knowledge, never been studied. 2) The use of flat-featured
perceptual stimuli extends the study of the effects of interitem comparison on learning beyond the domain of structural
alignment theory (Gentner & Markman, 1997). 3) The
influence of item juxtaposition on learning may help
differentiate theoretical accounts of categorization. If
exemplar models (e.g., Medin & Schaffer, 1978; Nosofsky &
Palmeri, 1997) are correct in de-emphasizing the role of
summary representations of category concepts, then
manipulating presentation context should have little impact
on category learning. If abstraction of commonalities among
labeled category members drives learning, consistent with
prototype models (e.g., Hampton, 1995; Rosch, 1978), then
contexts which afford within-category comparison should be
beneficial. If discrimination of differences between members
of competing classes is a critical factor in category formation,
as might be the case for hypothesis testing and decision
boundary models of perceptual categorization (e.g., Nosofsky
& Palmeri, 1998) then the opportunity to assess contrasts
between members of different categories should be a
facilitative factor.

Abstract
In four experiments, participants were trained to classify
organism-like visual stimuli into three categories. On each
training trial, the target item was presented with two other items
varying in category membership. Learning was superior when
each item in the triples was a member of a different category,
though the strength of this effect depended on the nature of the
categories being learned. In addition, there was an overall
benefit of explicit prior knowledge of the triples structure.
These results suggest, contrary to exemplar models, that
abstraction processes do occur during category learning and,
contrary to prototype models, that information about category
contrasts is more helpful than information about category
commonalities.
Keywords: Categorization; classification; concepts; learning.

Introduction
While there is a vast body of research on concepts and
classification, and many issues have been investigated in
depth, there has been relatively little exploration of the role of
the context in category learning. One important kind of
context is the set of comparison items within which a to-belearned item is embedded. Comparison of examples has been
shown to influence category learning in research that includes
work on explicit remindings to previous cases (Ross, Perkins,
& Tenpenny, 1990; Spalding & Ross, 1994), array-based
presentation of entire item sets (Regehr & Brooks, 1995), and
pairwise comparison of examples of relationally-defined
categories (Kurtz & Gentner, 1998; Kurtz & Boukrina, 2004).
The finding by Kurtz and Boukrina (2004) of
some improvement in classification accuracy when training
with pairs versus individual items points to at least one kind
of positive context effect on category learning. Comparison of
examples has also been shown to promote knowledge change
in numerous domains that elicit structured representations
(e.g., Gick & Holyoak, 1983; Loewenstein & Gentner, 2001).
We investigate the role of stimulus juxtaposition in
classification learning by presenting target items in the
context of coordinated triads. This "triples" paradigm allows
us to study variously structured triads that invite the learner to
121

Experiment 1
Six conditions are included, varying in the kind of
information presented during training. In five of these
conditions, a triple of items was presented on each trial. In the
aAA condition, both context items match the category of the
target item ‘a’; in the aAB condition, one context item
matches the category of the target item and one does not; in
the aBB condition, both context items are from the same
category which differs from the target item’s category; in the
aBC condition, all three items are from different categories;
and in the aXX condition, the context items are random with
respect to category. A single item control (SIC) condition was
structured in the same way as the aXX condition, but each
item was presented one at a time.
One possible learning strategy is to locate common features
between items known to belong to the same category and
perform abstraction, in which case the aAA condition should
be advantaged. Another potential strategy is to identify
contrasts between items belonging to different categories, in
which case the aBC condition is most beneficial. The aBB
condition offers weaker forms of both abstraction and
differentiation on every trial, while the aAB condition is least
informative since the learner doesn’t know for certain which
context item matches the target item’s category and which
does not.

Figure 1: Sample stimuli for Experiment 1.
Procedure Each participant was randomly assigned to one of
the six conditions, each of which consisted of a training phase
and a test phase, both conducted using SuperLabPro software
on Macintosh iMac computers. For all conditions, the training
phase consisted of an instruction screen describing the nature
of the condition followed by 144 trials. For example, for
participants in the aAA condition, the screen would indicate
that the three objects shown on each trial would always be
from the same category. For conditions aAA, aAB, aBB,
aBC, and aXX, on each trial, a triple of items configured as
shown in Figure 1 would appear for 3 seconds followed by
the identical screen with a red arrow indicating which of the
three items was the target. The participant would press a key
to classify the target as a Gex, Kij, or Zof and would
immediately receive a feedback screen indicating if the
response was correct or not, and if not, giving the correct
classification. The SIC condition was exactly like the aXX
condition except that each item was shown individually
rather than in triples.
Of the 64 possible stimuli in each category, 48 were used
an equal number of times, once as a target and twice as a
nontarget (context) item. No item appeared in a triple with
itself and no two items appeared more than once in a triple.
The location of the target item in the triple varied randomly,
as did the order of the triples. For all conditions, in the test
phase, participants classified all possible 192 items presented
one at a time in random order without feedback. At the
conclusion of the test phase, participants were asked what
they paid attention to and what strategies they used, if any, to
learn the categories. Space limitations preclude discussion of
those responses here.

Method
Participants A total of sixty-nine Vassar College
undergraduates participated in partial fulfillment of an
introductory psychology research requirement.
Stimuli The stimuli consisted of organism-like patterns
created in Adobe Photoshop that varied systematically along
three dimensions: body-aspect ratio, flagella length, and stripe
width (see Figure 1). Body-aspect ratio consisted of a series
of ovals with the same area but different dimensions,
progressing gradually from more elongated to more round.
Flagella consisted of a group of wavy lines that increased in
size. Stripes mimicked the shading properties of a sine wave
gradient and increased in width. For each dimension, eight
values were selected such that adjacent values were just
clearly distinguishable based on informal psycho-physical
testing.
Three categories were defined using the higher or lower
four dimension values as shown in Table 1.
Table 1: Category definitions for Experiment 1.
Category
Gex
Kij
Zof

Body-aspect
ratio
More elongated
More elongated
Rounder

Flagella
length
Shorter
Longer
Longer

Stripe
width
Wider
Narrower
Wider

Results and Discussion
To examine learning during the training phase, the 144 trials
were divided into six blocks of 24 trials. A 6 (condition) by 6
(block) analysis of variance with repeated measures on block
on proportion correct yielded significant effects of both
condition (F(5,63) = 3.324, MSE = .174, p = .01) and block
(F(5,315) = 43.868, MSE = .014, p < .0001). The interaction

The structure on the left of the stimulus remained constant
across all stimuli. Note that all three dimensions are necessary
to learn these categories.
122

between condition and blocks was nearly significant
(F(5,315) = 1.508, MSE = .014, p = .0592). Performance
improved substantially over blocks though less so for the
aAB condition. Post hoc analysis (Fisher’s PLSD) indicated
that condition aBC produced significantly more accurate
performance than all others, condition aAB produced
significantly less accurate performance than all others, and
condition aAA was significantly less accurate than conditions
aBB and aEC as well as aBC. All groups perform well above
chance, which is .33.
A 6 (condition) by 3 (category) analysis of variance with
repeated measures on category on overall proportion correct
in the training phase produced significant effects of both
condition (F(5,63) = 3.392, MSE = .086, p = .0089) and
category (F(2,126) = 18.223, MSE = .012, p < .0001). The
Kij category produced more accurate classification,
suggesting that stripe width is the most salient dimension.

Experiment 2
Method
Participants A total of fifty-five Vassar College
undergraduates participated in partial fulfillment of an
introductory psychology research requirement.
Stimuli and Procedure These were identical to those of
Experiment 1 except that the initial information screen did not
identify the nature of the triples to be presented, hence was
identical for all conditions. Because the SIC condition of
Experiment 1 presented no information that could be
removed, this condition was not run again. Thus Experiment
2 included only conditions aAA, aAB, aBB, aBC, and aXX.

Results and Discussion
The analyses performed for Experiment 1 were performed on
the accuracy data of Experiment 2 and a very similar pattern
of results emerged. For the training data, there were
significant effects of both condition (F(4,50) = 4.194, MSE
= .123, p = .0053) and block (F(5,250) = 43.126, MSE =
.013, p < .0001). Unlike Experiment 1, there was no
interaction between condition and blocks since the AB
condition improved as much as the others, perhaps because
participants in this condition were less aware of its added
complexity. Post hoc analysis (Fisher’s PLSD) indicated that
condition aBC again produced significantly more accurate
performance than all others and in addition performance in
condition aAA was significantly worse than in condition
aAB.
A 6 (condition) by 3 (category) analysis of variance with
repeated measures on category on overall proportion correct
in the training phase produced significant effects of both
condition (F(4,50) = 4.282, MSE = .059, p = .0047) and
category (F(2,100) = 12.632, MSE = .015, p < .0001), as in
Experiment 1.

Table 2: Accuracy in training phase of Experiment 1.
Condition

Mean

SD

aAA
aAB
aBB
aBC
aXX
SIC

.66
.55
.74
.83
.69
.73

.22
.24
.19
.16
.18
.16

For accuracy in the test phase, a 6 (condition) by 3
(category) by 2 (old/new) analysis of variance with repeated
measures on the last two variables yielded significant effects
of category (F(2,120) = 30.713, MSE = .047, p < .0001) and
old/new (F(1,60) = 24.858, MSE = .006, p < .0001). The Kij
category remains most accurately classified and old items (M
= .729, SD = .235) are classified slightly more accurately than
new items (M = .690, SD = .245), which are classified well
above chance, indicating that participants were able to apply
their knowledge of the categories to novel instances. There
was also a significant interaction between category and
old/new (F(2,120) = 5.458, MSE = .005, p = .0054), with
new Zof instances being least accurately classified. The effect
of condition was not significant (p = .1886), but the pattern of
means was similar to that of the training phase, with BC
being most accurate (M = .793, SD = .161) and AB being
least accurate (M = .603, SD = .292).
Experiment 1 suggests that the nature of the triples
presented during category learning does affect classification
accuracy, at least for the duration of the training. A concern
was the possibility that the information given at the start of
training about the nature of each condition might not have
been retained. To disambiguate this variable, two additional
experiments were conducted. In Experiment 2, no information at all was given about the special nature of each
condition, while in Experiment 3, participants were told the
information and then given a series of pre-training trials to
test their retention of the information.

Table 3: Accuracy in training phase of Experiment 2.
Condition

Mean

SD

aAA
aAB
aBB
aBC
aXX

.61
.67
.66
.83
.64

.22
.16
.19
.14
.17

The test phase analysis of variance on proportion correct
yielded the same pattern of results as in Experiment 1, with
significant effects of category (F(2,100) = 38.394, MSE =
.042, p < .0001), old/new (F(1,50) = 14.010, MSE = .006, p
= .0005), and category by old/new interaction (F(2,100) =
15.580, MSE = .005, p < .0001). Once again the effect of
condition was not significant (p = .2443), but the pattern of
means was similar to that of the training phase, with condition
aBC being most accurate (M = .817., SD = .194). However,
here condition aAA is the least accurate (M = .668., SD =
.257).

123

While the reduced number of participants in several
conditions lessens the power of the analysis, the results of
Experiment 3 suggest that the effect of condition – in
particular, the advantage of the aBC condition seen clearly in
the training phases of Experiments 1 and 2 – is essentially
removed when structured triples are presented and
participants understand that structure. Comparing the results
of Experiment 3 to those of Experiment 2, it appears that
condition aAA performance was improved by the pre-training
manipulation.

The similarity between the results of Experiments 1 and 2
suggests either that prior knowledge of the triples structure
has no effect on category learning accuracy, or that the
information given to participants in Experiment 1 was
insufficient to demonstrate an effect of prior knowledge. The
purpose of Experiment 3 was to determine which of those is
the case by strengthening the nature of the information given
to participants.

Experiment 3

Experiment 4

Method

Experiments 1-3 taken together suggest that under some
circumstances, category learning is improved by the
presentation of items in triads consisting of a target and two
other items, where the three are all from different categories.
Although the significance of this effect was not maintained
during the testing phase or when all participants fully
understood the structure of the various types of triples, it did
occur despite exactly the same items being presented in the
different conditions, and only the configuration of
presentation varying.
It is interesting that the superior condition was aBC, which
highlights differences between categories. This might seem
somewhat surprising in light of the emphasis in the category
learning literature on similarities and abstraction within
categories. The purpose of Experiment 4 was to test whether
aBC remains advantageous using a very different category
structure than that used in Experiments 1-3. In particular, we
expected that using several category-irrelevant dimensions of
variation and one, relatively subtle category-relevant
dimension would favor comparative evaluation of withincategory examples, i.e., the aAA condition, over the aBC
condition. Experiment 4 included only these two types of
triples, along with a prior information manipulation.

Participants A total of fifty-one Vassar College
undergraduates participated in partial fulfillment of an
introductory psychology research requirement.
Stimuli and Procedure These were identical to those of
Experiment 2 except for the following: Prior to the training
phase, participants were informed of the structure of the
triples in their condition and given ten trials presenting
incomplete triples composed of simple geometric shapes. On
each trial, participants indicated what shape the missing item
could or had to be and received feedback on their responses.
Because there is no systematic structure to the triples in the
aXX condition that participants can be pre-trained on, this
condition was not included. Thus Experiment 3 had only
conditions aAA, aAB, aBB, and aBC

Results and Discussion
Pre-training performance differed considerably across
conditions; subsequent analyses were carried out only on data
from participants performing better than chance (15/15 in
aAA, 6/12 in aAB, 8/12 in aBB, and 10/12 in aBC).
The training phase data for Experiment 3 produced a
significant effect of blocks (F(5,185) = 29.109, MSE = .014,
p < .0001) but not condition (p = .1514), though the pattern of
means was fairly close to that of Experiment 1 (see Table 2).
Similarly, for overall proportion correct in the training phase,
there was only an effect of category (F(2,74) = 10.913, MSE
= .013, p < .0001).

Method
Participants A total of sixty-six Vassar College undergraduates participated in partial fulfillment of an introductory
psychology research requirement.
Stimuli The stimuli were similar to those used in
Experiments 1-3 but category membership depended on only
one dimension, flagella length, which took on the same eight
values used previously and one additional, shorter value.
Gexes had the shortest three values, Kijes the middle three,
and Zofs the longest three. The eight values of body-aspect
ratio and stripe width used previously were also used but
varied randomly, with all values occurring in all categories.
Two new dimensions each took on four values and also
varied randomly: the size of the structure that appeared on
the left of all stimuli in Experiments 1-3, and the width of the
oval’s outline. Examples are shown in Figure 2.

Table 4: Accuracy in training phase of Experiment 3.
Condition

Mean

SD

aAA
aAB
aBB
aBC

.78
.69
.68
.82

.17
.14
.21
.16

The test phase data for the participants in Experiment 3 who
performed well on the pre-training showed the familiar
effects of category (F(2,74) = 16.345, MSE = .032, p <
.0001) and old/new (F(1,37) = 11.407, MSE = .004, p =
.0017), though no interaction of the two. There is again no
effect of condition (p = .5899).

124

0.8
0.7

Training

0.6

Test

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
aAA

Figure 2: Sample stimuli for Experiment 4.
Procedure Only conditions aAA and aBC were used but each
occurred both with no information given to participants about
the triples structure (comparable to the instructions used in
Experiment 2) and with information and pre-training on the
triples structure (comparable to the procedure used before the
training phase in Experiment 3).
Since there are many more possible instances of these
categories, a set of 48 instances of each category was chosen
randomly with the constraint that equal numbers of every
dimensional value were used and no two features were
correlated with each other, within or across categories. These
48 instances from each category were used in the training
phase, which was otherwise identical procedurally to the
training phase of Experiments 2 and 3. For the test phase, and
to avoid chance imbalances in the sampling from the three
categories, an additional 16 items were randomly chosen
from the center of each category by using only the middle
flagella value for each category and the middle two values of
each irrelevant dimension. These additional items were used
along with the training phase items in the test phase, which
was procedurally identical to that used in Experiments 1-3.
In addition to the aAA and aBC conditions with no prior
information, and the aAA and aBC conditions with pretraining on the triples structure, a single item control
condition (SIC) was also included for purposes of comparison
in learning and classification performance.

aAA Info

aBC

aBC Info

SIC

Figure 3: Mean proportion of correct classifications in
training and test phases of Experiment 4.
Similar analysis of overall proportion correct in the training
phase yielded significant effects of condition (F(1,49) =
17.288, MSE = .023, p = .0001) and information (F(1,49) =
5.175, MSE = .023, p = .0273). Post hoc analysis (Fisher’s
PLSD) with the SIC condition included indicated that all five
means differ significantly except that neither aAA condition
differs significantly from SIC. Mean performance in several
conditions remains at or near chance.
Analysis of test phase accuracy produced significant effects
of condition (F(1,49) = 23.499, MSE = .218, p < .0001) and
category (F(2,98) = 3.471, MSE = .038, p = .0350), with Kij
responses being slightly more accurate. The condition by
information by old/new interaction was also significant
(F(1,49) = 9.335, MSE = .023, p = .0036) due to old (but not
new) items being classified more accurately in the aAA
information condition than the aAA no information condition.
The main effect of information did not reach significance
(F(1,49) = 3.033, MSE = .218, p = .0879). Post hoc analysis
(Fisher’s PLSD) with the SIC condition included indicated
that all five means differ significantly except that the aAA
information condition did not differ significantly from either
aAA no information or SIC.
Experiment 4 thus produced a pattern of results similar to
that shown in Experiments 1-3, but much more strongly in
that the aBC condition was superior for both training and test
phases compared to both aAA and SIC conditions, and
whether participants were explicitly pre-trained to ensure
prior knowledge of the triples structure or not. Unlike the
previous experiments, prior information about the triples
structure did not remove differences between the aAA and
aBC conditions, though it did tend to improve performance in
both.

Results and Discussion
These categories were more difficult to learn than those used
in Experiments 1-3. Pre-training performance was good for
both the aAA and aBC conditions, so no data were excluded
from the analyses. Analysis of training phase accuracy
without the SIC condition allowed for condition and prior
information to be incorporated as independent variables. This
analysis showed significant effects of condition (F(1,48) =
19.030, MSE = .225, p < .0001), information F(1,48) =
4.350, MSE = .225, p = .0423), and block (F(5,240) =
14.426, MSE = .020, p < .0001), and a significant condition
by block interaction (F(5,240) = 7.811, MSE = .020, p <
.0001) because performance in the aAA conditions barely
improved over the training.

General Discussion
The experiments reported here demonstrate that success in
classification learning can be affected by the nature of the
items presented in coordinated triads during training, and
suggest that learners are able to benefit most from such triads
when each item is a member of a different category. For the
125

set of categories used in Experiments 1-3, this effect was only
significant in the absence of clear prior knowledge of the
structure of the triads, and only during training. For the set of
categories tested in Experiment 4, triads containing members
of all three categories led to significantly better classification
accuracy than triads containing members of the same
category, and this was true for both training and subsequent
testing with old and new items. It was also true whether
participants were explicitly informed and pre-trained on the
structure of the triads prior to learning or not, though prior
information improved performance during training. It is
interesting that the random variation and relatively subtle
category distinctions used in Experiment 4 produced an even
stronger advantage for the different-category triads over the
same-category triads.
These findings suggest that the potency of inter-item
comparison during learning that has been demonstrated in
numerous domains involving structured representations can
potentially be extended to classification of flat-featured
perceptual stimuli, and may have implications for the
relationship between structural alignment principles and
categorization (Lassaline & Murphy, 1998). It is also
important to consider how our findings relate to available
evidence concerning sequential item comparisons that may be
occurring during traditional single-item classification training.
These results are of additional interest because they are
difficult to reconcile with exemplar or prototype models of
category learning. In exemplar models, learning depends on
the set of labeled examples that are presented, which was kept
constant over all conditions of our experiments, and on
selective attention to diagnostic features, and all features were
equally diagnostic in our first three experiments. Thus it is not
clear how these models can explain the observed aBC
advantage. Prototype models allow for some information
beyond labeled instances and attention weights to be derived
during learning, information to which the inter-item
comparison afforded by our triads could potentially be
relevant. However, such models would predict that the aAA
condition would be most beneficial since it promotes the
abstraction of common elements. We can therefore conclude
that there is an abstractive process beyond what exemplar
models allow, but that, surprisingly, it is better supported (at
least in the case of our design and materials) by the
opportunity to easily pick out category-differentiating
information rather than within-category commonalities.
Exploration of other kinds of models will be needed to clarify
alternative approaches to category learning that will more
successfully capture this pattern of findings.

References
Gentner, D., & Markman, A. (1997). Structure mapping in
analogy and similarity. American Psychologist, 52, 45-56.
Gick, M., & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema induction and
analogical transfer. Cognitive Psychology, 15, 1-38.
Hampton, J. A. (1995). Testing the prototype theory of
concepts. Journal of Memory and Language, 34, 686–708.
Homa, D., & Vosburgh, R. (1976). Category breadth and the
abstraction of prototypical information. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory,
2(3), 322-330.
Kurtz, K. J., & Boukrina, O. (2004). Learning relational
categories by comparison of paired examples. Proceed-ings
of the Twenty-Sixth Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society.
Kurtz, K. J., & Gentner, D. (1998). Category learning and
comparison in the evolution of similarity structure.
Proceedings of the Twentieth Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (p. 1236).
Lassaline, M. E., & Murphy, G. L. (1998). Alignment and
category learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 24(1), 144-160.
Loewenstein, J., & Gentner, D. (2001). Spatial mapping in
preschoolers: Close comparisons facilitate far mappings.
Journal of Cognition and Development, 2(2), 189-219.
Markman, A. B., & Maddox, W. T. (2003). Classification of
exemplars with single- and multiple-feature manifestations: The effects of relevant dimension variation and
category structure. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 29(1), 107-117.
Medin, D. L., & Schaffer, M. M. (1978). Context theory of
classification learning. Psychological Review, 85, 207–238.
Nosofsky, R. M., & Palmeri, T. J. (1997). An exemplar-based
random walk model of speeded classification.
Psychological Review, 104, 266–300.
Nosofsky, R. M., & Palmeri, T. J. (1998). A rule-plusexception model for classifying objects in continuousdimension spaces. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 5(3),
345-369.
Regehr, G., & Brooks, L. R. (1995). Category organization in
free classification: The organizing effect of an array of
stimuli. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 21(2), 347-363.
Rosch, E. (1978). Principles of categorization. In E. Rosch &
B. B. Lloyd (Eds.), Cognition & categorization (pp. 27–
48). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ross, B. H., Perkins, S. J., & Tenpenny, P. L. (1990).
Reminding-based category learning. Cognitive Psychology, 22, 460-492.
Spalding, T. L., & Ross, B. H. (1994). Comparison-based
learning: Effects of comparing instances during category
learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 20(6), 1251-1263.

Acknowledgments
Our thanks to the Undergraduate Research Summer Institute
at Vassar College, and to Peter Alfaro, Ariana Brill, Jason
Chen, Jessica Cicchino, Elizabeth Gonsiorowski, and Emma
Myers for their assistance with these experiments.

126

