UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Improving Skills of Addition and Subtraction Involving Negative Numbers Based on Cognitive
Task Analysis and Assessment of Mental Representations of Negative Numbers: A Case
Study of a Seventh-Grade Student

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7xg1j5bs

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Hasegawa, Mayu
Murohashi, Harumitsu
Sawaki, Risa
et al.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Improving Skills of Addition and Subtraction Involving Negative Numbers Based on
Cognitive Task Analysis and Assessment of Mental Representations of Negative
Numbers: A Case Study of a Seventh-Grade Student
Atsushi Terao (atsushi@edu.hokudai.ac.jp)
Risa Sawaki (sawaki@edu.hokudai.ac.jp)
Mayu Hasegawa (hasegawa@edu.hokudai.ac.jp)
Harumitsu Murohashi (muroh@edu.hokudai.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Education, Hokkaido University, Kita 11 Nishi 7
Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-0811 JAPAN

Abstract
The aim of this paper is to show how we can use cognitive
task analysis and the SNARC effect (e.g., Fisher, 2003) to
refine students’ skills of addition and subtraction including
negative numbers. We taught these problems to a seventhgrade student. She had frequently made errors in solving the
problem. Several possible ways of calculation were identified
based on a cognitive task analysis. Some were pictorial
solutions involving a mature mental number line; others were
purely algebraic solutions not requiring direct use of a mental
number line. It also turned out that her errors were due to bug
rules and the lack of a critical production when executing a
purely algebraic solution. The direction of the SNARC effect
suggested that the student had an immature mental number
line, containing only positive entries. Considering the bug
rules and her immature mental representation of numbers, we
focused on refining her solution procedure without
emphasizing the use of a mental number line. It worked very
well. This case suggests that cognitive task analysis and
assessment of the mental representation of numbers can
provide a foundation for effective teaching of integer addition
and subtraction.

Introduction
The authors run a social and academic activity under the
supervision of the fourth author of this paper, called the
Saturday classroom, in which we teach school subjects and
play with students who suffer from a mild developmental
disorder, such as autism, AD/HD, or a learning disorder.
The goal of our research group is to understand these
disorders from the viewpoints of psychology and brain
science. The Saturday classroom gives us a chance to
observe these disorders and to understand the difficulties the
students are experiencing. Each student comes to our
department twice a month, on Saturday.
From the beginning of the 2004 school year (from April
2004 to March 2005), the first three authors taught a 7th
grade-student (initials AY) addition and subtraction
incorporating negative numbers. In Japan, this calculation is
the first topic of junior-high-school mathematics (7th to 9th
grade). A doctor has diagnosed AY with a learning disorder,
stemming from a car accident when she was an older
preschooler. Her brain was severely damaged, and the
difficulty she has in learning calculations involving negative

integers may be due to her disorder. However, we believe
that the errors she made can be observed in normal students,
and what was done in AY’s case is also useful for normal
students. Moreover, the aim of this paper is to discuss
usefulness of the information obtained from cognitive task
analysis and the assessment of the mental representation of
numbers in teaching calculations on integer numbers. For
these reasons, hereafter we will not refer to her disorder.
It is surmised that the mental number line should be used
as a critical base of calculation on real numbers
{x | −∞ < x < +∞} . The mental number line is a
language-independent representation of number magnitude
(Dehaene, Spelke, Pinel, Stanescu, & Tsivkin, 1999). All
the textbooks used in Japan, as far as we know, first teach
this calculation on integer numbers as a movement on the
(written) number line. For example, a textbook
teaches 2 − 6 as moving 6 to the negative direction (left)
from the point of 2 along the number line. AY was initially
taught to solve this kind of problem in the same way as the
textbook does. When students reach a certain level of
expertise, they no longer write a number line on paper.
However, it is thought that an internal representation of the
number line still plays a role in executing calculation.
Several studies have shown that the mental number line is a
critical source of mathematical thinking, including
approximation (Dehaene, et al., 1999), elementary addition
and subtraction (Griffin, Case, & Siegler, 1994), and solving
word problems (Lewis, 1989; Paige & Simon, 1966; Terao,
Koedinger, Sohn, Qin, Anderson, & Carter, 2004).
AY had often made errors in executing the integer
calculation. For example, her answer to 2 − 5 was 3. Using
a written number line, she was taught that the answer to this
problem should be a negative number (actually -3) because
from the point of 2 we have to go over zero to reach the
point of the answer on the number line. She seemed to
understand the calculation and was able to solve similar
problems correctly. But in the next Saturday classroom (two
weeks later) she made the same errors again. Given her
relapse, it became imperative to understand when and why
these errors occurred, and to consider whether how she was
being taught was in order.

2172

Table 1: A LISP Function for a Pictorial Solution.
(defun pn_count (oper num1 num2)
(cond ((< num2 0)
(change_addend 'pn_count oper num1 num2))
;; If the second number is negative,
;; it will be changed to positive.
((equal oper '+) (count_up num1 num2))
((equal oper '-) (count_down num1 num2))))

The purpose of this paper is to describe the case of AY
which illustrates how a cognitive task analysis and the
assessment of the mental number line can refine and correct
the skills of addition and subtraction involving negative
numbers. A cognitive task analysis was done to understand
the strategies she might employ in solving the addition-andsubtraction problems she had trouble with. Observing AY
while she solved a series of problems, the pattern of correct
and incorrect answers was traced in terms of a set of
production rules. Further investigation into AY’s mental
number line using the SNARC effect (e.g., Fisher, 2003)
yielded a targeted approach to correcting AY’s erroneous
strategies

Cognitive Task Analysis
Cognitive task analysis of a mathematical problem reveals
how the problem could be solved. From the analysis, one
can know what knowledge or representation is required to
execute a solution and how the solution is organized. Once a
solution is described in detail, it provides clues to
understand where and why a student failed to solve the
problem. For example, bug rules can be identified which
lead the student to an incorrect answer (e.g., Koedinger &
Terao, 2002).
Although many studies have been done as to how
elementary addition and subtraction problems are solved
(e.g., Carpenter, Noser, & Romberg, 1982), little is known
about calculations incorporating negative numbers. We
began by searching the major textbooks used in Japan for
possible solution methods to the addition and subtraction
problems which incorporate negative numbers.
Among several possible solutions that were found, two of
them are described below. The first solution is an example
of a “pictorial” solution, which in this paper means that the
solution requires explicit use of a written or mental number
line. This was the solution initially taught to AY during the
early months of the school year. The second solution is an
example of an algebraic solution, which does not need to
use a written or mental number line. As it turned out, it was
a buggy version of this method that AY was attempting to
employ.

movement on a (mental) number line. This solution is an
extension of a solution taught in the elementary arithmetic,
where adding a positive number is equivalent to going right
on the mental number line and subtracting it is going left.
The elementary-math version of this solution has been
called the counting-on strategy.
In this solution, the student initially looks at the second
number (i.e., b in a ± b ) of the expression. If the number
is a negative number, the student then tries to change it to a
positive number. This can be done by changing the problem
a ± b to a m (−b) . For example, if the problem
is 2 + ( −5) , the student will change it to 2 − 5 . If the
second number is a positive number, the student does
nothing at this stage. Then the student moves right
(addition) or left (subtraction) along the number line from
the point of the first number, and reaches the point of the
answer.
To ensure that we grasp this solution in detail and there is
no hole in our description of the solution, we implemented
this solution with a set of LISP functions. Table 1 shows the
main function for executing this solution. The subfunction
count_up counts up num2 from num1; the subfunction
count_down works in a similar way.
A more sophisticated version of this solution does not use
a written number line. Students no longer do counting. This
sophisticated solution totally depends upon a mental number
line and makes use of a part-part-whole relation on a mental
number line. For example, consider the problem 2 − 5 . First
you move from 0 toward the point of the first addend 2 on
your mental number lien. Then you imagine yourself to go 5
to the left. Now the whole length is 5, the length of the right
part is 2, and the length of the left part is unknown. If you
use a part-part-whole relation, you can find the unknown
length is 3. The answer to this problem is -3, not +3,
because you past zero when moving from the 2, a point in
the positive side. We also implemented this more
sophisticated solution with a set of LISP functions (not
presented in this paper).

The Algebraic Solution

The Pictorial Solution

This solution is taught in all the textbooks we searched
through. The description of the textbooks can be easily
translated into a set of production rules shown in Table 2.
First of all, you have to confirm the operator is addition. If
not, you need to change the problem to the equivalent
addition problem. The production P0 in Table 2 changes the
problem from a − b into a + ( −b) . Then you look
whether the signs of the two addends are the same or
different. If the signs are in common, you add the absolute
value of the second addend to the absolute value of the first
addend (see production P1 in Table 2), and the polarity of
the answer (positive or negative) is consistent with the
common sign of the two addends (production P4). If the
signs are different, you compare the absolute value of the
first addend with the absolute value of the second addend,
subtract the smaller absolute value from the larger absolute
value (production P2), and the polarity of the answer is
consistent with the sign of the addend of larger absolute
value (production P5). This solution was also implemented
with a set of LISP function (not presented in this paper).

This solution requires the solver to use a written or mental
number line because the calculation is equivalent to
2173

numbers were positive and the answer was also positive,
like (+8) - (+6). The other eight problems involved negative
numbers like (+3) - (+6) or (-6) - (+3). The second number
was always a positive number. AY made no error in the
addition problems and the simple subtraction problems. Of
eight subtraction problems involving negative numbers, AY
gave wrong answers to seven problems.
Looking at the written calculation, it was suspected that
she tried to execute the algebraic solution described in the
previous section but failed in solving the problem because
of lack of a critical production and use of bug rules which
lack a critical test in the condition part. She showed a wrong
solution like (+3) - (+6) = + (6 - 3) = +3 or (-6) - (+3) = - (6
- 3) = -3. It was also apparent that she did not have the
production P0 in Table 2 because she did not change a
subtraction problem to the equivalent addition problem. It
was also suspected that she had a buggy version of the
production P2 that lacks the test of operator (see Table 2). In
order to make the set of AY’s productions cover all types of
addition and subtraction problems, one needs to consider
productions for doing subtraction between two numbers of
common sign. It was assumed that AY had the production
P3 in Table 2 for this type of problem.
Putting all the productions together, we can describe the
AY’s strategy as follows:

Table 2: Production Rules for an Algebraic Solution
P0: Change-subtraction-to-addition
If the operator is subtraction
then change the operator to addition
and change the sign of the second addend.
P1: Do-absolute-addition
If the operator is addition
and the two addends have the same sign
and no absolute-value addition has been executed
then add the absolute value of the each addend together.
P2: Do-absolute-subtraction
If the operator is addition ;; A bug version of this production
;; lacks this part of the condition.
and the two addends have different signs
and no absolute-value subtraction has been executed
then subtract the smaller absolute value
from the larger absolute value of the two digits.
P3: Do-absolute-subtraction-same-sign
If the operator is subtraction
and the two digits have the same sign
and no absolute-value subtraction has been made
then subtract the smaller absolute value
from the larger absolute value of the two digits.
P4: Attach-sign-to-common-sign-problem
If the two digits have the same sign
and an absolute-value calculation has been executed
then attach the common sign to the result
of the absolute calculation.
P5: Attach-sign-to-different-sign-problem
If the two digits have different signs
and an absolute-value calculation has been executed
then attach the sign of the digit of larger absolute value
to the result of the absolute calculation.

If the problem is an addition problem
and the two addends have the same sign
then add the absolute value of the each addend together
and attach the common sign.
Otherwise subtract the smaller absolute value from
the larger absolute value
and attach the sign of the digit of larger absolute value.

This algebraic solution does not require explicit use of a
written or mental number line, although we can justify this
solution by considering a pictorial solution similar to the
sophisticated pictorial solution described in the previous
subsection.

This strategy is almost the same as the correct algebraic
solution described in the previous section, but it produces an
incorrect answer to a certain types of problems. From the
trace of AY’s solution, we derived several predictions on
her performance and tested these predictions with 56
problems.

Predictions of Performance

Identifying Solutions and Bug Rules

The production trace of AY’s solution allows us to derive
several predictions on her performance as follows:
(1) No error will occur for addition problems. Even if AY
does not have the production P0 and does have a bug
version of the production P2, this does not lead to any
wrong answers to addition problems.
(2) For the problems which subtract a positive digit from
another positive digit, an error was produced by the
production P3 and the lack of P0 only if the second
digit is larger than the first digit. In the case of a larger
first digit, this problem is a simple subtraction problem
and no error will occur.
(3) For the problems which do a subtraction between
numbers of different signs, AY will always make an

This section describes how we identified the details of the
erroneous strategies that AY used. Observing AY while she
solved a series of test questions, the pattern of correct and
incorrect answers was noted as well as any intermediate
results. These patterns were traced in terms of a set of
production rules which were slightly different from the ones
described in the previous section (Table 2). This productionrule trace was used to construct a second test, and AY’s
predicted performance was compared to her actual
performance on the second test.

Production Trace of AY’s Solution
One day, AY was given a test of eight addition problems
and 12 subtraction problems. Of 12 subtraction problems,
four problems were very simple ones in which the two
2174

which the absolute value of the second digit is larger
than the absolute value of the first digit. However, this
could be due to the fact that we failed to include the
predicted wrong answer as one of the two candidates
appearing on the screen. The correct answer and the
predicted wrong answer have the same absolute value
differing only in polarity. Thus, AY might have had the
incorrect answer (e.g., (-4) - (-9) = - (9 - 4) = -5), but
chose the opposite polarity when presented with the two
candidates (i.e., selecting 5 in the previous example). It
is worth mentioning that about one month before this
test, she solved a similar problem, (-3) - (-8), and gave
the predicted answer, -5.

error due to the buggy version of production P2 and the
lack of P0.
(4) For the problems which subtract a negative number
from another negative number, an error was produced
by the production P3 and the lack of P0 only if the
absolute value of the second digit is larger than the
absolute value of the first digit. The production P3 is a
bug rule. Nonetheless, if the absolute value of the first
digit is larger than the absolute value of the second digit,
the produced answer is consistent with the correct
answer.

Test of Predictions
To test these predictions, we gave AY a wide variety of
problems. Table 3 shows 28 pairs of the first and second
digit of the problems (see the second and third column of
the table). An addition problem and a subtraction problem
were generated from each pair to yield 56 problems. The
number pairs in Table 3 were also used to assess AY’s
mental representation of negative numbers as described in
the next section. The names of the conditions in Table 3 are
of this assessment.
These problems were presented on a screen one problem
at a time. The operator (+ or -) was presented at the center
of the screen for 1.5 seconds followed by two digits
appeared to the left and right side of the operator. We asked
AY to solve the problem in mind accurately but as quickly
as possible and push a button when she had an answer. Then
a pair of two numbers was presented on the screen after a
short interval (1.5 seconds). She was asked to select the
correct answer from the two numbers by pushing either of
the two buttons. Six seconds after the button press, the next
problem appeared.
Overall, the performance of AY supported our hypotheses,
meaning that we successfully understood her strategy of
calculation. The forth and fifth column of Table 3 show all
the wrong answers AY gave. The blank means that she gave
the correct answer to that problem.
(1) AY actually made no error for addition problems,
except for an error (i.e., 9 + 4 = 5) which may be a
careless mistake.
(2) Of four problems which subtract a larger positive digit
from a smaller positive digit, AY gave wrong answers
to three problems. The produced errors were consistent
with the ones which were predicted from the production
P3 and the lack of P0. She also gave a wrong answer, 7,
to the problem of 0 - 7. This error can be explained by
the production P3 and the lack of production P0 if she
considered 0 as a positive number.
(3) AY gave wrong answers to five of eight problems in
which she had to do subtraction between numbers of
different signs. These errors can be explained by
executing the buggy version of production P2 and the
lack of the production P0.
(4) Differing from our prediction, AY gave the correct
answers to all the four problems which subtract a
negative number from another negative number and in

Table 3: Number pairs used for calculation and comparison
Condition 1st digit 2nd digit Addition Subtraction

A+N+

A-N+

A+N-

A-N-

4
2
0
-2
3
1
-1
-9
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
9
8
7
6
5
4
3

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
-9
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
4
2
0
-2
3
1
-1

5
7
4
2
3
2

-3
-1

-3
5

Assessment of Mental Number Line

2175

Besides knowing AY’s calculation strategy in detail,
knowing how AY represented numbers would also be useful
in deciding what kind of corrective teaching should be
employed with the student. For example, after knowing that
a student tried to execute an algebraic solution but failed in
solving the problem due to a lack of production and/or use
of bug rules, should we focused on correcting it within the

algebraic solution? Or we should emphasize use of a mental
number line because it is a central concept for mathematical
thinking? We think it depends on the nature of his or her
mental number line. On one hand, if the student has a
mature mental number line, a pictorial solution can be
taught and the student should have no difficulty in
understanding and using that solution. On the other hand, if
his or her mental number line is immature, the teacher could
either try to develop the number line first, or switch to
another method that does not require a mature mental
number line.

The SNARC Effect
To assess AY’s mental number line, the authors made use of
the SNARC effect (for spatial-numerical association of
response codes). It has been shown that the mental number
line represents spatial positional codes, with small numbers
on the left side and larger numbers on the right. Any effects
due to this property of the mental number line are called the
SNARC effects. This effect has been replicated with various
tasks (e.g., Fias, Brysbaert, Geypens, & d’Ydewalle, 1996;
Fisher, 2001, 2003).
Fisher (2003) used the SNARC effect to examine whether
negative numbers become associated with the left side of
space as a result of experience with them. He presented
fourteen students (age range: 20-38 years) with pairs of
digits and asked them to press the button near the smaller
(or larger) number. The response times in two critical
conditions were compared: the A+N- condition and the AN+ condition (see Table 3). The notation here indicates
whether the left-right ordering of the digits’ absolute
magnitudes was congruent (A+) or incongruent (A-) with
the left-right orientation of the mental number line, and
whether the left-right ordering of the digits’ numerical
magnitudes was congruent (N+) or incongruent (N-) with
the left-right orientation of the mental number line. It is
predicted that the comparison speed will be faster in the AN+ condition than in the A+N- condition if students have a
mature mental number line extending to both left and right
from zero. On the other hand, if students’ mental number
line is immature and contains only positive entries, the
response time should be faster in the A+N- condition.
Fisher found that his participants have a mature mental
number line, on which negative numbers are associated with
the left side of the space, indicating a numerical continuum
from − ∞ (left) to + ∞ (right).

Assessment
Using Fisher’s experiment as a basis, the same set of digit
pairs in the two critical conditions (the A+N- condition and
the A-N+ condition) was used in the assessment of AY’s
mental number line. However, for the other two conditions a
different set of number pairs was used instead. The reason
for this change was that the same number pairs were used in
the calculation task described in the previous section. Fisher
kept the split between the digits in all pairs constant at 5 to
avoid being contaminated by the distance effect (increasing

comparison time with the distance between the two digits).
If we had used exactly the same set of number pairs as used
in Fisher’s experiment, the answers to subtraction problems
would have been always 5 or -5.
The procedure was almost the same as in the calculation
task. Instead of executing the calculation, AY was asked to
compare the magnitudes of two digits. In the first block, 28
pairs of numbers shown in Table 3 were presented, and AY
selected the larger number from the two digits. In the
second block, we asked her to select the smaller number.
The response was made by pushing either of two buttons
with her right had: the Left choice was her index finger and,
and the Right choice was her middle finger. The total
number of trials was 56.
Data from the two number pairs in the A-N+ condition
were discarded because of the wrong response and a
program error. Comparing the two critical conditions, the
mean reaction time in the A+N- condition was 1115 ms; the
mean reaction time in the A-N+ condition was 1275 ms.
The difference between the two conditions was marginally
significant by the paired t-test, t (11) = 2.15, p = .055, in
which the stimuli composed of the same digits (e.g., [-9,-4]
and [-4, -9]) were paired. This difference reached a
significant level by the Wilcoxon’s test, p = .05 .
From the assessment of AY’s mental representation of
numbers, it appeared that AY did not have a mature mental
number line. The direction of the SNARC effect was just
opposite to the one observed in the Fisher’s (2003) study,
implying that her mental number line was a numerical
continuum from 0 (left) to + ∞ (right), not from − ∞ to
+ ∞ . Since her mental number line was immature, it is
reasonable that AY did not notice she gave a wrong answer
to the problem in which movement on the mental number
line clearly goes over zero from the positive side (e.g., 4 - 9
= 5). She cannot feel going over zero if her mental number
line does not have the negative side.

Correcting AY’s Calculation Strategy
Having determined the deficiencies in AY’s calculation
strategy and considering her immature mental number line,
we decided to correct her existing calculation strategy
without emphasizing the use of the mental number line. She
was taught that the subtraction problem has to be changed to
the equivalent addition problem and all the other
manipulations are executed only for addition problems, thus
teaching the production P0 and correcting errors in AY’s
production P2. It is worth mentioning that this kind of
correction is the basis of intelligent tutoring systems: tracing
students’ solutions and fixing buggy rules.
This correction worked very well for AY, and she now
gives the correct answer to the integer problems she would
have previously missed. The success of this intervention is
not temporary one. Six month after the intervention, we
gave AY a retest of the 56 problems and she still gave the
correct answers to all problems.
We assume that acquiring a mature mental number line is
a prerequisite for teaching a pictorial solution for addition
and subtraction problems involving negative numbers. AY
gave a wrong answer to 2 − 5 , +3, even after we taught her
that it is a stupid answer because we have to go over zero

2176

from the positive side to reach the correct answer along the
number line. We thought that she was not able to imagine
going over zero because of her immature mental number
line. As mentioned above, if a student does not have a
mature mental number line, the teacher could either try to
develop the number line first, or switch to another method
that does not require a mature mental number line. We
chose the second option in AY’s case. It never means that
we despaired of developing her mental number line. We
admit that a correct, mathematically full-fledged solution
strategy for such addition and subtraction problems
necessarily implies a good understanding of the number line.
Our intention is first to give her the ability of giving the
correct answer to any addition and subtraction problems and
then to develop her mental number line gradually. If she can
always give the correct answer, this must relieve her. If we
tried to develop her number line first, it could take longer
time, and it could then disquiet her because she has to spend
a long time without being able to give the correct answer to
such a problem. Instead, we decided to correct her wrong
algebraic solution then try to develop her mental number
line, which can be use to verify the corrected algebraic
solution. We can find this kind of “first-can-do-then-thinkwhy” teaching strategy in some textbooks used in Japan at
any grade, and we think this way of teaching is sometimes
useful.

Discussion
The case of AY suggests that cognitive task analysis and
assessment of the mental number line provide useful
information for deciding how to refine the student’s
calculation skills. The cognitive task analysis revealed
possible solutions for addition and subtraction on integer
numbers. Based on this analysis, AY’s solution was traced
and where and why she failed in solving problems was
determined. Furthermore, making use of the SNARC effect,
it turned out that AY’s mental number line was immature.
Given the above information, it was determined that AY
would be most responsive to a correction that did not
emphasize the use of the mental number line. AY responded
well to this targeted teaching, and has retained the
correction to date, which is far longer than previous
attempts at teaching other (pictorial) methods.
The case of AY raises several questions for additional
research. First, we need to determine a more comprehensive
set of the kinds of errors that can be encountered in solving
addition and subtraction problems involving negative
numbers. The errors AY made should be only a small part
of the set of all possible errors, and correcting the erroneous
solutions was relatively easy in the case of AY. But we do
not know if this is true for other types of errors. Second, we
need to know a sufficient number of trials in a SNARC
experiment. Fisher (2003) required his participants to go
through more than 560 trials. In the case of AY only 56
trials were enough to yield a reliable SNARC effect, but
more trials may be needed for another student. Third, it
should be examined whether seventh-grade students have
generally acquired a mature mental number line. We did not
emphasize the use of the mental number line when we tried
to correct AY’s calculation strategy. However, if seventh-

grade students generally have an immature mental number
line but it is normally developed quickly soon after, it would
be better to focus on training her mental number line.

Acknowledgement
Part of this study was supported by the “grant-in-aid for
scientific research” grant 17730376 from the Ministry of
Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology to the
first author. I wish to thank Erick Lindsley for editing the
manuscript of this paper.

References
Dehaene, S., Spelke, E., Pinel, P, Stanescu, R., & Tsivkin, S.
(1999). Sources of mathematical thinking: Behavioral and
brain imaging evidence. Science, 284, 970-974.
Carpenter, T. P., Moser, J. M., & Romberg, T. A. (1982).
Addition and subtraction. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Fias, W., Brysbaert, M., Geypens, F., & d’Ydewalle, G.
(1996). The importance of magnitude information in
numerical processing: Evidence from the SNARC effect.
Mathematical Cognition, 2, 95-110.
Fisher, M. H. (2001). Number processing induces spatial
performance biases. Neurology, 57, 822-826.
Fisher, M. H. (2003). Cognitive representations of negative
numbers. Psychological Science, 14, 278-282.
Griffin, S. A., Case, R., R Siegler, R. S. (1994). Rightstart:
Providing the central conceptual prerequisites for first
formal learning of arithmetic to students at risk for social
failure. In K. McGilly (Ed.), Classroom lessons:
Integrating cognitive theory and classroom practice.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Koedinger, K.R., & Terao, A. (2002). A cognitive task
analysis of using pictures to support pre-algebraic
reasoning. Proceedings of the Twenty-fourth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (Pp. 542547). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Lewis, A. B. (1989). Training students to represent
arithmetic word problems. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 81, 521-531.
Paige, J. M., & Simon, H. A. (1966). Cognitive processes in
solving algebra word problem. In B. Kleinmuntz (Ed.),
Problem solving: Research, method and theory. New
York: John Wiley & Sons.
Terao, A., Koedinger, K. R., Sohn, M. -H., Qin, Y.,
Anderson, J. R., & Carter, C. S. (2004). An fMRI study of
the interplay of symbolic and visuo-spatial systems in
mathematical reasoning. Proceedings of the Twenty-sixth
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

2177

