UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
In Defense of Psychological Essentialism

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8xz4d507

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Richard, Jean-Francois
Sander, Emmanuel

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

In Defense of Psychological Essentialism
Fei Xu & Mijke Rhemtulla
fei@psych.ubc.ca, mijke@psych.ubc.ca
Department of Psychology, 2136 West Mall
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, B.C., Canada V6T 1Z4
Abstract
This paper attempts another defense of
psychological essentialism (Strevens, 2000, 2001;
Ahn, Kalish, Gelman, Medin, Luhman, Atran,
Coley & Shafto, 2001). Using evidence from
adults’ and children’s understanding of artifact
concepts, we argue that the notion of essence does
play a role in everyday reasoning and inference.
Furthermore, there is also some corroborating
evidence from the biological domain, contra
Strevens.
Keywords: psychological essentialism, concepts,
artifact concepts.
A recent exchange between Strevens (2000, 2001)
and Ahn et al. (2001) has forced both psychologists
and philosophers to take a closer look at the very idea
of “psychological essentialism.” Strevens (2000) laid
out clearly the three versions of psychological
essentialism as well as his alternative minimal
hypothesis. All three versions of psychological
essentialism posit essences at the center of children
and adults’ representational scheme for making
inferences about observable properties of natural
kinds. The minimal hypothesis suggests, contra
psychological essentialism, that the notion of essence
does not play a role in our everyday inferences.
Instead, Strevens argued that K-laws, i.e., kind-based
causal laws that guide our inferences about observable
properties, are enough to back our inferences about
kind membership. That is, to make inferences about
tiger membership, one needs only know that "being a
tiger" gives rise to tiger-properties such as stripes and
ferocity, independent of any tiger-essence that may or
may not exist.
We agree with many of the arguments made in Ahn et
al. (2001) and we echo some of them below. This paper

attempts
another
defense
of
psychological
essentialism. Using evidence from the understanding
of artifact concepts, we argue that 1) one source of
evidence – data on the understanding of artifact
2377

concepts by adults and children – may support the idea
that essences do enter into our daily reasoning and
judgment, 2) the fact that children may show
understanding of essences of artifact kinds earlier than
natural kinds strongly suggests that human beings have
a natural inclination to look for essences, and 3) the
evidence against the use of essences in reasoning
about biological kinds may not be as strong as
Strevens suggests. Inspired by the exchange between
Strevens and Ahn et al., we also suggest that empirical
investigations of the nature of kind concepts and
psychological essentialism may take a different, more
direct route.
The key claim in Strevens (2000) is that although
representationally we may posit an ‘essence box’
(“essence of tigerhood”) between category identity
(“being a tiger”) and observable properties (“ferocity”
and “stripes”), as far as psychological processes like
categorization and inferences are concerned, the notion
of essence does not play a role at all. Inasmuch as our
reasoning goes like this: "That thing is an X, therefore
it must have X essence, therefore it shows Xproperties," Strevens argues that we may as well get
rid of the middle step, thus, “That thing is an X,
therefore it has X-properties.” Patterns of
categorization and inferences can all be explained in
terms of K-laws: Our understanding that kinds are
causally connected with observable surface properties
dictates our categorization and inference patterns. This
is all the machinery we need. Let’s forget about
essences as playing any explanatory role in our
everyday reasoning.
We do, however, need some way of getting to the
first inference, “that thing is an X.” Advocates of
psychological essentialism would suggest that some
observable properties (e.g., large, four-legged object
capable of self-generated motion; roaring) lead to the
inference that this thing is a tiger with tiger essence
and other properties such as ferocity and stripes would
follow. According to Strevens, the first set of
observable properties would lead to the inference that
this thing is a tiger, and given this kind membership

information, the other properties such as ferocity
would follow. On one reading of Strevens, his views
are perfectly consistent with psychological
essentialism – he simply replaces the word “essence”
with the word “kind.” In other words, “being a tiger”
is different from “being striped” – the former identifies
its kind (or essence, depending on one’s terminology)
and the latter identifies an attribute that may or may
not be important.
But let’s get back to the claim that the notion of
essence does not play any role in everyday reasoning
and categorization. The examples cited in this
exchange were mostly from the biological domain. For
instance, if something is a cow but was raised by a
horse, is it going to be a cow or a horse when it grows
up? Focusing on the biological domain is a sensible
thing to do: the notion of essence may be most
applicable to biological kinds (or more broadly,
natural kinds) as some have argued (e.g., S. Gelman,
2003; Keil, 1989; Schwartz, 1979) and many studies
have been conducted given this assumption. However,
several psychologists have argued in recent years that
artifact concepts also fall under the basic tenets of
psychological essentialism (e.g., Bloom, 1998; Hall,
1995; Kelemen, 1999; Kelemen & Carey, in press).
The suggestion is that the original intended function,
or designer’s intent, is the essence of an artifact.
According to psychological essentialism (e.g.,
Gelman, 2003; Keil, 1989; Medin & Ortony, 1989),
when applied to a natural kind concept, the essence
determines the surface properties we observe. This
idea can be applied to an artifact kind as well: the
original intended function determines the surface
properties of an artifact, the actual uses it can fulfill,
and its kind. For example, a chair is suitable for sitting
because that is what its designer had intended. The fact
that a chair has a flat surface and a back are properties
that are appropriate for and determined by its intended
function. A chair is a member of the kind chair
because its designer had intended it to be a member of
that particular artifact kind. A chair can also be used as
a doorstopper or a ladder, but that is not why it came
into being. It came into being because someone had
intended to create a chair. Intuitively, we honor this
distinction all the time, and would find it very
confusing to refer to a chair differentially according to
its current use (Imagine the following exchange.
Person A: "The book is next to my alarm clock on the
bedside table." Person B: "What bedside table?"
Person A: "The one shaped like a chair." etc.).
If this analysis is correct, we can get back to the
issue raised by Strevens (2000) and ask: Do adults and

children use original intended function – the essence
of an artifact kind – when making judgment about kind
membership? The answer seems to be “yes.” Rips
(1989) showed that adults favored the original function
of an artifact over its form in categorization. For
example, if an object has the features of an umbrella
but the original intent was to make a lampshade, adults
judged that it was a lampshade. Matan and Carey
(2001) found that an object made for containing tea
but used for watering flowers was judged to be a
teapot. Thus original intended function is weighted
more heavily than current function or the object’s
form. If we agree that original intended function is the
essence of an artifact kind, these results provide strong
evidence that adults do use information about essence
in everyday reasoning.
In several developmental studies, Kelemen and
colleagues have found that 4-year-old children are able
to make kind membership judgments based on
intended function. In Kelemen’s (1999) study, adults
and children were shown pictures of novel artifacts
that were designed for one purpose (e.g., squeezing
lemons) but used by someone else for another purpose
(e.g., picking up snails). When asked to judge what the
objects were “for,” both adults and children favored
the intended function. In another study (Kelemen,
2001), 4- and 5-year-old children were shown real
novel objects and they also judged what the objects
were ‘for’ based on intended function. Again, if we
agree that intended function is the essence of an
artifact kind, these data provide evidence that essences
do play a role in everyday reasoning, even in young
children who have not had any formal schooling.
Another source of evidence comes from Keil’s
(1989) justly famous transformation studies. With
artifacts such as coffee pots, adults and children were
told that a coffee pot was modified to make a
birdfeeder. Then they were asked to judge what the
object was. The most common answer was “a
birdfeeder.” Keil’s intention was to show that, unlike
natural kinds, artifact kinds could change category
membership easily because they do not have essences.
However, if intended function really is the essence of
an artifact kind, one might argue that the answer “a
birdfeeder” was justified – after all, the adults and
children were told that the coffee pot had been
modified intentionally to make a birdfeeder! That is,
someone intentionally used the original artifact as a
base for designing some new artifact with a new
function, and since intended function determines kind
membership, the object has truly become a member of
another kind via this change of intention (even when it

2378

is not a change of intention on the part of the original
designer).
Interestingly, the age (about 4 years) at which
children first show an understanding of the essence of
artifact kinds is younger than the age (about 6 years) at
which they show sensitivity to insides or lineage, the
best candidates for representations of essences in the
biological domain. This is a bit peculiar since most
agree that the notion of essence is more applicable in
the biological and natural kind domain than in the
domain of artifact kinds. One reason for believing in
essences for natural kinds is because we believe that
scientists may discover relevant facts that would
inform us what the true essences are. For example, if
scientists discovered that elephants were really robots
controlled from Mars, their essence and our
understanding of what their essence may be would
change completely. Why is it then that children seem
to have ‘discovered’ the essence of artifacts kinds
before they discover the essence of biological/natural
kinds? We offer the following speculation. Children
(as well as adults) have a natural inclination to find
(and use) information about essences of kinds, contra
Strevens (2000). In contemporary western society,
discovering the essences of biological kinds is fairly
difficult – since most of us do not live a life with lots
of experiences with animals and plants, we have to
rely on what others tell us. While parents may talk
about birth and DNA fairly frequently, these are
difficult concepts for children to grasp. For artifact
kinds, on the other hand, we can imagine abundant
evidence for intended function: children may well
engage in games in which they have to make a novel
artifact to serve a particular function, e.g., use
playdough to make a bowl to hold water, or they have
to bend a piece of wire to make a hook. Children are
also very familiar with the frustrating situation of
finding one's own creations misinterpreted: a child
who has created a dinosaur out of building blocks will
not take kindly to its being treated as a mountain. That
is, children understand that their own intentions are
supposed to determine the final object’s kind identity
and they are outraged by any misinterpretation of that
intention. Such experiences may serve as the relevant
‘trigger’ for children who are looking for essences.
Even in the biological domain, we believe that the
evidence is stronger than Strevens suggested (here we
endorse an argument made in Ahn et al., 2001). One of
Strevens’ arguments was that internal essentialism
does not work because children rely on both
information about insides and information about
lineage (parents and offspring) to reason about

biological kinds. Strevens was probably correct in
saying that insides were not the only thing that
mattered, thus the most literal reading of internal
essentialism does not hold up. But let’s consider the
lineage information for a moment -- biologically,
information about lineage is in fact a definitive clue to
which essence (horse or cow) has been transmitted
from generation to generation. Lineage is the
mechanism by which essence is realized in each
individual member of a kind. Thus we are inclined to
suggest that children’s reliance on lineage is actually
evidence for psychological essentialism. In sum, we
argue that an unusual source of evidence –
understanding of artifact kinds – provides data against
Strevens’ minimal hypothesis. The fact that children
and adults rely heavily on original intended function
when reasoning about artifact kinds suggests that
essence does play a role in everyday reasoning and
kind judgment. Metaphysically, essences are least
likely to exist in artifacts, as Strevens (2000) noted.
Children and adults' tendency to look for essences in
the least likely place, then, would seem to constitute a
strong argument in favor of psychological
essentialism. Furthermore, even in the biological
domain, the use of lineage may be construed as
evidence that adults and children rely on essence – in
this case how the essences are passed on – when
thinking about biological kinds.
We end on a methodological note. All parties agree
that the basic tenet of psychological essentialism is the
idea that essences are causally responsible for the
surface features we observe. Many of the empirical
studies to date have adopted the paradigm of pitting
causally deep properties or information about essences
against observable surface properties. As Medin and
Ortony (1989) pointed out, discussions of
psychological essentialism first appeared against the
backdrop of theories of concepts that relied entirely on
surface properties and similarity. The studies we have
reviewed were often conducted with the goal of
showing that adults and children reason according to
causally deep properties and they are not simply bound
by surface features and similarity. These studies, in
our opinion, have shown convincingly that both adults
and young children are not perception bound. Yet a
more direct test of psychological essentialism would
be to show that adults and children believe that
essences are causally responsible for the surface
properties observed. This, of course, is more easily
said than done. But perhaps we psychologists should
begin to devise such empirical tests (see also Fodor,
1998; Gelman, 2003). ]

2379

References
Ahn, W., Kalish, C., Gelman, S.A., Medin, D.L.,
Luhman, C., Atran, S., Coley, J.D., & Shafto, P.
(2001) Why essences are essential in the
psychology of concepts. Cognition, 82, 59-69.
Bloom, P. (1996) Intention, history, and artifact
concepts. Cognition, 60, 1-29.
Fodor, J. (1998) Concepts. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Gelman, S. A. (2003) The essential child. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Hall, D.G. (1995) Artifacts and origins. Unpublished
manuscript. University of British Columbia.
Keil, F. C. (1989) Concepts, kinds, and cognitive
development. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kelemen, D. (1999) The scope of teleological thinking
in preschool children. Cognition, 70, 241-272.
Kelemen, D. (2001) Intention in children’s
understanding of artifact function. Paper presented
at the Biennial Meeting of the Society for Research
in Child Development, Minneapolis, MN.

Kelemen, D. & Carey, S. (in press) The essence of
artifacts: developing the design stance. In S.
Laurence and E. Margolis (eds.), Creations of the
mind: Theories of artifacts and their
representation. Oxford University Press.
Matan, A., & Carey, S. (2001) Developmental changes
within the core of artifact concepts. Cognition, 78,
1-26.
Medin, D. L., and Ortony, A. (1989) Psychological
essentialism. In S. Vosniadou and A. Ortony (Eds.),
Similarity and analogical reasoning (pp. 179-195).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rips, L. J. (1989). Similarity, typicality and
categorization. In S. Vosniadou and A. Ortony
(Eds.) Similarity and analogical reasoning (pp. 2159). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Schwartz, S. (1979) Natural kind terms. Cognition, 7,
301-315.
Strevens, M. (2000) The essentialist aspect of naïve
theories. Cognition, 74, 149-175.
Strevens, M. (2001) Only causation matters: reply to
Ahn et al. Cognition, 82, 71-76.

2380

