UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
In Search of the Holy Grail: Understanding Artefact Mediation in Social Interactions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/12332578

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
Susi, Tarja

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

In Search of the Holy Grail:
Understanding Artefact Mediation in Social Interactions
Tarja Susi (tarja.susi@his.se)
University of Skövde, School of Humanities and Informatics
Box 408, 54128 Skövde, Sweden
element in human activities does not mean that they are
merely some kind of appendages, or external elements that
exert some influence on cognitive processes. Rather, they
are part and parcel of our cognition, and it can be considered
a mistake ”to posit a biologically fixed ’human nature’ with
a simple ’wrap-around’ of tools and culture. For the tools
and culture are indeed as much determiners of our nature as
products of it” (Clark, 2002, pp.27-28; Rogoff, 2003).
While research in cognitive science has lead to insight into
individuals’ cognitive processes (Day, 1988; Cox, 1999;
Norman, 1991), other perspectives, such as ethnographical,
anthropologocial, cultural-historical, and situated cognition
research have taken a broader view on cognition, including
social and material aspects (e.g., Engeström et al., 1999;
Heath & Luff, 1996; Hutchins, 1995). These broader
perspectives have shown the crucial role of artefacts in the
coordination of collective activities (Hutchins, 1995;
Rambusch et al., 2004; Susi & Ziemke, 2001). However,
despite the emphasis on external resources and their use,
and a large number of studies of artefacts, we still have a
poor understanding of the ways people utilise and adapt
artefacts in their work to scaffold their cognitive abilities
(Clark, 2002; Gauvain, 2001; Perry, 2003; Preston, 1998;
Wynn, 1993). Clark (2002), for instance, argues that “the
single most important task…is to better understand the
range and variety of types of cognitive scaffolding, and the
different ways in which non-biological scaffoldings can
augment (or impair) performance on a task”. Clark further
states: “The Holy Grail here is a taxonomy of different types
of external prop, and a systematic understanding of how
they help (and hinder) human performance” (p.29).
This paper describes part of a framework concerning
artefacts (with a focus on material objects) and human
activities, based on the integration of concepts from two
different research areas (human-computer interaction and
cognitive science). The possible use of the combined
concepts is illustrated by a case study in a collaborative
work setting.
The next section describes in some detail the concepts of
triggers, placeholders, and entry points. Then an emerging
framework, focusing on the integration of the three
concepts, is described. The next section presents an
illustrative case study, followed by a discussion.

Abstract
Traditionally cognition has been regarded in terms of internal
symbolic representations and computational processes, while
the environment largely has been reduced to inputs and
outputs. More recent situated cognition approaches emphasise
the role of environmental resources in cognition, and today it
is well known that artefacts affect, not only the individual, but
also social interactions. Despite a growing emphasis on the
role of artefacts we still have only a limited understanding of
the ways artefacts are used and adapted to support cognitive
capabilities. This paper presents initial steps in the
development of a framework that can contribute to a more
principled understanding of the role of artefacts in social
interactions. This focus on artefacts is based on concepts from
human-computer interaction and cognitive science: triggers,
placeholders, and entry points. Triggers and placeholders
concern the way environmental resources affect, and are used
in, work processes. Entry points, on the other hand, concern
the ways people adapt their environments, with a focus on the
properties of artefacts. These concepts complement each other
and provide a perspective that integrates agent, environment,
activities, and temporal aspects. This part of the framework is
illustrated by a case study conducted in a setting where
artefacts take a central role in the ongoing work processes.
Keywords: artefacts; social interaction, trigger; placeholder;
entry point, case study.

Introduction
Traditionally cognition has been regarded in terms of
internal symbolic representations and computational
processes, while the environment largely has been reduced
to inputs and outputs (e.g., Pylyshyn, 1990). However, since
the mid-1980s there has been a growing awareness that
individuals are socially and culturally situated and that the
environment needs to be considered in order to understand
cognition (Clancey, 1997; Clark, 1997; Hendriks-Jansen,
1996; Hutchins, 1995; Suchman, 1987). From this
perspective, cognitive processes are not confined to the
individual’s head, but instead extend to include external,
material and social, resources (Clancey, 1997; Clark, 1997,
1999; Clark & Chalmers, 1998; Susi, et al., 2003). It has
even been stated that one of the fundamental findings of
cognitive science is that artefacts shape cognition and
collaboration (Woods, 1998). The general idea reaches back
to the Russian cultural-historical school in psychology, and
Vygotsky’s research in particular (e.g., Galperin, 1969;
Leontiev, 1978; Vygotsky, 1978). According to Vygotsky,
“[t]he inclusion of a tool in the process of behavior…recreates and reorganizes the whole structure of behavior”
(1981, p.139-140). Recognising artefacts as an important

Triggers, Placeholders, and Entry Points

2110

In human-computer interaction, in the work of Dix et al.
(1998a; 1998b; 2004), we find a concern for the ways in
which environmental resources contribute to work activities.
Dix et al. (2004) propose trigger analysis as a way to
analyse work activities, and to find out why things happen

when they happen. Trigger analysis is a complement to
other task analysis methods and shows the ways external
resources initiate activities, function as reminders of where
in a work process people are, and ensure that tasks are
carried out in full. This kind of analysis also reveals whether
a certain task is robust to interruptions and delays, and if
there are failing triggers that may cause a breakdown in a
work task. Of interest, for present purposes, are the concepts
of triggers and placeholders. A trigger is something that
prompts an activity, something that tells you that you need
to do something. Triggers identified by Dix et al. (1998;
2004) include:
• Immediate: takes place when an activity begins
immediately after a previous task is completed
(e.g., open post as soon as it has been brought to
the desk).
• Temporal: actions that happen at regular intervals
or after a particular delay (e.g., check diary first
thing every morning, send a reminder letter two
weeks after the original letter was sent, regular
routines).
• Sporadic: when someone remembers that
something must be done (e.g., remembers to write
something in a diary after having been interrupted)
• External event: some external event occurs (e.g.,
phone call, face-to-face request, signal/reminder
from automatic calendar).
• Environmental cue: something in the environment
that reminds us that something needs to be done.
The cues are coded explicitly (e.g., to-do-list, entry
in calendar) or implicitly (e.g., half-written letter).
A placeholder, on the other hand, is something that tells
you what you need to do. Placeholders help people keep
track of where in the process they are, reminding them of
what to do next, thus making sure that tasks will be carried
out. Placeholders are stored in different ways (Dix et al.,
2004):
• In people’s heads: they remember what to do next.
• Explicitly in the environment: to-do-lists, planning
charts, notes.
• Implicitly in the environment: whether the in-tray
is empty yet.
Some triggers and placeholders may seem similar to one
another, but in some cases an artefact can in fact be both a
trigger and a placeholder. A to-do-list, e.g., may trigger an
activity written on the list. At the same time the list may be
a placeholder telling what needs to be done next. One of the
questions Dix et al. (1998) ask is what it is that makes
someone notice a cue. An answer that fits the question is
found in another line of research, in cognitive science, that
is also concerned with artefacts and work activities.
Kirsh (1996; 2001) takes an interest in the ways people
actively use environmental resources to structure their work,
e.g., in offices. According to Kirsh, concepts like reminders,
placeholders, and triggers may be helpful for understanding
work contexts, but they do not help us gain more insight
into their deep structure. Instead, he argues, we need to
move beyond such “surface structures”, and describe
environmental elements in more abstract terms. Some
central concepts in Kirsh’s work are activity landscapes,
2111

coordinating mechanisms, and entry points. In short,
activity landscapes are people’s interactively constructed
workspaces, whereas coordinative mechanisms refer to the
use of environmental resources that help people achieve
their goals. In the present context, however, it is the third
concept that is of most interest - entry points. The concept,
influenced by Gibsonian psychology (1986), refers to
structures or cues that invite people to do something,
“typically information or communication related things”. In
other words, an entry point is “a structure or cue that
represents an invitation to enter an information space or
office task” (Kirsh, 2001, p.305). As such, entry points are
used as a way of achieving cognitive affordances. Entry
points in an office are, e.g., folders, to-do-lists, and day
planners. What people do is that they create collections of
entry points that tell them what is going on, what needs to
be taken care of the next day, and so on. Such collections
are personal and subjective as preferences for the number
and type of entry points differ. The entry points that office
occupants create have different properties, or characteristics
that affect the way people react to them, properties that vary
along a number of key dimensions (Kirsh, 2001):
• Intrusiveness: how much attention, visually or
sensorially, an entry point attracts. Items with
different colours, e.g., or shape and quality of
papers attract different amounts of attention.
Intrusiveness determines the probability that the
entry point will be approached.
• Richness in metadata: how much the entry point
conveys about its underlying information.
Headings, markings, etc., all provide information
about what the entry point holds. The more
metadata the entry point holds, the less needs to be
kept in memory.
• Visibility: how distinct or unobstructed the entry
point is. Some entry points, e.g., a calendar or a
pile on the desk are more visible than others, like
folders in a filing cabinet. The higher the visibility
of the entry point, the higher the chance it will be
used.
• Freshness: when was the entry point last touched?
Recency influences recall, and recently touched
files, papers, notes, etc., are more likely to be used
in current activity.
• Importance: how pressing the activity, associated
with the entry point, is. An upcoming due date, for
example, increases the importance of a matter.
• Relevance: how useful an entry point is to a current
activity. The probability of using a certain entry
point increases the more relevant the entry point is.
The number of entry points created vary from one office
occupant to another. So-called ”neats” keep their desks tidy
with few items on them, which provide a clear structure
with a controlled amount of entry points (Kirsh, 2001).
“Scruffies”, on the other hand, are, or at least seem to be,
less in control. Their desks are filled with all kinds of things
found in an office, and they make use of ad hoc categories
to a greater extent, that is, they create categories as needed.

Either way, with a high or low degree of structure, it
provides external scaffolding for their work tasks.
In sum, Kirsh investigates how active subjects make use
of environmental structures to scaffold their daily work and
to achieve various work tasks. Emphasis lies on the coadaptation of agent and environment (or office occupant and
office), i.e., the individual’s cognition and her use of
artefacts. The structure provided by entry points reduces
cognitive demands and helps people to improve their
performance. A central concern is the various properties of
entry points that affect the way people react to them. Dix et
al.’s work primarily focuses on work processes, and central
issues are why things happen when they happen, and how
people know what to do next. Part of the answer lies in the
role of artefacts as triggers and placeholders. This work has
its focus mainly on individuals’ use of environmental
resources, but adds a temporal aspect that is much less clear
in Kirsh’s work.

An Emerging Framework

(AT) as a basis (Engeström, 1987, Leontiev, 1978).
However, even as AT emphasises the mediating role of
artefacts, their role needs to be explained in further detail.
The combination of triggers and placeholders, and entry
points, can contribute to a more principled understanding of
the role of artefacts in social interactions. Due to space
limitation, the framework as a whole is not discussed here in
further detail. Instead the remainder of the paper mainly
focuses on the previously described concepts.
At a first glance, the concept of entry points may perhaps
seem to be more elaborated than the concepts of triggers and
placeholders, but these two lines of work have different foci,
and can be seen as complementary rather than alternative
views. While entry points describe in more detail the
properties of an artefact, triggers and placeholder comprise
’knowing that’ and ’knowing what’ in work activities, and
they add a temporal aspect. By integrating these concepts
(Table 1) we get a fuller view of a work process, including
more fine-grained details of artefacts’ properties. The rows
of Table 1 include the different dimensions of entry points,
and the columns include triggers and placeholders.
Examples of where these coincide are marked with an “x”.
Where exactly an “x” should go depends on the activity and
setting under study. Subsequently, the table would appear
differently in different settings. A schedule, for example,
may be an important placeholder and a trigger with different
kinds of entry points in one setting, but only play a minor
role or not exist at all, in another.

The concepts described in the previous section provide
some initial steps in the development of a framework for
further understanding of artefacts and their role in social
interactions. First, however, let us clarify what the term
“frame work” itself means in the present context. The view
adopted here is based on Crick and Koch’s (2003)
description of framework. In their view, a framework
combines different ideas that are novel, or ones that have
been previously presented by an author herself or by others.
Although the ideas in themselves may not be new it is the
combination of ideas that is original. According to Crick
and Koch, a framework is “not a detailed hypothesis or set
of hypotheses; rather, it is a suggested point of view for an
attack on a scientific problem, often suggesting testable
hypotheses” (p.119). They argue that “[a] good framework
is one that sounds reasonably plausible relative to available
scientific data and that turns out to be largely correct. It is
unlikely to be correct in all the details. A framework often
contains unstated (and often unrecognized) assumptions, but
this is unavoidable” (Crick & Koch, 2003, p.119). The
framework under consideration here takes Activity Theory

A case study
The potential use of the combined concepts, focusing on
artefacts, is illustrated with a recent case study of ours,
conducted in a control room at a Swedish grain silo
(Lantmännen AB). The use of artefacts in this setting
illustrates some of the aspects shown in Table 1. The study
was ethnographically inspired, using observations, video
recording, and interviews (at present the study is still in
progress, and data analysis has not been completed). The
participants in the study were two women and four men.
Their experience from working in silo control rooms varied

Table 1. Triggers and placeholders (columns), “knowing that” and “knowing what”,
integrated with entry points (rows) which describe different properties of artefacts. Each
“x” exemplifies a case where the concepts complement each other.
Triggers
Entry points

Immediate

Objective
Intrusiveness

X

Placeholders
Temporal

Sporadic

X

Env. cue In the Expl. in Impl.
head
env.
in env.
X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Metadata rich
Visibility
Freshness
Subjective
Importance

Ext.
event

X

X

Relevance

2112

from no previous experience (novices) to 26 years
experience. The work processes at the silo are quite
complex (the silo actually consists of 29 separate silos, but
for the sake of convenience the whole plant is here mostly
referred to as ’the silo’). During the harvest season, grain is
delivered by local farmers, and by trucks that collect grain
from distant farms. There is up to a hundred deliveries per
day of (up to) 11 different types of grain. In this setting
mistakes can be very costly. One kind of a serious mistake
is to (accidentally) transport different kinds of grain into one
and the same silo – a mistake that can cost some 70 000 $.
One factor that adds to the complexity is the control panel
through which all the mechanical processes are operated
(Figure 1). The control panel represents the whole plant, but
the mapping between the representation and its underlying
machinery is not very good – partly a consequence of new
technical features that have been added incrementally over a
period of some 10-15 years. The complexity of the control
panel is evident from the fact that it takes 2-4 years to learn
to use the control panel properly, i.e., to know the effects of
all the buttons and switches, and the proper sequences for
their use (to start transportation of grain into a silo, e.g.,
requires a sequence of 12-15 pushes of buttons, with
different time intervals). The control room staff, 2-3 people
working at a time, coordinates the off-loading and
transportation of grain into different silos.

arrival, the farmer fills in a form (delivery assurance for
type of grain, contract number, etc.). The staff prints out
additional documents from the computer: forms for all the
data concerning the delivery, a strip of bar codes unique to
each delivery, etc. All the documents are put together and
placed on the desk (Figure 2). The farmer off-loads the grain
into one of three pits, from where the grain is mechanically
transported into a silo. Each pit is connected to a scale
through which the process is monitored (Figure 2).
Watching the numbers on the scale is the only way of
knowing whether transportation of grain is still in progress,
has come to a halt, or been completed. The control panel
only indicates whether some mechanical process is running,
not whether grain is being transported or not. While the
grain is being transported, the staff takes two samples of the
grain to check its humidity, protein level, etc., and each
sample is labelled with a bar code. When grain
transportation is completed, all forms are filled in and filed.

Figure 2. Above the desk, near the ceiling are three
scales (black “boxes”) used for monitoring grain
transportation processes. On the desk lie printers
(connected to the scales) and piles of documents.
Next, let us consider a few of these artefacts in terms of
the previously described concepts. The control panel holds
indicators (light on or off), hand-written notes, and magnetic
plaques that are all environmental cues (triggers) that
prompt different kinds of activities. But what makes
someone notice these cues? First of all, what is going on, on
an overall level, constantly guides the staff’s attention, but
whether a certain cue is noticed or not also depends on what
kind of an entry point it is. For instance, a yellow post-it
note on the control panel catches all the staff’s attention
(due to its intrusiveness). But the control panel is also
‘cluttered’ with small magnetic plaques in several different
colours, indicating what kind of grain is stored in which
silo, if a silo has been filled to its limit, ongoing repairs in
the facility, etc. Unlike the post-it note, one more of the
small magnetic plaques blend in well among fifty or so
others. Being much less intrusive, the magnetic plaque can
go unnoticed and cause a breakdown in the ongoing activity.

Figure 1. Control panel in the control room. The
panel represents the whole plant, e.g., silos (“circles”
that the staff is pointing at), and transportations
shafts (vertical and horizontal lines). To the left on
the wall behind the staff is the whiteboard.
Many work activities are performed individually, but
much of what is seemingly individual work, is in fact
collective collaborative activities, where much of the
coordination is achieved through the use of artefacts. Some
of the most important, and most often used, artefacts in this
setting are the control panel and a whiteboard (to the left in
Figure 1), anddocuments and the scales used for monitoring
transportation of grain (Figure 2). The process of
transporting grain into the silo is roughly as follows. On
2113

The indicators are both temporal triggers and placeholders.
For instance, as grain transportation is started, there is a
whole sequence of pushing buttons, where some of the
buttons are not to be pushed before some indicator’s light
turns on (or off). The indicators thus provide a temporal
guidance and structure to the process. In addition, they are
also placeholders that tell the staff where in the process they
are. As the lights turn on, one by one, they provide very
useful environmental cues in the current activity, i.e., each
indicator is an entry point where the dimension of relevance
affects the staff’s reaction to them.
The whiteboard is used for leaving notes to each other,
things to take care of, some more urgent than others, etc.
The whiteboard is also used as storage for magnetic plaques
not needed on the control panel. Hence, the whiteboard is
also, at times, quite ‘cluttered’. All the markings are explicit
environmental cues (triggers), but have varying properties.
The meaning of some markings is very clear, while others
may be more cryptic. The markings vary along the
dimension of “richness in metadata”. Unclear or much
abbreviated messages require that more of its underlying
information be kept in memory, than is the case with clear
messages.
A number of documents are central during the process of
transporting grain into the silo. The staff constantly keeps an
eye on the documents kept on the desk, as its constitution
changes during the process. The bar codes are usually kept
on top of the other documents, which provides an
environmental cue indicating that a sample needs to be
taken. At the same time, the strip of bar codes is a
placeholder indicating the process’ status. Sometimes the
strip of bar codes is placed (accidentally) beneath one of the
other documents. In that case it has a very low degree of
intrusiveness and visibility, and unless someone actually
goes through the documents in time, they sometime miss the
opportunity to take a sample, which causes a breakdown in
the workflow (the problem then requires other solutions).

Discussion

environment where the presence of things can be “ticked
off” according to the table’s entries, when in fact we are
dealing with complex, dynamical interactions between
people and environmental resources. These complexities
and dynamics are not captured by the table in its present
form. Another point concerns theoretical issues. There is
much more theoretical work that can, and should, be
integrated with the (few) concepts used here, but space
limitations do not allow for such discussions here. However,
issues of interest are, e.g., the concept of affordances
(Gibson, 1986) to which the entry point concept is already
related. Of special interest are furthermore sequential and
nested affordances (Gaver, 1991; McGrenere & Ho, 2000).
It is well known that artefacts coordinate collective
activities, and work on distributed cognition (DC)
(Hutchins, 1995), for instance, has shown the interdependencies between people and artefacts, and the way
information is propagated and transformed in ongoing
(collective) activities. An important point shown in the
present case study, which is not dis cussed in DC work, is
the way the organisation of collective work processes
provides a structure to individual activities that in turn
continually produces new triggers (and placeholders) for
one’s own and others’ activities. Roughly speaking, when
person A puts the documents on the desk, it prompts person
B to push the buttons on the control panel to start the
mechanical grain transportation process. The start of the
process (indicator light on) prompts that person, or someone
else, to keep an eye on the scale. The list of bar codes on the
desk prompts person C to take a sample, and so on. The
coordination of such work activities can also be described in
terms of stigmergic principles (Susi & Ziemke, 2001),
which explain the achievement of coordinated behaviour
through indirect communication via artefacts. Similarly,
Activity Theory emphasises the mediating role of artefacts,
but it does not provide explanations of the role of artefacts
in enough detail. Much research has focused either on the
individual’s (internal) cognition, or group level activities.
However, from an activity theoretical perspective there is no
such thing as individual activity, since all activities are
social (Leontiev, 1978). If we are to gain a better
understanding of the role of artefacts in human activities, we
cannot just focus on either individual or collective activities.
To paraphrase Rogoff (2003), a focus on either/or activity is
“as pointless as asking whether people rely more on their
right leg or their left leg for walking” (p.65). Hence, a
further step in elaborating the present work is to take
activity theory as a basis, which considers individual and
collective activities, and describe typical sequences of
activities that take place in a work situation. Such
descriptions can then be combined with the concepts of
triggers, placeholders, and entry points. That would allow a
more fine-grained analysis for each activity, including
individual and collective activities, what it is that prompts
the activity in the first place, and which new triggers the
activity produces. While the framework proposed here may
not be the Holy Grail that Clark requests, it can very well
serve as a starting point for a more principled understanding
of the role of artefacts in human activities.

This paper has combined different ideas concerning
artefacts as part of a framework for a more thorough
understanding of the role of artefacts in human activities,
and the ways we make use of and adapt artefacts. The
potential use of the concepts has been illustrated by a case
study. Besides necessary theoretical advancements on the
issue, a deeper understanding of artefacts also has
implications for more applied areas like human-computer
interaction and computer-supported cooperative work
(Perry, 2003). One favourable aspect of the work discussed
here, from a situated cognition perspective, is that it
integrates agent, environment, activities, and temporal
aspects. Such a combination of views takes us one step
further than trigger analysis, as it considers not only ‘what’
and ‘where’ of a process, but looks in more detail into why
something prompts (or not) an activity, and how we make
use of artefacts and their features to adapt our environments
to support our cognitive capacities. However, the use of the
concepts, as presented here, is still work in progress, and
their combination needs further elaboration. For instance,
depicting a framework as a table implies a rather static
2114

Cognition and communication at work . Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Hendriks-Jansen, H. (1996). Catching ourselves in the act:
situated activity, interactive emergence, evolution, and
human thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Kirsh, D. (1996). Adapting the environment instead of
oneself. Adaptive Behavior, 4(3/4), 415-452.
Kirsh, D. (2001). The context of work. Human-Computer
Interaction, 16, 305-322.
Leontiev, A.N. (1978). Activity, consciousness, and
personality. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
McGrenere, J. & Ho, W. (2000). Affordances: clarifying
and evolving a concept. Proceedings of Graphics
Interface 2000, Montreal.
Norman, D. (1991). Cognitive artifacts. In: J.M. Carroll
(Ed.), Designing interaction: psychology at the humancomputer interface (reprinted edition, 1993). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Perry, M. (2003). Distributed cognition. In: J.M. Carroll
(Ed.), HCI Models, theories, and frameworks: toward a
multidisciplinary science. Amsterdam: Morgan Kaufman
Publishers.
Preston, B. (1998). Cognition and tool use. Mind &
Language, 13(4), 513-547.
Pylyshyn, Z.W. (1984). Computation and cognition: toward
a foundation for cognitive science. Cambridge, Mass.:
The MIT Press.
Rambusch, J., Susi, T. & Ziemke, T. (2004). Artefacts as
mediators of distributed social cognition: a case study. In:
K. Forbus, D. Gentner & T. Regier (Eds.), Proceedings of
the 26th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp.1113-1118). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Rogoff, B. (2003). The cultural nature of human
development. New York: Oxford University Press.
Suchman, L.A. (1987). Plans and situated actions: the
problem of human machine communication. Cambridge,
MA: Cambridge University Press.
Susi, T. & Ziemke, T. (2001). Social Cognition, artefacts,
and stigmergy. Cognitive Systems Research, 2(4), 273290.
Susi, T., Lindblom, J. & Ziemke, T. (2003). Beyond the
bounds of cognition. In: Proceedings of the 25th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.11341139). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Vygotsky, L.S. (1978). Mind in society. The development of
higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press. Original work published 1932.
Vygotsky, L.S. (1981). The genesis of higher mental
functions. In: J.V. Wertsch (Ed.), The concept of activity
in Soviet psychology. New York: M.E. Sharpe, Inc.
Original work published 1960.
Woods, D.D. (1998). Designs are hypotheses abut how
artifacts shape cognition and collaboration. Ergonomics,
41(2), 168-173.
Wynn, T. (1993). Layers of thinking in tool behavior. In:
K.R. Gibson & T. Ingold (Eds.), Tools, language and
cognition in human evolution. Cambridge, MA:
Cambridge University Press.

Acknowledgements
The author would like to thank the staff at Lantmännen AB
for their participation, and Jessica Lindblom, Henrik
Svensson, and Tom Ziemke for discussions and helpful
comments.

References
Clancey, W. J. (1997). Situated cognition. New York:
Camb ridge University Press.
Clark, A. (1997). Being there: Putting brain, body, and
world together again. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Clark, A. (1999). Where brain, body, and world collide.
Cognitive Systems Research, 1, 5-17.
Clark, A. (2002). Towards a science of the bio-technical
mind. International Journal of Cognition and Technology,
1(1), 21-33.
Clark, A. & Chalmers, D. (1998). The extended mind.
Analysis, 56, 10-23.
Cox, R. (1999). Representation construction, externalised
cognition and individual differences. Learning and
Instruction, 9, 343-363.
Crick, F. & Koch, C. (2003). A framework for
consciousness. Nature Neuroscience, 6(2), 119-126.
Day, R.S. (1988). Alternative representations. In: G.H.
Bower (Ed.), The psychology of learning and motivation,
Vol.22. New York: Academic Press.
Dix, A., Ramduny, D. & Wilkinson, J. (1998a). Interaction
in the large. Interacting with Computers, 11, 9-32.
Dix, A. Ramduny-Ellis, D. & Wilkinson, J. (2004). Trigger
analysis - understanding broken tasks. In: D. Diaper & N.
Stanton (Eds.), The Handbook of Task Analysis for
Human-Computer Interaction. Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Dix, A., Wilkinson, J. & Ramduny, D. (1998b). Redefining
organisational memory - artefacts, and the distribution
and coordination of work. Workshop on Understanding
work and designing artefacts, York, 21st September,
1998.
Engeström, Y. (1987). Learning by expanding: An activitytheoretical approach to developmental reserarch.
Helsinki: Orienta-Konsultit Oy.
Engeström, Y., Miettinen, R. & Punamäki, R-L. (Eds.)
(1999). Perspectives on activity theory. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Gal’perin, P.Y. (1969). Stages in the development of mental
acts. In: M. Cole & I. Maltzman (Eds.), A handbook of
contemporary Soviet psychology. New York: Basic
Books, Inc., Publishers.
Gauvain, M. (2001). Cultural tools, social interaction and
the development of thinking. Human Development, 44,
126-144.
Gaver, W.W. (1991). Technology affordances. In:
Proceedings of CHI’91. New York: ACM.
Gibson, J.J. (1986). The ecological approach to visual
perception. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Heath, C. & Luff, P. (1996). Convergent activities: line
control and passenger information on London
underground. In: Y. Engeström & D. Middleton (Eds.),

2115

