UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Information Acquisition in the Iterated Prisoner's Dilemma Game: An Eye-Tracking Study

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/02v820jr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Grinberg, Maurice
Hristova, Evgenia

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Information Acquisition in the Iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma Game:
An Eye-Tracking Study
Evgenia Hristova (ehristova@cogs.nbu.bg )
Central and Eastern European Center for Cognitive Science,
New Bulgarian University, 21, Montevideo street, Sofia 1618, Bulgaria

Maurice Grinberg (mgrinberg@nbu.bg)
Central and Eastern European Center for Cognitive Science,
New Bulgarian University, 21, Montevideo street, Sofia 1618, Bulgaria

The bounded rationality theoretical framework (see e.g.
Simon, 1955), implies limitations on cognition and states
that people devote limited efforts in making decisions.
Computations are cognitively expensive and people usually
try to avoid them. According to these theories, rationality
should be replaced by a behavior compatible with limited
access to information and limited computational capacity
(Simon, 1955; Einhorn & Hogarth, 1981).
Playing PD games surely demands a considerable
cognitive effort. To grasp the whole structure of the game,
the player should pay attention not only to his payoffs but
also to take into account the possible payoffs of the other
player. What’s more, the game outcome for the player
depends not only on her moves but also on the moves of the
opponent. Form the bounded rationality standpoint, we can
hypothesize that, in the case of PD, subjects are also using
only a limited portion of the available information and are
not reasoning much ahead about their opponent’s moves.
Although suboptimal, with regard to the game theoretical
reasoning, such a behavior requires less cognitive resources
and seems much more plausible to take place in reality. This
brief discussion shows how important the detailed
investigation of the information processing is in order to
understand the specific judgment and decision making
processes that take place in game playing.
In the present paper, we study the typical patterns of
information acquisition in PD games by recording eye
movements. This is an attempt to reveal the actual cognitive
processes involved in playing and to explore the way in
which subjects make use of various characteristics of the
game (like the cooperation index). As established in
previous experiments (Hristova & Grinberg, 2004), different
groups of subjects can be identified depending on their
predominant cooperation patterns. Here, we want to further
explore the differences between these groups by analyzing
the specificity of their information acquisition strategies as
evidenced by the eye-tracking technique.

Abstract
Eye-tracking recordings were used to explore the choice
process in playing the iterated Prisoner’s dilemma. This is a
novel approach in studying the cognitive processes in game
playing. The information acquisition patterns of two groups of
subjects, identified on the basis of their playing behavior,
were compared. The subjects from the first group paid more
attention to the game payoffs and showed a strong
dependence on their relative magnitudes. The subjects from
the second group paid less attention to the payoff matrix but
spent more time considering the opponent moves. These
results show that the analysis of eye movement can give
valuable information about the processes of decision making.
Keywords: eye-tracking;
information aquisition.

prisoner’s

dillema

game;

Introduction
The iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma (PD) game has been
widely used as a model for exploring the determinants of
cooperative behavior in social situations. The PD game has
attracted much attention in the scientific literature and
considerable numbers of papers have appeared (e.g.
Rapoport & Chammah, 1965; Rapoport & Mowshowitz,
1966 and more recently Camerer & Ho, 2002; Erev & Roth,
2001; Macy & Flache, 2002).
However, no considerable efforts were invested in the
careful study of the cognitive processes involved in playing
the PD game. For instance, questions like what are the
specific patterns of information acquisition about the game
and how they are related to the behaviour observed (like the
dependence of the moves on the so-called cooperation
index, Rapoport & Chammah, 1965) remain open.
One of the strong assumptions in the formal game theory
is that the players have complete knowledge about the
game, the possible strategies and payoffs (Colman, 2003).
The psychological game theory and behavioural game
theory are expected to provide better predictions of
experimental observations (Colman, 2003; Camerer, 2003).
They are based on experimentally determined psychological
regularities and seem to give more accurate explanations
than traditional game theory.

The Prisoner’s Dilemma Game
Prisoner’s dilemma is a two-person game. The payoff table
for this game is presented in Figure 1. The players
simultaneously choose their move – C (cooperate) or D
(defect), without knowing their opponent’s choice.
983

cognitive processes (for a review see Rayner, 1998). The
pattern of eye movements reveals what information is being
looked at, for how long and how often. Position, duration
and sequence of fixations can be used to study different
tasks keeping in mind the important assumption that the
information subjects are look at is closely related to the
information they are processing. So, data about looking
patterns could be used to gain knowledge about the thinking
patterns.
To the best of our knowledge no eye-tracking studies of
subjects playing PD games exist. A similar approach
however was used in studying bargaining behaviour
(Johnson et al., 2002). In these studies information
acquisition patterns were studied using the Mouselab system
in which the information is hidden in closed boxes on which
subjects must click to see it.

R is the payoff if both cooperate (play C), P is the payoff
if both defect (play D), T is the payoff if one defects and the
other cooperates, S is the payoff if one cooperates by
playing C and the other defects by playing D.

Player I

Player II
C
D

C

D

R, R

S, T

T, S

P, P

Figure 1. Payoff table for the PD game. In each cell the
comma separated payoffs are the Player I’s and Player II’s
payoffs, respectively
The payoffs satisfy the inequalities T > R > P > S and
2R > T + S. This structure of the payoff matrix of that game
offers a dilemma to the players: there is no obvious best
move. D is the strongly dominant strategy for both players
because each player receives a higher payoff by choosing D
rather than C whatever the other player might do. However,
if both players defect, the payoffs (P, P) are lower than the
payoffs (R, R) they would have received if both had
cooperated (had chosen the dominated C strategy). By
choosing to cooperate however, they have to trust that their
opponent will also cooperate and take the risk of getting the
lowest payoff – S (taken to be 0 in the present experiment).
Rapoport and Chammah (1965) have proposed the
quantity CI = (R–P)/(T–S), called cooperation index (CI), as
a predictor of the probability of C choices, monotonously
increasing with CI. In Figure 2 two examples of PD games
with different CI − 0.9 and 0.1, respectively − are presented.
Player II

D

C

56, 56

0, 60

D

60, 0

50, 50

Player I

Player I

Player II
C

Experiment
The first goal of this work is a descriptive one: to study the
choice process in playing iterated PD games. We wanted to
determine which information (payoffs, opponent’s moves
etc.) is more important for the subjects while playing PD
games. The information acquisition patterns are studied
using eye-tracking recordings.
The second goal of the experiment is to study the way CI
is derived, if so, from the payoff matrix. In computing CI
(or other possible indexes that could serve as predictors of
cooperation rates), it is implicitly assumed that players pay
attention to all payoffs in the payoff matrix in order to be
able to extract the index. In most of the experiments
exploring the influence of CI (see e.g. Rapoport &
Chammah, 1965; Steele & Tedeschi, 1967; Jones et al.,
1968; Oscamp & Perlman, 1965), each subject played one
and the same PD game hundreds of times. In the latter case,
subjects didn’t need to pay attention to the payoffs all the
time because the payoff matrix was the same. In the
experiment presented here, we are interested in the actual
computation of CI in a setup in which the payoffs are
randomly generated and are different in each game.
The third goal is to try to find out how different strategies
used by subjects are related to different information
acquisition patterns.

C

D

C

69, 69

0, 70

D

70, 0

6, 6

Figure. 2. Examples of PD games with different CI. The
first game has a CI=0.1, the second one has CI=0.9.

Eye Movements
People see clearly only in the central area of the visual field
and in order to cover larger visual areas perform frequent
eye-movements (3-4 times per second). In general, eye
movements consist of fixations (relatively stable eye
positions, lasting approximately 200-300 ms) and saccades
(fast transitions between two consecutive fixations). Visual
information is acquired only during the fixations.
Decisions and choices depend on the processed information
and this why studying information acquisition is so
important to understand the strategies involved in game
playing (Einhorn & Hogart, 1981; Lohse & Johnson, 1996).
Eye movement recordings provide objective and
quantitative evidence on what is being processed at the
moment (Just & Carpenter, 1976; Duchowski, 2002). Eyetracking data are used in a large number of studies of the

Method
Participants 25 subjects with normal or corrected to normal
vision took part in the eye-tracking experiment. All of the
subjects were psychology students that participated in the
experiment for course credits. Due to technical difficulties
with calibration, the eye-tracking records of 6 subjects were
discarded.
Eye Movements Recordings Eye movements were
recorded using the ASL 501 eye-tracker with 60 Hz
sampling rate. The light head mounted optics recorded the
left eye movements. The centre of the pupil and the corneal
reflection were tracked to determine the relative position of
the eye. A magnetic head tracking equipment (Ascension
984

distinction between eye-fixations belonging to respective
zones.

Flock of Birds) was used in order to compensate for the
possible head movements and ensure sufficient precision of
the measurements. Integration of the eye movements and
head movements made it possible to compute point of
regard on the computer screen.
The eye-tracker was calibrated using a 9-point grid. The
accuracy of the gaze position record is about 0.5 degrees
visual angle. Two computer systems were utilized. Intel
Pentium 2.4 GHz PC ran the ASL software to calibrate and
adjust settings on the eye tracker. Another Intel Pentium 1.8
GHz PC with 17” monitor was used for game presentation
and running the Gaze tracker software for data recording
and analysis.

Results and discussion
Areas of Interest We define 12 areas of the screen that are
interesting in studying information acquisition during PD
game playing. Each Area of Interest (AOI) contains the box
in which the information is presented and a small region
around it. The following AOIs were defined:
Four AOIs containing the subject’s possible payoffs:
further these AOIs are referred to as Ts, Rs, Ps, and Ss.
Four AOIs containing the computer’s possible payoffs:
further referred to as Tc, Rc, Pc, and Sc.
Four AOIs containing the current game outcome:
subject’s move – Ms, computer’s move – Mc,
subject’s payoff – Pfs and the computer’s payoff – Pfc.

Payoff Matrices A set of 50 PD different payoff matrices
(containing an equal number of games with CI equal to 0.1,
0.3, 0.5, 0.7 and 0.9) was used in the experiment. Although
CI is invariant with respect to the possible linear
transformations of the payoff matrix, Oskamp and Perlman,
1965 claimed that the average payoff per trial is also
important in predicting cooperation. Taking this into
account, the payoff matrices were randomly generated with
the payoff magnitudes kept within certain limits. T was
between 22 and 77 points (mean 50), R was between 13 and
68 points (mean 41), P was between 1 and 60 points (mean
16). The S payoff is held constant (equal to 0). The games
were presented randomly with respect to their CI.

Dependent Variables The number of cooperative choices
for each CI was used as a dependent variable characterizing
the subjects playing behaviour.
The eye-tracking data were analyzed using two different
measures of the attention paid to different AOIs. The first
measure was the number of fixations in each AOI. It reflects
the relative importance of the information presented in the
AOI (Jacob & Karn, 2003). The second measure was the
number of games in which a particular AOI was attented to
at least once. The results from the two analyses were
similar, so in the following we present only the first one.
Another measure that is commonly used is the duration of
fixations in a given AOI. However, it seems to reflect the
difficulty of information extraction rather than its
importance (Jacob & Karn, 2003). Moreover, in the present
experiment the information in each AOI was similar and the
duration of fixations was almost the same. Therefore this
metric was not used in the analysis of the data.
The information was gathered in two stages: before
subject’s choice (for Ts, Rs, Ps, Ss, Tc, Rc, Pc, and Sc
AOIs) and after subject’s choice (for Ms, Mc, Pfs, and Pfc
AOIs). This was made in order to separate the data for the
decision making process (before the game outcome).

Design Each subject played 50 PD games against the
computer. The game was presented in a formal and a neutral
formulation. On the interface, the moves were labeled ‘1’
and ‘2’. Further in the paper, for convenience, we will
continue to use cooperation instead of move ‘1’ and
defection instead of move ‘2’. Subjects were instructed to
try to maximize their payoffs.
The computer used a probabilistic version of tit-for-tat
that takes into account the two previous moves of the player
and plays the same move with probability 0.8. The latter
makes the computer’s strategy harder to be discovered by
the subject and in the same time allows the subject to
impose her own strategy (and be followed by the computer).
After each game the subjects got feedback about their and
the computer’s choice and payoff in the current game.
Subjects could also permanently monitor the total number of
points they have won. They had no information about the
computer’s total score. This was made to prevent a possible
shift of subjects’ goal – from trying to maximize the number
of points to trying to outperform the computer.

Subjects with Different Strategies in Playing Although it
is reasonable to cooperate more when R is high and P and T
are relatively low, there is no guarantee that all of the
subjects were able to take advantage of CI in their move
choices. As the data from the present experiment show,
confirming well-known previous results (see e.g. Rapoport
& Chammah, 1965), there is a significant influence of CI on
the cooperation rate – subjects cooperate more in PD games
with higher CI (see Figure 3). But if we look more closely at
the data, this trend is not followed by all of the subjects. As
a cluster analysis based on the cooperation rate for each CI
showed, two groups of subjects can be singled out. For the
first group of 8 subjects (called further CI-based) the
cooperation is a monotonously increasing function of CI;
while for the second group of 11 subjects (called further

Procedure Each subject was tested separately. After
calibration of the eye-tracker system, instructions were
presented and each subject played 5 training games. After
checking again the calibration (and fixing it if needed) the
subject played the PD games sequence during which eye
movements were recorded.
The game was presented on a 17” monitor. Each box
containing payoffs or moves occupied about 1 degree visual
angle on the screen. The distance between two adjacent
boxes was at least 1 degree visual angle to ensure stable
985

the mean number of fixations in the Ts and Rs zones. The
finding is that subjects’ attention was not equally divided to
different payoffs.
Further, we were interested in the relation between
playing behaviour and attention to payoff AOIs.
Comparison between the mean number of fixations for both
groups of subjects (the CI-based and non-CI-based) s
presented in Figure 5. The difference is significant for Rs,
Ps, and Ss AOIs (p<0.05). The conclusion can be made that
the subjects from the non-CI-based group paid less attention
to the payoffs than those from the CI-based.

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

mean number of fixations

cooperation (%)

non-CI-based) such dependence is not observed (see Figure
3). The number of cooperative choices for each subject and
each CI was analyzed in a repeated-measures ANOVA with
the CI of the game as a within-subjects factor and the group
(CI-based vs. non-CI-based) as a between-subjects factor.
There is a significant interaction between the CI and the
group (p<0.001). CI-based subjects were influenced by CI
(p<0.001), while the influence of CI on cooperation rate for
non-CI-based subjects is not statistically significant
(p=0.65). Non-CI-based subjects showed an overall lower
cooperation rate (20%) than the CI-based subjects (49%).

CI-based
non-CI-based
all

0.1

0.3

0.5

0.7

0.9

CI

non-CI-based

Rs

Ps

Ss

AOI

Figure 5. Mean number of fixations in AOIs containing the
subject’s possible payoffs (Ts, Rs, Ps, and Ss): CI-based
group (grey bars) and non-CI-based group (white bars).

In summary, on the basis of their cooperation patterns
with respect to CI, two groups of subjects were identified.
One group of subjects was influenced by the CI and the
other was not. It was found that the CI-based group
cooperated in average more than the non-CI-based one.

All subjects paid more attention to T and R payoffs
compared to P and S payoffs. There is also a relation
between the playing behaviour and the looking patterns. As
expected, the subjects from the CI-based looked more often
at their possible payoffs.

Attention to Subject’s Payoffs (Ts, Rs, Ps, and Ss AOIs)
Eye-tracking data for the AOIs containing subject’s payoffs
were analyzed. Averaged data for all subjects are presented
in Figure 4. It can be seen that subjects paid more attention
to T and R payoffs. Subjects were looking at these payoffs
twice more often than at P and S payoffs.

Transitions between AOIs The processing of possible
payoffs is not related only to the number of times each
payoff was attended to. It is also linked to the pattern of
transitions between payoffs’ AOIs. Transitions are used as
an indicator of performed comparisons between payoffs.
40

Ts

Rs

Ps

mean number of transitions

mean number of fixations

CI-based

Ts

Figure 3. Mean cooperation for PD games with different CI:
all subjects (bold line), CI-based group (solid line), non-CIbased group (dotted line).

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Ss

35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

AOI

Figure 4. Mean number of fixations in AOIs containing
subject’s possible payoffs (Ts, Rs, Ps, and Ss).

Ts↔Rs Ts↔Ps Ts↔Ss Rs↔Ps Rs↔Ss Ps↔Ss

Figure 6. Mean number of transitions between the
corresponding AOIs (in both directions): e.g. Ts↔Rs stands
for transitions between Ts and Rs AOIs, and Ts↔Ps – for
transitions between Ts and Ps AOIs.

A repeated measures ANOVA was performed with the
AOI (Ts vs. Rs vs. Ps vs. Ss) as a within-subjects factor.
The main effect of AOI is significant (F(3, 54)=20.77,
p<0.001). Pairwise comparisons were used to test the
difference between each pair of AOIs. All differences turned
out to be statistically significant, except for the difference in

Eye-tracking data for transitions are presented in
Figure 6. Most transitions were made between Ts and Rs,

986

The difference in the mean number of fixations between
subjects with different strategies is significant for all of the
computer’s payoffs – Tc, Rc, Pc, and Sc (p<0.05 for all
comparisons) (see Figure 9). The non-CI-based subjects
paid almost no attention to the computer’s payoffs – each
payoff was attended less than 10 times for 50 PD games.
These subjects ignored completely their opponent’s possible
payoffs. CI-based subjects paid less attention to the
computer’s possible payoffs than to their own possible
payoffs. Still, computer’s payoffs got considerable attention
– especially Rc and Tc AOIs (see Figure 9).

40

CI-based

35

non-CI-based

30
25
20

non-CI-based

Tc

15

Rc

Pc

Sc

AOI

10

Figure 9. Mean number of fixations in AOIs containing
computer’s possible payoffs (Tc, Rc, Pc, and Sc) for the both
groups of subjects: CI-based (grey bars) and non-CI-based
(white bars).

5
0
Ts↔Rs Ts↔Ps Ts↔Ss Rs↔Ps Rs↔Ss Ps↔Ss

Figure 7. Mean number of transitions between the
corresponding AOIs for the CI-based subjects (grey bars)
and non-CI-based subjects (white bars). Ts↔Rs stands for
transitions between Ts and Rs, AOIs; Ts↔Ps – for
transitions between Ts and Ps AOIs; etc.

Attention to Game Results (Ms, Pfs, Mc, and Pfc AOIs)
The number of fixations in AOI related to the game
outcome (points obtained and moves made) is presented in
Figure 10. Subjects paid less attention to the computer’s
result and move than to their own. The difference in the
mean number of fixations between subjects with different
strategies is significant for Mc AOI (p=0.048). The subjects
with non-CI-based strategy paid more attention to their
opponent’s move than the subjects from the CI-based group.
This is consistent with the hypothesis that the subjects from
the non-CI-based group relied more on this information than
the subjects from the CI-based group.

mean number of fixations

Attention to Computer’s Payoffs (Tc, Rc, Pc and Sc
AOIs) As mentioned above, playing that is based on all the
available information and is inline with the game theory
reasoning, should take into account not only the player’s
payoffs but also his opponent’s possible payoffs. Eyetracking data show that considerably less attention was
devoted to the computer’s payoffs (see Figure 8). Fixations
again are more numerous for the R and T opponent’s
payoffs.
mean number of fixations

CI-based

45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

mean number of fixations

mean number of transitions

and between Ts and Ps AOIs. It can be hypothesized that
subjects were comparing T and R payoffs, also T and P
payoffs. Rapoport (1965) proposes that CI is computed as
(R-P)/T. Data form the current experiment show that CI
might be computed e.g. as R/T – P/T. The latter is
mathematically equivalent to CI and in the same time allows
for a two-step evaluation: first R and T, and then P and T.
These findings apply especially to the CI-based subjects
(see Figure 7). Non-CI-based subjects very rarely compared
T and P payoffs. Transitions between Ts and Ps AOIs were
statistically less than the transitions between Ts and Rs
AOIs (p=0.022). In fact these subjects were not able to
estimate the CI as they were not paying attention to all of
the payoffs and relations between them.

45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

40

CI-based

35

non-CI-based

30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Ms

Tc

Rc

Pc

Pfs

Mc

Pfc

AOI

Sc

Figure 10. Mean number of fixations in AOIs containing
game results (Ms, Pfs, Mc, and Pfc): CI-based group (grey
bars) and non-CI-based group (white bars).

AOI

Figure 8. Mean number of fixations in AOIs containing
computer’s possible payoffs (Tc, Rc, Pc, and Sc).
987

From the presented in Figure 10, it might seem that
subjects did not pay much attention to the game results.
However, it should be noted that in the game interface used,
there was a different way of gathering information about the
game outcome. After a move choice, the payoffs
corresponding to the game outcome changed their color in
the payoff matrix. This should be corrected for in future
experiments.

References
Axelrod, R. (1984). The evolution of cooperation. Basic Books.
Camerer, C. (2003). Behavioral game theory: experiments on
strategic interaction. Princeton University Press.
Camerer, C., Ho, T.-H., & Chong, J. (2002). Sophisticated EWA:
learning and strategic teaching in repeated games. Journal of
Economic Theory, 104, 137-188.
Colman, A. (2003) Cooperation, psychological game theory, and
limitations of rationality in social interaction. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 26, 139-198.
Duchowski, A. (2002). A breadth-first survey of eye tracking
applications. Behaviour Research Methods, Instruments, and
Computers, 1, 1-16.
Einhorn, H., & Hogarth, R. (1981). Behavioral decision theory:
Processes of judgment and choice. Annual Review in
Psychology, 32, 53-88.
Erev, I., Roth, A. (2001). Simple reinforcement learning models
and reciprocation in the Prisoner's dilemma game. In:
Gigerenzer, G., Selten, R. (Eds.), Bounded rationality: the
adaptive toolbox, Cambridge, Mass. MIT Press.
Hristova, E., & Grinberg, M. (2004). Context effects on judgment
scales in the Prisoner’s dilemma game. Proceedings of the 1st
European Conference on Cognitive Economics.
Jacob, R. & Karn, K. (2003). Eye tracking in human computer
interaction and usability research: Ready to deliver the promise.
In: Hyona, J., Radach, R., & Deubel, H. (Eds.), The mind’s eye:
cognitive and applied aspects of eye movement research.
Elsevier Science BV.
Johnson, E., Camerer, C., Sen, S., & Rymon, T. (2002). Detecting
failures of backward induction: monitoring information search
in sequential bargaining. Journal of Economic Theory, 104, 1647.
Jones, B., Steele, M., Gahagan, J., & Tedeschi, J. (1968). Matrix
values and cooperative behavior in the Prisoner’s dilemma
game. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 8, 148153.
Just, M., & Carpenter, P. (1976). Eye fixations and cognitive
processes. Cognitive Psychology, 8,441-480
Lohse, G. & Johnson, E. (1996). A comparison of two process
tracing methods for choice tasks. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 68, 28-43.
Macy, M., & Flache, A.(2002). Learning dynamics in social
dilemmas. PNAS, 99, 7229-7236.
Oskamp, S., & Perlman, D. (1965). Factors affecting cooperation
in a Prisoner’s dilemma game. Journal of Conflict Resolution,
9, 359-374.
Rapoport, A. (1967). A note on the ‘index of cooperation’ for
Prisoner’s dilemma. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 11, 100103.
Rapoport, A., & Chammah, A. (1965). Prisoner’s dilemma: a
study in conflict and cooperation. Univ. of Michigan Press.
Rapoport, A., & Mowshowitz, A. (1966). Experimental studies of
stochastic models for the Prisoner’s dilemma. Behavioral
Science, 11, 444-458.
Rayner, K. (1998). Eye movements in reading and information
processing: 20 years of research. Psychological Bulletin, 124,
372-422.
Simon, H. (1955). A Behavioral model of rational choice.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 69, 99-118.
Steele, M. & Tedeschi, J. (1967). Matrix indices and strategy
choice in mixed motive games. Journal of Conflict Resolution,
11, 198-205.

Conclusions
In the present paper we studied the information acquisition
patterns of subjects playing PD game by means of eyetracking recordings. The method used is applied for the first
time for the investigation of the details of the decision
making process in PD games.
The analysis of the data showed that subjects do not pay
equal attention to all of their possible payoffs – they were
mainly interested in the T and R payoffs (payoffs for
unilateral defection and for mutual cooperation). The
opponent’s payoffs were looked at rarely. These results
challenge game theory axioms of access to complete
knowledge about the games and are in favor of the boundedrationality framework for decision making analysis.
On the basis of their playing behaviour two groups of
subjects were identified. Part of the subjects showed a clear
dependence on the game cooperation index – they played
more cooperatively with increasing CI. The other part of the
subjects cooperated less and did not show any dependence
on CI. The comparison of the eye-tracking data for both
groups reveals different patterns of information processing
consistent with the latter behavioural differences.
The subjects from the first group (CI-based) paid more
attention to the payoffs. They compared predominantly the
T and R payoffs and to a lesser extent T and P payoffs.
These data support our hypothesis that the cooperation
index, usually presented as (R-P)/T, might be evaluated by
subjects as R/T – P/T.
The second group of subjects (non-CI-based) looked less
frequently at the payoffs than the first group and almost
completely ignored the opponent’s payoffs. They made
comparisons predominantly between T and R and only
incidentally between T and P. On the other hand, this group
paid more attention to the computer’s moves. These two
findings are evidence that the subjects from this group
didn’t made use of CI, which is completely consistent with
the behavioural data. Their strategy was predominantly
based on the opponent moves.
The results obtained demonstrate that eye-tracking data
combined with behavioural data can shed light on the
different strategies employed by subjects during playing and
on what part of the available information subjects base their
decisions.

Acknowledgments
This work was partly supported by the European
Commission (EUROCOG project).

988

