UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Integrating and Evaluating Graphic Premises On-line

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8wk5b9c4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Garcia-madruga, Juan A.
Moreno-Rios, Sergio

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Integrating and Evaluating Graphic Premises On-line
Sergio Moreno-Ríos (semoreno@ugr.es)
Facultad de Psicología. Universidad de Granada. Granada-18017 Spain

Juan A. García-Madruga (jmadruga@psi.uned.es)
Facultad de Psicología. UNED. Madrid-28040. Spain

Abstract
We study the effect of redundant and integrative information
on the evaluation of a conclusion. Parameters of presentation
of premises try to emulate those conditions most frequently
used in in-vehicle signing systems, where premises give
diagrammatic and graphic information, displayed item-byitem. Results show that the evaluation of a conclusion is
slower when information from the premises can be integrated
than when it cannot. Redundancy of the information in
different premises is only effective when it avoids the
integration of information.
Keywords
Reasoning, Integration of information, Traffic signs.

Introduction
What is the best way to display premises to make inferences?
In some circumstances we cannot go back to consider
previous premises because they have disappeared. This
happens, for example, with in-vehicle navigation systems.
Traditional studies in reasoning used almost exclusively
linguistic information in the logical arguments that are
present throughout the making of an inference. On the other
hand, in present-day signalling systems, on-line pieces of
information are displayed for only a few seconds in a
different format: maps, diagrams or drawings. It is assumed
that this format facilitates making faster inferences.
Research in thinking and reasoning provides us with
an excellent starting point for estimating the difficulty of an
argument and the easiest way of arranging our premises to
evaluate a conclusion. However, one of the most relevant
factors in designing the format and the order of the
information in on-line information systems is the nucleus of
the discrepancy between reasoning theories: how premises
are represented and integrated. Mental model theories assume
the construction of analogical representations. Although there
is not a clear definition of the process of integration of the
premises and the conditions that influence it, they seem to
depend on the repetition of components in the models
(Johnson-Laird, 1983; Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1993).
Moreover, some authors have proposed that particular
repetitions of elements inside the models lead to the
integration of premises (e.g. Johnson-Laird, Girotto,
Legrenzi, 2004, pp.644-645). Mental-logic theories propose
that information in the premises is translated into a
propositional language and some schemes or mental rules acts

on this (Braine and O’Brien, 1998; Rips, 1994). Therefore the
format of the premises should not have a dramatic effect on
deduction. Although reasoning theories provide us with
interesting and consistent predictions about general
phenomena in deduction, in this case they do not offer
unambiguous and consistent predictions about redundancy
and integration.
In reasoning tasks it has been asserted that in some
(but not all) circumstances, people hold premises separately
without integrating them, but in others this is not so (JohnsonLaird and Bara, 1984, see also Gutiérrez, García-Madruga,
Carriedo and Moreno-Ríos, 2000). Also, Maybery, Bain and
Halford (1986), using linguistic premises with relational
problems and with a concurrent task (detecting a sound),
showed that when the premises could be integrated with
previous ones (e.g., Mike is taller than John, John is taller
than Tom), reasoners took longer to process the premises than
to process non-integrative premises (e.g., Mike is taller than
John, Dan is taller than Tom). Likewise, in a study in which
people have to form a chain of transitive relations from
multiple conditional premises, Gutiérrez, García-Madruga,
Carriedo and Moreno-Ríos (2000) confirmed that the
integration of new information in the third premise consumed
more time for two-model problems (for instance, if e then b,
if a then b, if b then c, if c then d) than for one-model
problems (for instance, if a then e, if a then b, if b then c, if c
then d). Therefore, integration is a time-consuming operation
and the more alternative models are yielded by the
comprehension of premises, the more demanding the
integration process will be.
Our aim in this study was to explore the conditions that
maximise the information given by premises, assuming that
those presentations that are simpler in terms of quantity of
information shown and faster to process are the best. A basic
question here is whether the repetition of information in two
premises should be avoided.
More specifically, in this study we tried to examine: 1)
whether redundancy in the information given by premises
influences the evaluation of a conclusion, and if so, 2)
whether the integration of information has any cost in
processing time and whether redundancy is effective when it
avoids having to integrate information. In this study we used
the simplest deductive task: participants had to evaluate the
sufficiency of a conclusion, that is, whether the conclusion
was consistent with the premises. They did not have to

1537

However, the two conditions differ from each other
in more than just the necessity for integration. In the second
condition there is repetition of one unit of information (the
presence of the blue ball on the left). A possible difference in
the evaluation time for the two conditions could be due not
only to integration but also to redundancy. Therefore control
conditions were created (see Figure 2). Both give the same
information about the position of only one ball and the only
difference is that the second one gives redundant information.
This condition enables us to detect the possible effect of
redundancy without integration in our study.

evaluate the necessity (whether it was the only conclusion
consistent with the premises). Thus, in the present study we
explored how redundancy and integrative information
influence the evaluation of a conclusion. To do so, we used a
task similar to that used by Moreno-Ríos and García-Madruga
(2002) but using pictures as premises.

Study
Figure 1 represents the two conditions of interest in this
study. Participants are required to think about the order of the
set of three balls (blue, black and red). To carry out the
experiment, we display every premise for two seconds
(premise 1). The first premise in the example tells participants
that there is a blue ball on the left and nothing is said about
the other two, which are covered by a rectangle. When
premise 1 disappears from the screen, the second drawing
(premise 2) is shown, also for two seconds. In this case, it
informs participants that the black ball is in the middle.
Lastly, the conclusion is shown: the complete arrangement of
the three balls. Participants have to decide whether this is
congruent with the information given by the premises. In our
example, the correct answer is “yes, it is possible”.
Premise integration

P2
____________

C
C
blue black red
blue black red
Figure 2. Control conditions with information about only 1
ball.
Method
Participants: 31 male and female students from Granada
University took part. They received experimental credits as
compensation for their participation. All were students,
registered in the first year of a developmental psychology
course. All had normal or corrected vision. The participants
did not know the objectives of the research.

P2
____________

C
blue black red

P1

P2
____________

P1

P2

Control Redundant I.

P1

Redundant information

P1

____________

Control Condition

C
blue black red

Figure 1: Premises (p) shown one-by-one, informing
participants of the arrangement of three balls. They had to
evaluate whether the final arrangement (C: conclusion) was
possible.
In figure 1, the information offered by the two
conditions is identical. However, only the first condition
requires integration of the information given by the two
premises. The second (premise 2) has the complete
information. The mental operation for integrating the
information could be a very rapid and automatic process,
which could be carried out while on-line information is being
shown. However, as seems to happen with linguistic
information in the studies cited (Maybery et al., 1986) this
process may not be automatic and can slow down the
evaluation of the conclusion. Also, people might avoid
integrating premises, maintaining both pieces of information
separately. Therefore, our question is whether graphic or
diagrammatic premises can be integrated. That is, whether the
evaluation of the conclusions takes longer with integrative
premises.

Stimuli and apparatus. Both the presentation of stimuli and
the collection of responses were controlled by the E-Prime,
Version 1.1. (Schneider, 2003) software. Stimuli were
displayed on the computer screen. Each configuration of
stimuli consisted of a chain of three balls (red, blue and black)
located in the left, right and central positions. The premises
offered information about the relative position of the balls,
showing them, or showing a grey rectangle that covered them
in some of the three positions.
Material. The instructions encouraged participants to pay
attention to all the premises. The stimulus set was constructed
by changing the name and position of all the three balls. Two
experimental conditions were created: in the premise
integration condition the first premise showed one ball and
the second one showed another ball. In the experimental
redundant condition the second ball was shown adding the
ball shown in the first premise. Two control conditions
showed the position of only one ball in the first premise. The
second premise was the same in the control redundant
condition and none were shown (the three positions covered)
in the control condition. In half of the trials all the premises

1538

were inverted (first premises were changed for the second
premises). Conclusions were possible in half and impossible
in the other half. In addition, for half the trials the conclusion
was a complete configuration showing the three balls, and in
the other half only one ball was shown (and the other two
were covered).

Discussion and Conclusions

Procedure. The session began with the reading of the
instructions informing participants about the nature of the
task. These instructions provided an example corresponding
to each of the experimental conditions. Participants then
carried out one block of practice tests before beginning the
experimental block of tests. In eight training tests, each
premise remained on the screen for two seconds. When
participants made a mistake the programme gave feedback
indicating the correct premise. Once the most informative
premise was identified, participants pressed the appropriate
key. The word "ERROR" appeared on the screen when the
incorrect key was pressed. Feedback about errors was given
only in this practice block; the objective of this feedback was
to facilitate correct identification of the premise’s meaning.
The conclusion was displayed, followed by the question: "Is it
possible?", which remained on the screen until the response
was given. The response was made by pressing the keys
labelled "yes" and "no". Each test began when participants
pressed the space bar. The experimental block consisted of 80
experimental trials presented in random order. Half of these
were experimental trials and the other half were control trials.
The content of the premises determined the possible and
impossible conclusions (true and false), leading to two types
of trial. In half of the trials the correct answer was "YES", and
in the other half it was "NO". Adhesive labels with the words
"Yes" and "No" were stuck on the "F" and "I" keys of the
keyboard, respectively, in one order for half of the
participants and in the other order for the rest.

The integration of information is a basic process in reasoning.
The effect of premise presentation has been tested in
deduction (e.g., Girotto, Mazzoco and Tasso, 1997; Legrenzi,
Girotto and Johnson-Laird, 1993) but the process of
integration needs to be studied in detail. This knowledge
could be especially interesting for a growing area in
communication in daily activities, such as driving using in-car
navigation systems or reading variable-content signing
systems. Similar conditions in the way of presenting
information were used in this study to analyse the effect of
presentation of redundant information (repetitions) and to
know whether the integration of information about an event is
made in an automatic way producing the slowing down of
later processing.

Results

The results of this study showed that when
information from the premises needed to be integrated, the
evaluation of the conclusion took longer than when one of the
premises contained all the information (integration was not
required), according to Maybery et al’s (1986) results with a
relational propositional task and Gutiérrez et al’s (2000)
results with multiple conditional problems. Also, the control
condition showed that redundant information (repeating the
information in a premise) per se did not influence the
evaluation time of the conclusion.
We think that this result is interesting in two aspects:
in the studied conditions, which are frequently used for
communication systems (that show premises one-by-one for
few seconds), repetition of information does not necessarily
facilitate the comprehension or the evaluation of conclusions.
However, when different pieces of information have to be
integrated the evaluation is slower. It is in this case, when the
repetition of information allows us to avoid the operation of
integrating information, that redundancy is more effective in
the evaluation of conclusions. This happens even with very
simple information such as that shown in the present study.
The main deductive theories coincide with each
other, predicting the main results in reasoning, although in
some cases they describe the processes implicated in a
different way. Unfortunately, they do not give a complete and
clear description about how people integrate information
from the premises. The present results could be accounted for
by the two main theories in reasoning (the mental model
theory and mental logic theories). However we think that the
mental model theory can incorporate these results in a more
natural and easier way. Traditional tasks designed to study
deduction used linguistic premises and the main explanatory
effort of the theories has being directed to this kind of task.
Mental Logic theories (Braine and O’Brien, 1998; Rips,
1994) assume that premises (linguistic, diagrammatic, etc.)
are translated into propositions and assigned to the
appropriate schemes, losing their perceptive character. Of
course, relevant perceptive aspects of the premise such as
colour or location could be coded by propositions. However
we think these theories predict that graphic or diagrammatic
premises do not contribute to facilitating deduction. On the

Errors accounted for less than 5% of the overall
responses. Reaction times shorter and longer than 3 standard
deviations calculated for each individual subject were
eliminated. An ANOVA (analysis of variance) was carried
out on the reaction time for correct responses of possible
conclusions for the factors Premise Integration (integration
Vs no integration). Evaluation time was slower for the
integration condition (1329ms) than for the non-integration
condition (1134ms) [F(1,30)=40.2; MSe=13238; p<.00001].
Another ANOVA was carried out with the control
conditions to evaluate the effect of the repetition of
information. In this case the variables were Premise repetition
(repetition Vs non-repetition). Repeating the information
(1158) of a previous premise or not repeating it (1169) did not
show significant difference in the evaluation of conclusions
[F(1,30)<1; MSe=10939; p>.4].

1539

other hand, the mental model theory (Johnson-Laird, 1983,
1999) seems to account for (and predict in a more natural
way) thinking with diagrammatic and graphic premises.
Actually advantages have been predicted for some conditions
regarding linguistic premises (eg. Bauer and Johnson-Laird,
1993). This theory maintains that people represent premises
in an analogical format: a mental model of the premise (such
as an arrangement of three balls).
One example of how theories could help is by
signalling the factors that contribute to the integration of
premises or others that can incite people to maintain the
information given by the premises separated in the Working
Memory until they are required. From the mental model
theory, it has been proposed that definition of the context is
one important factor for integration (Bouquet and Warglien,
1999). It seems plausible that one way of integrating premises
is by comparing elements inside the models. Anyway this
study shows that whatever the explanation of the integration,
even in simple cases, it takes time, which influences the
evaluation of a subsequent conclusion.
To summarise, this study showed that the integration
of information implies a time cost for later processing (the
evaluation of conclusions). In dynamic information systems,
such as in-vehicle navigation systems or similar, this delay
could decrease the probability of generating important
conclusions that might also be required to integrate new
information. Knowing the conditions that make the
integration of information easier can help us to propose
theoretical models from the main theories of deduction that
help us to find more general principles in this field.

References

Acknowledgments

Bauer, M.I., & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1993) How diagrams can
improve reasoning. Psychological Science, 4, 372-378.
Bouquet, P. & Warglien, M. (1999). Mental models and
Local models semantics: the problem of information
integration. Mental models and Local models semantics:
the problem of information integration. ECCS, 27-30.
Braine, M. D. S., & O’Brien, D. (1998). Mental logic.
Mahwah, NJ:Erlbaum.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1983). Mental models. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1999). Deductive reasoning. Annual
Review, 50, 105-135.
Johnson-Laird, P.N. & Bara, B.G. (1984). Syllogistic
Inference. Cognition, 16, 1-61.
Johnson-Laird, P.N. & Byrne, R.M.J. (2002). Conditionals: A
theory of meaning, pragmatics, and inference.
Psychological review, 109, 646-678.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., Girotto, V., Legrenzi, P. (2004).
Reasoning to consistency. Psychological Review, 3, 640661.
Girotto, V., Mazzocco, A. & Tasso, A. (1997). The effect of
premise order in conditional reasoning: a test of the mental
model theory. Cognition, 63, 1-28.
Gutiérrez, F., García-Madruga, J. A., Carriedo, N. &
Moreno-Ríos, S. (2000). Reasoning with multiple
conditionals. Whe do reasoners construct mental models?
In J. A. García-Madruga, N. Carriedo and M. J. GonzálezLabra (Eds.), Mental Models in Reasoning (pp. 283-297).
Madrid: UNED Ediciones.
Legrenzi, P., Giroto, V. & Johnson-Laird, P. (1993). Focusing
in reasoning and decision-making. Cognition, 49, 37-66.
Maybery, M.T., Bain, J.D. & Halford, G.S. (1986).
Information-processing demands of transitive inference.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory
and Cognition, 12, 600-613.
Moreno-Ríos, S., & García-Madruga, J.A. (2002). Priming in
deduction: a spatial arrangement task. Memory &
Cognition, 30(7), 1118-1127.
Rips, L.J. (1994). The psychology of proof. Cambridge, MA:
Routledge.
Schneider, W. (2003). Psychology Software Tools, Inc.
http://www.pstnet.com/

We thank Cándida Castro and Francisco Tornay for their
helpful comments and ideas. The research was part of the
“Razonamiento proposicional y modelos mentales: el papel
de la Memoria Operativa” project founded by the Spanish
Ministry of Education and Science (BSO2003- 02103).

1540

