UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Interpretive Diversity as a Source of Metaphor-Simile Distinction

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1n5110jm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Lacroix, Joyca P.W.
Murre, Jaap M.J.
Postma, Eric O.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Interpretive Diversity as a Source of Metaphor-Simile Distinction
Akira Utsumi (utsumi@se.uec.ac.jp)
Yuu Kuwabara (kuwabara@utm.se.uec.ac.jp)
Department of Systems Engineering, The University of Electro-Communications
1-5-1 Chofugaoka, Chofushi, Tokyo 182-8585, Japan

Abstract
In this paper, we argue that the metaphor form of a comparison (i.e., a topic-vehicle pair) is preferred over, and more comprehensible than, the simile form when the interpretive diversity for that comparison is high. Interpretive diversity refers
to the richness of the figurative meaning of a comparison; it
is high to the extent that more features or properties are related to the figurative meaning and their values of salience
are more uniformly distributed. We tested this claim through
three experiments. Experiment 1 examined preference for the
metaphor form and found that, as the interpretive diversity of
the features shared by the topic and the vehicle increased, the
metaphor preference increased as well. Furthermore, interpretive diversity was found to have a greater effect on metaphor preference than topic-vehicle similarity, which Chiappe
and Kennedy (2001) claimed was a source of metaphor preference. Experiment 2 assessed familiarity of topic-vehicle pairs
and demonstrated that interpretive diversity was more important in determining the metaphor preference of less familiar
pairs than that of familiar pairs. Experiment 3 addressed comprehension of metaphors and similes and found that metaphors
were comprehended more easily than similes when the interpretive diversity of the figurative meaning is high. These findings provide empirical evidence in favor of our argument and
suggest that metaphor-simile distinction is better explained by
interpretive diversity.

Introduction
When we describe a concept (i.e., topic) figuratively in terms
of a different concept (i.e., vehicle), we can express the comparison in two ways: in metaphor form (X is Y) and in simile
form (X is like Y). Since metaphor and simile express almost
the same figurative meaning, it is often said that a metaphor
is an indirect paraphrase of a simile. If so, however, why do
we use both expressions without bringing them together?
Recently some experimental studies have tackled the problem of how metaphor and simile differ. One series of experimental studies (Chiappe and Kennedy 1999, 2001; Chiappe,
Kennedy, and Chiappe 2003) has been made on what properties affect people’s preference for the metaphor form. These
studies demonstrated that metaphor preference was explained
by similarity between a topic and a vehicle, or aptness of the
comparison. The metaphor form was preferred over the simile form when the topic and the vehicle of the comparison
were highly similar or when the comparison was highly apt,
while the simile form was preferred when the topic-vehicle
similarity or the aptness of comparison was low. Another series of experimental studies (Bowdle and Gentner 1999; Gentner and Bowdle 2001; Zharikov and Gentner 2002) has addressed the conventionality of the figurative meaning of the

vehicle (i.e., the base term) as a source for metaphor-simile
distinction. These studies demonstrated that the simile form
was preferred when the vehicle of the comparison was novel,
but the metaphor form became preferred when that vehicle
was conventionalized by repeated figurative use.
In this paper, we propose interpretive diversity of a comparison as a key property which explains the metaphor-simile
distinction. By the term ‘interpretive diversity’, we mean the
richness of the figurative meaning of a comparison. The richness of the figurative meaning depends on two factors, that is,
the number of features (or predicates) involved in the meaning and the salience distribution of those features (Utsumi
2005). In general, the richness of a comparison is high to the
extent that more features are related to the figurative meaning
and that the values of salience of those features are more uniformly distributed. For example, the comparison “Deserts are
(like) ovens” may possibly convey one highly salient meaning
of “They are burning hot” with a relatively much less salient
meanings such as “They are dry” or “Their temperature is
greatly changed”. Such interpretation can be seen as less rich
or less diverse. On the other hand, the comparison “History
is (like) footprints” can be considered as having a highly rich,
diverse interpretation because many equally salient meanings
such as “It remains behind”, “It is a thing of the past” and “It
is a living proof” are contained in the figurative interpretation.
Interpretive diversity can be assessed by using an idea of
Shannon’s entropy H(X) defined by the following equation.

H(X) = −
p(x) log2 p(x)
(1)
x∈X

A higher value of entropy means that a single random variable X has more states and their probability p(x) is more uniformly distributed. The entropy is maximal, H(X) = log 2 N
with N the number of states in X, when all states have the
same probability 1/N , and the entropy is minimal, H(X) =
0, when one state has probability 1 and all others have probability 0. Therefore, if we regard the salience distribution of
features for the figurative interpretation of a comparison as a
probability distribution p(x), the entropy becomes a reasonable measure of richness of that interpretation.
We then argue that, when the interpretive diversity for
a comparison is high, i.e., when the figurative meaning is
highly diverse, the metaphor form of that comparison is preferred over, and more comprehensible than, the simile form.
According to our argument, for example, “History is footprints” may be preferred over and comprehended more easily than “History is like footprints” because the comparison
2230

is interpretively diverse, while in the case of the comparison “deserts – ovens” the simile form “Deserts are like ovens”
may be preferred and more comprehensible.
In the rest of this paper, we report three experiments conducted to test our claim. In the first two experiments (Experiments 1 and 2), we addressed the preference rating for the
metaphor form, i.e., to what degree people judged the metaphor form to be a better way of expressing a given comparison. In Experiment 1, we examined how the metaphor preference could be explained by the interpretive diversity of the
features shared by the topic and the vehicle, and compared it
with people’s similarity rating, which Chiappe and Kennedy
(2001) claimed was an important source of metaphor preference. In Experiment 2, we focused on how the familiarity (or conventionality) of a comparison was related to the
metaphor preference of that comparison. In the last experiment (Experiment 3), we examined how comprehensibility of
a comparison changed between when it was presented in the
metaphor form and when it was presented in the simile form
by asking participants to judge ease of comprehension after
they interpreted the metaphor or the simile. We then tested
whether difference in comprehensibility between both forms
was explained by the interpretive diversity of the figurative
interpretation generated by participants.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants Ninety undergraduate and graduate students
participated as volunteers. All participants were native speakers of Japanese.
Materials Thirty pairs of Japanese topic and vehicle words
were used for the experiment. These pairs were derived from
a pilot study.
Pilot study For a pilot study, we used 40 Japanese topicvehicle pairs. They were composed of 22 pairs chosen as appropriate for Japanese figurative comparisons from among a
list of 30 English pairs used in Chiappe and Kennedy’s (1999)
experiments, and 18 pairs chosen from a list of expressions
frequently used for Japanese metaphors or similes.
Forty undergraduate and graduate students participated in
the pilot study. None of them participated in the main study.
They were assigned to all the 40 topic-vehicle pairs and asked
to rate each pair with respect to similarity on a 5-point scale
(1 = not at all similar, 5 = extremely similar). Based on the
ratings, 30 pairs were chosen for the main study such that
they differ in similarity as gradually as possible.
Procedure The main study of Experiment 1 consisted of
three tasks: preference rating task, shared feature listing task
and salience rating task. Participants were assigned to 30
topic-vehicle pairs and carried out only one of the three tasks.
The presentation order of 30 pairs was randomly determined
for each participant.
In the preference rating task, 30 participants were asked to
read each pair and to rate it on a 5-point scale of metaphor
preference (1 = simile is preferable, 5 = metaphor is preferable). In the shared-feature listing task, 30 participants were
asked to read each pair and to list features shared by the topic
and the vehicle. For the features listed for each pair, closely

Table 1: Regression analysis of interpretive diversity and similarity for predicting the metaphor preference (n=30).
B

SE B

β

Interpretive diversity

0.76

0.26

0.46**

Topic-vehicle similarity

0.29

0.13

0.35*

Variable

Note. R2 = .40, F (2, 27) = 8.98, p = .001.
*p < .05. **p < .01.
related words and phrases were accepted as the same feature.
After that, any features listed by only one participant were
dropped. As a result, 4 to 13 features per pair (a total of 233
features) were selected as shared. These features were used
for the salience rating task. In the salience rating task, 30
participants were assigned to all the 30 pairs with the shared
features listed in the feature listing task. They were asked to
read each pair and its shared features, and to judge how salient these features were when they were seen as shared by
the topic and the vehicle using a 7-point scale (0 = not at all
salient, 6 = extremely salient).

Results and Discussion
For each pair, the similarity rating in the pilot study and the
metaphor preference rating in the main study were averaged
across participants. The mean similarity rating across 30 pairs
was 2.96 (SD = 0.83), ranging from 1.45 (freedom – the dark)
to 4.25 (hope – light). The mean preference rating was 2.82
(SD = 0.69), ranging from 1.57 (tree – umbrella) to 4.20 (history – footprints).
Interpretive diversity of shared features for each pair was
calculated by Equation 1 as follows. First, the salience rating
for each feature x was averaged across participants. Then
p(x) was assessed in such a way that the mean salience
rating of the feature x was divided by the sum of all the
mean salience ratings for the topic-vehicle pair. For example, for the comparison “deserts – ovens” four shared features
(burning, hot, dry, great change of temperature) were listed
and their mean salience ratings were 4.88, 4.77, 3.42 and
2.65. Hence the value of interpretive diversity for this comparison was calculated as −(4.88/15.72) log(4.88/15.72) −
(4.77/15.72) log(4.77/15.72) − (3.42/15.72) log(3.42/15.72)
−(2.65/15.72) log(2.65/15.72) = 1.95. The mean interpretive diversity across 30 pairs was 2.87 (SD = 0.42), ranging
from 1.95 (deserts – ovens) to 3.68 (life – journey).
As predicted, the interpretive diversity of shared features
was positively correlated with the metaphor preference rating,
r = .53 (p < .005). The similarity rating was also positively
correlated with the preference rating, r = .45 (p < .05). To
examine which of the two variables better explains the preference rating, regression analysis was conducted with preference rating as the dependent variable. Table 1 shows the
result of the regression analysis. Both interpretive diversity
and similarity accounted for a significant portion of the variance in metaphor preference, but the standardized regression
coefficient was larger for interpretive diversity than for similarity. Furthermore, the commonality analysis revealed that
50% of the explained variance (i.e., 20% of the total variance)
2231

in metaphor preference was associated uniquely with interpretive diversity, while 28% of the explained variance (i.e.,
11% of the total variance) was associated uniquely with similarity. These results suggest that interpretive diversity is a
more important factor, but similarity does not lose its role as
a supplementary source of the metaphor preference.
Chiappe and Kennedy (2001) interpreted their finding of
the positive correlation between topic-vehicle similarity and
metaphor preference as indicating that “the classification [i.e.,
metaphor] form is used when the topic and the vehicle share
many properties, whereas the similarity [i.e., simile] form is
used when the topic and the vehicle share fewer common
properties” (p.250). However, our finding indicates that the
correlation between similarity and metaphor preference may
not reflect the effect of the number of shared features. Indeed, the correlation between similarity rating and the number of shared features was not significant, r = .22. Rather, our
finding shows that interpretive diversity embodies such effect
and at the same time that although playing a secondary role,
similarity has a unique impact on metaphor preference.

Experiment 2
Method
Participants Twenty undergraduate and graduate students
participated as volunteers. All participants were native speakers of Japanese.
Materials The 30 topic-vehicle pairs used in Experiment 1
were used for this experiment. Each participant was assigned
to all the 30 pairs. The order of the material was randomly
determined for each participant.
Procedure Participants were asked to read each topicvehicle pair and to rate how familiar they were with the expression comparing the topic word of the pair with the vehicle
word on a 7-point scale (0 = not at all familiar, 6 = extremely
familiar).

Results and Discussion
The familiarity rating of each pair was averaged across participants. The mean familiarity rating across 30 pairs was 2.93
(SD = 1.27), ranging from 0.53 (cigarettes – time bombs) to
4.89 (life – journey).
The correlation between familiarity and metaphor preference was positive and significant, r = .47 (p < .01). However,
familiarity was also highly correlated with similarity, r = .82
(p < .0001). Hence, the regression analysis was conducted
with familiarity, similarity and interpretive diversity as the
independent variable. The result was that the standardized regression coefficient for familiarity was 0.002 and the squared
partial correlation for familiarity was 0.000. This result indicates that familiarity did not have a unique contribution to
determining metaphor preference.
This finding on the relation between similarity and familiarity replicates the finding of Chiappe and Kennedy’s (2001)
study. From this finding, they argued that “Familiarity’s role
is to enhance similarity” (p.263). If their argument is right,
interpretive diversity is predicted to have a greater effect
on preference when topic-vehicle pairs are unfamiliar than
when they are familiar. To test this prediction, we divided
the 30 topic-vehicle pairs into two groups — familiar pairs

Table 2: Summary of regression analysis predicting the metaphor preference for familiar and less familiar comparisons.
Variable

B

SE B

β

p

Familiar pairs (n=16)
Interpretive diversity

0.73

0.36

0.45

0.06

Topic-vehicle similarity

0.51

0.26

0.43

0.07

Less familiar pairs (n=14)
Interpretive diversity

0.88

0.43

0.53

0.07

Topic-vehicle similarity

0.23

0.36

0.16

0.54

2

Note. R = .38, F (2, 13) = 3.90, p < .05 for familiar
pairs; R2 = .40, F (2, 11) = 2.11, p = .17 for less familiar
pairs.

(i.e., those whose familiarity rating was the midpoint of 3 or
higher) and less familiar pairs (i.e., those whose familiarity
rating was less than 3) —, and conducted regression analysis
separately for the two groups of pairs. Table 2 shows the two
regression equations with interpretive diversity and similarity
as independent variables.
The result shown in Table 2 is consistent with the prediction. Concerning familiar pairs, both interpretive diversity
and similarity accounted for a marginally significant portion
of the variance in preference, and more importantly the effect of similarity on preference was greater than when all
the pairs were entered into the regression analysis. Indeed,
the commonality analysis showed that the percentage of the
variance explained uniquely by similarity increased to 19%
(i.e., 50% of the variance explained by both factors), as compared to 11% of the variance in preference for all pairs. On
the other hand, for less familiar pairs only interpretive diversity accounted for a marginally significant portion of the
variance in preference. It was also found that 98% of the
explained variance was associated uniquely with interpretive
diversity, while similarity uniquely explained only 10% of the
explained variance. 1 From these findings it follows that interpretive diversity was more important in determining metaphor preference for less familiar pairs than for familiar pairs.
In other words, people may judge preference of novel topicvehicle pair, in which preexisting similarity is unlikely to be
perceived, primarily on the basis of the interpretive diversity
of created similarity.

Experiment 3
Method
Participants One hundred and twenty-two undergraduate
students participated for a requirement of computer literacy
course. All participants were native speakers of Japanese.
1
It must be noted that common variance, i.e., the variance explained by a joint effect of multiple variables, may have a negative
value, which means a lack of a joint effect. For example, the proportion of variance for less familiar pairs shared by interpretive diversity
and similarity was −0.074.

2232

Materials Forty pairs of Japanese topic words and vehicle
words, different from the pairs used in Experiments 1 and 2,
were used for this experiment. These pairs were constructed
from ten groups each of which consisted of two topic words
and two vehicle words. For example, from the two topics,
‘anger’ and ‘sleep’, and the two vehicles, ‘sea’ and ‘storm’,
four topic-vehicle pairs were created: anger – the sea, anger –
storm, sleep – the sea and sleep – storm. Topic and vehicle
words were selected from an experimental study on Japanese
metaphor and a list of words frequently used for Japanese
metaphors. Topic-vehicle pairs were presented in metaphor
form (e.g., “Anger is the sea” [“Ikari ha umi da” in Japanese])
or in simile form (e.g., “Anger is like the sea” [“Ikari ha umi
no you da” in Japanese]).

Table 3: Correlations of the comprehensibility difference
with the interpretive diversity of figurative meaning.
Difference of comprehensibility
All (n=40)

Comprehensible (n=25)

Interpretive diversity
Metaphor

0.21

0.47*

Simile

0.43**

0.55**

Sum

0.43**

0.61**

*p < .05. **p < .01.

Procedure This experiment was conducted separately for
metaphor comprehension and simile comprehension. The experiment for metaphor comprehension was a part of larger
experiment reported elsewhere (Utsumi 2005).
In the experiment for metaphor comprehension, metaphor
comprehension task was preceded by the feature listing task
for single words. Eighty participants each were assigned to
10 words for the feature listing task for single words and 10
metaphors which did not include any of the assigned words.
In other words, for example, participants who saw a word
‘sleep’ did not see the ‘sleep’ metaphors, either “Sleep is the
sea” or “Sleep is a storm”. Words and metaphors of each
group were counterbalanced so that they were assigned to 20
participants. In the feature listing task for single words, participants were asked to list at least three features of a concept expressed by a single word. In the metaphor comprehension task, participants carried out three subtasks. First,
they were asked to consider the meaning of a metaphor and
to list at least three features of the topic (presented with an
underline) that were being described by the vehicle of that
metaphor (feature listing task). Second, they were asked to
describe their own interpretation of the metaphor freely by
sentences (free description task). 2 Finally, they were asked
to rate the metaphor with respect to ease of interpretation on
a 7-point scale ranging from 1 (not at all comprehensible) to
7 (extremely comprehensible) (comprehensibility rating task).
In the experiment for simile comprehension, 42 participants each were assigned to 20 similes which shared neither the topic nor the vehicle (e.g., “Anger is like the sea”
and “Sleep is like a storm”). Similes were counterbalanced
across participants so that they were assigned to 21 participants. Each participant carried out the same three subtasks as
those of the metaphor comprehension task (i.e., feature listing
task, free description task and comprehensibility rating task).

Results and Discussion
For each metaphor and simile, the comprehensibility rating was averaged across participants. The mean comprehensibility rating across 40 metaphors was 4.32 (SD = 1.05),
ranging from 1.90 (perfume – ice) to 6.14 (child – jewelry).
The mean comprehensibility rating across 40 similes was
4.52 (SD = 1.00), ranging from 2.09 (perfume – ice) to 5.90
(lover – sun). Difference of comprehensibility for each topic2
In this paper, the date obtained in the free description task was
not used in the analysis.

2233

vehicle pair was then calculated by subtracting the mean comprehensibility rating for the simile form from the mean comprehensibility rating for the metaphor form. Hence the difference of comprehensibility is positive when the metaphor
form is more comprehensible than the simile form. The mean
difference of comprehensibility was −0.21 (SD = 0.48), ranging from −1.40 (character – fire) to 0.63 (love – journey). It
was significantly different from 0, t(39) = 2.73 (p < .01), thus
suggesting that similes were comprehended more easily than
metaphors.
Interpretive diversity of the metaphorical meaning was calculated separately for metaphors and similes, using the features listed in the feature listing task for metaphor or simile
comprehension. First, closely related words or phrases in the
same list of features were accepted as the same feature if they
met one of some criteria, such as one that they belonged to the
same deepest category of a Japanese thesaurus and one that
they shared the same root form. After this feature combination process, any features mentioned by only one participant
were eliminated from the list of features. Finally, for each feature x in the amended list of features, p(x) of Equation 1 was
assessed by dividing the number of tokens of that feature (i.e.,
the number of participants who listed that feature) by the total
number of tokens involved in the list. The mean interpretive
diversity across 40 pairs was 3.01 (SD = 0.42) when the pairs
were presented in the metaphor form, and 3.08 (SD = 0.41)
when the pairs were presented in the simile form.
To examine whether difference in comprehensibility between metaphors and similes is explained by interpretive diversity of figurative meaning, we correlated difference of
comprehensibility with three values, i.e., metaphor’s diversity, simile’s diversity and the sum of both diversities. The
result of correlation is presented in Table 3. Overall, comprehensibility difference was positively correlated with the
interpretive diversity of the figurative meaning; two out of
three correlations were significant. The metaphor form was
rated as more comprehensible than the simile form when
the interpretive diversity was high, whereas the simile form
was perceived as more comprehensible when the interpretive diversity was low. Furthermore, to avoid an undesirable
effect of semantically irrelevant features which may be included in the list of features generated for incomprehensible
or less comprehensible pairs, we limited the correlation analysis to comprehensible pairs whose comprehensibility rating
for both forms was the midpoint 4 or higher. The result was

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

was very small (Nueckles and Janetzko 1997; Utsumi 2005). 4
Therefore, the finding that more shared features were generated when topic-vehicle pairs were interpreted as similes than
when interpreted as metaphors may mean that simile comprehension is geared to a few highly salient meanings.

(%)
90 100

Metaphor
Shared

Topic

Vehicle

General Discussion

Emergent

The three experiments reported in this paper provided empirical evidence in favor of our argument that interpretive diversity is an important source of metaphor-simile distinction.
Moreover, interpretive diversity was found to be more important in determining metaphor preference than Chiappe and
Kennedy’s (2001) topic-vehicle similarity. At the same time,
however, similarity had a unique effect on preference which
could not be achieved by interpretive diversity.
Then, what is a source of the unique contribution of similarity? We speculate that the source of such unique effect may
involve the total salience of shared features, upon which interpretive diversity does not depend. For example, when two
topic-vehicle pairs X1 – Y1 and X2 – Y2 have the equal number of equally salient shared features, they are equal in interpretive diversity. However, imagine further that the features
for X1 – Y1 are more salient than the features for X2 – Y2. In
this case, they are still equal in interpretive diversity, but they
differ in the total salience and possibly in similarity; it seems
reasonable to suppose that the pair X1 – Y1 is more similar
than the pair X2 – Y2. This assumption may be supported by
the result of Experiment 1. The similarity rating was significantly correlated with the total salience of shared features
(i.e., the sum of the salience rating for each pair), r = .43
(p < .05), although it was not correlated with the number of
shared features, r = .22.
In this paper, we did not address an effect of the conventionality of the vehicle (Bowdle and Gentner 1999; Zharikov
and Gentner 2002), but it deserves special mention. The theory underlying these studies is the career of metaphor (Bowdle and Gentner 2005; Gentner et al. 2001) which reconciles
two rival theories of metaphor, the structure mapping theory
(Gentner 1983) and the attributive category theory (Glucksberg 2001). The career of metaphor hypothesis claims that
figurative statements with novel vehicles (i.e., their figurative
meanings are not conventionalized) are processed as comparisons, but conventional figuratives (i.e., the figurative meanings of the vehicles are conventional) are processed as categorizations (but also comparisons). Therefore, it predicts that
similes are preferred when vehicles are novel, and metaphors
become preferred when vehicles are conventionalized.
However, as Chiappe and Kennedy (2001) pointed out, the
conventionality of the vehicle alone cannot provide a reasonable explanation for how metaphor preference (and comprehensibility difference) differs among different topic-vehicle
pairs. Even though a vehicle has one conventional figurative
meaning, other possible figurative meanings of that vehicle
are not necessarily conventional. Hence figurative statements

Simile
Figure 1: Comparison of the proportions of four feature types
in the figurative interpretation between metaphors and similes.
that, as shown in Table 3, higher correlations were observed
between comprehensibility difference and interpretive diversity, and all the correlations became significant. These findings clearly show that the metaphor form is more comprehensible than the simile form to the extent that a potential
figurative meaning is diverse.
One question that arises here is whether or not the generated figurative meanings differ between metaphors and similes, in other words, whether the grammatical form affects
comprehension of figurative statements. The negative result
was that there was not a significant difference between metaphor’s diversity and simile’s diversity, t(39) < 1. In addition,
the difference of comprehensibility was not correlated with
the difference of interpretive diversity between both forms
(i.e., metaphor’s diversity minus simile’s diversity), r = −.16.
In contrast, a positive result was also obtained on qualitative difference of figurative meaning; more shared and topic
features were generated for interpretation of similes than for
interpretation of metaphors, as shown in Figure 1. Shared features were those listed for both the topic and the vehicle in the
feature listing task for single words, and more shared features
were generated for similes than for metaphors, t(39) = 2.15
(p < .05). 3 Topic features were those listed only for the topic
and more topic features were generated for similes than metaphors, t(39) = 2.45 (p < .05). Concerning other types of
features — vehicle features (i.e., those listed only for the vehicle) and emergent features (i.e., those listed for neither the
topic nor the vehicle) —, there was no significant difference
in the number of features between similes and metaphors.
These findings seem to suggest that metaphors may be
comprehended so that its figurative interpretation diverges to
multiple equally salient meanings, while that similes may be
comprehended so that its figurative interpretation converges
into one or only a few highly salient meanings. The rationale behind this suggestion is that “shared features” here can
be assumed to be much more salient than other types of features on the grounds that shared features were listed by many
participants although the number of different shared features
3

Features listed in the feature listing task for single words were
preprocessed in the same way as the features listed for metaphors
and similes. For each word (a topic or a vehicle), closely related
words were combined into one feature, and any features mentioned
by only one participant were eliminated from the list of features for
that word. After these lists of features were generated, the features
in the amended list for metaphors and similes were classified into
the four types of features.

4
It must be noted here that the shared features in Experiment 3
differ from the shared features in Experiment 1. The latter shared
features were obtained when a topic and a vehicle were presented together (and thus they might capture a whole figurative meaning), but
the former ones were listed both for a topic and for a vehicle when
they were presented separately. Hence, the shared features here can
be seen as most salient of the shared features in Experiment 1.

2234

with the same vehicle can differ in preference when the topics
make different properties relevant to the comparison. In this
respect, familiarity of topic-vehicle pairs, not the familiarity
of vehicles irrespective of topics, is more appropriate for examining the effect of the conventionality of figurative meanings. And, as Experiment 2 showed, the familiarity of topicvehicle pairs, too, may not be a primary source of metaphorsimile distinction. Rather, the interesting question for further research is what properties of topic-vehicle pairs have
a joint effect with familiarity or conventionality. For example, Nakamoto and Kusumi (2004) focused on this question,
and showed that the effect of conventionality of the vehicle
on metaphor preference was greater when comparisons were
highly apt than when they were less apt.
Nevertheless, we suggest that interpretive diversity may be
consistent with the comparison-categorization distinction advocated by the career of metaphor. Novel topic-vehicle pairs
are processed as comparison involving structural alignments
between the topic and the vehicle, and thus it will succeed
even when only a few highly salient features or predicates
are common to both concepts, i.e., even when they are interpretively less diverse. On the other hand, conventional or
familiar pairs are processed as categorization which requires
direct mapping of many salient features involved in the figurative meaning of the vehicle into the topic; categorization
statements are inappropriate if only some of the features can
be mapped to the topic. Therefore, the pairs for which the metaphor form is preferred must be interpretively diverse. Perhaps the reverse may be possible. Figurative statements with
diverse meanings can be comprehended as categorization expressing that the topic is a member of an ad hoc superordinate
category exemplified by the vehicle, as argued by Glucksberg
(2001), but if they have only a few salient meanings they cannot be comprehended as categorization. Hence, in such cases,
they are likely to be comprehended as comparison.
Finally, we should also mention the third existing account
of metaphor preference. Aisenman (1999) proposed that
metaphor-simile distinction is closely tied to the type of predicates shared by the topic and the vehicle: If shared features are primarily relational then the metaphor form is preferred, while if attributional predicates are shared then the
simile form is preferred. This hypothesis receives some support from experimental studies examining how relationality
and conventionality affect the metaphor preference (Gokcesu
and Bowdle 2003; Zharikov and Gentner 2002). Although
how relationality is associated with interpretive diversity must
await further research, we offer a possible speculation. Relational predicates may encourage a rich variety of mappings
between the topic and the vehicle, and thereby the figurative
meaning is likely to be diverse and the metaphor form is preferred. Attributional predicates, on the other hand, are salient
on their own, and thus the figurative meaning tends to be less
diverse and the simile form is preferred.
To conclude, our findings suggest that interpretive diversity
can be a better candidate for the source of metaphor-simile
distinction. It would be interesting and vital for further research to examine which of the properties for topic-vehicle
pair — interpretive diversity, similarity, aptness, conventionality, relationality — dominates metaphor-simile distinction
and how these properties interact with each other.

References
Aisenman, R. (1999). Structure-mapping and the similemetaphor preference. Metaphor and Symbol, 14(1), 45–
51.
Bowdle, B. and Gentner, D. (1999). Metaphor comprehension: From comparison to categorization. In Proceedings
of the 21st Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society, pp. 90–95.
Bowdle, B. and Gentner, D. (2005). The career of metaphor.
Psychological Review, 112(1), 193–216.
Chiappe, D. and Kennedy, J. (1999). Aptness predicts preference for metaphors or similes, as well as recall bias. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 6, 668–676.
Chiappe, D. and Kennedy, J. (2001). Literal bases for metaphor and simile. Metaphor and Symbol, 16(3&4), 249–
276.
Chiappe, D., Kennedy, J., and Chiappe, P. (2003). Aptness is
more important than comprehensibility in preference for
metaphors and similes. Poetics, 31(1), 51–68.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure mapping: A theoretical framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155–170.
Gentner, D., Bowdle, B., Wolff, P., and Boronat, C. (2001).
Metahor is like analogy. In Gentner, D., Holyoak, K., and
Kokinov, B. (Eds.), Analogical Mind: Perspectives from
Cognitive Science, pp. 199–253. MIT Press.
Gentner, D. and Bowdle, B. (2001). Convention, form, and
figurative language processing. Metaphor and Symbol,
16(3&4), 223–247.
Glucksberg, S. (2001). Understanding Figurative Language:
From Metaphors to Idioms. Oxford University Press.
Gokcesu, S. and Bowdle, B. (2003). Conventionality, similarity, and the metaphor/simile distinction. In Proceedings of
the 25th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society,
p. 1350.
Nakamoto, K. and Kusumi, T. (2004). The effect of repeated presentation and aptness of figurative comparisons
on preference for metaphor forms. In Proceedings of the
26th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, p.
1611.
Nueckles, M. and Janetzko, D. (1997). The role of semantic similarity in the comprehension of metaphor. In Proceedings of the 19th Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society, pp. 578–583.
Utsumi, A. (2005). The role of feature emergence in metaphor appreciation. Metaphor and Symbol, 20(3), in press.
Zharikov, S. and Gentner, D. (2002). Why do metaphors seem
deeper than similes?. In Proceedings of the 24th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, pp. 976–981.

2235

