UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Is There Any Difference Between the Spatial Response Code Elicited by Bilateral
Symmetrical Biological and Non-Biological Stimuli?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9n61s1dm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Bonfigliolo, Claudia
Iani, Cristina
Nicoletti, Roberto
et al.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Is There Any Difference Between the Spatial Response Code Elicited by Bilateral
Symmetrical Biological and Non-biological Stimuli?
Paola Ricciardelli (paola.ricciardelli@unitn.it)
Dept. of Cognitive Sciences and Education, University of Trento, Via Matteo del Ben, 5
38068 Rovereto (TN), Italy

Claudia Bonfiglioli (bonfiglioli@form.unitn.it)
Dept. of Cognitive Sciences and Education, University of Trento, Via Matteo del Ben, 5
38068 Rovereto (TN), Italy

Cristina Iani (iani.cristina@unimore.it)
Dept. of Social, Cognitive and Quantitative Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, via Giglioli Valle, 9
42100 Reggio Emilia, Italy

Sandro Rubichi (rubichi@unimo.it)
Dept. of Social, Cognitive and Quantitative Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, via Giglioli Valle, 9
42100 Reggio Emilia, Italy

Roberto Nicoletti (nicoletti@dsc.unibo.it)
Dept. of Communication Disciplines, University of Bologna, via Azzo Gardino, 23
40122 Bologna, Italy
Abstract
The aim of the present study was to investigate whether the
biological relevance of the stimulus could enhance taskirrelevant spatial information delivered by a pair of bilateral
stimuli. Participants had to perform a Simon-like task in which
they were required to respond to the color of two framed
squares (on and off-centered), two framed arrows, or two
schematic eyes by pressing one of two keys on the left and on
the right of the body midline. Results showed that regardless of
stimulus type responses towards the direction indicated by the
stimuli (corresponding stimulus-response pairings) were faster
than responses against it (non-corresponding stimulus-response
pairings). It is argued that the biological relevance of the stimuli
does not seem to play a crucial role in the automatic processing
of stimulus inherent spatial properties.

Introduction
Spatial directional stimuli have been shown to influence our
performance in a variety of tasks. In daily life, for example,
arrows are commonly used by humans to convey spatial
information and have acquired a symbolic and directional
meaning. Indeed, central arrows have been also employed as
cues to study the voluntarily orienting of visual-spatial
attention (e.g., Posner, 1980), suggesting that their spatial and
directional meaning can influences people’s attentional
behavior. Moreover, there is evidence that spatial information
is processed automatically and cannot be ignored even in
many situations for which it is irrelevant to the task to be
performed (e.g., Tsal &Lavie, 1993).
Spatial coding has been studied most extensively in the
Simon task where irrelevant spatial information is processed,
even though participants are clearly instructed to select the

response exclusively on the basis of the relevant, non-spatial
stimulus feature (i.e. color or shape) (Simon and Rudell 1967;
see Hommel & Prinz, 1997; Lu & Proctor 1995, for reviews).
In a typical Simon task stimuli appear in one of two right-left
locations and participants respond with right or left effectors.
Even if stimulus location is task-irrelevant, when stimulus
and response positions are on the same side (e.g., right-right
or left-left; i.e. corresponding pairings) performance is faster
and more accurate than when they are on opposite sides (e.g.,
stimulus on the right side and response on the left side, or
vice versa; i.e. non-corresponding pairings). Thus, in the
Simon task, the irrelevant spatial information is processed,
even though participants are clearly instructed to select the
response exclusively on the basis of the relevant, non-spatial
stimulus dimension.
Recent works have demonstrated that also symbolic
centrally presented stimuli such as an arrow can produce the
Simon effect (e.g., Masaki, Takasawa, & Yamazaki, 2000;
Proctor, Marble, & Vu, 2000).
Intriguingly, Simon effects have also been reported for
gaze direction (Zorzi, Mapelli, Rusconi, & Umiltà, 2003 ;
Ansorge, 2003b). Therefore, it seems that also spatial
information intrinsic to many different categories of visual
objects (e.g., central arrows and gaze) is automatically coded
and affects performance.
An interesting question is whether different stimulus types
convey different amounts of spatial information. For instance,
it may be the case that the spatial salience of certain stimuli
and objects is more pronounced by virtue of the symbolic or
biological meaning they convey, and thus exert a greater
influence on performance. Gaze direction can be one of these
stimuli given its biological and social value. Indeed, eye gaze

1845

has been referred to by several authors as a unique visual
stimulus (e.g., Ricciardelli, Baylis, & Driver, 2000; Ristic,
Friesen, & Kingstone, 2002; Kingstone, Tipper, Ristic, &
Ngan, 2004).
Recently, Ricciardelli, Bricolo, Aglioti, and Chelazzi
(2002) reported that irrelevant biological (averted eye gaze)
and irrelevant symbolic (a pair of pointing arrows) stimuli
presented bilaterally to a central fixation point influenced
oculomotor RTs. In an instructed saccadic eye movement
task, saccadic latencies were faster when the direction of the
instructed saccade corresponded to the direction of pointing
arrows compared to when the instructed saccade had the
opposite direction. Interestingly however, the biological and
symbolic distracters had different effects on the observers’
gaze-following behavior. That is, observers made a
substantial number of erroneous saccades matching the
direction of the distracting gaze. Crucially, such effect was
found only with the biological distracters suggesting that both
eye gaze and symbolic directional stimuli automatically
convey distracting spatial information which influence correct
saccadic response times, yet they have a different degree of
impact on the observers’ reflexive orienting behavior. This
difference is likely to be due to the biological relevance of
gaze direction.
Two previous studies have suggested that the automatic
spatial code elicited by schematic eye-gaze stimuli can be
specific in at least two ways. First, Zorzi et al. (2003) found
that the lateralized position of eye gaze stimulus is coded
independently from gaze direction coding thus suggesting
that spatial information from different eye gaze stimulus
features is processed by different mechanisms. Second,
Ansorge (2003b) showed that gaze direction coding is timeconsuming as the interference induced by processing gaze
direction increased with response speed, whereas spatial
interference stimulus position decreased over time (e.g.,
Hommel, 1993). However, none of these studies (Zorzi et al.,
2003; Ansorge, 2003b) has directly compared whether other
kinds of non-biological symbolic stimuli (such as arrows)
could produce the same spatial influence as previously shown
for eye gaze stimuli.
In the present study we directly compared in the same
experiment different types of stimuli (geometrical, symbolic
and schematic eyes) in order to test whether or not they
generate an automatic stimulus spatial code that influence the
lateralized spatial response code to the same extent. We
employed a Simon-like task in which participants had to
respond to the color of different bilateral symmetrical stimuli.
If the biological relevance of the stimulus does not play a role
in generating an automatic spatial code, then we expected that
non-biological and schematic eye stimuli elicited a similar
amount of spatial influence.
If the direction indicated by the stimuli influenced
participants’ response times, faster response times should be
expected for the corresponding than non-corresponding
stimuli.
Moreover, if the biological relevance of gaze direction has an
effect in modulating the amount of spatial interference in
response selection, then we should expect a different amount

of interference for gaze-like stimuli. On the contrary, if the
spatial information delivered by gaze direction is processed
independently of its biological relevance, then we expect to
find the same amount of interference for the all three types of
stimuli (i.e. geometrical, symbolic and gaze like-stimuli).

Method

1846

Three different types of stimuli (i.e. on and off-center framed
squares, framed pointing arrows and schematic eyes) were
presented bilaterally to a central fixation cross and were used
in a Simon-like task. The subjects had to respond to the color
of the stimuli (green or blue) by pressing the designated key
on the left or on the right of the body midline using the
corresponding hand. The direction indicated by the stimuli
could be corresponding, neutral, or non-corresponding in
relation to the color response key.
Stimuli appeared on a computer monitor and responses were
made by pressing either the “L” or “D” button on the
computer keyboard. One key was assigned to the left of the
body midline and the response was made by the left index
finger, while the other key was assigned to the right and the
response was made by the right index finger. Participants
were seated at about 60 cm from the computer monitor. The
experiment was divided into three different blocks of 120
trials each. Different types of stimuli were presented in each
block but within each block the kind of stimuli presented was
the same. The presentation order of the blocks was fixed and
was as follows: framed squares, gaze-like stimuli, and
pointing arrows. This sequence was chosen so that the sight
of the gaze-like stimuli would not induce the framed square
stimuli to look like eye gaze. Indeed, contextual top-down
effects have been shown in the interpretation of simple
stimuli (Bentin, Sagiv, Mecklinger, & Friederici, 2002).
Every block was preceded by a practice session of 12 trials in
which only the stimuli that would be presented in the
following block were shown.
Each trial began with the exposure of a black central fixation
cross on a white background (0.5 x 0.5 cm) lasting 450 ms.
After 50 ms from the central fixation offset the imperative
stimulus was presented centrally and lasted until response.
The stimuli presented in the first block (Fig. 1, top panel)
consisted of two colored filled squares (i.e. blue or green, 1 x
1 cm) each one surrounded by a squared frame (3 x 2.8 cm).
The overall stimulus configuration was presented in the
centre of the display and measured 7.2 x 2.8 cm. The filled
squares could be both located in the centre of the frame
(neutral condition), shifted leftwards, or rightwards. In the
second block the stimuli consisted of two elliptic frames of
exactly the same size as the squared frames. The size of the
colored targets (two inner circles resembling the iris) was
identical to that of the colored squares (Fig. 1, middle panel).
In addition, the size of the whole configuration was the same
as in the first block. In the third block the stimuli were the
same as in the first block but the off-centered filled squares
were replaced by filled arrows pointing either to the subject’s
left or to the right, whereas the centered filled squares were

replaced by a double pointing arrow (neutral condition) (Fig.
1, bottom panel).

corrected p <.01). The effect of the type of stimuli did not
reach significance, and the two factors did not interact
significantly.
All participants correctly recognized the stimuli. All of them
described the pointing arrows and freely reported the relative
right/left position of the squares within the central frames.
More importantly, they spontaneously referred to the circled
stimuli as eyes.
Intriguingly, the biological relevance of the stimulus did
not seem to affect the magnitude of the spatial
correspondence effect (i.e. the difference between noncorresponding and corresponding responses), as the perceived
gaze direction produced a similar amount of spatial
interference compared to that elicited by the non-biological
stimuli [F(4,56) = 1.2, MSe = 166.5, p = 0.3, n.s.] (see Table
1). Therefore, in that respect eye gaze does not seem to be a
special stimulus.
Table 1. Mean RTs (ms) C = corresponding, N = neutral, NC
= non-corresponding, SE = Simon effect (NC – C)
Stimuli
Squares
Gaze-like
Arrows

Figure 1: Example of stimuli (blue or green) used, here
reduced in size.

C
498
491
497

N
504
505
517

NC
523
515
528

SE
25
24
31

General discussion

Fifteen participants performed a color discrimination (i.e.
blue vs. green) task, ignoring any other aspects of the stimuli.
Eight participants were instructed to respond to the blue color
by pressing the right key (labeled “B”) and to the green color
(i.e. “Verde” in Italian) by pressing the left key (labeled “V”),
whereas the remaining ones received the opposite
instructions. The blue and green stimuli were evenly
distributed among all conditions within each block. At the
end of the experimental session all participants were asked to
describe and name the stimuli they had just seen to test
whether they had correctly recognized the stimuli.
Results
Errors were quite rare (3%) and were not analyzed. For each
subject the overall mean RTs and standard deviation for
correct responses were calculated. RTs that exceeded two
standard deviations from the overall mean were filtered out
from the data sample so to exclude delayed responses. Then,
mean RTs were calculated as a function of spatial
correspondence
(corresponding,
neutral
and
noncorresponding) and stimulus type and entered into a repeated
measures analysis of variance (ANOVA). There was a
significant main effect of spatial correspondence, [F(2,28) =
23.8, MSe = 346.5, p <.001]. Corresponding stimuli produced
significantly faster RTs than non-corresponding (495 ms vs.
522 ms respectively, t(14) = 5.6, p <.001 corrected for
multiple comparisons) and neutral stimuli (495 ms vs. 508
ms respectively, t(14) = -5.2, corrected p <.001), which in
turn were significantly faster than RTs for non-corresponding
stimuli (508 ms vs. 522 ms respectively, t(14) = -3.4,

Our findings consistently show that a Simon effect of similar
magnitude occurs with bilateral non-biological spatial cues
(i.e. on and off-center framed squares and pointing arrows) as
well as with biological ones (i.e. gaze direction). Faster
response times towards the direction indicated by the stimuli
(corresponding) rather than against it (non-corresponding)
were found despite the type of the stimuli used. As the
stimulus spatial feature was irrelevant to the task, the results
clearly indicate automatic response activation evoked by all
types of stimuli used. Interestingly, therefore, gaze-like
stimuli evoke an automatic spatial coding that is not different
from that produced by other directional stimuli.
The present results seem to be at odds with previous claims
which regarded gaze direction as a unique spatial cue, capable
also of automatically orienting the observer’s visual attention
(e.g., Friesen & Kingstone 1998; Driver et al., 1999). How
can the present findings be reconciled with previous work?
The fact that arrows, for example, exert a similar amount of
interference to that elicited by gaze direction is in agreement
with the increasing evidence that automatic attentional cueing
effects can be produced not only by gaze cues (e.g., Langton
& Bruce 1999; 2000) but also by other directional stimuli,
biologically relevant or not, such as arrows and words (e.g.,
Hommel et al., 2001; Tipples, 2002). Therefore, in this
respect the fact that arrow stimuli exert a similar effect to that
elicited by gaze-like stimuli is not contradictory.
Interestingly, so far the main difference between gaze
stimuli and arrows seems to rest solely on the cortical
mechanisms underlying the attentional shifts in response to

1847

gaze and arrow stimuli (Kingstone, Friesen, & Gazzaniga,
2000; Ristic et al., 2002). More precisely, it was shown that
both types of non-predictive gaze and arrow cues equally
triggered visual attention in adults. However, in a split-brain
patient non-predictive arrows produced orienting of attention
in both hemispheres (Ristic et al. 2002), whereas nonpredictive gaze cues produced reflexive orienting only in the
hemisphere specialized for face-processing (Kingstone et al.,
2000). These studies strongly indicate that although gaze and
arrow cues may produce similar behavioral effects, they are
sub-served by different brain systems.
A similar argument could be made to account for the fact
that not just arrow and gaze stimuli produced similar Simon
effects in the present study but so did geometrical stimuli (i.e.
off-centre framed squares). Kato, Matsuo, Matsuzawa,
Moriya et al. (2001) used bilaterally presented schematic
eyes, squares, and arrows as three symbolic pointers to study
cortical activation during endogenous orienting of visual
attention. They found different anatomical activations
depending on the type of stimuli. However, the authors did
not report any behavioral difference across the three cue
types. Different findings between squares and schematic eyes
were reported by Zorzi et al. (2003) who found the Simon
effect only for eye-like stimuli but not for geometrical square
stimuli which were used in a control experiment. However,
their control experiment showed a marginally significant
Simon effect for square stimuli which was primarily based on
the interference effect (i.e. the difference between noncorresponding and neutral responses), as has also been
suggested in the present study. Thus, the unique nature of a
“gaze direction Simon effect” seems to be still a matter of
debate. One plausible reason against the unique nature of a
“gaze direction Simon effect” can be advanced following
Ansorge (2003a), who showed that even when upright
alphanumeric stimuli are used, a Simon effect can be elicited
depending on their context-relative spatial code. Indeed, in
the present study the context-relative spatial position of the
bilaterally presented stimuli may, at least, explain the Simon
effect that emerged in response to both the gaze-like stimuli
and the colored squares. As the stimulus location can be
automatically coded with respect to multiple reference frames
(e.g., Lamberts, Tavernier, & D’Yedewalle, 1992), it is
plausible to argue that in some circumstances it is the contextrelative frame which is dominant in determining spatial
coding (for the role played by the context frame in the gaze
cueing effect see Bayliss, Di Pellegrino, & Tipper, 2004).
This could be especially true in the case of bilateral stimuli
in which the body midline can play only a marginal role as a
frame of reference. In this framework, our results can be
explained by considering that when the colored squares (or
circles) were off-centered to the left or to the right they may
have activated a left or right spatial code, respectively (see
Danziger, Kingstone, & Ward, 2001).
The crucial issue to address in future work is whether or
not the neural mechanisms involved in task-irrelevant spatial
information effects are the same depending on the stimulus
spatial characteristics (i.e. location, direction), or on its

biological relevance (i.e. biological stimuli, symbolic
pointers). Recently, an event-related fMRI study (Peterson,
Kane, Alexander, Lacadie et al., 2002) investigated how the
brain processes task-irrelevant information and resolves
competing task demand in two different conflict tasks (i.e. the
Simon and the Stroop tasks). Intriguingly, similar brain
activations and time courses were found across tasks
regardless of the differences in nature of the stimuli and the
responses used, thus suggesting that it is likely that the
systems giving rise to the behavioral interference are also
similar. Therefore, it might well be the case that a common
mechanism generates a spatial code from any directional
stimuli despite their biological relevance. This might also
imply that the spatial code could be extracted prior to the
information about the type of the stimuli. However, further
experiments are needed in which the degree of biological
relevance is varied more extensively than in the present study,
by employing, for example, more realistic gaze stimuli,
and/or dynamic face context.
In conclusion, we have brought behavioral evidence
indicating that different types of bilateral symmetrical stimuli
can automatically drive spatial coding despite their biological
relevance. Further investigation within this research domain
is needed to understand the relationship between the
processing of the spatial meaning of symbolic and biological
relevant stimuli and the functioning of the basic and cognitive
spatial mechanisms underlying their processing.

Acknowledgments
We thank Antonello Pellicano and Anna Borghi for their
contribution to the discussion of the data.

References

1848

Ansorge, U. (2003a). Influences of response-activating
stimuli and passage of time on the Simon effect.
Psychological Research/Psychologische Forschung, 67,
174-183.
Ansorge, U. (2003b). Spatial Simon effects and
compatibility effects induced by observed gaze direction.
Visual Cognition, 10, 363-383.
Bayliss, A.P., Di Pellegrino, G., & Tipper, S.P. (2004).
Orienting of attention via observed eye gaze is head
centred. Cognition, 94, B1-B10.
Bentin, S., Sagiv, N., Mecklinger, A., & Friederici, A.
(2002). Priming visual face-processing mechanisms.
Psychological Science, 13, 190-193.
Danziger, S., Kingstone, A., & Ward, R. (2001).
Environmentally defined frames of reference: Their time
course and sensitivity to spatial cues and attention.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 27, 494-503.
Driver, J., Davis, G., Ricciardelli, P., Kidd, P., Maxwell, E.,
& Baron-Cohen, S. (1999). Gaze perception triggers
reflexive visuospatial orienting. Visual Cognition, 6, 509540.

effect in a stimulus-response compatibility paradigm.
Psychophysiology, 37, 464-472.
Peterson, B.S., Kane M.J., Alexander, G.M., Lacadie, P.K.,
Leung, H.C., May J., & Gore, J.C. (2002). An event
related functional MRI comparing interference effects in
the Simon and Stroop task. Cognitive Brain Research, 13,
427-440.
Posner, M.I. (1980). Orienting of attention. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 32, 3-25.
Proctor, R.W., Marble, J.G., & Vu, K.P. (2000). Mixing
incompatible mapped location-relevant trials with
location-irrelevant trials: effects of stimulus mode on the
reverse Simon effect. Psychological Research, 64, 11-24.
Ricciardelli, P., Baylis, G., & Driver, J. (2000). The positive
and negative of human expertise in gaze perception.
Cognition, 77, B1-B14.
Ricciardelli, P., Bricolo, E., Aglioti, S.M., & Chelazzi, L.
(2002). My eyes want to look where your eyes are
looking: Exploring the tendency to imitate another
individual’s gaze. NeuroReport, 13, 2259-2263.
Ristic, J., Friesen, C., & Kingstone, A. (2002). Are eyes
special? It depends on how you look at it.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9, 507-513.
Simon J.R., & Rudell, A. P. (1967). Auditory S-R
compatibility: the effect of an irrelevant cue on information
processing. Journal of Applied Psychology, 51,
300-304.
Tipples, J. (2002). Eye gaze is not unique: Automatic
orienting in response to uninformative arrows.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9, 314-318.
Tsal, Y., & Lavie, N. (1993). Location dominance in
attending to color and shape. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 19,
131-139.
Zorzi, M., Mapelli, D., Rusconi, E., & Umiltà, C. (2003).
Automatic spatial coding of perceived gaze direction is
revealed by the Simon effect. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 10, 423-429.

Friesen, C.K., & Kingstone, A. (1998). The eyes have it!
Reflexive orienting is triggered by nonpredictive gaze.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 5, 490-495.
Hommel, B. (1993). The role of attention for the Simon
effect. Psychological Research/Psychologische
Forschung, 55, 208-222.
Hommel, B., Pratt, J., Colzato, L., & Godijn, R. (2001).
Symbolic control of visual attention. Psychological
Science, 12, 360-365.
Hommel, B., & Prinz, W. (Eds.) (1997). Theoretical issues
in stimulus response compatibility. Amsterdam: North
Holland.
Kato, C., Matsuo, K., Matsuzawa, M., Moriya, T., Glover,
G.H., & Nakai, T. (2001). Activation during endogenous
orienting of visual attention using symbolic pointers in the
human parietal and frontal cortices: a functional magnetic
resonance imaging study. Neuroscience Letters, 314, 5-8.
Kingstone, A., Friesen, C.K., & Gazzaniga, M.S. (2000).
Reflexive joint attention depends on lateralized cortical
connections. Psychological Science, 11, 159-166.
Kingstone, A., Tipper, C., Ristic, J., & Ngan, E. (2004). The
eyes have it!: An fMRI investigation. Brain and
Cognition, 55, 269 - 271.
Lamberts, K., Tavernier, G., & D’Ydewalle, G. (1992).
Effect of multiple reference points in spatial stimulus
response compatibility. Acta Psychologica, 79, 115-130.
Langton, S., & Bruce, V. (1999). Reflexive visual orienting
in response to the social attention of others. Visual
Cognition, 6, 541-567.
Langton, S.R.H., & Bruce, V. (2000). You must see the
point: Automatic processing of cues to the direction of
social attention. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 26, 747-757.
Lu, C.-H., & Proctor, R. W. (1995). The influence of
irrelevant location information on performance: A review
of the Simon and spatial Stroop effects. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 2, 174-207.
Masaki, H., Takasawa, N., & Yamazaki, K. (2000). An
electrophysiological study of the locus of the interference

1849

