UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Learning How to Write through Encouraging Metacognitive Monitoring: The Effect of
Evaluating Essays Written by Others

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0vs682g5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
Inuzuka, Miwa

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Learning How to Write through Encouraging Metacognitive Monitoring:
The Effect of Evaluating Essays written by Others
Miwa Inuzuka (miwainzk@aol.com)1
Graduate School of Education, University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo Bunkyo-ku
Tokyo 113-0033, Japan
Abstract
This study investigated how facilitating metacognitive
monitoring could improve the writing performance of students.
To this end, an intervention called Evaluating Activity (EA)
was developed, and its effect was investigated. In Study 1, EA
was implemented for 30 eighth-grade students. In EA, students
are told to read and rate sample essays. After evaluating an
essay, they are required to comment on the strengths and
weaknesses of the text. The analysis of the participants’
comments suggested that a variety of viewpoints was crucial for
improving their writing performance. In Study 2, 91 eighthgraders participated. To encourage the participants to consider a
variety of viewpoints, collaborative work was introduced. The
purpose of Study 2 was to investigate differences between three
conditions of EA: individual (I), collaborative (C), and
collaboration following individual work (I-C). The results
indicated that the writing performance of the participants
improved significantly under Condition I-C. In addition, the
advantage of a variety of viewpoints increased only in
Condition I-C.
Keywords: Metacognitive monitoring; writing skills;
Evaluating Activity; collaboration.

Introduction
How do people learn to write, and how can we improve
students’ writing skills? Based on the process model of
writing (Hayes & Flower, 1980), numerous interventions
have been developed and studied. In many of these studies,
the writing process was divided into components, and
strategies to manage those components were developed
(Bereiter, Scardamalia, & Steinbach, 1984; Galbraith &
Rijlaarsdam, 1999 as a review). Most of these interventions
were designed to teach participants strategies for planning
(Kellogg, 1988) or revising the essay (Zimmerman &
Kitsantas, 1999). These studies showed that such strategies
enhanced students’ writing skills (Sawyer, Graham, & Harris,
1992). In addition, the process model of writing itself
suggests that a writer’s metacognition plays an important role
throughout the writing process (Flower & Hayes, 1980).
Metacognition has been defined as having two different
components: metacognitive activity and metacognitive
knowledge. In this study, we concentrate on metacognitive
activity in the writing process. Metacognitive activity is
composed of two different processes: monitoring and control.
Monitoring is the process through which people judges
discrepancies between the present state and the goal state
1

The author is now at Japan Society for the Promotion of Science /
Saitama Institute of Technology. 1690 Fusaiji Oaza Okabe-cho
Osato-gun Saitama 369-0293, Japan
1018

(Nelson & Narens, 1990). On the other hand, control process
involves with the implementation of the strategies.
Regarding the relationship between writing process and
the two aspects of metacognitive activity, several studies have
pointed to the role of metacognitive control. For example,
Breetvelt, Van Den Bergh, & Rijlaarsdam (1994) revealed the
metacognitive control affects writing process by indicating
that the time at which a writer engaged in a particular process,
and what they did, were related to the quality of writing. In
order to employ appropriate strategies at appropriate timing, it
is necessary for the writer to correctly recognize his/her goal
and present state. Surprisingly, however, only few studies
have investigated the effect of metacognitive monitoring on
essay writing. Therefore, in this study, we investigated how
we could encourage metacognitive monitoring, and its effect
on writing performance.
There were two reasons behind our focus on
metacognitive monitoring. (1) Since previous research on
learning strategies had suggested that monitoring ability
affects the choice of strategy and performance (Thiede &
Dunlosky, 1999; Thiede, Anderson, & Therriault, 2003), it
seemed important to investigate the role of monitoring in
relation to the writing process. (2) Although researchers have
already advocated the importance of monitoring, students do
not get enough instruction in schools in this regard.
To encourage students to enhance their monitoring skills,
we developed an intervention called Evaluating Activity (EA),
which we introduce here. In this intervention, students first
read essays with the explicit aim of learning the principles
that are essential for writing a good essay. Participants read
essays that another person has written, and rate them on a 5point scale (1-very poor to 5-excellent). Then, the participants
comment on why they rated the essay as they did, and suggest
ways to improve the essay.
EA was designed so that students can adopt an objective
point of view, by separating the judging activity from the
writing process. It is difficult to monitor one’s own essay
while writing it, because the writer needs to involve two
different cognitive levels when writing. Separating the two
levels makes it easier for the participants to conduct
monitoring activity. We included a comment-making activity,
so that the participants could look back on their activity. This
was aimed at helping the participants to clarify their
monitoring activity. In addition, the comments allowed us to
perceive their views on their monitoring. In addition, we

provided participants with essays written by strangers, in
order to help the participants examine essays critically.
Furthermore, we included a suggestion making activity, as a
bridge between the monitoring and the control activity.
Since the activity is based on the students’ evaluation,
and no other training takes place, the intervention introduced
here is called Evaluating Activity (EA).
In subsequent studies, we investigated whether EA
improves students’ writing performance. In order to
investigate how the participants evaluated or monitored the
essays, we analyzed the participants’ comments.

Study 1
Study 1 investigated the effectiveness of the evaluating
activities.

Method
Participants: Thirty eighth-grade students participated in the
study. All the participants were public school students, who
participated in the study during classes for a summer course
held at the University of Tokyo, in which they had
independently enrolled.
Materials All the sample essays presented to the participants
were chosen from a reference book on essay writing. Students
had originally written the essays; therefore, not written
skillfully. Some of the essays contained grammatical mistakes
and were not sufficiently organized. These essays were
chosen for the following reasons: (1) the participants would
regard the presented essays as imperfect models that could be
improved upon, and (2) as the author was anonymous, it
reassured the students that their own writing would not be
subjected to the EA.
Procedures Before the EA took place, the participants were
first instructed to write an essay on one of two topics: “In
your opinion, which one of the following offers the better
mode of transportation, cars or trains?” or “In your opinion,
which of the following offers the better way to obtain
information, TV or newspapers?” The essays were to be
analyzed as the pre-test. The topic was counterbalanced
among participants. Subsequently, the EA took place. It was
conducted as a four-day session. In each session, the students
were given a sample essay and instructed to evaluate it. The
same set of essays was given to all of the participants.
Approximately 25 minutes were allotted for the entire activity.
A worksheet was prepared for the EA. Using the worksheets,
the participants (1) rated the essay, (2) commented on the
essay and described its strengths and weaknesses, and (3)
suggested ideas for improvement. At the beginning and end
of each class, the instructor reminded the participants of the
aim of the activity: The activity was conducted so that the
participants would learn important viewpoints involved in
monitoring on writing, as well as the ability to apply these
viewpoints in monitoring when writing their own essay.
However, the instructor did not provide them with feedback
on their comments. At the end of the four-day session, the

participants were instructed to write an essay on the other pretest essay topic.

Results and Discussion
Performance in the Pre-test and Post-test
The data for
28 participants, who participated in all of the sessions, were
analyzed. All the essays were typed, and misspelling and
grammatical mistakes were corrected. Then, the author and
three graduate students rated the essays independently. All the
raters rated the essays on a 5-point Likert-type scale from 1
(not at all) to 5 (highly). The essay was rated on the
following: (1) readability, (2) persuasiveness, and (3)
coherence. The mean scores for each were calculated across
raters. Then, the scores were summed, giving a maximum
score of 15 for an essay.
The mean pre-test score was 10.17 (SD=1.95) and the
mean post-test score was 10.06 (SD=1.31). The scores were
analyzed using within-subject analysis of variance and did not
differ significantly (F<1).
Although there was no significant difference between
the pre-test and post-test scores, we found that half of the
participants (N=14) had improved their writing performance,
while the performance of the other half had deteriorated.
Furthermore, a change exceeding one standard deviation was
observed for 11 participants.
Participants’ Comments
Then, we investigated the
viewpoints of the participants. To this end, the comments
made during the last session were analyzed to discover
differences between the improved and deteriorated groups.
The comments of the participants whose performance had
changed more than one SD were selected. An examination of
each participant’s performance change revealed that five
participants improved by more than 1 SD, while six
deteriorated by more than 1 SD. The author and one graduate
student, who did not know the condition of the participants,
analyzed the comments. First, we chose keywords in the
comments (e.g., “The essay was hard to understand because
he changed the topic in the middle, but it was good that he

1019

Table 1. Categories and examples of the participants’
comments.
Categories

Examples of comments
(The author) changed the topic in the
Coherence
middle (of the essay)
Construction of (The
author)
made
paragraphs
the essay
appropriately
(The author) described his or her own
Conclusion
opinions
ReaderThe essay was difficult to understand
friendliness
(The author) mixed formal and casual
Language usage lines in the same essay
Content of the I do not think the author’s claim is
essay
correct.

Table 2. Number of participants’ comments on the example
essay. (% of all comments)
Coherence
Construction of the essay
Conclusion
Reader-friendliness
Linguistic usage
Content of the essay

Improved
2 (6 %)
6 (18 %)
6 (18%)
2 (6 %)
9 (26 %)
8 (24 %)

expected that this change would help the participants to
develop more variety in their viewpoints of monitoring. In
addition, we introduced a collaborative activity to the EA.
Cognitive science studies on collaborative learning have
shown that collaboration facilitates problem-solving (Miyake,
1986; Okada & Simon, 1997; Kiyokawa, Okada, & Ueda,
2002), learning the correct concepts (Schwarz, Neuman, &
Bieauner, 2000), and achieving diversity with respect to
viewpoints (Shirouzu, Miyake, & Masukawa, 2002). Based
on these previous researches, we hypothesized that discussing
the essay would lead participants to think collaboratively and
thus facilitate the achievement of diverse viewpoints of
metacognitive monitoring.
The studies mentioned above have reported the positive
effects of collaboration on problem-solving; nevertheless,
some studies have reported a negative effect of working in
groups, namely groupthink (Janis, 1972; Turner & Pratkanis,
1998). Groupthink is a phenomenon that occurs in group
decision making. When a group of people are required making

Deteriorated
1 (2 %)
3 (7 %)
7 (17%)
0 (0 %)
9 (21 %)
22 (52 %)

described his own opinions.”). Then, we divided the
comments that had more than two keywords so that each
comment contained one keyword (e.g., “The essay was hard
to understand”, “(The author) changed the topic in the middle
(of the essay)”, and “He (the author) described his own
opinions”). According to the keywords, the participants’
comments were divided into six categories: (1) coherence, (2)
construction of the essay, (3) drawing his/her own conclusion,
(4) how easy the essay was to understand, (5) grammatical
mistakes and phrasing, and (6) comments on the essay
content (Table 1). All of these comments were categorized
separately by the author and the graduate student, who did not
know the participants’ condition. Then, the comments were
judged by another graduate student, who did not know the
participants’ condition. Table 1 suggested that the participants
whose performance was improved made more various
comments. The comparison of the mean number of comment
categories between two groups confirmed the impression
revealing that the participants in improved group made larger
number of comment categories than the participants in
deteriorated group did (p<.10).
The results showed that the effect of the EA did not reach
significance, and that its impact differed widely across
participants. These results suggested that the process that was
followed during the activity differed across participants. The
investigation of the participants’ comments suggested that the
participants with more varied viewpoints improved their own
writing performance. Conversely, the writing performance of
the participants who had biased viewpoints, and who focused
on specific content, deteriorated. These results suggested that
the EA was effective when participants generate diverse
viewpoints. Therefore, a variety of viewpoints of monitoring
would be a key to improving their writing performance. The
results implied that in order to improve the participants’
performance, it is important to produce a situation that
encourages the participants to learn diverse viewpoints.

some decision, some negative effects of collaboration emerge:
the group examines few alternatives, and become uncritical of
other's ideas. Participants might regard group activity in EA as
decision making task, because it requires the participants to state
the group’s ideas. If this is the case, the collaborative activity in
EA ends up with limited viewpoints. To encourage

participants’ viewpoints during monitoring to become more
diverse through discussion, it is necessary to avoid the
negative effects of groupthink.
For this purpose, a condition that required the participants
to work as individuals, before participating in the group
discussion, was introduced. Having prepared the presentation
of one’s own ideas, participants were able to examine each
member’s ideas. For this reason, the individual work would
help the participants discuss broader ideas, and thereby, the
possibility of opposite opinion would increase. Therefore, we
hypothesized that negative effects of groupthink would not
occur with an individual work condition, and that the students
would succeed in achieving the various viewpoints.
Conversely, when lacking an opportunity to prepare their own
ideas, the participants’ ideas would be limited. In this case,
the viewpoints of participants in the collaboration-only
condition would be likely to become more and more biased,
and they would fail to achieve a variety of viewpoints.

Method

Study 2

Participants The participants in this study were 91 eighthgrade students. All the participants were students at public
schools. They participated in the study during classes for a
summer course, held at the University of Tokyo, in which
they had enrolled independently. The participants were
randomly assigned to three experimental conditions described
below.

From the results of Study 1, we hypothesized that if the
participants succeeded in perceiving a variety of viewpoints
during metacognitive monitoring, then their writing
performance would improve. Study 2 was aimed at
encouraging participants to achieve more diversity in their
viewpoints of monitoring, and investigating its effects.
To this end, we revised the original EA and added time for
listening to other peoples’ ideas, with the instruction that
participants should learn from other people’s ideas. We

Materials
All the sample essays were the same as those
used in Study 1.

1020

Procedures The procedure followed was the same as that
for Study 1, except that the participants were divided into

three conditions. In the collaboration condition (Condition C),
the participants worked in groups of three. They rated and
described the sample essay’s strengths and weaknesses, and
suggested ideas for improving it through discussion. In the
individual condition (Condition I), the participants engaged in
the same EA as in Study 1, except for the instruction that
directed them to learn from others’ ideas. In the individualcollaboration condition (Condition I-C), the participants first
rated the sample essay and described its strengths and
weaknesses. Then, they formed a group of three and
discussed each group member’s ideas, and suggested
possibilities for improvement. Although the activity styles
differed, the amount of time they spent on the EA was
approximately the same (25 min.). Another change from
Study 1 was in the pre-test/post-test writing topics (“In your
opinion, which of the following is the better mode of
transportation, car or train?” or “Some people argue that
‘language pollution’ is a serious problem among young
people. What do you think about this claim?”). The topics for
the pre-test/post-test were changed because the topics used in
Study 1 were too similar. The writing topics were
counterbalanced among participants.

Results and Discussion
In the following, the significance level was p<.05 unless
otherwise mentioned. The data for the participants who
participated in all of the sessions were analyzed.
Performance in the pre-test and post-test: The scoring
procedures were essentially the same as in Study 1. Only the
items rated were changed, to make the rating more sensitive
and reliable. In addition to rating the impression of
persuasiveness, we rated the strength of the argument, the
extent to which an appropriate basis for the conclusion had
been provided, and the clarity of the conclusion. Since the
above-mentioned items relate to the coherence of the essay,
we did not rate coherence this time. Instead, we rated the
structure of the essays and whether the essay had appropriate
paragraphs. Consequently, the pre-test and post-test essays
were scored on the following factors: (1) readability, (2)
35

persuasiveness, (3)strong argument, (4) appropriate basis for
conclusion, (5) strong conclusion, and (6) appropriate
paragraphs.
Since the scores were correlated with each other (α=.86), a
total of the six scores was used in the subsequent analysis. For
the participants in Conditions C and I-C, the average scores of
each group were analyzed. Therefore, the number of data in
Conditions C, I-C, and I were 7, 8, and 18, respectively. The
mean scores for each condition were as follows: the
respective mean pre-test and post-test scores were 21.58
(SD=6.04) and 19.37 (SD=6.14) in Condition I, 21.61
(SD=3.98) and 21.00 (SD=4.94) in Condition C, and 21.37
(SD=4.95) and 24.98 (SD=4.32) in Condition I-C (Figure 1).
A General Linear Model (GLM) procedure was conducted,
with the condition and pre-test scores as the independent
values, and the post-test scores as the dependent value. The
results of the GLM revealed that the main effect of pre-test
and condition was significant (F(1,28)=7.58, F(2,28)=3.79,
respectively). The other effects did not reach significance.
The subsequent multiple comparison revealed that the posttest performance of the participants in Condition I-C was
significantly better than that of the participants in Condition I.
Table 3 shows the change in the participants’ scores. The
participants/groups whose scores improved by more than 1
SD
were
considered
“Improved”,
while
the
participants/groups whose scores deteriorated by more than 1
SD were considered “Deteriorated”, and the other
participants/groups were considered “Unchanged”. The
scores of the participants in Conditions C and I changed, just
like they did for the participants in Study 1. The results of
Condition I replicated Study 1. In addition, the results of
Condition C showed a tendency similar to that of Study 1.
However, a different tendency was found in the results of
Condition I-C, in which most of the groups showed improved
writing performance and only one group in Condition I-C
showed deterioration.
Participants’ Comments The participants’ comments were
divided into six categories, as in Study 1. The coding
procedures were the same as in Study 1. Note that the
comments mentioned below were made after the discussion in
Conditions C and I-C. By contrast, those of Condition I were
made before listening to others’ ideas.

30
25

Table 3. Number of participants/groups distributed
according to the change in scores

20

pretest
posttest

15

Condition

Improved

Unchanged

Deteriorated

10

I

9

0

9

5

C

3

1

3

I-C

7

0

1

0
I

C

I-C

Figure 1. Pre-test and Post-test performance in each
condition. I: individual condition, C: collaboration
condition, and I-C: collaboration-individual condition.

Note: The numbers for Conditions C and I-C are the
numbers of groups. The numbers for Condition I are the
number of participants.
1021

Table 4. Number of participants’ comments (% of all comments made at the session)
I-C Condition (N= 8 groups)
Session 1
Coherency
Construction of the essay

C Condition (N= 7 groups)

Session 4

Session 1

Session 4
+

4 (14.3%)**

1 (4.5%)

4 (8.70%)

2 (7.1%)

1 (4.5%)

10 (21.74%)
+

I Condition (N= 18 participants)
Session 1

Session 4

0 (0.0%)

0 (0.0%)

0 (0.0%)+

4 (19.05%)

6 (15.0%)

8 (15.4%)

Own conclusion

7 (25.0%)

7 (31.8%)

5 (10.87%)

2 (9.52%)

9 (22.5%)

12 (23.1%)

Reader friendliness

8 (28.6%)

5 (22.7%)

4 (8.70%)*

4 (19.05%)

6 (15.0%)

15 (28.8%)+

Linguistic usage

1 ( 3.6%)+

2 (9.1%)

8 (17.39%)

10 (47.62%)**

3 (7.5%)

9 (17.3%)

Contents of the essay

6 (21.4%)

6 (27.3%)

15 (32.61%)

1 (4.76%)*

16 (40.0%)*

8 (15.4%) +

Total number of comments

28

22

46

21

40

52

Mean number of comments

3.50

2.75

6.57

3.00

2.22

2.88

Mean number of categories of
comments

2.50

2.63

3.29

1.86

1.89

2.56

+: p<.10, *: p<.05, **: p<.01
Omnibus results First, we analyzed the comments made
through all the four sessions. The mean total number of
comments made by one group or one participant was
calculated. In Condition C, it was 16.29 (SD=2.50). This
indicated that in Condition C, one group made about 16
comments in the four EA sessions. By contrast, the mean total
number of comments in Condition I-C was 11.88 (SD=3.48)
and it was 10.06 (SD=3.455) in Condition I. A betweensubject factor analysis of variance (ANOVA) was conducted
and the result was significant (F(2,30)=9.02). The following
multiple comparisons revealed that the differences between
Conditions C and I-C and between Conditions C and I were
significant. The participants in Condition C made
significantly more comments than did those in the other two
conditions.
However, when we compared the variety of the comments,
we found that the opposite was the case. We counted the total
number of categories of comments the participants mentioned
at least once throughout the four sessions. In Condition I-C,
the number of categories was 4.75 (SD=0.89), whereas it was
3.57 (SD=0.79) in Condition C. In Condition I, it was 4.11
(SD=0.96). The result of ANOVA was marginally significant
(F(2,30)=3.15, p=.06) and the difference between Conditions
C and I-C was significant (p<.05). When comparing
Conditions C and I-C, the data supported our prediction.
However, it was not clear what caused the performance to
differ in Condition I-C and not in Condition I.
Comments made in Session 1 and 4
To examine the
difference between the conditions more precisely, we
investigated the comments made in the first (Session 1) and
last (Session 4) sessions (Table 4). First, we compared the
mean numbers of comments made in the first and last
sessions. We conducted a 2×3 ANOVA with session and

condition as the between subject factors. The results revealed
that the interaction effect reached significance
(F(2,30)=24.70). A significant effect of session was found
only in Condition C, in which the participants reduced the
number of comments significantly. Moreover, ANOVA on
the mean number of categories of comments showed that the
interaction effect was significant (F(2,30)=12.36). The
significant effect of session was found only in Condition C,
showing that the participants produced less varied viewpoints
in the last session than in the first session. By contrast, the
effect of session was marginally significant in Condition I
(p=.09). The participants in Condition I generated more
diversity in viewpoint in the last session than in the first.
Following this, a 6×6 chi-square test was conducted. The
results reached significance (χ2(25)=58.60). The results of the
residual analysis (Table 4) revealed that, in the first session,
participants showed some bias in each condition, generating
more or fewer comments for particular categories than
expected. In the last session however, significant bias was
seen only in Condition C. In addition, only marginally
significant results were obtained in Condition I (p<.10).
In summary, the analysis of writing performance showed
that only the participants in Condition I-C improved.
However, the analysis of the comments revealed that the
Conditions I and I-C did not differ. There were no significant
differences between the two conditions regarding the variety
and number of categories. The participants in both conditions
made more varied comments than did those in Condition C.
In addition, the participants in Condition I showed
improvement with respect to developing diversity in their
viewpoints through EA. Although the results of Conditions C
and I-C supported our hypothesis, this cannot explain the
results for Condition I.

1022

General Discussion
This study investigated whether students’ writing improved
through an intervention designed to facilitate their monitoring
activity. It was found that the participants developed more
variety in their viewpoints of monitoring, and improved their
writing performance through EA only when they worked in
collaboration after working individually. The participants in
Condition C showed more bias in their viewpoints, which
hindered their improvement in writing. The results suggest
that collaboration helps students enhance their viewpoints, but
it is also necessary to provide them with the opportunity to
prepare and clarify their own ideas individually.
Conversely, it was not clear why Individual EA, with
instructions to learn from others’ ideas, did not improve
participants’ writing performance. The participants achieved
varied viewpoints, but their performance was not improved.
We speculated that there was a difference in how they learned
about the viewpoints of others. In Condition I-C, the
participants needed to be involved in the formulation of
viewpoints, whereas the participants in Condition I simply
listened to the products of the other participants. Involvement
in the formulation process appears to be important for putting
the learnt viewpoints into practical use in writing. A more
detailed analysis of the participants’ learning process would
be necessary in order to clarify the factors that contribute to
the effects of the EA. Moreover, we need to look at how the
participants’ writing processes changed. As mentioned above,
how the participants put the learnt viewpoints into actual
writing situations differed. Although the change in
participants was analyzed through the change in their
comments, it would also be important to investigate the
process of the participants on-line.
Note that the EA takes relatively little time and can be
administered without much instructor scaffolding. Although
our study did not compare EA with other teaching methods,
the results indicate that this intervention functioned to
improve students’ writing performance, through encouraging
their metacognitive monitoring. However, this does not mean
that the EA should be implemented alone. The EA constitutes
one possible intervention for improving student writing. It is
well known that the essay-writing process is strongly affected
by the context of writing, and expert scaffolding is effective
(Galbraith & Rijlaarsdam, 1999). EA with an authentic
context and scaffolding might lead to greater improvements
in student writing. In addition, strategy teaching should be
combined with the EA. Our study showed that the EA would
work without these other techniques, but we do not deny the
possibility of it being a better intervention when used with
other teaching methods.

References
Bereiter, C., Scardamalia, M., & Steinbach, R. (1984).
Teachability of reflective processes in written composition.
Cognitive Science, 8, 173-190
Breetvelt, I., Van Den Bergh, H., & Rijlaarsdam, G. (1994).
Relations between writing processes and text quality: When
and how? Cognition and Instruction, 12, 103-123.

Flower, L.S., & Hayes, J.R. (1980). The dynamics of
composing: Making plans and juggling constraints. In L. W.
Gregg and E. R. Steinberg (Eds.), Cognitive Processes in
Writing, (pp 31-50). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Galbraith, D., & Rijlaarsdam, G. (1999). Effective strategies
for the teaching and learning of writing. Learning and
Instruction, 9, 93-108.
Hayes, J.R., & Flower, L.S. (1980). Identifying the
organization of writing processes. In L. W. Gregg and E. R.
Steinberg (Eds.), Cognitive Processes in Writing, (pp 3-30).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Janis, I. (1972). Victims of groupthink. Boston: Houghton
Mifflin.
Kellogg, R., T. (1988). Attentional overload: Effects of rough
draft and outline strategies. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 14, 355365.
Kiyokawa, S., Okada, T., & Ueda, K, (2002). The effect of
metacognitive suggestions on viewpoint change in
collaborative problem solving. Proceedings of the 4th
International Conference on Cognitive Science. [On CDROM].
Miyake, N. (1986). Constructive interaction and the iterative
process of understanding. Cognitive Science, 10, 151-177.
Nelson, T. O. & Narens, L. (1990). Metamemory: A
theoretical framework and new findings. In G. H. Bower
(Ed.), The Psychology of Learning and Motivation (Vol. 26,
pp 125-141). New York: Academic Press.
Okada, T. & Simon, H.A. (1997). Collaborative discovery in
a scientific domain. Cognitive Science, 21, 109-146.
Sawyer, R.J., Graham, S., & Harris, K.R. (1992). Direct
teaching, strategy instruction, and strategy instruction with
explicit self regulation: Effects on the composition skills
and self efficacy of students with learning disabilities.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 84, 340-352.
Schwarz, B. B., Neuman, Y., & Bieauner, S. (2000). Two
wrongs may make a right… If they argue together!
Cognition and Instruction, 18, 461-494.
Shirouzu, H., Miyake, N., & Masukawa, H (2002). Cognitive
active externalization for situated reflection. Cognitive
Science, 26, 469-501.
Thiede, K. W., Anderson, M. C. M., & Therriault, D. (2003).
Accuracy of metacognitive monitoring affects learning of
text. Journal of Educational Psychology, 65, 66-73.
Thiede, K. W., & Dunlosky, J. (1999). Toward a general
model of self-regulated study: An analysis of selection of
items for study and self-paced study time. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 25, 1024-1037.
Turner, M. E., & Pratkanis, A. R. (1998). Twenty-five years
of groupthink theory and research: Lessons from the
evaluation of a theory. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 73,105-115.
Zimmerman, B.J., & Kitsantas, A. (1999). Acquiring writing
revision skill: Shifting from Process to Outcome selfregulatory goals. Journal of Educational Psychology, 91,
241-250.

1023

