UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Linking Cognitive Science to Education: Generation and Interleaving Effects

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/56w8q3z9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Bjork, Robert A.
Finley, Jason R.
Linn, Marcia C.
et al.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Linking Cognitive Science to Education: Generation and Interleaving Effects
Lindsey E. Richland (Lengle@psych.ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology, UCLA
Los Angeles, CA 90095

Robert A. Bjork (RABjork@Psych.ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology, UCLA
Los Angeles, CA 90095

Jason R. Finley (JFinley@ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology, UCLA
Los Angeles, CA 90095
Marcia C. Linn (MCLinn@ucberkeley.edu)
Department of Education in Mathematics, Science, and Technology, UC Berkeley
4611 Tolman Hall
Berkeley, CA, 94720-1670
Abstract
Performance during a learning event is frequently used as a
measure of learning; however, basic cognitive research suggests
that this may be an unreliable predictor of long-term learning
and transfer. Rather, in some training paradigms, higher error
rates during training may predict greater retention and
generalization of learning. One such paradigm is training in
which learners generate, rather than read, during study
opportunities. A second is training in which study for two sets
of information is interleaved rather than grouped into separate
blocks. Educationally relevant learning requires retention and
the capacity to generalize information across contexts, leading
to the hypothesis that these paradigms may have important
implications for educational practice. An experiment is
described in which the effects of generation and interleaving are
examined using complex, educationally-relevant materials.
Findings indicate that these effects are relevant for instructional
design, but that there is not a straightforward relationship
between laboratory research with simple materials and
educational practice. Rather, the educational goal must be
considered when determining the utility of generation and
interleaving principles in designing instructional technology.

A large body of research on cognition exists in which
simple materials have been used to understand the
mechanisms underlying learning, retention, and transfer. Such
research has led to rich understanding of principles that guide
learning in laboratory contexts, but less is known about how
these principles generalize to learning of the more complex
content typically acquired in educational contexts.
This paper describes a study that links laboratory research
on learning with educational practice. In particular, this study
explores “desirable difficulty” (Bjork, 1994, 1999) findings
that have been well studied in laboratory contexts and that
may have important, albeit unintuitive, implications for
educationally-relevant learning.
A common strategy for optimizing student learning in
classroom contexts is the manipulation of study conditions to
increase students’ ease of comprehension and to improve

students’ performance on assessments embedded into the
learning task. This is a strategy based on the assumption that
performance during learning is a reliable index of knowledge
and will predict learning and memory for the material over
time. This assumption is made regularly by instructors as well
as by learners themselves. Children and adults examine their
own performance as a metacognitive strategy when making
predictions about their own learning and retention over time
(Benjamin & Bjork, 1996; Koriat & Bjork, in press) and
when determining how to structure study time or when
making decisions about how to optimize learning events
(Son, under review).
While the relationship between performance and learning is
regularly invoked in both educational practice and research
on learning, other cognitive research indicates that this
assumption may be misleading. A growing body of laboratory
research indicates that increasing the difficulty of a learning
activity in systematic ways may impair learners’ performance
during initial knowledge acquisition but improve learning and
retention for this learning over time. Several specific
principles have been identified and defined as “desirable
difficulties” (Bjork, 1994, 1999). Desirable difficulties are
specific types of manipulations of the learning context that
increase learners’ errors during learning and slow initial
acquisition of materials but lead to increased memory for the
relevant information over time.

Generation
Generation is an instructional strategy that impairs initial
knowledge acquisition and slows learning but leads to
increased likelihood of retention for learned information. The
principle of generation describes the reliable phenomenon
that having learners generate components of a learned
stimulus produces better learning and retention that having
learners read or re-read study materials. For example,
Hirshman & Bjork (1988) found that requiring a learner to
generate letters within the second word in a pair such as

1850

bread: bu_tt_ _ results in greater retention for the word pair:
“bread: butter” than does study in which the learner reads:
bread: butter. After a five minute delay, participants in the
read condition recalled 13% of word pairs in a free recall
paradigm, which participants in the generate condition
recalled 41%. This striking difference is particularly
interesting because the generation tasks are so minimal in this
type of a paradigm.
The effects of generation on retention and recall have been
well studied and are robust for simple materials such as word
pairs. However, the effects of generation on transfer and
generalization of learning are not well understood.

instructional materials might impair performance during
learning but improve performance at a delay.

Platform: Web-Integrated Science Enrichment
(WISE)
The current study explores the generation and interleaving
effects using educationally-relevant science materials and an
educational software platform used frequently in US
classroom contexts. Specifically, an educational module was
developed to teach astronomy materials using the WebIntegrated Science Enrichment (WISE) platform developed
and maintained by Marcia Linn and colleagues
(http://wise.berkeley.edu). This unique software enables
researchers to design and modify science educational
curriculum in order to systematically manipulate the order
and structure of the materials. Further, the platform is highly
approachable and is used successfully in thousands of middle
and high school classrooms across the United States. Thus
studies using the WISE platform can be systematically
controlled, yet they are educationally relevant since very
similar modules are regularly in use within educational
practice. Explorations of interleaving and generation effects
using WISE software therefore provide data that is more
generalizeable to realistic classroom learning contexts than
experiments using simple materials and abstract computer
tasks or paper and pencil activities.
As shown in Figure 1, WISE is designed as a set of content
pages that are navigated by the learner. The learner scrolls
through pages by following the arrows on the left side of the
screen. WISE contains many alternative forms of pages,
including information pages, as in Figure 1, drawing
activities, pages with links to other online materials, and
pages in which the learner has an opportunity to study the
material they have read about (see Figure 2).

Interleaving
Interleaving is a second principle for designing learning
contexts in which learning is made more difficult during
instruction, but retention and transfer are higher after a delay.
Interleaving describes the method of structuring acquisition of
two or more learning sets such that instruction alternates
between the sets. This is in contrast to blocked instruction, in
which learning for each set would be conducted separately.
For instance they might complete instruction for one set
before moving to the next set for instruction. A learner who is
interleaving his/her learning would switch randomly between
two sets of information during initial acquisition. The most
typical strategy for teaching two sets of similar information
(A,B) would be to serially teach set A and then set B. By
contrast, interleaving these materials would mean to
randomly switch between teaching parts of A and parts of B.
So for instance a learning sequence might be:
A1B1B2A2A3B3A4B4B5A5. Interleaving has been shown
to be more effective for producing learning than blocking or
massing learning (A1A2A3A4A5B1B2B3B4B5) on many
diverse sets of stimuli including word pairs (Battig, 1979),
motor patterns (Shea & Morgan, 1979), and word translations
(Richland, Bjork & Finley, 2004).
In a training study, for example, (reference) manipulated
training practice schedules for children learning to toss a bean
bag into a target location from varying distances. Some
children received training in blocks such that they that
practiced multiple times from one distance in each block.
Other children randomly practiced throwing from varying
distances within each block of practice trials. During learning,
mean performance for children in the blocked training
performed was higher than mean performance for children in
the randomized training condition. However, the opposite
was true on a final test. After a delay, children were tested on
a distance that was practiced by the blocked training group
but that was not practiced by the random training group.
Interestingly, children in the random training group
performed higher overall than the children in the blocked
training group – in spite of the fact that those in the blocked
training group had practiced on the distance that was tested.
These findings suggest important implications for
organizing instruction in more educational settings,
potentially indicating that randomly interleaving related

Figure 1. Sample WISE screen.
In the current study, the information pages and the study
pages were manipulated to investigate whether generation
and interleaving effects generalize from laboratory research

1851

with simple materials to more complex learning with science
educational content.

Figure 2. Sample generate condition study page.

Experiment
This experiment was designed to examine whether
generation and interleaving effects identified in laboratory
research as two principles of desirable difficulty would
generalize to educationally-relevant materials. We
hypothesized that generation during study would produce
increased retention when compared with re-reading during
study. Interleaving was hypothesized to produce more
knowledge integration and flexible learning than blocking
learning, resulting in increased transfer.

Methods
Participants
Undergraduates from the University of California, Los
Angeles participated in this experiment for course credit. Data
from 96 participants was used in the reported analyses. All
participants were given a pretest that elicited information
about relevant coursework. If a participant had taken a course
on astronomy, their data were excluded from analyses.
Participants who did not answer questions during training, or
who did not return for the delayed posttest, were also
excluded from analyses. 13 participants total were excluded
for either relevant college coursework or for failure to
complete the entire experiment.
Materials
Four versions of a science instructional module were
created in a 2 x 2 between-subjects design. The first variable
was Interleaving, in which the two learned sets of educational
information were either presented in an interleaved order or a
blocked order (see below for more details). The second
variable was Generation, in which a subset of the learning
materials was re-studied during instruction either as a
generation/ retrieval test or as a re-read task.

As described more fully below in the description of the
posttest, three dependent variables were measured after a 48hour delay. The first was Retention, and this was measured
through the repetition of sentence completion questions
during learning and on the posttest. This measure was only
used to assess the Generation manipulation. There were also
two transfer measures. The first transfer measure was a fairly
near transfer, requiring mostly retention: Single Concept,
which measured transfer to new questions that required
information about a single concept. The second measure of
transfer was Concept-Integration, which measured learners’
ability to flexibly apply their learning to new questions that
required integrating concepts. The transfer questions included
both sentence-completion and multiple-choice questions.
Means were taken for each problem and then were averaged
to create composite scores for each of the dependent
variables.
The overarching theme of the science content used in the
instruction was the search for life on other planets. Two
distinct sets of information were presented. The sets were
organized such that they were mutually informative, but they
had distinct educational content. Specifically, the first set of
information described the role of a planet’s mass on the
likelihood that a planet could be inhabited (Mass). The
second set of information described the impact of a planet’s
distance from the sun on its habitability (Distance).
The WISE interface functions such that a learner navigates
serially from one web page to a next page in a specified order.
As shown in the Figure 1, the participant views a page within
a viewer window, and on the left side of the screen s/he sees
the order of all the following pages. When the participant
finishes reading one page, s/he uses a mouse to click on the
next page indicated by the arrows on the left side of the
screen. In this experiment, each page had approximately one
short paragraph of information and a relevant graphic. The
graphics were visual representations of the information and
generally did not add separate content.
The two manipulations of the generation variable were
conducted using a feature of WISE that enables student
participation. Study pages were inserted between 3 and 5
slides after initial instruction in which the participant can
enter a response, as shown in Figure 2. These study pages
either contained a sentence with one word underlined in
which a subset of the information was re-presented, the read
condition, or they contained a sentence completion activity,
the generate condition. As in Figure 2, in the generate
condition a sentence was presented with one word missing.
This was the same word as was underlined in the read
condition study pages. There were always either three or four
pages intervening between the initial presentation of
information and the study page.

1852

Posttest
A posttest was developed to test participants’ learning for
the material presented in the WISE astronomy module. There
were three types of questions on the posttest. The first type of
question was the most complex and required the learner to

generate facts from both the mass and the distance categories
of information. These were both open-ended short answer and
fill in the blank questions. The second type of questions
required participants to generate multiple facts from either the
mass category or the distance category of information. These
were both open-ended short answer and fill in the blank
questions. The third type of questions were single fact fill in
the blank questions. These were the same type as those used
during the module as generation or study questions, in order
to test retention. All of the questions asked during the module
were included on the posttest as fill in the blank generation
questions. There were also questions of this same type (single
fact, fill in the blank) that were not studied during the learning
module.
Procedure
All participants were tested individually on a Macintosh
computer. They came for one hour for the learning module,
and then they returned two days later for the posttest. There
was always a 48-hour delay between learning and posttest.
The learning modules were schedule for Monday, Tuesday
and Wednesday, while the posttests were scheduled for
Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday.
Participants were randomly assigned to one of eight
counterbalanced versions of the WISE Astronomy module.
There was an instructions page in which they were given
directions for navigating the WISE interface by clicking on
pages serially following the arrows on the left side of the
screen (as shown in Figure 1). There was also a sample study
task in which they were told that they would see some
questions like this in which they would be asked to type a
complete sentence into the space below. The sample note was
consistent with the generation condition, so if a participant
was assigned to a generation module, they would see a
sample question in which one word was blank. If they were
assigned to a read condition they would see a sentence with
one word underlined.
When participants completed the learning module they
were excused and reminded to return at the same time in 48
hours for the second part of the experiment. They were not
explicitly told that they would be tested on their memory for
the material in the module they had just completed.
One their return, participants were given the posttest in two
separate parts. They were first given a paper packet with the
complex open-ended and fill in the blank questions that
required multiple facts either integrating mass and distance
information, or just multiple mass or distance facts. Once they
completed this part of the test this packet was removed and
they were given the fill in the blank questions. The order of
the two parts was held constant because the fill in the blank
questions could potentially have served as prompts for facts
required to answer the more open-ended questions.

Data
Generation
Participants’ accuracy on single fact fill in the blank
questions was analyzed in order to examine the generation
effect and to assess whether generating facts during the
learning module impacted learners’ retention for the
information over a 2 day delay.
The effects of Generation on Retention were examined
through analysis of the sentence completion questions
answered during learning as well as on a posttest after a 48hour delay. During learning, the participants either read a
sentence referencing material they had learned previously, or
they generated a word to complete the same sentence.
Participants were randomly assigned to either condition in a
between-subjects design.
As shown in Figure 3, a two-level ANOVA was conducted
to examine retention by comparing performance during
instruction with performance after a delay, on the posttest.
There was a main effect of extra study for the item during
learning (F (1, 58) = 45.2, p < .001) as well as a significant
interaction between retention and the generation variable (F
(1, 58) = 34.9, p < .001) such that performance was highest
during learning for participants in the read condition, but
performance at a delay was highest for participants in the
generation condition.
The effects of generation on retention were further
examined using a two-level ANOVA to compare participants’
performance on posttest items that were not seen during
learning with performance on items answered correctly
during learning. Generation was included as a betweensubjects variable. There was a main effect of extra study on
the item during learning (F (1,58) = 16.0, p < .001) as well as
a main effect of generation over reading (F (1, 58) = 7.2, p <
.01). There was also a significant interaction with the
generation variable: F (1, 58) = 23.7, p < .001) such that
items that were generated successfully were recalled more
frequently after a delay than items that were re-read during
study. As noted above, participants retained more of their
learning in the generation condition than in the read
condition.
For items not generated successfully in the generation
condition, there was no difference between performance
during learning and final test. In the current study,
participants were not given feedback following incorrect
generation during learning, so this finding might have been
different if learners had been provided with corrective
feedback. This suggests that for a classroom context, where
retention of all items is optimal, feedback might be essential
in designing generation opportunities.

1853

Conclusions

%

100
90

Read On

80

Generati

These data reveal that principles of generation and
interleaving generalize to educationally relevant materials.
The manipulation of the Generate variable (generate versus
read) study conditions revealed that participants made more
errors during learning in the generate condition than in the
read condition. However, after a two day delay participants
showed the opposite pattern: participants in the generate
condition recalled more correct answers than those in the
read condition. This interaction within performance
suggests that the generation effect impacted learners’
retention of these complex science facts when assessments
were embedded within the science instruction.

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Instruction

Posttest

Findings also support the claim that interleaving two
related sets of information during learning will produce
improved ability to transfer learning to more complex,
integrated problems after a delay. Specifically, the data
revealed that the important effect of interleaving in these
educational materials was the role of question type. Learners
were not different on their performance on questions that
required recall of single types of facts, but they were different
on questions that required more complex reasoning and
integration of the two sets of interleaved information.
The goal of most classroom science learning is to teach
reasoning and learning that generalizes beyond the specific
recall of scientific facts. Thus, this finding suggests that
interleaving is a strategy for facilitating complex learning
such that interleaved information can be integrated into a
representation that allows for considering relationships
between the information. However, interleaving may not be
the most optimal way to enhance recall of specific fact types
of information. The generation effect is more relevant to this
type of learning and may be essential to promoting study that
facilitates learners’ recall of important facts.
Thus, this study demonstrates that the Interleaving effect
and the Generation effect are useful for complex
educationally-relevant materials, but it also indicates that
consideration of the learning goals will dictate which type of
principle would be most optimal for instructional design.
Retention as a goal suggests that generation can be used to
optimize learning. Even though learners might make more
errors during learning, their retention for generated items will
be higher than their retention for items re-read during
learning. However, feedback or alternative supports might be
necessary to assist learners with items that are not generated
correctly during learning.
If integrated knowledge is a goal, instructors might
optimize learners’ acquisition by interleaving instructional
materials. Although this has the potential to cause confusion
for learners by requiring them to switch back and forth
between materials, results indicate that this instructional
design can lead to integrated conceptual knowledge that can
be transferred to questions requiring knowledge integration.
Thus, this study finds that the desirable difficulty principles
of generation and interleaving can facilitate instructional

Figure 3. Interaction between Generating versus Reading
during study and time of test.
Interleaving
As shown in Figure 3 below, participants’ performance on
two types of transfer questions from the posttest were
compared. Data reveal presentation order (interleaving versus
blocking) interacted with type of question, interacting that
presentation order led to different results on the three types of
questions (F (1,61) = 5.54, p < .05). On posttest questions that
required recall of single facts, or integration of facts with a
single domain of information, there was a slight advantage for
participants in the blocked condition. On more difficult
posttest questions that required more complex integration of
information from the two domains, there was an advantage
for participants in the interleaved condition.
This interaction suggests that although instruction may
have been more difficult when structured in an interleaved
format than when structured in a blocked format,
participants were more able to integrate their learning in the
interleaved condition than in the blocked condition.
100
90
Interleave

80

Blocked

% Correct

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Single Fact

Integration

Figure 4. Effects of Interleaving on simple versus
integration posttest questions.

1854

design. Instruction with complex educational materials can
build systematically on findings from simple materials in
laboratory contexts, and in particular this study found the
technology of WISE as an optimal platform for design of
science astronomy lesson.

References
Benjamin, A. S. & Bjork, R. A. (1996). Retrieval fluency as a
metacognitive index. In L. M. Reder (Ed.), Implicit
Memory and Metacognition: The 27th Carnegie
Symposium on Cognition. (pp. 309-338) Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Battig, W. F. (1972). Intratask interference as a source of
facilitation in transfer and retention. In R. F. Thompson
and J. F. Voss (Eds.), Topics in learning and performance
(pp. 131- 159). New York: Academic Press.
Bjork, R.A. (1994). Memory and metamemory considerations
in the training of human beings. In J. Metcalfe and A.
Shimamura (Eds.), Metacognition: Knowing about
knowing. (pp.185-205). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bjork, R. A. (1999). Assessing our own competence:
Heuristics and illusions. In D. Gopher and A. Koriat
(Eds.), Attention and peformance XVII. Cognitive
regulation of performance: Interaction of theory and
application (pp. 435-459). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hirshman, E. L., & Bjork, R. A. (1988). The generation
effect: Support for a two-factor theory. Journal of

1855

Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, &
Cognition, 14, 484-494.
Koriat, A., & Bjork, R. A. (in press). Illusions of competence
in monitoring one's knowledge during study. Journal of
Experimental
Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition.
Richland, L.E., Finley, J, R. Bjork, R. A. (2004).
Differentiating the Contextual Interference Effect from
the Spacing Effect. In K. Forbus, D. Gentner, & T. Regier
(Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, pp. 1624.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Shea, J.B., & Morgan, R.L. (1979) Contextual interference
effects on the acquisition, retention, and transfer of a
motor skill. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Learning and Memory, 5, 179-187.
Schmidt, R. A., & Bjork, R. A. (1992). New
conceptualizations of practice: Common principles in
three paradigms suggest new concepts for training.
Psychological Science, 3, 207-217.
Son, L. (under review). Metacognitive control: Childrens’
short-term versus long-term study strategies.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by an Institute of Education
Sciences, Cognition and Student Learning Grant
#R305H020113 to Robert Bjork and Marcia Linn.

