UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Mechanisms Underlying the Effects of Labels on Cognitive Development

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5zd9n15r

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Howard, Erica M.
Robinson, Christopher W.
Sloutsky, Vladimir M.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Mechanisms Underlying the Effects of Labels on Cognitive Development
Christopher W. Robinson (robinson.777@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science
The Ohio State University
208F Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place
Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Erica M. Howard (howard.432@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science
The Ohio State University
207D Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place
Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Vladimir M. Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science
The Ohio State University
208C Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place
Columbus, OH 43210, USA
demonstrated that 9-month-old infants are more likely to
form object categories when the objects are presented with
the same label, whereas, hearing the same nonlinguistic
sound associated with the same objects had no facilitative
effect on category formation. In addition, it has also been
demonstrated that 9-month-olds are more likely to expect that
two objects are hidden behind an occluder when the two
objects are associated with two labels than when the two
objects are associated with two non-speech sounds or the
same label (Xu, 2002). To explain these findings, it has been
proposed that infants have assumptions that words are linked
to categories and hearing the same label associated with
different objects facilitates categorization by directing
infants’ attention to commonalities and hearing different
labels facilitates individuation by directing infants’ attention
to differences (Waxman, 2003).
Although these studies suggest that labels, but not other
types of stimuli, play a special role in cognitive development,
there is an alternative explanation that can equally explain the
same set of findings without proposing that 9-month-olds
have broad assumptions that labels refer to categories. In
particular, there is a growing body of evidence suggesting
that some auditory stimuli overshadow (or attenuate
processing of) corresponding visual input, whereas other
stimuli tune or facilitate processing of visual input, and these
effects are not specifically tied to linguistic stimuli
(Napolitano & Sloutsky, 2004; Robinson & Sloutsky, 2004;
Sloutsky & Napolitano, 2003; Sloutsky & Robinson, 2005).
These researchers argue that understanding attentional factors
underlying cross-modal processing may be fundamental for
understanding how labels affect cognitive development.
When infants and young children are presented with
unfamiliar sounds and unfamiliar pictures, the auditory input
often overshadows the visual input (Robinson & Sloutsky,

Abstract
It has been argued that labels play a special role in cognitive
development: hearing the same label associated with different
entities facilitates categorization by directing infants’ attention to
commonalities. The current study assessed 8-month-olds’
attention to commonalities and processing of visual input more
generally when visual stimuli were presented without auditory
input (baseline), as well as when paired with the same label, the
same nonlinguistic sound, and pre-familiarized sound. Labels did
affect infants’ looking differently than unfamiliar nonlinguistic
sounds, however, these effects stemmed from sounds
overshadowing (or attenuating processing of) visual input more
than labels. Furthermore, when children were pre-familiarized to
the nonlinguistic sounds prior to the experiment proper, effects of
sounds and labels on processing visual input did not differ. Taken
together, these findings suggest that labels may affect cognitive
development differently than other types of stimuli because they
represent a familiar class of stimuli.
Keywords: Cognitive Development, Attention, Language
Acquisition, Psychology, Human Experimentation.

Introduction
Labels appear to play an important part in the way children
perceive the world. In particular, it has been demonstrated
that labels facilitate category formation and labels help
children differentiate object kinds (e.g., Balaban & Waxman,
1997, Xu, 2002, see also Waxman, 2003 for a review).
Although these effects are well documented, there are very
different proposed mechanisms underlying these effects.
According to one position, even prelinguistic infants are
“equipped with a broad, universally shared expectation,
linking words to commonalities among objects,” (Waxman,
2003, p. 220). For example, Balaban and Waxman (1997)

1878

more than labels, and this effect would stem from familiarity
effects as opposed to linguistic effects.

2004; Sloutsky & Napolitano, 2003). However, under ample
exposure to the auditory-visual compounds, these
overshadowing effects disappear when the auditory
component is familiar (Sloutsky & Robinson, 2005). Here,
16-month-olds are more likely to discriminate visual stimuli
when paired with familiar sounds or familiar words than
when the visual images are presented in isolation. These
finding suggest that familiarity of the auditory stimulus has
larger effects on processing corresponding visual input than
whether the stimulus is linguistic or nonlinguistic.
One prediction that can be drawn from these recent studies
is that previously reported effects of labels on categorization
and individuation may stem from unfamiliar auditory stimuli
(e.g., pure tones) overshadowing visual information more
than familiar auditory stimuli (e.g., human speech). This
hypothesis was recently tested in a study conducted by
Tobin, Howard, Robinson, and Sloutsky (2004). In this
study, 8- and 12-month-olds were presented with different
exemplars from a basic-level category and the exemplars
were either associated with the same label, the same
nonlinguistic sound, or no auditory input. In sum, labels did
have a small effect over nonlinguistic sounds, however, these
effects stemmed from sounds overshadowing visual input
more than labels, with neither auditory condition exceeding
the no auditory baseline.
The goal of current research is to further examine effects of
auditory input (including linguistic input) on processing of
visual input. In this research, we employed a task that was
capable of assessing infants’ processing of visual input under
different auditory conditions, as well as children’s attention
to commonalities. In particular, infants in the current study
participated in a familiarization task where they were
presented with two visual stimuli: one visual stimulus
remained the same on every trial (familiar stimulus) and one
stimulus (novel stimulus) changed on every trial (see Fantz,
1964; Roder, Bushnell, & Sasseville, 2000 for a similar
procedure). The amount of familiarization needed before
children demonstrated any systematic looking (i.e., above
chance looking to the novel stimulus or familiar stimulus)
served as a measure of visual processing speed. By adding
auditory input to the task, researchers have used variations of
this procedure to investigate early word learning in young
children (see Mather & Schafer, 2005; Mather, Schafer, &
Houston-Price, 2005). The current study employed a similar
procedure to assess processing of visual input under different
unimodal and bimodal stimulus presentations.
Understanding how children attend to simultaneously
presented auditory and visual input is a necessary condition
underlying many cognitive tasks. In particular, understanding
attentional factors and attentional learning that occurs in
cross-modal processing has implications for not only
understanding early word learning, but also for understanding
how labels affect categorization and individuation. Based on
previous research it was expected that effects of labels, if
found, would stem from sounds overshadowing visual input

Experiment 1
Method
Participants Forty-five 8-month-olds (23 boys and 22 girls,
M = 249 days, Range = 237 - 270 days) participated in this
experiment. Parents’ names were collected from local birth
announcements, and contact information was obtained
through local directories. A majority of infants were
Caucasian and had no auditory or visual deficits, as reported
by parents. Six infants were not included due to fussiness.
Apparatus Infants were seated on parents’ laps
approximately 100 cm away from a 152 cm x 127 cm
projection screen, which was located approximately 5 cm
above the infant’s eye level. A Sony DCR-TRV40 camcorder
was used to capture infants’ fixations and was projected to
one of two Dell flat panel monitors in the observation room.
An NEC GT2150 LCD projector was mounted on the ceiling
approximately 30 cm behind the infant (130 cm away from
the projection screen). Two Boston Acoustics 380 speakers
were 76 cm apart from each other and mounted in the wall.
The speakers and camcorder were concealed by black felt
and located directly below the projection screen. Two small
lights were located behind the infant to ensure that the room
was dimly lit throughout the entire procedure. In an adjacent
room, a Dell Dimension 8200 computer with Presentation
software was used to present stimuli to the infants, as well as
to record the onset and offset of infant’s visual fixations.
Fixations to the visual stimuli were recorded online by
pressing one of two buttons on a 10-button USB game pad
when infants were looking at the stimuli and releasing the
buttons when infants looked away from the stimuli. A second
Sony DCR-PC120 camcorder was used to record the video
stream of the infant from the monitor indicated above, as
well as to record the image of the stimulus presentation on a
second Dell flat panel monitor.
Stimuli Infants were familiarized to pairs of visual stimuli
and an auditory stimulus. The auditory stimulus consisted of
either an unfamiliar sound (a laser sound) or an infantdirected nonsense label (“Look at the dax”). Each auditory
stimulus was presented at 65-68 dB for approximately 1200
ms. The visual stimuli consisted of realistic pictorial
representations of animals and commonplace objects (e.g.,
dog, ball, etc.). Each visual stimulus was projected to
approximately 36 cm x 36 cm with approximately 100 cm
separating the two images.
Procedure The procedure consisted of 24 trials, and each
trial was 8000 ms in duration. In each trial, infants were
simultaneously presented with two visual stimuli (V1 and
V2) and accompanying auditory stimulus (A1). Each
successive trial consisted of presenting a new visual stimulus
and the old visual stimulus, and children heard the same
auditory stimulus throughout familiarization (see Figure 1 for

1879

160 s of familiarization, t > 50%, t (20) = 1.86, p < .08, and
after 192 s of familiarization, t > 50%, t (20) = 1.95, p < .07.

procedure). As can be seen in Figure 1, A1 and V1 were
perfectly correlated, whereas, there was no correlation
between A1 with the novel visual stimuli. The left-right
location of the novel/familiar stimuli was held constant
across training for each subject and counter-balanced
between subjects. Fixations were recorded online by an
experimenter for all trials.

Figure 2. Effects of labels and sounds on processing visual
stimuli in Experiment 1

Percent looking to differences

Label

Figure 1. Overview of Procedure
Visual pairs

Auditory

Time

Trial 1:

V1 V2

A1

Trial 2:

V1 V3

A1

Trial 3:

V1 V4

A1

Results and Discussion
Analysis of test trials focused on infants’ relative looking to
commonalties (V1) and differences (V2, V3, etc) across the
label and sound conditions. If children map the nonsense
label to the correlated visual stimulus (V1) and hearing the
same label directs attention to commonalities, then
introducing the same label should direct infants’ attention to
objects in the environment that share many commonalities
with the original referent. In addition, if effects are specific to
language than these effects should be found in the label
condition but not in the sound condition. However, if effects
of labels stem from sounds having stronger overshadowing
effects than labels, then infants in the sound condition should
require more familiarization before showing any systematic
shift in attention compared to children in the sound condition.
Percent looking to the changing visual images (looking to
the different stimulus/looking to both stimuli) was calculated
on each trial and a mean was averaged across four
consecutive trials. A mean greater than 50% reflects an
attentional preference to look to differences (novelty
preference), whereas a mean below 50% reflects an
attentional preference to look to commonalities (i.e., stimulus
correlated with the auditory stimulus). As can be seen in
Figure 2, hearing the same label across familiarization did
not direct infants’ attention to commonalities. In particular,
looking was never below 50% in the label condition, and
children who heard the same label across familiarization
were not more likely to look to commonalities than children
in the sound condition.
To determine how the sounds and labels affected
processing of the visual input, infants’ preferences were
compared to 50%. Infants in the label condition demonstrated
a reliable preference after 96 s of familiarization, one-sample
t > 50%, t (24) = 3.79, p < .001, whereas infants in the sound
condition never demonstrated a reliable preference, although
children had a tendency to look to the different stimuli after

Sound

75
70
65
60
55
50
45
40
35
30
32

64
96
128 160
Time in seconds

192

Note: Error bars reflect Standard Errors of the mean.
Although hearing the same label did not direct infants’
attention to commonalities, it could be argued that the labels
played a special role by facilitating processing of visual input
(e.g., Balaban & Waxman, 1997, Waxman & Markow, 1995;
Xu, 2002). In other words, it could be argued that hearing the
same label was not enough to override children’s preference
to look to differences (novelty preference), but exposure to
the label did facilitate processing of visual input. At the same
time, it is possible that this effect stemmed from the nonspeech sounds overshadowing the visual input more than the
labels (e.g., Sloutsky & Robinson, 2005; Tobin, Howard,
Robinson, & Sloutsky, 2004). To distinguish between these
two alternatives, it is important to compare the speed of
processing visual stimuli in the label and sound conditions to
a no auditory condition.
Twenty-nine additional infants, none of whom
participated in the previous experiment, participated in the
no-auditory baseline condition. The procedure was identical
to the sound and label conditions reported above, however,
the auditory stimulus was removed. As can be seen in Figure
3, infants’ looking behaviors became systematic (i.e.,
different from 50%) in both the label and no auditory
conditions at 96 s of familiarization, ps < .01, which suggests
that the labels did not facilitate processing of visual input
relative to their baseline performance in the no auditory
condition. Furthermore, across all points of familiarization,
there were no differences between infants’ looking in the no
auditory condition compared to the label condition, ps > .1.
Although these findings suggest that labels had no
significant effect on infants’ preferences relative to a no
auditory baseline, it is important to note that infants’
attentional preferences in the label condition did drop to

1880

Stimuli and Procedure The procedure was similar to the
sound condition of Experiment 1, except that children heard
the nonlinguistic sound 20 times prior to participating in the
experiment proper (pre-familiarization phase). The laser
sound was not associated with any visual images during prefamiliarization, and children were given a short break prior to
testing.

chance at 192 s of familiarization. One possible explanation
is that children in this condition simply started responding at
chance. However, it is also possible that, after hearing the
labels 24 times, children were in the early stages of mapping
the label to the correlated visual stimulus.
Figure 3. Effects of labels on processing visual stimuli
compared to a no auditory baseline
75
Percent looking to differences

Results and Discussion

Label
No Auditory

Percent looking to the changing visual images (i.e., looking
to differences) was calculated on each trial and a mean was
averaged across 4 consecutive trials. As can be seen in Figure
4, children who heard pre-familiarized sounds shifted their
attention to differences after 96 s, t > 50%, t (18) = 2.69, p <
.05, which was comparable to children who heard the labels.
Furthermore, there was no point across familiarization where
infants’ looking in the label condition (Experiment 1)
differed from infants’ looking in the pre-familiarized sound
condition (Experiment 2), ps > .1.

70
65
60
55
50
45
40
35
30

Figure 4. Effects of familiar sounds on visual processing
32

64
96
128 160
Time in seconds

192

Note: Error bars reflect Standard Errors of the mean.
Percent looking to
differences

In sum, Experiment 1 demonstrated that labels affected
infants looking differently than sounds, however, this effect
stemmed from sounds overshadowing visual input more than
labels. Why did sounds overshadow visual input more than
labels? One possibility is that words are different from other
types of auditory input. Another possibility is that words
represent a familiar class of stimuli, and under repeated
presentations, familiar stimuli are less likely to overshadow
visual input.

Label
Sound
Familiar Sound

75
70
65
60
55
50
45
40
35
30
32

Experiment 2
If differences between the sounds and words in the previous
experiment stem from linguistic effects (e.g., words are
special) then labels should also have different effects on
processing visual input than pre-familiarized sounds.
However, if familiarity can account for the previous
difference then pre-familiarizing infants to the same
nonlinguistic sound used in Experiment 1 should decrease the
processing demands needed to encode the auditory stimulus,
which should free up the attention resources that are needed
to process the visual stimulus. From this perspective, prefamiliarized sounds and words should have comparable
effects.

64

96
128 160
Time in seconds

192

Note: Error bars reflect Standard Errors of the mean.

General Discussion
The results of the current study reveal several important
findings. First, children who heard the same non-speech
sound across familiarization responded differently to the
visual images than children who heard the same label.
However, these effects stemmed from non-speech sounds
overshadowing visual input more than labels. Second, there
was no evidence suggesting that hearing the same label
directed infants’ attention to commonalities. In fact, infants
who heard the same label (e.g., “Look at the dax”) were
actually more likely to direct their attention away from the
correlated visual stimulus. The current study expands
previous research investigating mechanisms underlying the
effects of labels on cognitive development.

Method
Participants Nineteen 8-month-olds (9 boys and 10 girls, M
= 249 days, Range = 212 - 274 days). Recruitment
procedures and demographics were identical to Experiment
1. Two infants were not included due to fussiness.

1881

It has been demonstrated that hearing the same label
associated with different objects (e.g., Balaban & Waxman,
1997), and hearing different labels associated with different
objects facilitates individuating object kinds (e.g., Xu, 2002).
Furthermore, it has been argued that the mechanisms
underlying these effects reflect the notion that children
initially have broad assumptions that words but not sounds
highlight categories and hearing the same label directs
attention to commonalities and hearing different labels
directs attention to differences (Waxman, 2003). The finding
that both familiar sounds and labels have similar affects on
infants’ attention questions whether young infants already
understand that notion that words refer to categories.
However, effects of labels on cognitive tasks can occur in
several ways. For example, some auditory stimuli can hinder
rather than facilitate processing of corresponding visual
input, and these effects can affect object recognition and
categorization tasks (Robinson & Sloutsky, 2004; Tobin,
Howard, Robinson, & Sloutsky, 2004). Therefore, it is not
only important to investigate categorization and individuation
behaviors across different auditory stimulus conditions, but
also to make specific predictions about the mechanism(s)
underlying this ability. For example, if labels but not sounds
direct attention to commonalities then children should be
faster at noticing commonalities between entities, thus,
demonstrating faster habituation rates when visual images are
associated with the same label (see Waxman & Markow,
1995 for a similar claim). To date, there is very little
evidence supporting this claim using typical categorization
tasks (e.g., Balaban & Waxman, 1997; Fulkerson & Haaf,
2003; Tobin, Howard, Robinson, & Sloutsky, 2004). While
the current task did find some support for this claim using a
more sensitive task where children were given 192 s to
process a single stimulus (V1), it is important to note that this
finding was not specific to language (Experiment 2).
The current study has implications beyond cross-modal
processing in infancy. In particular, attentional factors and
attentional learning in cross-modal processing underlie many
cognitive tasks such as word learning and how labels affect
categorization, individuation, and induction. The current
study, in conjunction with Napolitano and Sloutsky (2004)
and Robinson and Sloutsky (2004), question whether
children really understand that words refer to categories.
Rather, many linguistic effects often attenuate when labels
are compared with familiar nonlinguistic stimuli.
Furthermore, by focusing on children’s attention to
simultaneously presented auditory and visual input more
generally, Napolitano and Sloutsky (2004) and Robinson and
Sloutsky (2004), have demonstrated that even 4-year-olds
have difficulty selectively deploying their attention to a
specific auditory or visual component of a compound
stimulus. Without such attentional control, it is unlikely that
children can deliberately use labels, even if they do
understand their conceptual importance.

Acknowledgments
This research has been supported by grants from the National
Science Foundation (REC # 0208103 and BCS # 0078945) to
Vladimir M. Sloutsky.

References
Balaban, M.T., & Waxman, S.R. (1997). Do words facilitate
object categorization in 9-month-old infants? Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 64, 3-26.
Fantz. R.L. (1964). Visual experience in infants: Decreased
attention to familiar patterns relative to novel ones.
Science, 46, 668-670.
Fulkerson, A.L., & Haaf, R.A. (2003). The influence of
labels, non-labeling sounds, and source of auditory input
on 9- and 15-month-olds’ object categorization. Infancy, 4,
349-369.
Mather, E. & Schafer, G. (2005, April). Familiarity and
novelty preferences for visual stimuli in the second year of
life: Initial findings and new directions. Poster presented at
the Biennial meeting of the Society for Research in Child
Development, Atlanta, GA, April 2005.
Mather, E., Schafer, G., & Houston-Price, C. (2005). Objectlabel covariation – A cue for The acquisition of nouns?.
Manuscript submitted for publication.
Napolitano, A. C., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2004). Is a Picture
Worth a Thousand Words? The Flexible Nature of
Modality Dominance in Young Children. Child
Development, 75, 1850-1870.
Robinson, C.W. & Sloutsky, V.M. (2004). Auditory
dominance and its change in the course of development.
Child Development, 75, 1387-1401.
Roder, B.J., Bushnell, E.W., & Sasseville, A.M. (2000).
Infants’ preferences for familiarity and novelty during the
course of visual processing. Infancy, 1(4), 491-507.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Napolitano, A. (2003). Is a picture worth
a thousand words? Preference for auditory modality in
young children. Child Development, 74, 822-833
Sloutsky, V.M., & Robinson, C.W. (2005). The role of words
and sounds in visual processing: From overshadowing to
attentional tuning. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Tobin, L., Howard, E., Robinson, C.W., & Sloutsky, V.M.
(2004, May) The effect of non-speech sounds and labels on
categorization. Poster session presented at the Biennial
International Conference for Infant Studies, Chicago, Il.
Waxman, S. R. (2003). Links between object categorization
and naming: Origins and emergence in human infants. In
D. H. Rakison & L. M. Oakes (Eds.), Early category and
concept development: Making sense of the blooming,
buzzing confusion (pp. 213-241). London, UK: Oxford
University Press.
Waxman, S. R., & Markow, D. B. (1995). Words as
invitations to form categories: Evidence from 12- 13month-old infants. Cognitive Psychology, 29, 257-302.
Xu, F. (2002). The role of language in acquiring object kind
concepts in infancy. Cognition, 85, 223-250.

1882

