UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Memory for Object Location: A Span Study in Children

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0d44j3dz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Cestari, Vincenzo
Lucidi, Annalisa
Pieroni, Laura
et al.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Memory for Object Location: A Span Study in Children
Vincenzo Cestari (cestari@lumsa.it )
LUMSA, Facoltà di Scienze della Formazione, Roma
Istituto di Neuroscienze del C.N.R., Sezione di Roma, Italia

Annalisa Lucidi (a.lucidi@lumsa.it )
LUMSA, Facoltà di Scienze della Formazione, Roma

Laura Pieroni (laurapieroni@hotmail.com)
Dipartimento di Psicologia,
Università di Roma “La Sapienza”, Roma, Italia

Clelia Rossi-Arnaud (clelia.rossi-arnaud@uniroma1.it)
Dipartimento di Psicologia,
Università di Roma “La Sapienza”, Roma, Italia
(Postma & De Hann, 1996). On the other hand, interfering
with the visuo-spatial sketchpad with a simultaneous activity,
such as repeated tapping of a spatial pattern, disrupts
positional encoding process (Pickering et al., 2001).
With regards to object-location assignment there is
agreement in the literature that a developmental improvement
in the number of associations remembered is found.
Schumann-Hengsteler (1992) reported that children improved
with age in remembering the locations of specific objects. In
this study a picture reconstruction task with simultaneous
presentation of scene-like visual spatial arrangements was
used. Subjects had to recognize objects and reconstruct the
initial spatial arrangement. In the first experiment an age
dependent improvement in remembering the locations of
specific objects was shown in 4 and 11 year olds. The second
study with 3 and 7 year olds revealed similar results. In line
with these findings Walker, Hitch, Doyle, and Porter (1994)
reported a study in which a probed memory task was use to
investigate children's short-term visual memory for an
object's spatial location or colour. The results of their second
experiment indicate that there was a developmental
improvement in memory for spatial location in children of 5
and 7 years of age. Other studies have also found this
developmental improvement for tasks in which different
objects have to be linked to different locations (Siemens,
Guttentag and McIntyre, 1989, Rossi-Arnaud Alfano,
Longoni, 1999).
On the other hand, with regards to spatial location, Hasher
and Zacks (1979) suggested that it is encoded and retained
automatically and that as a consequence of being automatic,
memory for spatial location should not show any
developmental enhancement. Although a number of studies
have investigated the development of spatial memory (Orsini,
Grossi, Capitani, Laiacona, Papagno & Vallar, 1987; Logie &
Pearson, 1997; Hamilton, Coates and Heffernan, 2003), few
have specifically addressed the issue of the development of
positional encoding per se. Schumann-Hengsteler (1992), in
the experiments mentioned previously, observed that whereas
children improved with age in remembering the locations of

Abstract
A number of studies suggest that object location memory might
depend upon a variety of component processes, namely
remembering which locations in space were occupied and
remembering the identity of the objects that occupied each
location. The aim of the present experiment was to analyse,
using a span procedure, the development of spatial memory in
three experimental conditions: positional reconstruction, objectlocation binding, and the integration of these two in the
combined condition. A total of 160 children aged 6, 8 and 10
years were tested. The findings of the present study provide
developmental spans in each relocation condition. Results also
show an age dependent improvement in all conditions, showing
that spatial location is not automatically encoded and different
developmental patterns for each of the relocation conditions
considered, suggesting that spatial memory does comprise a
number of different component processes.

Introduction
Spatial memory enables us to find our way in our
environment but also to find objects such as keys or glasses
that we have recently used and deposited somewhere in our
surroundings. Regarding this ability it has been suggested that
it might depend upon a variety of component processes,
specifically memory for the locations of individual items and
memory for occupied locations, that may be affected
differently by variations in stimulus characteristics or task
demands (Puglisi, Park, Smith and Hill, 1985). More recent
studies (Postma & De Hann, 1996; Schumann-Hengsteler,
1992, Shoqierat & Mayes, 1991) also suggest that two
separate spatial processes may be involved in short-term
object location memory. First, one needs to remember the
precise position occupied in a given space (positional
encoding per se), then one has to decide which object was at
which position (object-to-position assignment). Evidence
from studies in adults shows that disrupting the phonological
loop, with a concurrent verbal task (articulatory suppression),
interferes with the object-to- position assignment process,
suggesting that it relies to some extent upon verbal coding
408

mentioned above
Combined).

specific objects, there was no age effect on memory for the
critical loci themselves. Other results are in contrast with the
latter study and report a developmental improvement in
positional encoding (Conte, Cornoldi, Pazzaglia & Sanavio,
1995; Siemens et al., 1989). Siemens et al. (1989) presented
children aged 4 to 8 and college students with 3-7 items in
different cells of a 4 * 4 matrix and required to remember
either the identity, the locations, or both identity and
locations. In both experiments there were much larger age
differences in retention of location than of identity
information. Recent work by Postma, Wijnalda and Kessels
(2001) and by Rossi-Arnaud, Alfano, Longoni (1999) used
Postma and De Haan's experimental paradigm and compared
the performance of children in 3 different relocation
conditions. In the first condition, named the position-only
condition all objects are the same and hence only precise
locations have to be remembered. In the object-to position
condition the positions where objects should be replaced are
marked hence only the association between object identity
and location needs to be remembered whereas in the
combined condition both locations and object-location
associations have to be coded. Both studies suggest that there
might be age differences in memory for positions per se,
however both studies use a fixed length procedure, i.e.
children are shown a fixed number of stimuli simultaneously,
but none have really addressed the question of how many
stimuli children can actually encode and remember at each
age considered. The latter is better examined using a span
procedure.
Spatial span has generally been determined using the
Corsi’s block test (e.g. Orsini et al.,; Isaacs and VarghaKhadem, 1989, Logie and Pearson, 1997) which entails a
sequential presentation of the items to be remembered, one of
the aims of the present study was to determine the span in
children of different age groups for visuo-spatial information
presented simultaneously. Differently from studies which
have measured span using the recall of occupied cells in a
matrix (eg Wilson, Scott and Power, 1987; Miles, Morgan,
Milne and Morris, 1996; Pickering, Gathercole and Hall,
1997) in the present study span will be measured in parallel
for each of the relocation condition previously described,
namely positional reconstruction, object location binding, and
the integration of these two. Firstly, this allows to examine if
performance in the three conditions show different
developmental trends. This pattern of results would on the
one hand lend some support to the idea that they are different
memory processes and on the other hand would allow to
understand whether some processes develop before others do,
in particular whether nonassociative processes (e.g. positional
reconstruction) develop before associative processes (objectto-position assignment). Second, results will answer the
question of whether there is a developmental improvement
for each of the three spatial memory processes described
above, including positional encoding per se. In the
Experiment described below, children aged 6, 8 and 10 years
were thus randomly assigned to one of 3 groups and a span
procedure was used in each of experimental conditions

(Position

only,

Object-to-position,

Method
Participants
A total of 160 children in a junior high school in middle class
areas in Rome, Italy, participated in the study. There were 52
children aged 6 (mean age= 6 years 1 month), 54 children
aged 8 (mean age= 8 years 4 months) and 54 children aged 10
(mean age= 10 years 3 month). In each group children were
randomly assigned to one of 3 groups according to type of
condition considered (Position, Object to position,
Combined).

Materials
The stimuli used were 10x10 cm paper cards arranged in a
4x4 paper matrix on a table, with each cell measuring 10x10
cm. In the present experiment in the object to position and
combined condition the stimuli were line drawings of
familiar object, while in the position condition the stimuli
were black paper cards.

Procedure
Each child was tested individually in a quiet testing room in
the school, using a classical span procedure, as used in
Gathercole et al. (1994). Cards were arranged over a paper
matrix. On any given trial, the examiner displayed a
particular sequence of cards. Sequences of increasing length,
starting from length two, were presented if the subject
correctly recalled two strings for each length. If the child
failed to repeat both of the two lists at one length, no further
lists were given. When the child correctly recalled only one
of the first two lists at a particular length, a third list of the
same length was given. If the third list was correctly
repeated, trials at the next length were given. If the child
incorrectly repeated the third list, testing stopped. Span was
scored as the maximum length at which the child correctly
recalled at least two lists. According to Postma e De Hann’s
paradigm, one relocation was the “ Object-to-Position”
condition, in which the position where object should be
relocated were marked on the matrix; the other one is the “
combined” condition in which subjects had to relocate the
cards on the matrix, without any marking of the original
positions. In the position condition children had to remember
only the exact place occupied on the matrix by the black
paper cards.

Data analysis
Three separate univariate analyses of variance (ANOVA)
with one between- group factor, age group (6, 8 and 10 years
of age), were performed on the total number of correctly
relocated items in the three different tasks considered,
position only, object-to position and combined. The Newman
Keuls post hoc test was applied where necessary. Further, a

409

trend analysis was also performed to identify if there was a
significant linear trend.

Discussion
In the present study developmental changes in three spatial
processes, namely in the retention of spatial locations per se,
in the assignment of objects to locations and in the integration
of these two, were analysed. A first aim of the present study
was to measure the span for spatial locations, the span for the
association between objects and their locations and the span
in a spatial memory task requiring the ability to combine
these two processes. A second goal was to test the hypothesis
that there is a developmental trend in these spatial processes
and, finally, a third objective was to assess whether there are
selective developmental patterns for these distinct
components of location memory, specifically whether the two
basic processes, such as remembering the locations per se or
assigning objects to locations, develop earlier than the ability
to combine them.
Regarding spatial span, whereas a number of studies have
analysed spatial span in children either with a Corsi’s block
test (e.g. Orsini et al.,; Isaacs and Vargha-Khadem, 1989,
Logie and Pearson, 1997) or with the recall of occupied cells
in a matrix (eg Wilson, Scott and Power, 1987; Miles,
Morgan, Milne and Morris, 1996; Pickering, Gathercole and
Hall, 1997) none have to date analysed, in parallel, the
development of span for the three spatial processes previously
mentioned. The studies which have operated such a
distinction between processes have used a fixed length
procedure. The findings of the present study are important
because they provide spans for children belonging to three
age groups for the three spatial processes considered which
have been tested in parallel in three different relocation
conditions. These results can be useful for further studies in
children or for a neuropsychological use of the paradigm
presented.
With regards to the hypothesis that there is a developmental
trend for all the processes considered, our results indicate that
there is an age dependent improvement in all conditions. The
clear age effect found in the object-to-position condition is in
agreement with the literature which suggests an improvement
with age in memory for object-location associations (Postma
et al., 2001; Siemens et al., 1989; Schumann-Hengsteler,
1992). On the other hand, as previously mentioned, there are
a number of contradictory results with regards to a
developmental enhancement in memory for spatial location
per se. The significant age effect found in the present study in
the position only condition is in agreement with previous data
showing that location memory is consistently affected by age
(Puglisi et al., 1985; Siemens et al. 1989), with older children
performing better than younger ones (Postma et al., 2001;
Rossi-Arnaud et al., 1999). The latter findings argue against
the view that occupied-location information is encoded
automatically (Hasher and Zacks, 1979).
When looking at the developmental patterns it is interesting to
note that children first improve their ability in remembering
the spatial locations per se and in associating the objects to
the locations. Our results show that there is a significant
improvement both in positional reconstruction and in objectlocation binding at 8 years of age. It is only later that children

Results
Table 1: shows the mean span and standard deviation for
correctly relocated items in the three different age groups in
the three different relocation conditions.
SPAN

Position

AGE

Mean

S.D.

Object-to
Position
Mean
S.D.

Combined

6-yearolds
8-yearolds
10-yearolds

3,05

1,59

3,88

1.57

2,77

1.06

4,66

1,23

5.10

1.04

2.51

1.42

4,69

1,31

5,88

1,69

3,72

1.51

Mean

S.D.

Position only. When the mean span for correctly remembered
positions in children aged 6, 8 and 10 years was analysed,
statistical analysis indicated a significant main effect of age
F(2,46)= 4.74, (p = .01) p.<.05. Post hoc comparisons
indicated that the span for correctly remembered positions is
significantly lower in 6 year-olds than in older children (p=
.03 when comparing 6- and 8-year-olds; p= .01 when
comparing 6- and 10-year-olds). Children of 8 years of age
did not differ from 10 year-olds in the span for positions
remembered (p = .45). Finally, remembered positions showed
a significant linear trend F(1,46)= 6.72, (p=.01) p.<.05.
Object-to-position. When the mean span for correctly
relocated objects in children aged 6, 8 and 10 years was
analysed, statistical analysis indicated a significant main
effect of age F(2,54)=8,07; p<.001. Post hoc comparisons
indicated that the span for correctly relocated objects is
significantly lower in 6 year-olds than in older children (p <
.05 when comparing 6- and 8-year-olds; p < .001 when
comparing 6- and 10-year-olds). Children of 8 years of age
did not differ from 10 year-olds in the span for objects
relocated (p=.12). Lastly, correctly relocated objects showed
a significant linear trend F(1,54)= 15.86, p < .001.
Combined When the mean span for correctly relocated
objects in children aged 6, 8 and 10 years was analysed for
the Combined task, statistical analysis indicated a significant
main effect of age F(2,54)=15.52; p<.001. Post hoc
comparisons indicated that the span for correctly relocated
objects is significantly higher in 10 year-olds than in younger
children (p < .001 when comparing 6- and 10-year-olds; p <
.001 when comparing 8- and 10-year-olds). Children of 8
years of age did not differ from 6 year-olds in the span for
objects relocated (p = .17). Lastly, correctly relocated objects
showed a significant linear trend F(1,54)= 29.04; p<.001.

410

A normative study. British Journal of Developmental
Psychology,7,377-380
Logie, R.H. & Pearson, D.G. (1997). The inner eye and the
inner scribe of visuo-spatial working memory: Evidence
from developmental fractionation. European Journal of
Cognitive Psychology, 9 (3), 241-257
Miles, C., Morgan, M.J., Milne, A.B., & Morris, E.D.M.
(1996). Developmental and individual differences in visual
memory span. Current Psychology, 15, 53-67
Orsini, A., Grossi, D., Capitani, E., Laiacona, M., Papagno,
C. & Vallar, G. (1987). Verbal and Spatial Immediate
Memory Span. Italian Journal of Neurological Science, 8,
539-548
Pickering, S.J. (2001). The development of visuo-spatial
working memory. Memory, 9 (4/5/6), 423-432
Pickering, S.J., Gathercole, S.E., Hall,M., & Lloyd, S. (2001).
Development of memory for pattern and path: Further
evidence for the fractionation of visuo-spatial memory.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,54A, 397420
Postma, A. & De Haan, E.H.F. (1996). What was where?
Memory for object location. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 49A, 178-199
Postma, A., Wijnalda, E.M, Kessel, R.P.C. (2001). Objectlocation memory in primary school children: A preliminary
study. Cognitive Processing, 2, 221-233
Puglisi, T.J., Cortis Park, D., Smith, A.D., Hill, G.W. (1985).
Memory for two types of spatial location: Effect of
instructions, age, and format. American Journal of
Psychology, 98, (1), 101-118
Rossi-Arnaud, C., Alfano, F. & Longoni, A.M. (1999). The
development of short-term memory for object locations in
children. In: Proceedings of the Seventh European
Workshop on Imagery and Cognition. Brunel University,
UK. ISBN 1-902316-02-9.
Schoqierat, M.A. & Mayes, A.R. (1991). Disproportionate
incidental spatial and recall deficit in amnesia.
Neuropsychologia, 29, 8, 749-769
Schumann-Hengsteler, R. (1992). The development of visuospatial memory: How to remember location. International
Journal of Behavioral Development, 15(4), 455-471
Siemens, L., Guttentag, R.E., McIntyre, M. (1989). Age
differences in memory for item-identity and occupiedlocation information. American Journal of Psychology, 102
(1), 53-68
Walker, P., Hitch, G.J., Doyle, A., Porter, T. (1994). The
development of short-term visual memory in young
children. International Journal of Behavioral Development,
17 (1), 73-89
Wilson, J.T.L., Scott, J.H. & Power, K.G. (1987).
Developmental differences in the span of visual memory
for pattern. British Journal of Developmental Psychology,
5, 249-255

improve in the ability to perform positional reconstruction
and object-location binding together. Our data show a
significant improvement in the combined condition at age 10.
This pattern of results suggests that the combined condition is
indeed the most complex relocation condition and that the
ability in this distinct component of object-location memory
depends upon the development and integration of the two
other more elementary processes. This selective
developmental patterns for the three distinct component of
object-location memory is what was expected although, using
the same experimental paradigm, Postma et al. (2001) had not
found this pattern of results in children. However, in their
study, as suggested by the authors, there was probably a
practice effect which masked the higher complexity effect in
that, in their procedure, the combined condition was always
performed at the end of the experiment.
The developmental patterns observed for the three spatial
abilities considered in the present study might be related to
the way children encode the information in each condition.
For instance, it has been reported that a concurrent verbal task
strongly interferes with the object-to-position assignment task
(Postma & De Haan, 1996) suggesting that this process
depends on verbal encoding. In children, however, verbal
encoding might not be effectively applied until the age of 8
years (Hitch, Halliday, Schaafstal & Schraagen, 1988).
Further studies should thus analyse which strategies are used
in each relocation condition by children of different ages.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Daniele Del Duca and Carlo
Piredda for their help in data collection.

References
Conte, A., Cornoldi, C., Pazzaglia, F., Sanavio, S. (1995).
The development of the visuo-spatial working memory and
it’s role in spatial memory. Ricerche di Psicologia, 2, 19,
95-113
Gathercole, S.E., Adams, A., Hitch, G.J. (1994). Do young
children rehearse? An individual differences analysis.
Memory and Cognition, 22, 201-207
Hamilton, C.,J., Coates, R.O., Heffernan, T. (2003). What
develops in visuo-spatial working memory development?
European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 15 (1), 43-69
Hasher, L. & Zacks, R.T. (1979). Automatic and effortful
processes in memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology,
108, 356-395
Hitch, G.J., Halliday, M.S., Schaafstal, A.M. & Schraagen,
J.M.C. (1988). Visual working memory in children.
Memory and Cognition, 16, 120-132
Issacs, E.B., & Vargha-Khadem, F. (1989). Differential
course of development of spatial and verbal memory span:

411

