UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Neural Correlates Underlying Action-intention and Aim-intention

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/44p1s4zq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Adenzato, Mauro
Becchio, Cristina
Bertone, Cesare
et al.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Neural Correlates Underlying Action-intention and Aim-intention
Mauro Adenzato (adenzato@psych.unito.it)
Centre for Cognitive Science, via Po 14
10123 Turin, Italy

Cristina Becchio
Centre for Cognitive Science, via Po 14
10123 Turin, Italy

Cesare Bertone
Centre for Theoretical and Applied Ontology, via S. Ottavio 20
10124 Turin, Italy

Raimo Tuomela
Department of Social and Moral Philosophy, P.O. Box 9
00014 University of Helsinki, Finland
Action-intention. If the intention concerns the direct
performance of an action (e.g., when an agent intends to
open the window), we speak of an action-intention. In this
case, the agent is assumed at least to lack the belief that it is
impossible for him to perform the action. This kind of
intention is (direct) action-intention. At in least in this paper,
action-intention will be identified with the intention to
perform an action directed to a proximate goal (e.g.,
reaching and grasping an object).
Aim-intention. An action-intention contrasts with an aimintention. Whereas action-intention is necessarily related to
one’s own actions, aim-intention does not require a control
condition, e.g. that the agent believes that he can alone bring
about or see to it that the action comes about. An aimintention can in typical cases be rendered as “the agent
intends, by his actions, to bring about a state or event E”,
where E can in principle be any kind of state.
An aim-intention can be either I-mode or we-mode.
Intending in the I-mode just means intending purely
personally (or as a private person), the relevant intention
expression here being "I intend to do X", while intending in
the we-mode means intending as a group member, the
relevant intention-expression here being "we together intend
to do X" (where X can be done together or separately by
us).

Abstract
In this paper we present a theoretical analysis of recent
neuroscientific evidence for different neural activations
underlying “action-intention” and “aim-intention”. As regards
action-intention, it is shown that recognizing the actionintentions of others is based, at least in part, on the same
mechanisms that underlie one’s own action-intention. In
contrast, a specific area of activation was found to correlate
with social aim-intention, a special case of aim-intention
related to acting together. This result suggests that the
distinction between I-mode (viz. “private” mode) and wemode (viz. “group” mode) intention is relevant also at the
neuroscientific level of analysis.

Intentional Action, Action-intention,
Aim-intention
People normally distinguish between “intentional” and
“unintentional” behavior, and this distinction applies not
only to self-initiated actions, but also to other people’s
actions. By observing people acting, we can usually say
what they doing and what their goals are (Baldwin & Baird,
2001). We can frequently even imagine why they are acting.
If agents have this capacity, it must supervene on their
brain activities. Thus, the question is to know which specific
neural processes enable it. The topic of this paper is the
investigation of the neural processes underlying one’s own
intentional action and the observation of others’ action. How
do we understand other people’s intentional actions? What
is the relation, in neural terms, between action and intention
and what is the neural basis of intention? How do we impute
intention on the basis of action?
In order to address these questions we need first to
introduce some relevant conceptual distinctions.
We assume that an action is a behavior undertaken with a
goal in view and partly because of this goal. Action depends
for its intentionality on a relevant intention of the agent.
Following Tuomela (in press), this intention can be either an
“action-intention” or an “aim-intention”.

The Action System
Empirical evidence suggests that recognizing the actionintentions of others is based, at least in part, on the same
mechanisms that underlie one’s own action-intention.
The discovery made approximately ten years ago of a
particular class of motor neurons in a sector of the ventral
premotor cortex of monkeys, called F5, provided the first
convincing physiological evidence for a direct match
between action execution and action perception (Gallese et
al., 1996; Rizzolatti et al., 1996). In fact, quite
unexpectedly, the study of motor functions showed that not
only are pure motor neurons found in the F5 area, but also
62

The spatio-temporal congruence of the features of a
movement certainly represents a strong cue for determining
the experience of agency. This mechanism, however, does
not account for the frequent instances in which an intention
is generated but the corresponding action is not executed. A
paradigmatic situation where this occurs is motor imagery
(i.e., imagining the performance of an action), in which
there are no reafferent signals and no proprioceptive signals.
Yet, attribution of action is clearly made (Jeannerod, 2003).
Jeannerod (2003) hypothesizes that in situations such as
these, correct attribution depends on the existence of nonoverlapping areas that are specifically activated for the self
and others. The diagram in Figure 1 is a tentative illustration
of this process. It represents a motor cognitive situation
involving two people. Agent A generates a representation of
a self-generated action, i.e., a motor intention. If it is then
executed, it will become a signal for agent B, such that
agent B will form a representation of the action she sees.
Agent B will make an estimate of the social consequences
of the action she sees and will possibly change her beliefs
about agent A. The interaction of the two agents should
depend on the interaction of the representations of the
observed and executed actions within each of the two
brains. In fact with an individual, the two representations are
closely situated and partially overlap. Determining who is
acting - the other or the self - should be based on the nonoverlapping part.
Motor imagery studies provide a crucial opportunity to
test these hypotheses. In a PET experiment, Ruby and
Decety (2001) asked participants to imagine actions from
different perspectives. In the first-person perspective,
participants were told to imagine that they are executing a
given action. In the third-person perspective, the instruction
was to imagine that they were watching somebody else
doing that same action. In the first-person perspective,
specific activation was observed in the inferior parietal
lobule in the left hemisphere. By contrast, activation was
found in a symmetrical area of the right hemisphere for the
third-person perspective. Other areas were activated in both
conditions.
It is interesting to note that in both experimental
conditions, participants were required to imagine an action.
The representations activated in both situations were thus
activated from within. The fact that a difference in
activation was nevertheless observed in the right inferior
parietal lobe shows that the inferior parietal lobe is not
simply involved in associating actions and their sensory
consequences (Farrer et al., 2003), but also in distinguishing
the self from others. In a subsequent PET study, Ruby and
Decety (2003) investigated the neural correlates of the
self/other distinction at the conceptual level by comparing
the neural networks involved in answering the same set of
questions from either a first- or a third-person perspective.
Participants were selected from a group of medical students
and were presented with written sentences related to the
health sciences. They were then instructed to make truthful
judgments about the statements, according either to their
own perspective or according to what they thought a layman
might think. Variations in rCBF between the two conditions
demonstrated that the brain areas distinguishing the cerebral

that are neurons that fire when a recorded monkey observes
another monkey, or even an experimenter, performing a
similar action.
Subsequent experiments showed that these neurons,
designated as “mirror neurons”, are not restricted to the
premotor cortex, but are also found in other areas of the
monkey brain, notably, in the posterior parietal cortex
(Gallese et al. 2002), and in homologous areas in the human
brain (Fadiga et al., 2002; Grezes et al., 2003; Hamzei et al.,
2003).
As Jackson and Decety (2004) note, the existence of a
system matching executed and perceived actions offers a
parsimonious explanation of how we recognize other
people’s intended actions - i.e., by a direct mapping of the
visual representation of the observed action onto our own
motor representation of the same action. The same motor
representation is used for intending actions as well as
recognizing other people’s action-intentions (Garbarini &
Adenzato, 2004).

The Necessity of a “Who?” System
The existence of shared neural representations enables us to
settle the question of what the agent is doing, but it poses
the problem of action/intention attribution (Becchio &
Bertone, 2004): if the same areas are activated while
representing one’s own action and during the observation of
another person’s action, how do we in neural terms
distinguish between ourselves and others? The activation of
shared neural representations allows us to identify the
action-intention (e.g., to discriminate between the intention
of grasping an object and the intention of touching it), but it
seems not to be per se sufficient to attribute the intention to
an agent.

The Agent System
At the level of the mirror neuron system, the agent
parameter is still not articulated as a component of the
representation of the action. As Dokic and Pacherie (2004)
note, the agentive understanding of action is something
different. It involves understanding the more complex
relationship between an agent with a goal, the instrumental
means, and the effects produced. In fact it involves agentintentionality. Various neural mechanisms have been
proposed as possible candidates for the “Who” system
(Georgieff & Jeannerod, 1998), specifically dedicated to
action attribution. One hypothesized mechanism is the
monitoring of signals arising from body movements, i.e.
comparison between the control signals that contribute to
generating a movement and signals arising out of its
execution. There is good evidence that the inferior parietal
cortex and the insula are crucial components of this
mechanism, which is specifically involved in perceiving the
spatial features of movements (Decety et al. 2002;
Chaminade & Decety, 2002; Farrer et al., 2003; for a review
see also Jackson & Decety, 2004). A recent study by Leube
et al. (2003) found that right posterior superior sulcus
activation positively correlates with a temporal delay
introduced on-line between an action and its visual
feedback.
63

correlates of first- and third-person perspective-taking at the
conceptual level are similar to those already detected at the
motor level, i.e. the right inferior parietal lobe and the
frontopolar and somatosensory cortices.
Furthermore, the role of the inferior parietal lobe in firstperson/third-person perspective distinction is confirmed by
neuropsychological and psychopathological evidence.
Mesulam (1981) reported the case of a patient with an
abscess of the right parieto-occipital region who suffered

from delusion of external control. Schizophrenic patients
experiencing passivity phenomena believe their thoughts
and actions to be those of external, or alien, entities. Using a
PET methodology on such patients, Spence et al. (1997)
found hyperactivation of the right inferior parietal cortex,
and experience passivity as compared to healthy subjects
during the performance of freely selected movements.

Figure 1: The diagram depicts the interactions of two agents (A and B) observing each other. Each agent builds a
representation of his or her own intentions/actions and of the intentions/actions of the other agent. Representations of selfgenerated actions and observed actions tend to overlap. From Jeannerod (2003).

64

Would we still find an activation within the anterior
paracingulate cortex when eliminating actual interaction?
The question is in part addressed by the second
experiment designed by Walter et al. (2004). This
experiment substituted the condition involving actual
interaction for a new conceptual category: prospective
social intentionality, which the authors referred to as the
intention of a single agent whose private action is oriented
towards subsequent, social interaction (e.g., John
preparing a romantic evening with Mary). This condition
involves a social aim but without actual interaction. The
reasoning underlying the experiment was that if anterior
paracingulate cortex activation was due to the presence of
two agents actually interacting, no activation should be
observed in the prospective social intentionality condition.
Conversely, if the activation depended on the social
nature of the aim an agent pursued, anterior paracingulate
cortex activation should still be observed.
The results confirmed this second prediction: a pattern
of activation similar to that observed in the social
interaction condition was also found in the prospective
social intentionality condition. As expected, based on the
results from the previous experiment, no activation was
detected in the intentional conditions that presented either
a single agent or two agents acting independently in the Imode.
The experiment shows that the activation of the anterior
paracingulate cortex modulates with respect to the nature
of the aim (social vs. non-social). Observing an agent
acting on a social aim results in the same activation
associated with the observation of two agents socially
inter-acting.
A question still to be investigated is whether a social
aim in this kind of context has to be thought as
representing, in all cases, a foreseen social interaction in
order to result in the expected pattern of activation. At
least the majority of the examples of prospective social
condition used by Walter et al. (2004) implied in fact the
representation of a future interaction). As a consequence,
even if the second experiment allows us to exclude that an
actual interaction is a necessary condition, it does not rule
out the possibility that foreseen interaction plays a role in
such activation.

The Aim System
The processes described thus far concern the recognition
of an action-intention and its attribution. As we have seen,
a further aspect to be considered concern aim-intention.
The same behavior, performed by the same agent can be
initiated for different aims: enlarging the temporal horizon
allows us to focus on what the agent aims at by its action.
As said above, an aim-intention can be either in the Imode or in the we-mode (Tuomela, 2002). Consider the
case of an agent, John, lighting a candle. John may light a
candle because the electricity has gone out, and he wants
to read a book. This is an I-mode case. As to we-mode
intention, suppose John and Mary have both formed the
(we-) intention to have lunch together, their we-intention
(amounting to a joint intention when considered
collectively) is a we-mode aim-intention. I-mode means
acting and having an attitude privately, as a private
person, whereas we-mode means having it as a group
member.
Walter et al. (2004) have launched a new series of brain
mapping experiments, with the objective of distinguishing
between merely private aim-intention and social aimintention. In a first fMRI experiment, participants were
asked to read short comic strips that depicted an unfolding
story plot. The participants’ task was to choose the most
logical story ending from three pictures representing
answers. The story content was either physical, i.e.,
unintentional (a ball blown by the wind breaking several
bottles) or intentional. In turn, the intentional strip
contents pertained to three conceptual categories,
depicting either the intentional, I-mode action of a single
agent (changing a broken bulb in order to read a book) or
of two agents acting independently in the I-mode (an
agent building a doghouse while another agent sets up a
tent for camping), or social interaction between two
people communicating through gestures (requesting
another person to pass a bottle by pointing at it).
The most interesting result was a significant increase in
activation associated with the social interaction condition.
Seeing two agents communicating resulted in significant
activation in the medial prefrontal cortex, especially in the
anterior paracingulate cortex. The fact that Walter et al.
(2004) found no activation during the reading of comic
strips depicting either one agent acting or two agents
acting independently of each other suggested that the
observed activation was not due simply to the intentional
content or to the number of agents represented in stories.
Indeed, the activation of the anterior paracingulate cortex
required two agents socially interacting.
A somewhat controversial issue is whether cooperation
requires that agents, beyond having a shared social aim,
also actually overtly interact (for a discussion of this point
see Tuomela (2000), chapter 3). In the first experiment the
critical activation was always associated with actual
interaction. Of course, the interacting agents also had a
social aim but the experimental design did not allow
differentiating between the effect of interaction and the
effect of social aim.

Conclusions
In this paper we presented a theoretical analysis of recent
neuroscientific evidence for different neural activations
underlying action-intention and aim-intention (as defined
in the paper and also in Tuomela, 2002). As regards
action-intention, it is shown that recognizing the actionintentions of others is based, at least in part, on the same
mechanisms that underlie one’s own action-intention. In
contrast, a specific area of activation was found to
correlate with social aim-intention, a special case of aimintention related to acting together (Walter et al., 2004).
This result suggests that the distinction between I-mode
(viz. “private” mode) and we-mode (viz. “group” mode)

65

consciousness of action and self-consciousness.
Consciousness and Cognition, 7, 465-477.
Grèzes, J., Armony, J. L., Rowe, J., & Passingham, R. E.
(2003). Activations related to mirror and canonical
neurons in the human brain : An fMRI study.
NeuroImage, 18, 928-937.
Hamzei, F., Rijntjes, M., Dettmers, C., Glauche, V.,
Weiller, C., & Buchel, C. (2003). The human action
recognition system and its relationship to Broca’s area:
An fMRI study. NeuroImage, 19, 637-644.
Jackson, P. L., & Decety, J. (2004). Motor cognition: A
new paradigm to study self-other interactions. Current
Opinion in Neurobiology, 14, 259-263.
Jeannerod, M. (2003). The mechanisms of selfrecognition in humans. Behavioural Brain Research,
142, 1-15.
Leube, D. T., Knoblich, G., Erb, M., Grodd, W., Bartels,
M., & Kircher, T. T. J. (2003). The neural correlates of
perceiving one’s own movements. NeuroImage, 20,
2084-2090.
Rizzolatti, G., Fadiga, L., Gallese, V., & Fogassi L.
(1996). Premotor cortex and the recognition of motor
actions. Cognitive Brain Research, 3, 131-141.
Ruby, P., & Decety, J. (2001). Effect of subjective
perspective taking during simulation of action: A PET
investigation of agency. Nature Neuroscience, 4, 546550.
Ruby, P., & Decety, J. (2003). What you believe versus
what you think they believe: A neuroimaging study of
conceptual perspective-taking. European Journal of
Neuroscience, 17, 2475-2480.
Tuomela, R. (in press). We-intentions revisited.
Philosophical Studies.
Tuomela, R. (2000). Cooperation: A philosophical study.
Philosophical Studies Series, Kluwer Academic
Publishers.
Tuomela, R. (2002). The philosophy of social practices: A
collective acceptance view. Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press,
Walter, H., Adenzato, M., Ciaramidaro, A., Enrici, I., Pia,
L., & Bara, B. G. (2004). Understanding intentions in
social interaction: The role of the anterior paracingulate
cortex. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 16, 18541863.

intention might be relevant also at the neuroscientific
level of analysis.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by MIUR of Italy (cofin 2003,
protocol n. 2003119330_008).

References
Baldwin, D. A., & Baird, J. A. (2001). Discerning
intentions in dynamic human action. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 4, 171-178.
Becchio, C., & Bertone, C. (2004). Wittgenstein running:
Neural mechanisms of collective intentionality and wemode. Consciousness and Cognition, 13, 123-133.
Chaminade, T., & Decety, J. (2002). Leader or follower.
Involvement of the inferior parietal lobule in agency.
NeuroReport, 13, 1975-1978.
Decety, J., Chaminade, T., Grèzes, J., & Meltzoff, A. N.
(2002). A PET exploration of the neural mechanisms
involved in reciprocal imitation. Neuroimage, 15, 265272.
Dokic, J., & Pacherie, E. (2004). Mirror neurons,
understanding of action, and joint action. Paper
presented at the IV Conference on Collective
Intentionality, Siena, 13-15 October.
Fadiga, L., Craighero, L. Buccino, G., & Rizzolatti G.
(2002). Speech listening specifically modulates the
excitability of tongue muscles: A TMS study. European
Journal of Neuroscience, 15, 399-402.
Farrer, C., Franck, N., Georgieff, N., Frith, C. D., Decety,
J., & Jeannerod, M. (2003). Modulating the experience
of agency: A PET study. Neuroimage, 18, 324-333.
Gallese, V., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., & Rizzolatti, G.
(1996). Action recognition in the premotor cortex.
Brain, 119, 593-609.
Gallese, V., Fogassi, L., Fadiga, L. & Rizzolatti, G.
(2002). Action representation in the inferior parietal
lobule. In: W. Prinz & B. Hommel (Eds.), Attention and
Performance, vol. 19, Oxford University Press, New
York, 247-266.
Garbarini, F., & Adenzato, M. (2004). At the root of
embodied cognition: Cognitive science meets
neurophysiology. Brain and Cognition, 56, 100-106.
Georgieff, N., & Jeannerod, M. (1998). Beyond
consciousness of external reality: A "Who" system for

66

