UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Object Categorization in the Preschool Years and Its Relation with Cognitive Inhibition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/94g2t4pr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
Ionescu, Thea

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Object Categorization in the Preschool Years
and Its Relation with Cognitive Inhibition
Thea Ionescu (theaionescu@psychology.ro)
Department of Psychology, Babes-Bolyai University,
37 Republicii Street, 400015 Cluj-Napoca
Romania

Abstract
The present study aimed to investigate the relationship between
flexible categorization and cognitive inhibition in preschool
children. Subjects (N=14) were aged between 3 and 4 ½ years.
They were tested with two tasks: a Stroop-like day-night task
for inhibition (Gerstadt, Hong & Diamond, 1994) and an
object-sorting task for flexible categorization. As 6 children did
not perform the inhibition task properly, it was impossible to
measure any correlation. In consequence, the study presents the
analysis of the individual performance of the 8 children that
performed both tasks. Discussion regards the implications of
investigating the interplay between external and internal factors
for understanding the mechanisms and the development of
categorization.
Keywords: categorization; cognitive inhibition; preschool
children.

Development of Categorization
If one takes the vast literature there is on categorization, a
broadly accepted definition for this process will lead him/her
to view it as the grouping of stimuli in different classes.
Studying its ontogenesis has at least two major aims: to
understand the development of categorization and to identify
the mechanisms that lead to the way categorization will
function in the adult period. The choice of categorization as
an investigation topic is motivated mainly by the fact that we
can consider it as a first step in problem solving. This way it
becomes a very valuable ability for the cognitive system and
by understanding its nature we can find out the manner in
which we could optimize its functioning.
For long time categorization was seen as referring to
grouping stimuli on the basis of some necessary and sufficient
features (as in the theory of Piaget, or as logical
categorization – Ionescu, 2001b). In the last decades
psychology has changed this view by adding several other
approaches – one of the most known examples is the
prototype-based categorization (see the theory of Rosch in
Miclea, 1999). One of the most recent views defines
categorization as “a systematic differential interaction
between an autonomous, adaptive sensorimotor system and
its world” (Harnad, 2003). Barsalou (2003) considers that
“each represented category corresponds to a component of
experience”. In his Situated Simulation Theory (Barsalou,
2003) he states a link between sensorimotor and conceptual
processing because “conceptual processing uses reenactments
of sensory-motor states – simulations – to represent

categories”. So the author considers concepts as abilities to
construct representations according to the current needs of an
action, meaning in continuous change. This view will give us
useful insights about flexible categorization that will be
discussed in the following.
One of the most important uses of categorization is to give
high efficiency to the cognitive system when it encounters the
vast amount of information in the environment. This
efficiency is given on the one hand by the existence of well
defined categories in our representational system that help us
to quickly label a new stimulus if it is similar to the members
of a certain category (e.g., animals, furniture, flowers, etc.);
and on the other hand, by the capacity to go beyond the
boundaries of these categories and to reconsider the group a
certain stimulus belongs to according to the current needs
(e.g., a glass as “object to drink from” or as “bowl for
flowers”). This second aspect, namely flexible categorization,
which allows us to reorganize information according to the
contextual demands, was long time considered as not
accessible to children. The existence of well defined
categories was recognized as a capacity of the child’s
cognitive system: it was accepted that we make a distinction
among object classes from the first years of life, but the
access to class inclusion was thought as possible only at
school entrance (see the theory of Piaget, e.g., 1945). The
accepted flow of categorization development was from
thematic categorization (according to a shared event – e.g.,
dog and his master) to the taxonomic one (according to kinds
of objects – e.g., dog and cat as animals), and only in later
childhood to the ability to flexibly alternate among them. The
last decades of research has outlined however that
preschoolers, and even infants (Mareschal & Quinn, 2001)
can categorize flexibly if certain conditions are met
(Blanchet, Dunham & Dunham, 2001; Gopnik & Astington,
1988; Prasada, Ferencz & Haskell, 2002; Rice et al., 1997;
Waxman & Namy, 1997).
Studies with preschool children show that they do not have
a preference for thematic categorization and they can use both
thematic and taxonomic categories. For example, Waxman
and Namy (1997) outline that the tendency for thematic
categorization comes mainly at the age of 4 after a
coexistence with taxonomic categorization, and it is often the
effect of instructions used in the experiment. Using a forcedchoice task, with a thematic and a taxonomic alternative for
the target item (e.g., tulip-target object, daffodil-taxonomic
alternative, vase-thematic alternative), and manipulating the
instructions, the authors showed that performance differs

1024

significantly according to the instruction. In the “goes best”
and “goes with” conditions there are more thematic
categorization, while in the “another one” condition children
choose more taxonomic alternatives. We see that preschoolers
do not have a clear preference for one or the other type of
categorization; on the contrary, at 3, children seem to choose
more taxonomic objects in the “another one” condition, and at
4 they choose more thematic alternatives in the “goes best”
condition (Waxman and Namy, 1997). The authors plead for
the hypothesis that children, just like adults, build their
categories as a response for situational demands. This way,
we could speak about a gradual development of the flexible
knowledge system up to the adult stage, development that is
based on abilities that are present very early in ontogeny.
But how exactly can we explain flexible categorization in
young children?

Factors that Explain the Performance in Flexible
Categorization Tasks. Cognitive Inhibition.
We can identify several factors that influence and facilitate
complex forms of categorization in the preschool years. These
factors can be grouped in two classes:
•

external factors – represented by the constraints of the
environment;

•

internal factors – namely, the internal constraints of the
cognitive system that categorizes.

There are in the literature studies that focus on the
relationship between categorization and external factors. They
show that factors like those listed below can influence the
performance of children in flexible categorization tasks:
•

instructions – Deak and Bauer (1995), Waxman and
Namy (1997);

•

training – Deak and Bauer (1995);

•

the induction of certain contexts as well as the type of
task – Blaye and Bonthoux (2001), Bonthoux, Cannard
and Blaye (2000);

•

type and features of stimuli – Ahn, Gelman,
Amsterlaw, Hohenstein and Kalish (2000), Blanchet,
Dunham and Dunham (2001), Chaigneau and Barsalou
( in press), Gutheil, Bloom, Valderrama and Freedman
(2004);

•

different cues used in experiments – Nazzi and Gopnik
(2003).

Regarding the internal factors (like knowledge base,
working memory, cognitive inhibition, the comparison
process, or language), we have very few studies that relate
these with the ability of flexible categorization. They refer
mainly to: language and concept acquisition or the influence
of linguistic labels on categorization (Samuelson & Smith,
2000; Smith, Jones, Landau, Gershkoff-Stowe & Samuelson,
2002); the process of comparison and categorization (Gentner
& Namy, 1999; Namy & Gentner, 2002); executive functions
and flexible thinking (Jacques & Zelazo, 2001). There are no
studies, to our knowledge, that investigate directly the link

between performance in categorization tasks and in cognitive
inhibition tasks, even though inhibition is considered in many
studies on categorization in childhood a sine qua non
condition for children’s performance. In other words, the
failure of little children to categorize flexibly is often
explained via their reduced cognitive inhibition (due to the
incomplete maturation of their frontal lobes), expressed in the
perseveration of response (Zelazo & Jacques, 1996, apud
Deak, 2000).
The present study aimed to investigate the relationship
between flexible categorization and cognitive inhibition in
preschool children (3 to 5 years). The assumption of the study
is that there is a positive correlation among the two
mentioned cognitive aspects, but a moderate one, because a
good performance in categorization tasks is determined by
external factors as well. This fact is demonstrated by the
existence of flexible categorization even at 3-4 years of age,
when the evaluation of cognitive inhibition would predict a
high rigidity of information processing in children. Taking
into account that for considering several possibilities of
classification one needs to inhibit the previous categorization
choice, we can consider inhibition as one of the important
factors that intervene in the process of flexible categorization.
Cognitive Inhibition and Its Development. The inhibitor
control is defined most often in developmental psychology as
the capacity to suppress the actions or cognitive processes
that interfere (Carlson, Moses & Hix, 1998, apud Benga,
2003). In the present paper, I have selected the cognitive
aspect of the inhibitor control (see the procedure below),
because cognitive inhibition is the closest to the nature of the
categorization process.
The development of cognitive inhibition, as that of the
executive functions in general, takes the shape of an inversed
U-shaped curve – with low performance in childhood,
optimal performance in the adult period, and again low scores
in the third age (Zelazo, Craik & Booth, 2004). Its
development depends on the maturation of the frontal cortex
(Diamond & Taylor, 1996). There are a lot of precursors of
inhibition from the first year of life (Benga, 2003), and
between 3 and 7 years we are witnesses of a marked progress
of this function.
The performance of children in tasks that require to
remember two rules and alternative responses according to
different demands is often explained via inhibition (Jacques
& Zelazo, 2001). So far, there is no study to investigate the
relationship among this “natural” constraint of the young
cognitive system and the ability to categorize flexibly, and the
experiments that investigate external factors explain
children’s failure via the procedures used in the studies
(Waxman & Namy, 1997).

The Relationship between Flexible
Categorization and Cognitive Inhibition

1025

I have chosen for the assessment of inhibition the day-night
Stroop-like task (Gerstadt, Hong & Diamond, 1994) because

it is the closest to the processing that takes place during
categorization and because it evaluates cognitive inhibition.
In order to evaluate object categorization I have chosen an
object-sorting task that was derived form the literature (e.g.,
Waxman & Namy, 1997) and from some previous personal
case studies (Ionescu, 2001a; Ionescu, 2003). They will be
described in the section with the procedure.
According to the priority given either to external or to
internal factors as essential in influencing flexible
categorization behavior, we can make two predictions:

a)

a)

b)

c)

Children with low performance at the inhibition task will
avoid to choose the object that was in the first category
for the second one as well (see the Material section), and
they will need longer time to solve the second
categorization.
Children with good inhibition will be as efficient in the
second categorization as in the first.

b) There are no marked differences between the above
mentioned groups of children regarding their
performance in the categorization task.
After reviewing the literature we favor the second class of
prediction, but we expect a positive moderate correlation.

Method
Subjects. Children (N=14) are aged between 3 years and 4
years and 6 months (m=3 years and 5 months), 9 boys and 5
girls (gender was not considered as a variable in this phase of
the research). All children attend kindergarten and the
approval of the institution was obtained to carry out the
research.
Materials.
Day-night Stroop-like task – 13.5X10 laminated cards with
two types of images: a sun on a light blue background; a
moon and stars on a dark blue background.
Object-sorting task – familiar objects (toys): 3 main objects (a
cup, a knife, a sharpener), target objects (e. g, cup, fork, etc.)
and distracters (e.g., a cube, a doll, etc.). For each of the main
objects there are two categorization possibilities: among the 7
objects that are in front of the child in a test trial, two always
fit the main objects according to a certain criterion (e.g., the
cup can be put in the category of “things we drink from” –
thematic criterion – and of “green toys” – perceptual criterion
– see fig. 1). All toys have similar size and the color was
controlled not to interfere with their possible choices. The
belonging of each main object to the classification
possibilities was tested on adult subjects, in order to verify the
members of each category and the clarity of the classification
criterions (N=10, mean age-21 years and 1 month). Where the
agreement was not 100%, objects were replaced until they
arrived to those used in the study with children (with a
maximum agreement).

1026

Figure 1: Example of materials used in the object-sorting
task: a) total set of toys (7); b) the category “toys we can
drink from”; c) the category “green toys”.
Procedure.
Day-night Stroop-like task (D/N) – the task started with
checking the knowledge about the association sun=day and
moon=night. As there were no two age groups to compare, I
used two versions for this tasks:
•

Real D/N – where sun=day and moon=night (control
version);

•

Inhibition D/N where sun=night and moon=day.

In the Inhibition D/N children had to say “night” when they
saw the card depicting the sun, and “day” when they saw the
card with the moon. This kind of answer needs the inhibition
of the prepotent response (i.e., sun=day). After specifying the
rules, there were 2 trials without feedback – if children erred,
rules were told again.
There were 16 testing trials with a pseudorandom sequence
(as in the study of Gerstadt, Hong & Diamond, 1994), and the
analyses looked at the number of correct responses (max. 16)
and the execution time.
The mean testing time was 2 minutes; all the situations were
videotaped, and children were tested individually in a room in
their kindergarten.
Object-sorting task – this task took the form of a game: “Let’s
arrange toys with Mickey Mouse!” The general background
of the task was that Mickey Mouse came with a lot of toys, all
put together, the task of children being to help him to group
the toys according to different rules.
In the familiarization phase, all objects and properties used in
the game were named by the child (with different objects than
those from the test phase), children being allowed to
manipulate them. The demonstration phase consisted in
showing children that one and the same object can be put into
two categories (a blue flower - “flowers” and “blue toys”).
The main instruction was “Let’s give Mickey Mouse all the
flowers/all the blue toys”. Objects were put back in the larger

Analyzing the videotaped behavior of the child who did not
complete the two versions we were able to observe a low
behavioral inhibition as well.

group of seven after each categorization trial. After that, the
child himself/herself did the categorization in order to check
the understanding of the rules and to exercise the possibility
to integrate one object into two categories.
In the test phase, there were 6 test-situations, two for each
main object (with different distracters for each). During the
game there were minimal cues, mainly clarifications of the
questions. The game stopped after all the three objects were
tested, and the analysis looked at the number of correct
responses (max. 6).
The mean testing time was 10 minutes, in the same conditions
as for the precedent task.
Evaluations with the two tasks took place in two different
days, and children were rewarded after each evaluation.
Feedback was not provided during the testing phases.
Videotapes were analyzed by two coders and disagreements
were all solved by discussion.

Object-sorting task.
Out of the 8 children:
• 7 children did integrate correctly 2 or 3 main objects;
• 1 child did not make it further than the demonstration
phase (the one that did not complete either version of
D/N task).
We could observe children’s tendency to put the object that
belonged to the first category as the last one in the second,
together with the visual search of feedback for the second
categorization (remember that children were given no
feedback at all).
We could also see that there is a relative independence of the
performance in categorization and the performance in
inhibition. Thus, there were children with good scores in
inhibition that categorized correctly two main objects, and
children with a lower score in inhibition who categorized
correctly all three main objects. The time needed for the two
categorizations/main object was similar, independent of the
result in the inhibition task.

Results
Day-night Stroop-like task (D/N).
Out of the 14 children:
• 2 children did not associate correctly sun=day and
moon=night in the beginning of the task;
• 4 children could not keep in mind the rules, not even
after three pairs of trials;
• 8 children did complete the task.
The 6 children that could not complete the task were
eliminated, and as a consequence the correlation was
impossible to estimate. Because this study is part of a larger
research project focused on flexible categorization in
children, I decided to analyze the individual performance of
the 8 children who performed both tasks, as a premise for the
future investigation of the relationship intended in this study.
The mean age of these children was 3 years and 8 months (3
years and 5 months-4 years and 6 months), 5 boys and 3 girls.
Out of the 8 children:
•
7 children performed the Inhibition D/N to the end;
• 1 child did not perform the Real D/N (he was not at the
kindergarten that day);
• 1 child did not perform to the end both versions; he
stopped at the 14th test trial in Inhibition D/N, and at the
12th test trial in real D/N.
The 6 children who performed completely the two versions
had a mean error number of 2 (Inhibition D/N) and 1 (Real
D/N), and a mean execution time of 58.5 sec (Inhibition D/N)
and 54 sec (Real D/N). So, if we consider their performance
as a “group” we could assert that they already have good
cognitive inhibition.
Taken individually, 4 of the children had the expected
differences in these kinds of tasks: more errors and a longer
time in Inhibition D/N vs. Real D/N (e.g., 70 sec vs. 50 sec.; 4
errors vs. 2 errors). However, 3 children had a shorter time in
Inhibition D/N (e.g., 46 sec vs. 53 sec) and an equal number
of errors (1).

Discussion

1027

The main observation that we can make on the basis of
individual pattern analysis is that when the differences in the
inhibition task (numbers of errors and execution time) are
small, performance in categorization proves the flexibility of
these children, namely the ability to integrate the same object
in distinct categories. There are no differences in the
categorization task – on the contrary, some of the children
with lower inhibition categorize better the toys. Only if the
score in the inhibition task is very low, leading to not
completing the task, performance in categorization is also
very low. In the case of that child, the most probable
explanation is the interference of a low behavioral inhibition
that has affected his focus on the task, and as a consequence
his cognitive performance could not have been evaluated.
There is no avoidance of the objects that go in the first
category for the second one, but they are postponed as if there
were a “last moment choice”. This can be a proof in favor of
the interaction of cognitive inhibition with other factors,
especially external ones, in determining the process of
flexible categorization. In other words, there may be an initial
inhibition, but the object is correctly chosen for the second
category as well, maybe because of the initial training, the
type of task and the familiarity of toys. In flexible object
sorting one needs to go beyond the first classification
criterion (e.g., thematic) and to reconsider the category that
object belongs to (to put it for instance in a perceptually based
category). This complex process is dependent both on
cognitive inhibition and external factors. Most of the studies
has focused so far on these types of factors (internal and
external) separately (e.g., Bonthoux, Cannard & Blaye, 2000;
Jacques & Zelazo, 2001; Waxman & Namy, 1997). We
consider it useful to study their interaction in order to get a

better image about the mechanisms and the development of
flexible categorization in childhood.
It is possible that the task used for the assessment of
cognitive inhibition was not discriminative enough for
children of 3-4 years, an aspect mentioned by other authors
who used this task as well (Benga, 2003). Therefore, even if
we could favor the second type of behavioral prediction, we
need to repeat the study with a larger number of subjects and
with alternative tasks for inhibition.
Speaking about the determinants of the ability to
categorize, Dunham and Dunham (1995) showed that the
preference for one kind or another of categorization in the
preschool period seems to depend on the type of senzorimotor
activity and on the early language production from the
previous age periods. Thus, children who at 24 months use
gestures for showing objects and names for their identity will
favor taxonomic strategies at 3 years; children who at 24
months play relational-functional games with objects and
who use terms for the relations among objects will favor
thematic strategies at 3 years of age. We see here a
sensorimotor grounding of categorization as we could see in
the approach of Harnad (2003) and Barsalou (2003). The
authors (Dunham & Dunham, 1995) propose two alternative
explanations. The first refers to a neurological explanation:
children who have a semantic bias to spatial and relational
terms would base their activity on the right hemisphere,
building holistic scenes for stimuli; on the other hand,
children who perceive more analytically and have a bias
toward naming individual objects seem to base their activity
on the left hemisphere. However, this hypothesis has to be
tested with neurological tests. The second hypothesis refers to
the social history of the child. In other words, it is the parental
style which is either oriented toward functional relationships
among objects, or on the identity of objects, that influence the
preference of the child. Even though this seems very intuitive,
this hypothesis is very difficult to test in rigorous conditions.
As we can see, the authors outline the early social context as
an external factor for determining the shape categorization
will take, but we need thorough future studies to investigate
this hypotheses.
As a conclusion, we can see that preschoolers are already
capable of doing multiple categorizations with the same
object, by appropriately taking into account the contextual
demands. The studies from the literature do not agree
however all the time with respect to the mechanisms and to
the factors that influence the ability to categorize in
childhood. Therefore, what remains essential in further
investigations is to study the interplay between external and
internal factors that allows and fosters flexible categorization
in preschool children.

Acknowledgements
The author wishes to thank the children and the staff from the
Kindergarten no. 59, Cluj-Napoca for their collaboration. She
also wishes to thank Assoc. Prof. Oana Benga and Assoc.
Prof. Adrian Bivolaru for their valuable comments all along
the research.

References
Ahn, W., Gelman, S. A., Amsterlaw, J. A., Hohenstein, J., &
Kalish, C. W. (2000). Causal status effect in children’s
categorization, Cognition, 76, B35-B43.
Barsalou, L. W. (2003). Situated Simulation in the Human
Conceptual System, Language and Cognitive Processes,
18, 513-562.
Benga, O. (2003). Dezvoltarea cogniţiei sociale la copii,
Doctoral dissertation, Department of Psychology, BabesBolyai University
Blanchet, N., Dunham, P.J., & Dunham, F. (2001).
Differences in Preschool Children’s Conceptual Strategies
When Thinking About Animate Entities and Artifacts,
Developmental Psychology, 37/6,791-800.
Blaye, A., & Bonthoux, F. (2001). Thematic and taxonomic
relations in preschoolers: The development of flexibility in
categorization choices, British Journal of Developmental
Psychology, 19, 395-412.
Bonthoux, F., Cannard, C., & Blaye, A. (2000). Le
developpement de la flexibilite categorielle entre 4 et 8
ans, unpublished paper.
Chaigneau, S. E., & Barsalou, L. W. (in press). The Role of
Function in Categories, Theoria et Historia Scientiarum.
Deak, G., & Bauer, P., (1995). The Effects of Task
Comprehension on Preschoolers’ and Adults’
Categorization Choice, Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 60, 393-427.
Deak, G. (2000). The Growth of Flexible Problem Solving:
Preschool Children Use Changing Verbal Cues to Infer
Multiple Words Meaning, Journal of Cognition and
Development, 1(2), 157-191.
Diamond, A., & Taylor, C. (1996). Development of an
Aspect of Executive Control: Development of the
Abilities to Remember What I Said and to “Do as I Say,
Not as I Do”, Developmental Psychobiology, 29(4),315334.
Dunham, P., & Dunham, F. (1995). Developmental
Antecedents of Taxonomic Thematic Strategies at 3
Years of Age, Developmental Psychology, 31/3, 483493.
Gentner, D., & Namy, L. L. (1999). Comparison in the
Development of Categories, Cognitive Development, 14,
487-513.
Gerstadt, C. L., Hong, Y. J., & Diamond, A. (1994). The
relationship between cognition and action: performance
of children 3 ½ - 7 years old on a Stroop-like day-night
test, Cognition, 53, 129-153.
Gopnik, A., & Astington, J. (1988). Children’s
Understanding of Representational Change and Its
Relation to the Understanding of False Belief and the
Appearance-Reality Distinction, Child Development, 59,
26-37.
Gutheil, G., Bloom, P., Valderrama, N., & Freedman, R.
(2004). The role of historical intuitions in children’s and
adults’ naming of artifacts, Cognition, 91, 23-42.

1028

Harnad, S. (2003). Cognition is Categorization, talk given at
the UQAM Summer Institute in Cognitive Sciences on
Categorization, Montreal, Canada.
Ionescu, T. (2001a). Flexibility of Categorization in 2-5
Years Old Children, Cogniţie, creier, comportament,
V/3, 235-263.
Ionescu, T. (2001b). Categorizarea obiectelor la copiii de
3-5 ani – pe bază de trăsături sau pe bază de exemplare?,
Cogniţie, creier, comportament, V/4, 385-403.
Ionescu, T. (2003). Categorization in preschool children,
poster presented at the UQAM Summer Institute in
Cognitive Sciences on Categorization, Montreal, Canada.
Jacques, S., & Zelazo, P. D. (2001). The Flexible Item
Selection Task (FIST): A Measure of Executive
Function
in
Preschoolers,
Developmental
Neuropsychology, 20(3), 573-591.
Mareschal, D., & Quinn, P. (2001). Categorization in
infancy, Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 5/10, 443-450.
Miclea, M. (1999). Psihologie cognitivă – Modele teoreticoexperimentale, Polirom, Iaşi.
Namy, L. L., & Gentner, D. (2002). Making a Silk Purse
Out of Two Sow’s Ears: Young Children’s Use of
Comparison in Category Learning, Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 131/1, 5-15.

Nazzi, T., & Gopnik, A. (2003). Sorting and acting with
objects in early childhood: an exploration of the use of
causal cues, Cognitive Development, 18, 299-317.
Piaget, J. (1945). La formation du symbole chez l'enfant,
Delachaux et Niestle, S.A., Neuchatel.
Prasada, S., Ferenz, K., & Haskell, T. (2002). Conceiving of
entities as objects and as stuff, Cognition, 83, 141-165.
Rice, C., Koinis, D., Sullivan, K., Tager-Flusberg, H.,
& Winner, E. (1997). When 3-Year-Olds Pass the
Appearance-Reality Test, Developmental Psychology,
33/1, 54-61.
Samuelson, L. K., & Smith, L. B. (2000). Children’s
Attention to Rigid and Deformable Shape in Naming and
Non-Naming Tasks, Child Development, 71/6, 1555-1570.
Smith, L. B., Jones, S. J., Landau, B., Gershkoff-Stowe,
& Samuelson, L. (2002). Object Name Learning
Provides On-The-Job Training for Attention,
Psychological Science, 13/1, 13-19.
Waxman, S.R., & Namy, L.L. (1997). Challenging the
Notion of a Thematic Preference in Young Children,
Developmental Psychology, 33/3, 555-567.
Zelazo, P. D., Craik, F. I. M., & Booth, L. (2004). Executive
function across the life span, Acta Psychologica, 115,
167-183.

1029

