UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
On Distinguishing Sensorial and Eliciting Epistemic Actions and on the Relationship between
Perceptive Structure of Body and Cognitive Processes

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/88v5q1hp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
Gatti, Alberto

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

On Distinguishing Sensorial and Eliciting Epistemic Actions and on the Relationship
between Perceptive Structure of Body and Cognitive Processes
Alberto Gatti (gatti3@unisi.it)
Department of Philosophy and Social Sciences, University of Siena
Via Roma 47, 53100 Siena, Italy
Abstract

is the one in which the cognitive agent performs a nonsensorial structured action upon the environment in order to
find previously unavailable data that are later examined. I
call this second kind of epistemic actions eliciting epistemic
actions (EEAs).
In the case of a sensorial epistemic action, the cognitive
agent gives a structure to its own sensorial action so that the
environment gives the agent itself a sensation that is structured as well and that contains information. By means of its
own sensorial action, the cognitive agent constructs a sensorial representation that carries information. Therefore, we
can say that a sensorial epistemic action has, as its counterpart, a sensorial representation. The distinctive feature of a
sensorial epistemic action is that, in a sensorial epistemic
action, the action that creates the representation is the same
identical action that explores it. We can say that a sensorial
epistemic action explores the sensorial representation by
creating it (see the illustrating scheme in Figure 1).

The present article is the fruit of part of an ethnographic research that I have carried out at an Italian hospital in order to
analyze how cognition goes on in a surgical team. The paper
has two main points: the distinction between two kinds of
epistemic action specifically devoted to construct representations in interaction with the environment and a reflection
about the possible influences on cognitive processes of a
change in the perceptive structure of human body. These two
points are treated by means of two case studies: medical semeiology and laparoscopic video-surgery, respectively. The
aim of the article is to try to demonstrate the hypothesis that
representations used in human cognitive processes arise from
more or less structured physical interactions between human
and environment and that a change in the perceptive relationship between body and environment may mean a change in
the representational codes used in reasoning.
Keywords: Distributed Cognition; Embodiment; Epistemic
Action; Perception; Teleoperation.

Sensorial Epistemic Actions and Eliciting
Epistemic Actions
Theoretical Analysis
Kirsh and Maglio (1994) make a fundamental distinction
between two kinds of action: pragmatic actions and epistemic actions. According to their analysis, pragmatic actions
are “actions performed to bring one physically closer to a
goal” (Kirsh & Maglio, 1994, p. 513), whereas epistemic
actions are “actions performed to uncover information that
is hidden or hard to compute mentally” (p. 513). In other
words, pragmatic actions are actions by means of which an
agent changes the world in order to create a state of affairs
that brings it physically closer to the goal that it wants to
reach. Epistemic actions, instead, are actions by means of
which an agent changes the world in a way that may even be
disadvantageous for reaching the physical goal, but that allows the agent to detect previously unavailable information
or to save internal cognitive effort.
I maintain the basic definition of epistemic action; however, I propose a further distinction, within the category of
epistemic actions, between two fundamental kinds of epistemic action. In addition, in my analysis I present a strict
correlation between the notion of epistemic action and the
notion of representation.
The first kind of epistemic action that I take into account
is the one in which the cognitive agent structures her own
sensorial action in order to receive from the environment a
feedback structured sensation that carries information. I call
this kind of epistemic actions sensorial epistemic actions
(SEAs). The second kind of epistemic actions that I consider

Figure 1: Illustrating scheme for sensorial epistemic action.
In the case of an eliciting epistemic action, the cognitive
agent performs actions that are devoted to change the configuration of the world or to stimulate the world in such a
way that it gives previously unavailable information. This
kind of action is not sensorial; it is an action that gives the
environment a new configuration or provokes a reaction in
the environment. This new configuration or this reaction are
later examined as if they were representations that carry information. Therefore, the counterpart of an eliciting epistemic action is an examination-independent representation.
Unlike sensorial epistemic actions, the distinctive feature of
an eliciting epistemic action is that, in an eliciting epistemic
action, the action that creates the representation is separate
from the action that explores it. The cognitive agent manipulates the world and elicits a particular configuration or a
773

using a sensorial epistemic action, which we can call visual
epistemic action and the result of this epistemic action is a
visual representation.
But, at the same time, the physician not only uses inspection alone, but also asks the patient to change her own position or to profoundly breathe and then observes specific data
in this new settings. So, we can notice that there are also
eliciting epistemic actions. These eliciting epistemic actions
are of a particular kind in that they are in fact performed by
the patient; however, the patient performs such actions under the instructions of the physician. Therefore, we can define these eliciting epistemic actions interpersonal eliciting
epistemic actions. The representation that they generate is
an interpersonally structured representation.
Such results related to inspection are schematized in the
following Table 1:

particular reaction that can count as representation and, then,
it explores such representation by means of a more or less
structured sensorial epistemic action (see the illustrating
scheme in Figure 2).

Table 1: Epistemic actions and representations
for inspection.
Epistemic Action
Visual Epistemic Action
(SEA)
Interpersonal Eliciting
Epistemic Action (languagemediated) (EEA)

Figure 2: Illustrating scheme for eliciting epistemic action.
In order to give support to the theoretical analysis illustrated above, in the next subsection I take into account a real
case in which the distinction between sensorial and eliciting
epistemic actions is evident.

Representation
Visual Representation
Interpersonally Structured
Representation

Palpation When the physician touches the abdomen of a
patient to detect diagnostic signs, she is using palpation gestures that have a specific structure depending on the sign
that the physician wants to detect and on the features of the
abdomen itself. Physician is performing a tactile technical
action which will give her specific tactile inputs. This time,
the sensorial representation that the physician receives is a
tactile representation, which she has obtained by means of a
sensorial epistemic action that we can call tactile epistemic
action. Therefore, the physician is handling a representation
that exhibits a representational code which is different from
the one of the representations collected during inspection.
As in the case of inspection, also during palpation the
physician asks the patient to take specific physical positions
in order to be able to detect otherwise unavailable diagnostic
signs. Therefore, also in this case there are interpersonal
eliciting epistemic actions that generate interpersonally
structured representations. But, besides this kind of eliciting
epistemic actions, in the case of palpation there is another
important kind of eliciting epistemic actions, which generates a specific elicited representation. This kind of eliciting
epistemic actions is constituted by the gestures through
which the physician provokes a pain reaction in the patient.
This kind of epistemic actions, that can be defined as paineliciting tactile epistemic actions, stimulate the patient’s
body in such a way that the patient has a pain reaction that
the physician evaluates. So, we can speak of a special kind
of representation that is constituted by a behavior of the patient and that can be defined as elicited behavioral representation. Table 2 shows the connections between epistemic
actions and representations that refer to palpation.

A Case Study: Medical Semeiology
Semeiology is the medical discipline that studies the correlation between signs and pathologies and the adequate gestures to detect the pathological signs themselves. After the
collection of the case-history related to the patient, the physician begins what is called objective examination. This examination follows the four principles of physical semeiology and these principles are: inspection, palpation, percussion, auscultation (DeGowin & DeGowin, 1969; Swartz,
2002). In this subsection, I will illustrate such principles by
taking into account the example of the examination of the
abdomen aimed at detecting signs of surgical pathologies
and I will propose a cognitive analysis of the various kinds
of actions at work in an objective examination by tracing a
specific connection between the actions performed by the
physician and the information representations that she obtains in the direct contact with the environment constituted
by the patient’s body.
The analysis has a primary goal: to show that the representational code of the representations actually used in cognitive processes has a deep and direct origin in the interaction with the environment and, therefore, that human cognitive agents use different types of representational code and
not a single internal one.
Inspection During the inspection time of abdominal objective examination, the physician directs her eyes toward specific parts of the patient’s abdomen in order to catch specific
visual clues that give diagnostic information. We can say
that the physician structures her visual action in order to receive structured visual inputs. In this case, the physician is

774

Table 2: Epistemic actions and representations for palpation.
Epistemic Action
Tactile Epistemic Action
(SEA)
Interpersonal Eliciting
Epistemic Action (languagemediated) (EEA)
Pain-Eliciting Tactile
Epistemic Action (EEA)

Auscultation Among the four semeiological times of physical semeiology, auscultation shows the particular property
that it involves the use of an external instrument, the stethoscope. Stethoscope can be viewed as an external sensorial
support that increases the physician’s auditory capabilities.
In this sense, there is a distribution of the sensorial action in
that the physician places the stethoscope on the patient’s abdomen to listen to the internal sounds and the stethoscope
amplifies these sounds.
The semeiological action that is performed by the physician in the auscultation moment can still be viewed as a sensorial epistemic action, because the physician structures her
own auditory action, which is, note, a hand movement and
not an ear movement on the patient’s abdomen, so as to obtain a feedback auditory sensation that carries diagnostic information. This action can be defined auditory epistemic
action and the representation that it creates can be defined
acoustical representation. But, if we want to do a detailed
analysis, in this sensorial epistemic action there is an eliciting component constituted by the amplifying action of the
stethoscope, which gives the physician’s ear a transformed
sound. However, I consider auscultation as a sensorial epistemic action, because the action performed by the physician
is completely devoted to listen to the diagnostic sounds and
the eliciting action is, instead, performed by the external instrument. What is interesting is the distribution that takes
place.
A series of actions that are, instead, genuinely eliciting
epistemic actions are the ones that the physician performs,
during auscultation, when she beats the abdominal wall with
repeated small strokes or rubs and pinches the skin or gently
massages the abdomen in order to stimulate the peristalsis.
These actions cause reactions inside the patient’s abdomen
that can be perceived as sounds that give diagnostic information. Such actions can be generally defined as soundeliciting tactile epistemic actions and the related representation is an elicited acoustical representation.
For the auscultation time, we have the following Table 4:

Representation
Tactile Representation
Interpersonally Structured
Representation
Elicited Behavioral
Representation

Percussion During the percussion moment of the objective
examination, the physician beats on the patient’s abdomen
with percussive technical gestures in order to generate
acoustical reactions that can give important diagnostic information as to the conditions of the internal organs and tissues. Therefore, in this case, the semeiological action, performed with the hands, is devoted to stimulate previously
unavailable acoustical signs that are later evaluated by the
physician’s ear. This means that the percussive semeiological gesture is an eliciting epistemic action, which can be defined as sound-eliciting percussive epistemic action. The
main representation that it creates is an elicited acoustical
representation, that is, a representation that exhibits still another representational code.
But the percussive semeiological action shows the property of generating, at the same time, another kind of elicited
representation. When the physician detects an area in which
an anomalous sound is heard, she has to percussively mark
the boundary of such area. To mark the boundary of the
area, the physician moves from the first found acoustically
anomalous point and percussively searches for the close
acoustically anomalous points until she has found all of
them. This movement of her own hands attracts the visual
attention of the physician toward the points that constitute
the boundary of the area under examination. Therefore, the
physical movements of the physician’s hands draw an elicited visual representation. If we want to do a more detailed
analysis, the hand movement draws the boundary of the area
to be examined and, therefore, elicits an external configuration. At the same time, this same movement of the physician’s hands attracts the physician’s visual attention making
her perform a guided visual epistemic action.
In addition, also in the case of percussion, the physician
asks the patient to change her position in order to percussively evaluate if an acoustically anomalous area changes
with the patient’s different positions. Therefore, there are
again interpersonal eliciting epistemic actions. The scheme
for percussion is shown in the following Table 3:

Table 4: Epistemic actions and representations
for auscultation.
Epistemic Action
Auditory Epistemic Action
(stethoscope-mediated)
(SEA)
Sound-Eliciting Tactile
Epistemic Action (EEA)

Sound-Eliciting Percussive
Epistemic Action (EEA)
Interpersonal Eliciting
Epistemic Action (EEA)

Elicited Acoustical
Representation

A Change in Embodiment, a Change in Mind:
Laparoscopic Video-Surgery

Table 3: Epistemic actions and representations
for percussion.
Epistemic Action

Representation
Acoustical Representation

An important aspect that emerges from the analysis conducted so far is that cognitive processes cannot be restricted
to internal manipulations of symbol structures of a single
language that take place only inside the head of the individual agent (Fodor, 1975; Newell, 1980), but they include
specific physical manipulations of the environment devoted
to gather from the environment representations of different
formats and structures. What seems to emerge is a perceptual origin of the material by which representations are con-

Representation
Elicited Acoustical
Representation
Elicited Visual
Representation
Interpersonally Structured
Representation
775

she is likely to find herself in a situation similar, at the level
of sensation, to the one that she encounters in laparotomy.
However, the transparency of the technological devices
used in laparoscopy is not complete. The video system,
which is the instrument that allows the surgeon to maintain
a control of the situation similar to the one that she has in
laparotomic operations, is also the element that creates difficulties as to the control of the gestures involved in a surgical
operation. The main problem that can be found in laparoscopy is a gap between surgical gesture and vision: the image on the monitor screen is managed by a videocamera
and, for this reason, such image gives sensations of dimension and depth that not always correspond to the real situation and that may create problems in the adjustment of the
surgical gestures. In other words, the surgeon acts on the
basis of the images on the monitor screen; these images
visually reproduce the operating field with dimensions that
are different from the real ones, but the surgeon is physically acting upon the real anatomical structures and this
causes difficulties in adapting the surgical gestures to the
real anatomical situation. It is necessary for the surgeon a
repeated training in order to adapt herself to this new embodiment in which she has to bring into coordination actions
performed upon anatomical structures that she does not see
directly with visual information about those anatomical
structures observed on a monitor screen. After adequate
training, however, this gap between gesture and vision is
overcome and the coordination between visual inputs and
gesture tends to become very similar to the one that takes
place in laparotomy.
What we have said so far is summarized in some assertions made by the surgeon that was my first informant during my in-the-field research and that I call here “The Fox”.
The assertions I am referring to are the following ones1:

stituted (Barsalou, 1999) and a direct, analogical influence
of the environment on cognitive processes (Shepard, 1984).
In this new perspective, many cognitive processes appear to
be embodied, in the sense that the body becomes the means
to perform actions that carry out a deep epistemic function.
If we consider the term “embodiment” as referring not
only to bodily actions that have a strong epistemic value, but
also to the specific structure of the boundaries of human
body, we may well hypothesize that a change in embodiment can cause a change at the level of cognitive processes.
In order to evaluate this hypothesis, I take into account the
case of laparoscopic video-surgery, where the surgeon finds
herself to work in a setting and with instruments that are
completely different from the setting and the instruments
that are present in traditional laparotomic surgery.
In more detail, laparoscopic video-surgery is a minimally
invasive surgical technique in which the surgeon intervenes
on the anatomical structures contained into the abdomen
without opening the abdominal cavity (Kremer, Platzer &
Schreiber, 1995). The operating field is observed by means
of an optical probe endowed with a videocamera that sends
the visual inputs to a monitor screen. The surgical instruments are longer than the laparotomic ones, they are introduced into the abdomen through small holes and are handled
from outside the abdomen.
On the basis of these considerations, laparoscopic videosurgery can be defined as a case of embodiment change. In
the analysis that follows, I will try to point out the cognitive
consequences that this embodiment change causes at the
level of sense of control and at the level of diagnostic information processing, both with respect to vision and with
respect to touch.

Vision
Sense of Control It can be said that one of the targets of
laparoscopic video-surgery is to give rise to a minimally invasive surgery by means of technological appliances that
reproduce an operating situation which be, at the sensation
level, as similar as possible to the operating situation that
the surgeon encounters in laparotomic surgery. From this
point of view, the appliances that support a laparoscopic
surgical operation would aim at becoming “transparent
technologies” (Clark, 2003), that is, tools that are so well
integrated with our own lives, with our ways to confront
problems, with our ways to interact with the rest of the
world that they become almost invisible while we use them.
It cannot be ignored that this aspect of transparency of
technological devices that try to give the surgeon the impression to operate in a situation similar to the laparotomic
one is actually present in laparoscopic video-surgery and it
is due, especially, to the video system that allows the surgeon to see the results of her own actions. The surgeon acts
upon real anatomical structures by means of the surgical instruments, but she observes what she is doing on the monitor screen and this certainly constitutes a change in embodiment that creates a completely different physical behavior in the surgeon. But, if the surgeon, thanks to the images
of the video system, can have a good control upon her own
gestures and, consequently, upon the anatomical structures,

Me: What are the differences between an operation in laparoscopy and an operation in laparotomy?
[…].
“The Fox”: […]the differences are basically the ones of putting a filter between oneself, one’s vision, and the object and
the more connatural this filter is with the gesture, the smaller
the refractive differentiation will be that can take place[…], in
the sense that we have a difference between what we see and
the gesture that we do, but[…]the better this sort of gap between vision and gesture is bridged, the more natural and almost normal it will become in the end[…].
Me: Almost like a laparotomy, at that point?
“The Fox”: Almost like a laparotomy.

Diagnostic Information Processing The optical probe that
is used in laparoscopic video-surgery allows the surgeon to
execute a visual exploration of the abdominal cavity which
is more accurate than the visual exploration that can be performed in the case of a laparotomic operation. This is due to
the fact that the laparoscopic optical probe can explore abdominal zones that the human eye cannot reach or cannot
see very well, it can arrive nearer the anatomical structures
than the human eye, it may offer different vision angulations
1

My English translation from Italian for this and the other quotations in the paper.

776

sorial epistemic actions) causes a change in the representations used in cognitive processes and that human cognitive
agents find themselves in front of different representations
of the same information and, in addition, it demonstrates
that the boundaries of our mind are deeply intertwined with
the boundaries of our body and that the boundaries of our
body are flexible.

according to the type of lens, allowing the surgeon, this
way, to have a wider view of the abdominal cavity and to
explore hidden areas; finally, the videocamera mounted on
the optical probe allows the image to be enlarged by means
of the zoom system.
From a cognitive point of view, the new embodiment constituted by the laparoscopic optical probe and, in general, by
the video system used in laparoscopy changes and improves
the surgeon’s visual epistemic actions and, consequently,
the visual representations that the surgeon collects in her
own interaction with the operating field. In laparoscopic
video-surgery, surgeon obtains new, clearer visual representations of anatomical structures that she had not been able to
see well in laparotomy or that she had not seen at all and she
had only been able to touch. Once again, there is a strict relationship between epistemic actions and representations: an
improvement in visual epistemic actions generated by an
external artifact brings to an improvement in the visual representations of the same identical information.
A demonstration of this fact and of the fact that different
representations of the same information may bring a cognitive agent to different cognitive processes and to different
decisions about what to do in a particular situation (Zhang,
1997, Zhang & Norman, 1994) is that, in some cases, it
happened that some surgical mistakes were made in laparoscopy because of the fact that the operator could see in a
clear way anatomical structures that could not be seen very
well in the laparotomic version of the same operation or that
could only be felt by touch. For this reason, the operator
could not recognize those anatomical structures in the
laparoscopic surgical operation and this was at the basis of
the surgical mistakes:

Touch
Sense of Control In laparoscopic video-surgery there is a
deep change in the tactile sensations that the surgeon feels
while performing surgical actions during a surgical operation. The impact with the anatomical structures is different
from the one that the surgeon has in laparotomic surgery
and this is due to the fact that the surgeon uses longer instruments that drastically reduce the tactile sensation that is
generated by the contact between surgeon and anatomical
structures. This change in embodiment that causes a reduction in tactile sensation has important consequences on the
sense of control. The surgeon sees what she is doing through
the monitor screen, but not always she has a tactile sensation
of what she is doing, not always she physically realizes that
she is touching anatomical structures and this can reduce the
sense of control that the surgeon feels.
On the basis of “The Fox’s” personal communications
collected through interviews, I have found that it is possible
to distinguish two situations of tactile sensation, on the part
of the surgeon, of what the surgeon herself is doing during a
laparoscopic surgical operation. The point of departure of
my analysis are these important statements made by “The
Fox”:
[…]I have realized that, at the moment in which you do the
usual gesture and you do the thing that, perhaps, you have
learned to do, instead, with the traditional gesture, you can
acquire your jump in quality, the jump in quality, in my opinion, at the moment in which, besides seeing, which has its
own importance and you see what you do and, therefore, you
can correct the gesture, you also have, with the surgical instruments, the sensation of what you are doing.[…]not in all
of the gestures you can understand that you are touching the
tissues, but in certain gestures you can[…]. It is not always
easy; some times you have such a light sensation that you
don’t have…you see it (the anatomical structure) and it seems
to you to feel it, but there are certain moments in which you
indeed feel too what you are doing and then, at that moment,
the capacity arises[…]of having an impact with the tissues
you are handling, which does not have to be, thus, only a virtual that you see, if possible, but also a real sensation[…].

“The Fox”: […]where video-surgery has mostly spread it is in
those kinds of operations in which the video-endoscopic vision is better than the open one.[…].[…]the success that
laparoscopic cholecystectomy has obtained is because you see
it well, very well, you see it better. That is, you can see structures of which you usually catch a glimpse or that you feel
with your fingers, to the point that there were even mistakes
of a surgical type with respect to the cholecystectomy, because you could see[…]certain structures so well that certain
structures were bound that didn’t have to be bound: when
common bile ducts were bound and cut, sectioned[…]because[…]you see them, even if you see them you
don’t recognize them in terms of habit, of experience and they
were bound.

So, such mistakes are explained by a contrast between an
internalized representation of anatomical structures that has
been generated through the experience in a laparotomic context and a new visual representation of the same anatomical
structures that is encountered in a laparoscopic context. This
contrast makes the mechanism of recognition difficult or
impossible and may bring the surgeon to make mistakes.
From the point of view of vision, in laparoscopic videosurgery the surgeon becomes an augmented cognitive agent
thanks to the presence of an external video system that
modifies and improves her capacity of capturing visual inputs. Laparoscopic video-surgery, in this sense, demonstrates that a change in epistemic actions (in this case, sen-

On the basis of these statements, I analyze from a cognitive point of view the two situations that emerge from “The
Fox’s” words.
The first situation is the one in which the surgeon has the
impression of feeling an anatomical structure because she
sees on the monitor screen her own surgical instrument
touching that anatomical structure. This can be defined as a
virtual tactile sensation induced by a visual representation:
the visual representation on the screen shows the image of a
physical contact and the surgeon has the impression of feeling that physical contact. This is an interesting case from a
777

this reason, as we have already said, vision acquires a
greater importance.

cognitive point of view, because the surgeon uses only one
real sensation, the one given by the external visual representation and, on the basis of the specific features of this sensation, creates a tactile representation that does not correspond
to any real tactile stimulation. It can be said that the surgeon
cognitively works with two completely different representations, one constituted by a sensation generated by a contact
with a particular stimulus and the other internally constructed with a sort of synesthetic process on the basis of the
features of the sensation that constitutes the first representation. We can assume that the second representation, that is,
the tactile representation, is constituted by tactile components that the surgeon has internalized through the experience in laparotomic surgical operations. The virtual tactile
sensation is used to reinforce the control on what the surgeon is doing.
The second situation is the one in which the surgeon has
not an impression of feeling an anatomical structure she is
touching, but she really feels that anatomical structure. In
this case the tactile representation is not constructed on the
basis of a visual representation, but it is generated by a tactile stimulus and, in particular, such tactile representation is
no longer constituted by internalized tactile sensations, but
by a new tactile sensation, in which the sensation is mediated by a surgical instrument which is longer than the laparotomic ones. The surgeon is using, in this case, a new tactile representational code, she is experiencing a new tactile
impact with the anatomical structures.

Conclusion
On the basis of the case studies illustrated in the present article, some important cognitive conclusions can be drawn:
1) Human cognitive system is not confined to the individual
agent, but it includes individual, material environment and
technological artifacts;
2) Human cognitive agents do not use, in their cognitive
processes, only one single symbolic internal language, but
they make use of several different representational codes,
each of which influences in a different way their cognitive
processes;
3) A fundamental role as source of these representational
codes is played by human-environment interaction;
4) Cognitive processes are deeply dependent on the way
human beings organize their perceptive contact with the environment and a change in the structure of the boundaries of
body may mean a change in the structure of human mind.

References
Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 577-660.
Clark, A. (2003). Natural-born cyborgs: Minds, technologies, and the future of human intelligence. New York: Oxford University Press.
DeGowin, E. L., & DeGowin, R. L. (1969). Bedside diagnostic examination. Indianapolis, IN: Macmillan Publishing Co., Inc.
Fodor, J. A. (1975). The language of thought. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Kirsh, D., & Maglio, P. (1994). On distinguishing epistemic
from pragmatic action. Cognitive Science, 18, 513-549.
Kremer, K., Platzer, W., & Schreiber, H. W. (Eds.) (1995).
Chirurgische Operationslehre Band 7/2. Minimalinvasive Chirurgie: Video-laparoskopische und videothorakoskopische Chirurgie. Stuttgart: Georg Thieme
Verlag. English Translation by J. Grossman (1999),
Kremer, K., Platzer, W., Schreiber, H. W., & Steichen F.
M. (Eds.), Atlas of operative surgery: Surgical anatomy,
indications, techniques, complications. Minimally invasive abdominal surgery. New York: Thieme Medical Publishers.
Newell, A. (1980). Physical symbol systems. Cognitive Science, 4, 135-183.
Shepard, R. N. (1984). Ecological constraints on internal
representation: Resonant kinematics of perceiving, imagining, thinking, and dreaming. Psychological Review,
91(4), 417-447.
Swartz, M. H. (2002). Textbook of physical diagnosis: History and examination. Philadelphia, PA: W. B. Saunders
Co.
Zhang, J. (1997). The nature of external representations in
problem solving. Cognitive Science, 21(2), 179-217.
Zhang, J., & Norman, D. A. (1994). Representations in distributed cognitive tasks. Cognitive Science, 18, 87-122.

Diagnostic Information Processing One of the most important consequences of the setting in which the surgeon
finds herself to operate in laparoscopic video-surgery is that
she no longer can use her own “naked” hand to touch the
anatomical structures. Direct palpation, which has a crucial
importance in traditional laparotomic surgery, disappears in
laparoscopic technique. It is vision, an improved vision, as
we have seen, that, in laparoscopic video-surgery, holds the
main role at a diagnostic level. The surgeon mostly uses a
visual semeiology:
“The Fox”: […]there can still be and there must be tactile
sensations; they certainly have less space than before, that is,
now[…]you have a visual semeiology, that is, you see and decide.

Notwithstanding this, palpation at a diagnostic level is
still present in laparoscopy, but it is mediated by special instruments, that is, metal bars that are introduced into the abdomen and are pushed against anatomical structures in order
to evaluate their consistence or are used to touch behind an
anatomical structure in order to test the presence or the absence of some elements that cannot be seen.
Once again, we are in presence of a change in embodiment that causes a change in sensorial epistemic actions
and, consequently, in the sensorial representations that are
used in cognitive processes. In laparoscopic video-surgery
there are, at a diagnostic level, new tactile representations
generated by new tactile epistemic actions. In particular,
these new tactile representations are less accurate than the
ones that can be obtained in laparotomic surgery and, for
778

