UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
On People's Incorrect Either-Or Patterns in Negating Quantified Statements: A Study

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5fz0p6m1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Alacaci, Cengiz
Pasztor, Ana

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

On People’s Incorrect Either-Or Patterns in Negating Quantified Statements:
A Study
Ana Pasztor (pasztora@fiu.edu)
School of Computer Science, Florida International University
11200 SW 8th Street, Miami, FL 33199 USA

Cengiz Alacaci (alacaci@fiu.edu)
Department of Curriculum and Instruction, Florida International University
11200 SW 8th Street, Miami, FL 33199 USA
Abstract
People manifest formally incorrect either-or, polarizing response tendencies when asked to negate quantified statements. Our study focuses on students’ error patterns when negating quantified sentences, which are the single most important cause for their difficulties with indirect proofs and proofs
by contradiction. We found that, contrary to our expectations,
the effect of content is relatively small on their negation behavior; that of the four quantifier categories used, students
have by far the most difficulties in negating universally quantified sentences; and that the effect of formal logic instruction
wears off relatively fast. The significance of our study reaches
beyond the classroom: logically literate reasoners are less
prone to be manipulated by either-or rhetoric of politicians,
and are more conscious of their own limiting beliefs.
Keywords: negation of quantified sentences, polarizing tendency, content effect, effect of formal logic instruction, either-or rhetoric, limiting beliefs.

The Problem
“No” is one of the first words a child hears. And yet, negation is a logical concept that has puzzled philosophers and
logicians for 2,500 years. As Horn (1989) notes, “negation
is to the linguist and linguistic philosopher as fruit to Tantalus: waving seductively, alluring palpable, yet just out of
reach, within the grasp only to escape once more” (p. xiv).
Although a great body of work has emerged since the 1950s
in cognitive science exploring people’s difficulties in reasoning with negation as part of their deductive reasoning,
little work has been done on how people actually negate
given statements, especially quantified ones.

Most of them agree that reasoning is rule-based but contentdependent, in particular it is dependent on content that
evokes relevant knowledge from memory (Manktelow &
Over, 1990).
People make systematic errors in deductive reasoning that
are not predictable by any of the rule-based theories mentioned above. Many of these are successfully explained and
predicted by the mental model theory (Johnson-Laird, 1983;
Johnson-Laird and Byrne, 1991) that “postulates that reasoning depends on understanding the meaning of premises,
and then using this meaning and general knowledge to construct mental models of the possibilities under description”
(Johnson-Laird, 2001, p. 5). Recently, a large body of papers on mental model theory has explained and predicted errors (“illusions”) that people make in reasoning by showing
that they construct incomplete (or not fully explicit) mental
models of the premises (e.g., Sloutsky & Johnson-Laird,
1999; Goldvarg & Johnson-Laird, 2000; Yang et al., 2000;
Yang & Johnson-Laird, 2000a, 2000b; and Johnson-Laird,
2001). One of the most powerful explanations/predictions
stems from the so-called principle of truth, which states that
people have great difficulty mentally representing what is
false according to the premises. This is particularly true in
the case of quantified reasoning (Yang & Johnson-Laird,
2000a, 2000b).

People Misconceive Formal Negation

Theories of Deductive Reasoning

In this paper we show that in the case of quantified reasoning, not only do people not build mental models of negations, but more fundamentally, they often don’t know how to
negate sentences correctly in the first place! In particular,
we show that they tend to mistake contrary opposition for
negation (which is defined as contradictory opposition—see
Figure 1 below), and their negation behavior is often automatic, including a “blind” polarized response.

Inferences based on formal logic set the norm for people’s
deductive reasoning—they are viewed as the way people
ought to reason. Many cognitive scientists have been attracted to the doctrine of mental logic (Braine & O’Brien,
1991; Rips, 1994), which claims that the human mind contains a reasoning system like that of formal logic. However,
in a brilliant and by now classical experiment called Wason’s selection task (Wason, 1968), Wason showed that this
is not the case. Specifically, he showed people’s difficulty
reasoning with inferences in the form known as modus tollens (If A then B, not B ∴ not A). Theories trying to explain/predict people’s deductive reasoning behavior abound.

People’s Tendency Toward Polarized Thinking

1714

Neither rule-based nor mental model theories of reasoning
explain/predict people’s negation behavior, particularly the
so-called “centrifugal politics and theology of polarization”
(Horn, 1989, p. 270) or either-or thinking.
Formal negation is defined as contradictory opposition.
The A/O and I/E pairs in Figure 1 below are contradictories
because in any situation one member of each must be true

and the other false. The A/E pair is a contrary opposition
because in some situations both can be false; their
contradictories (O and I, respectively) can sometimes both
be true of the same subject; e.g., “Not every rose is red” (or
“Some roses are not red”) and “Some roses are red.” (Horn,
1989, pp. 10-11).
Contradictories such as “All mammals live forever”/“Some mammals do not live forever” or “No mammals breathe”/“Some mammals breathe” do not allow any
middle possibility, while contraries such as “All kids are
lazy”—“No kids are lazy” do, formally, allow middle possibilities: some kids may not be lazy and some kids may be
lazy. In practice, however, naive reasoners tend to void the
space between contraries, turning them into either-or disjunctions (“Either all kids are lazy or no kids are lazy”). A
similar phenomenon is observable with predicates. While
contradictories such as black/not black, odd/even exclude
any middle term, contraries, such as black-white, short-long,
empty-full, in principle do not; your pants may be neither
black nor white. “But the context may fill in the gap between the contraries, establishing a disjunction of the type
normally associated with contradictories. The middle is not
so much excluded as pragmatically absorbed, and p or q becomes and instance of p or not-p. One context triggering
this absorption is the black-or-white, centrifugal politics of
polarization (‘He that is not with me is against me,’ ‘If
you’re not part of the solution, you’re part of the problem’)”
(Horn, 1989, p. xviii).

subaltern

contraries
contradictories

I
some S is/are P

subcontraries

no S is/are P
E
subaltern

all S is/are P
A
Fi

O
some S is/are not P

A: all monkeys are slow
I: some monkeys are slow
E: no monkey is slow
O: not every monkey is slow, some monkeys are not slow
Figure 1: Traditional Square of Oppositions (Horn, 1989, p.
208)
The naive reasoner who is not trained in formal negation,
falls easily pray to this polarizing tendency, to “this drift of
middle-allowing lexical contraries into middle-excluding
acting contradictories” (Horn, 1989, p. 271). Sapir (1944,
p.133, cited in Horn, 1989, p. 271) explains: “A speculative
mind might attribute the polarizing tendency to the presumed survival value for the primitive language wielder in
perceiving and classifying the universe into various series of
either-or, black-or-white, or ... yin-or-yang pairs, ignoring
the quasi-scientific niceties of the zone of indifference.”
A similar tendency is manifested with sentences of the
form, “Some S are P” such as “Some horses are slow,”
which is often negated as “Some horses are not slow,” or

even as “Some horses are fast” (polarizing tendency). People often turn the disjunction “Some S are P or some S are
not P” into an either-or disjunction, mistaking “Some S are
not P” for the contradictory opposition (i.e., negation) of
“Some S are P.”

Why Study Negation of Quantified Statements?
Psychology of Either-Or Language of Over-Generalized
Beliefs “I never seem to do the right thing,” “Everybody
hates me,” “Nobody ever tells me anything,” or “Math [all
of it!] stinks” are some of the familiar sentences that express
unqualified or over-generalized beliefs (Hale-Haniff &
Pasztor, 2000). They presuppose that there are no exceptions, and therefore, no choice; the implication is that the
statements must always be true.
Over-generalized beliefs are most often uttered by people
who feel stuck or depressed. When we are stuck and/or depressed, when flow temporarily stops in our experience, we
seem to forget that the negation of “I never enjoy anything”
is “I sometimes enjoy something” [be that even just a candy
or a hot shower], as opposed to “I always enjoy everything.”
It is often the task of successful therapy to help people recognize whether their belief statements reflect useful or necessary rules or generalizations that need to be updated or
applied to a narrower context than everywhere and all the
time.
Mathematics Education Over decades of teaching mathematical logic, the first author has observed that students experience serious difficulties formally negating quantified
statements and therefore doing indirect proofs and proofs by
contradiction. Formal logic instruction doesn’t seem to improve significantly students’ ability to negate quantified
statements or do indirect proofs or proofs by contradiction.
This phenomenon has also been documented by others, such
as Barnard (1995, 1996), Thompson (1996), and Antonini
(2001), although research on negation in education has been
sparse.
Barnard (1995) identified factors that influence students’
negation behavior, such as logical structure, lexical representation, context, level of abstraction, and degree of complexity. He found that even after two years of studying,
about one third of the students had difficulty in negating
even simple statements. He also found that students with
less training in abstract reasoning are more likely to be influenced by the truth value of the statements, especially if
these statements are set in everyday contexts. In a follow-up
study, Barnard (1996) reinforced his earlier findings and
also found a strong tendency, especially among younger
students, “to avoid ranges of variation (such as considering
‘some’ as being between ‘all’ and ‘none’) and subdivisions”
(p. 142).
Thompson (1996) studied the difficulties that students had
with indirect proofs. Even after instruction, she found that
only less than one third of the students were successful in
negating conditionals and thus performing indirect proofs.

1715

Participants Thirty two undergraduate college students taking “Logic for Computer Science” and fifteen computer science Master’s and Ph..D. students in a “Cognitive Science”
class participated in the study. The graduate students were
chosen from among those who had taken an undergraduate
logic class at least one year before the study.

Antonini’s (2001) study provides insights into why proof
by contradiction is difficult for many students, pointing to
the differences between natural language and mathematical
negation.
These studies document that mathematics education is in
dire need of ideas and tools that can help design more effective instructional procedures to teach negation. As most
theorems are stated as quantified statements, understanding
factors that improve students’ negation behavior of quantified statements can also improve students’ performance in
proofs by contradiction and indirect proofs in mathematics.

Procedures Participants were administered the instrument
at the beginning of the fall term before the formal instruction of negation (pretest), and at the end of the term before
final exams (posttest). The purpose was to study how students negate quantified statements before formal instruction
and to see how this changes after such instruction. Graduate
students (graduate group test) provided a measure of negation behavior after a longer time has elapsed from the time
of formal instruction.

Provisional Summary The psycholinguistics study of people’s negation behavior is of great importance in mathematics education, but also reaches into the psychological, philosophical, and political bases of our every-day lives. The
logically literate citizen is not only able to successfully
prove mathematical statements, but is also less prone to be
manipulated by the either-or rhetoric of politicians, and is
more conscious of his/her limiting beliefs.

A. Abstract statements

The Study
B. Nonsensical
statements

Guiding Questions
Three basic questions guided our study: 1. How do students’ performances compare in negating statements with
different quantifiers and statements with different semantic
structures? 2. How do the performances change immediately
after instruction of formal negation? How robust are such
changes, if there are any, i.e., to what degree do they last after a prolonged period of time after instruction? 3. What are
the incorrect schemes of negation that students use, and how
do these schemes change immediately after formal instruction? How robust are such changes?

C. Meaningful
statements with
true negations
D. Meaningful
statements with
negations that are
false or provide
weaker true information than
contraries

Methodology
Instrument For this study, we developed an instrument
with 16 sentences. The sentences consisted of statements
containing four types of quantifiers: all, none, some, and
some ... not. Further, each quantifier was cross-matched
with the following four types of semantic categories: A. abstract sentences, B. nonsensical sentences, C. meaningful
but false sentences with true negations (designed to serve as
control for effect of content), and D. meaningful sentences,
the negations of which are false (such as in the case of
“Some animals don’t live under water,” the negation of
which is “All animals live under water”) or, if they are true
(as in the case of “All mammals live forever,” the negation
of which is “Some mammals don’t live forever”), they provide weaker true information than the contraries (in this
case, “No mammals live forever”) (c.f. Horn, 1989, p. 211).
The sixteen statements were placed in a list in random order to avoid order effect. Figure 2 gives the statements included in the instrument. In the first row, we included in parentheses the correct formal negations (for ease of understanding of the data analysis).

1. All x’s are y. (Some x’s are not
y.)
2. No p is q. (Some p’s are q.)
3. Some i’s are j. (No i is j.)
4. Some r’s are not s. (All r’s are s.)
1. All morgies are brig.
2. No borogove is mimsy.
3. Some tambas are pasty.
4. Some cirks are not trique.
1. All teenagers are lazy.
2. No book is boring.
3. Some machines are alive.
4. Some living things do not grow.
1. All mammals live forever.
2. No mammals breathe.
3. Some animals live on earth.
4. Some people do not live underwater

Figure 2: Categories of the statements contained in the
negation instrument.
Participants were asked to work on the instrument during
class time and individually at their own pace. They were
given class participation points. They were asked to write
the “negation” of each sentence, where the negation of a
sentence A was defined as a contradictory sentence B that
denies the truth of the given sentence A, and in every situation, one of A and B must be true and the other false.
Data Analysis Data was analyzed both quantitatively and
qualitatively. First, students’ negation of each sentence was
evaluated for correctness for each administration of the instrument. Results were tabulated by the type of quantifiers
and by the semantic structure. This allowed us to see the
level of difficulty of statements with different quantifiers
and semantic structures. To ensure scoring reliability, two
independent coders each scored the same subset of student
responses, and an acceptable level of reliability was ob-

1716

served. Further, common schemes of errors made in the negations were analyzed qualitatively, and findings were again
organized by quantifier type and semantic structures.

Results from Quantitative Analysis of Students’
Responses
Table 1 presents students’ success rates in negating statements with different quantifiers and different semantic content. The rows present the rates for statements with different
quantifiers in the undergraduate pretest and posttest, and the
graduate group test, respectively. The columns give the rates
for the statements in the four semantic categories.
The pretest results reveal that overall, less than one third
of the students (28%) negated statements correctly. For
quantifier categories, the lowest success rate was for “no”
sentences at 16%, and the highest was for “some” sentences
at 42%, resulting in a range of 26% (highest minus lowest
rate). Pretest success rates in the semantic categories, however, were quite uniform, with a small range of only 3%.

the lowest rate of correctness, which, again, was not the
case. The semantic categories did not seem to be associated
with differential difficulty levels. The range was consistently small in all three measurements.
Although instruction did seem to make an immediate difference, in the graduate group test the effects of instruction
faded considerably for the statements with “no” and “all”
quantifiers.
To summarize, results from quantitative analysis seemed
to support our expectation that students would have more
difficulties in negating universally quantified sentences (all
and none) than other types. Results also supported our expectation that the effect of formal instruction, which is predominantly verbal (c.f. Pasztor, 2003), is not robust, fading
away significantly after a year. However, data did not support our expectation that semantic content of sentences
plays a significant role in students’ negation behavior.

Table 1: Percentages of correct responses by categories of
statements (1: n=32; 2: n=15)

Results from Qualitative Analysis of Student Responses

Categories
All

None

Some

Some ... are not

Average

pre1
post1
grad2
pre
post
grad
pre
post
grad
pre
post
grad
pre
post
grad

A
32
66
33
14
75
33
39
66
67
25
66
60
28
68
48

B
21
69
40
18
81
33
46
78
73
36
72
53
30
75
50

C
25
72
40
11
72
33
43
75
73
29
66
67
27
71
53

D
25
63
40
21
78
33
39
69
67
25
63
60
28
68
50

For this analysis, we identified the students’ schemes of negation, including their patterns of incorrect negation, and
found their rates of use in the pre-, post-, and the graduate
group test, respectively. This analysis provided a measure of
the effect of formal instruction on the ways students thought
while negating the statements. It also gave a measure of
which schemes were robust by virtue of the rate at which we
observed graduate students using them even after a year or
more had elapsed since formal instruction.
Table 2 presents the eleven schemes that we found and
the rates at which students applied them in each test, respectively.

Avg.
26
68
38
16
77
33
42
72
70
29
67
60
28
71
50

Table 2: Rates of the schemes of negation

Not surprisingly, in the posttest, i.e., after students received
formal instruction on negation, the overall rate of success
more than doubled (71%). The range of success in quantifier categories fell to about 10%, and the highest rate of improvement was in the “no” statements. For semantic categories, in the posttest the range stayed at the low level of 7%.
The overall graduate student performance rate was about
50%. The range was once again much higher in quantifier
categories (37%) than in semantic categories (5%). As in
the pretest, the “no” statements were the most difficult to
negate for this group (33%), which were followed by the
“all” statements (38%).
Regarding semantic content, we expected the “C” type
sentences to be the easiest to negate correctly. This was not
the case. We also expected the “D” type sentences to have

categories

pretest %
(n=32)

posttest %
(n=32)

contrary: all → no
contrary: no → all
subcontrary:
some → some ... not
subcontrary:
some ... not → some
mechanical response
dropping quantifiers
subaltern: e.g.,
some ... not → no
trivial negation
attaching personal
meaning to words
truth value effect
reformulation

71
71
54

16
13
22

graduate
class %
(n=15)
60
67
33

46

22

33

36
36
14

75
16
22

40
7
0

14
14

13
3

7
7

11
11

16
0

7
0

1717

Some of the negation schemes require explanation:

• Mechanical response: Various response categories
showed that students were mechanically applying syntactic rules/patterns.

was the only time the student used the quantifier
“no.”
Category D sentences were incorrectly negated,
while other category sentences of the same structure were negated correctly. For example, some
students who negated all other “All ...” sentences
correctly, negated the 1D sentence, “All mammals
live forever,” incorrectly as “No mammals live forever;” and the 2D sentence, “No mammals
breathe,” as “All mammals breathe,” although all
other “No ...” type sentences were negated correctly. Some students had all negations correct, except the negation of the 4D sentence, “Some people
don’t live under water,” which they negated as “No
people live under water,” instead of “All people
live under water.” In fact, most students who were
influenced by the truth value of the negation, were
misled by this sentence.

Use of “there is [or exists] at least one...” For example, “There exists at least one book that is boring” instead of, for example, “Some books are boring.”
Use of “All ...are not ...” For example, some students
negated “Some machines are alive” as “All machines
are not alive,” instead of, say, “No machines are
alive.” They seemed to be automatically applying the
formula “Some ...” → “All .... not ....” These students
usually did not use the quantifier “none” at all.
Use of “No .... don’t ....” For example, some students negated “Some living things don’t grow” as
“No living things don’t grow,” instead of, say, the
good old English sentence, “All living things
grow.” They seemed to be automatically applying
the formula “Some ...” → “No ....”
• Dropping quantifiers: A number of students negated
“No ...” type sentences by simply dropping the “no.”
E.g., they negated “No p is q” as “p is q” and/or “No
books are boring” as “Books are boring.”
•

Trivial negation: Some students used “prefix” negation,
i.e., they negated a sentence by putting “not” in front of
it. Interestingly, they did this only with “All ...” sentences, which shows that after all, it did matter to them
whether negations sound/look natural.

•

Attaching personal meaning to words: Some students
found personal (if sometimes “incorrect”) meaning in
the words, i.e., they didn’t treat them as mere symbols.
For example, they wrote “dead’ instead of “not alive,”
“die” instead of “not live forever,” and “on land” instead of “not under water.” One student commented the
sentence, “Some machines are alive,” with “Really?
AI?”; another student correctly negated the 4D sentence, “Some people don’t live under water,” by “All
people live under water,” but then humorously commented on the semantic content by “merpeople?”; and
one student wrote “hardly any” for some instances of
“no,” and “mostly” for some instances of “all.”

•

Truth value effect. There were two kinds of evidence
for the effect of the truth value of the negation of the
statements.
Category C sentences were correctly negated,
whereas other category sentences of the same
structure were not. For example, a student negated
the 4C sentence, “Some living things don’t grow,”
as “All living things grow,” whereas all her previous “Some ....” sentences were negated incorrectly.
Another student negated the 3C sentence, “Some
machines are alive,” as “No machines are alive,”
even though all her other “Some ....” type sentences were negated incorrectly; moreover, this

•

Reformulation: Some students reformulated the sentences instead of negating them. For instance, they negated “All students are lazy” as “No students are not
lazy.”
For the pretest, the most frequent misconception was that
negations are contraries. Specifically, “All” and “No” sentences had a 70% rate of contrary response. This was followed by a rate of about 50% for subcontrary responses for
“Some” and “Some … not” sentences. Although the rates
of contrary and subcontrary responses decreased significantly immediately after instruction, for the graduate class
they climbed back up to be the highest (not counting “mechanical response”). However, it is worth noting that the
rate of subcontrary responses was half of the rate of contrary
responses for the graduate class. Consequently, it is possible
to conclude that the tendency to negate by contraries is
much more robust than the tendency to negate by subcontraries.
Mechanical responses were observed in about one third of
students in the pretest, and it more than doubled in the posttest.
The effect of semantic content (truth value effect, and effect of the meaning of words) stayed at a relatively low rate
in all three measurements. The truth value effect was 1 in 10
in the pretest, 1 in 7 in the posttest, and almost negligible in
the graduate group test. This parallels our observation in the
quantitative analysis of data, that the range of rates in semantic categories was quite small. Our hypothesis that semantic content of sentences affects students’ responses was
therefore not supported.

Discussion and Conclusion

1718

Neither rule-based theories nor mental model theory have
been concerned with how people actually negate sentences,
particularly quantified ones. In the present paper, we have
focused on students’ negation behavior of quantified statements before and after formal instruction of negation.
The results of our study have corroborated the so-called
“centrifugal politics and theology of polarization” (Horn,

1989, p. 270) and tendency for automatic negation responses. Specifically, our qualitative analysis of responses
showed that most commonly, students conceive of contrary
and subcontrary opposition (see Figure 1) as negation of
quantified sentences. The contrary opposition as negation
scheme was observed in more than two thirds of responses
in the pretest. Although it fell dramatically in the posttest, in
the graduate group test it rose back up to about two thirds of
all responses. Negating quantified sentences by applying
mechanically or “blindly” syntactic rules was the most
common type of response behavior observed after the use of
contrary and subcontrary opposition schemes in the pretest.
It had the single highest rate in the posttest. Although our
study did not look into the nature of instruction students received between the pretest and the posttest, this high rate
suggests that instruction of formal negation may actually
foster a mechanical approach to negation.
We were able to observe some personal meaning making
as evidenced in the “truth value effect” and “attempts to attach personal meaning to words” of our qualitative data
analysis, although at a very small rate. We suspect that this
low rate can be attributed to the format of our instrument
and the context in which it was administered. Our instrument consisted of a small number (sixteen) of unrelated
statements, given in a list format. This might have encouraged students to look for syntactic rules for negating
structurally similar sentences. Furthermore, the instrument
was administered in a classroom setting, into which students
usually come leaving their personal sense-making behind,
expecting to acquire and be assessed for procedural as opposed to conceptual knowledge (Alacaci & Pasztor, 2002).
In a more recent study (Alacaci & Pasztor, 2005), in
which we used an instrument that describes a coherent scenario providing a semantic link between the sentences, and
that was administered in a semantically rich context, we
were able to observe significant effects of content on students’ negation behavior.

Acknowledgments
Pasztor’s work was partially supported by NSF grants EIA9906600, HRD-0317692, and CNS-042615, and ONR grant
N00014-99-1-0952 with the CATE Center at FIU.

References
Alacaci, C., and Pasztor, A. (2002) Effects of State Assessment Preparation Materials on Students’ Learning of
School Mathematics—A Study. The Journal of Mathematical Behavior, vol.21, pp. 225-253.
Alacaci, C., and Pasztor, A. (2005) People’s Negation Behavior: The Power of Content. Proceedings of the 27th
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, Stresa,
Italy, to appear.
Antonini, S. (2001) Negation in Mathematics: Obstacles
emerging from an exploratory study. Proceedings of the
Twenty fifth International Conference for the Psychology
of Mathematics Education, vol. 2, pp. 49-56.

Barnard, A. D. (1995) The impact of ‘meaning’ on students’
ability to negate statements. Proceedings of the NIneteenth International Conference for the Psychology of
Mathematics Education, vol. 2, pp. 3-10.
Barnard, A. D. (1996) To be or not to be: Pupils' difficulties
in negating statements. Proceedings of the Third British
Congress on Mathematical Education, Part 1,136-143.
Braine, M.D.S., and O'Brian, D. P. (1991) A theory of If: A
lexical entry, reasoning program, and pragmatic principles. Psychological Review, 98, 182-203.
Goldvarg, Y., and P.N. Johnson-Laird (2000) Illusions in
modal reasoning. Memory and Cognition 28: 282-294.
Hale-Haniff, M., and Pasztor, A. (2000) Linguistic presuppositions: Gateway to belief systems. 7th International
Pragmatics Conference, Budapest.
Horn, L. R. (1989) A Natural History of Negation. Chicago,
IL: The University of Chicago Press.
Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1983) Mental Model. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Johnson-Laird, P.N. (2001) Mental models and human reasoning. In Dupoux, E. (Ed.) Language, Brain, and Cognitive Development: Essays in honor of J.
Mehler. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Pp. 85-102.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., and R.M.J. Byrne (1991) Deduction.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Manktelow, K. I., and Over, D. E. (1990) Inference and Understanding. A Philosophical and Psychological Perspective. London: Routledge.
Pasztor, A. (2003) Making sense (literally!) of students'
mathematics experience. Proceedings of the Twentyseventh International Conference for the Psychology of
Mathematics Education, vol. 1, p. 311.
Rips, L.J. (1994) The Psychology of Proof: Deductive Reasoning in Human Thinking. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Sloutsky, V.M., and Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1999) Problem
representations and illusions in reasoning. Proceedings of
the Twenty-first Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, pp. 701-705.
Thompson, D. R. (1996) Learning and Teaching indirect
proof. The Mathematics Teacher 89(6), pp. 474-482.
Wason, P.C. (1968) Reasoning about a rule. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, vol. 20, pp. 273-81.
Yang, Y., van der Henst, J-B., and Johnson-Laird, P.N.
(2000) Strategies and tactics in sentential reasoning. Proceedings of the Twenty Second Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, pp. 1000-1006.
Yang, Y., and P.N. Johnson-Laird (2000a) Illusions in quantified reasoning: How to make the impossible seem possible, and vice versa. Memory and Cognition 28, pp. 452465.
Yang, Y., and P.N. Johnson-Laird (2000b) How to eliminate
illusions in quantified reasoning. Memory and Cognition
28, pp. 1050-1059.

1719

