UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
On the Interplay between Heuristic and Systematic Processes in Persuasion

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/49k9s69s

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Katsikopoulos, Konstantinos
Mata, Rui
Opwis, Klaus
et al.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

On the Interplay between Heuristic and Systematic Processes in Persuasion
Torsten Reimer (torsten.reimer@ndsu.edu)
Department of Psychology, North Dakota State University
102E Minard Hall, Fargo, ND 58105-5075, USA
Rui Mata (mata@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)
Center for Adaptive Behavior and Cognition (ABC)
Max Planck Institute for Human Development
Lentzeallee 94, 14195 Berlin, Germany
Konstantinos Katsikopoulos (katsikop@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)
Center for Adaptive Behavior and Cognition (ABC)
Max Planck Institute for Human Development
Lentzeallee 94, 14195 Berlin, Germany

Klaus Opwis (klaus.opwis@unibas.ch)
Department of Psychology, University of Basel
Missionsstrasse 62, 4055 Basel, Switzerland
Abstract
Dual-process models of persuasion (e.g., Heuristic Systematic
Model) contrast the use of heuristics with systematic
information processing. However, a great deal of attention is
increasingly being devoted to the interplay between the two
types of processing. We propose a multistage view that builds
on dual-process models of persuasion but emphasizes the
interplay between processing modes. According to this
multistage view, there are contexts in which receivers first use
systematic processes to derive information about expertise from
argument quality and, subsequently, make use of the expertise
heuristic to arrive at an attitude. We show that results of a
classic study (Petty, Cacioppo, & Goldman, 1981) are
compatible with this view. Additionally, we report results of a
study, in which the effect of argument quality on receivers’
attitudes was partially mediated by perceived source expertise
(Reimer, 2003). Two follow-up studies revealed that this
mediation tended to be stronger among receivers reporting low
self-expertise than among receivers reporting high selfexpertise.

Introduction
Higher-order cognitive processes are often described by dualprocess models that distinguish between systematic
(deliberate, top-down, explicit, conscious) and heuristic
(automatic, bottom-up, implicit, unconscious) processing.
This type of models has become prominent in different areas
of cognitive science (for an overview in cognitive
psychology, see Rossetti & Rovonsuo, 2000; Sloman, 1996;
for a reader in social psychology, see Chaiken & Trope,
1999). However, many researchers have criticized this
dichotomization of cognition due to its arbitrariness with
regard to the distinction of two exclusive processes (see
Kruglanski & Thompson, 1999; Gigerenzer & Regier, 1996).
Because we agree there is a need to bring forward models

that look at the relation between the two processing modes,
we make a contribution to this effort by focusing on the
interplay between heuristic and systematic processes in
persuasion (Bohner, Moskowitz, & Chaiken, 1995; Chaiken,
1987) and on the claim that heuristics are typically not used
when a message is processed systematically (Petty et al.,
1981).
Researchers in the persuasion field have studied under what
conditions the expertise heuristic (i.e., “experts are usually
correct”) is applied by receivers who are faced with a
persuasive message (Bohner, Ruder, & Erb, 2002; for other
source characteristics, see Petty & Wegener, 1998; Wood &
Kallgren, 1988). We show that studies which have assumed
that receivers do not use this heuristic when processing
information more systematically and deliberately (e.g., Petty
et al., 1981) may be reinterpreted by assuming a multistage
process in which receivers are assumed to, first, derive
information about source expertise from argument quality
and, second, make use of the expertise heuristic (Reimer,
2003). We also report follow-up studies which revealed that
receivers’ perceived self-expertise is a potential moderator
that affects whether a direct or an indirect process is taken by
receivers.

Heuristic and Systematic Information
Processing in Persuasion
The heuristic systematic model (HSM; Chaiken, 1987)
distinguishes heuristic and systematic information processing
(see Figure 1). According to the HSM, heuristic processing is
particularly likely to take place in situations in which people
are not motivated or for other reasons are not able to think
thoroughly about the contents of a message (e.g., low
personal relevance of the topic, time constraints). In contrast,

1833

systematic processing is likely to occur in situations in which
participants are highly motivated and able to scrutinize a
message (e.g., high topic relevance, no time constraints).
Experiments varying argument quality and communicator
cues such as source expertise (e.g., Petty et al., 1981) provide
support for the claim that motivation and ability determine
which process is chosen by the receiver of a message. For
example, high time pressure and distractions (e.g., Petty,
Wells, & Brock, 1976), low relevance of a topic (Petty &
Cacioppo, 1986; Petty et al., 1981), and low need-forcognition (Cacioppo, Petty, & Morris, 1983) seem to lead to
heuristic information processing. In this situation, and given
expertise information is provided by an easy-to-process cue
(e.g., the communicator is described as a professor vs.
student; see Kruglanski & Thompson, 1999), expert
statements are typically more convincing than statements
given by non-experts (Bohner et al., 2002). In contrast, in
situations of high personal involvement attitudes are typically
more strongly affected by argument quality, with strong
arguments exerting stronger attitude effects than weak
arguments. In this situation, the expertise cue usually does not
exert strong direct attitude effects (e.g., Bohner et al., 2002;
Petty et al., 1981; Petty & Wegener, 1998; for such an effect,
see Pantaleo, 1997; Pantaleo & Wicklund, 2000). In sum, in
cases of low motivation or ability, the attitude change is
mainly a function of the expertise cue, while the opposite
conditions foster an effect of argument quality.
HSM does not assume that the two processes are exclusive
(Bohner et al., 1995; Chen & Chaiken, 1999). In fact,
heuristic and systematic processing are assumed to co-occur
under certain conditions (Chaiken, 1987). For example, the
expertise cue may affect attitudes by influencing the
interpretation of ambiguous arguments (Chaiken &
Maheswaran, 1994) or may instigate the formation of
expectancies on message quality that serve as a standard to
which the subsequent arguments are compared (Bohner et al.,
2002). Thus, a communicator cue (e.g., a short description of
the communicator’s expertise) can directly affect the attitude
or may exert indirect attitude effects by affecting the
interpretation or the evaluation of the message (see dotted line
in Figure 1: expertise→argument quality→attitude path).
This connection raises the possibility of an intricate
interplay between heuristic and systematic processes and may
imply that there are a number of possible interactions between
argument quality, source expertise, and attitudes. Whereas
work has been done demonstrating effects of communicator
cues on the interpretation and evaluation of arguments
(Bohner et al., 2002; Chaiken & Maheswaran, 1994; Petty &
Cacioppo, 1986), little is known about the effects of argument
quality on the evaluation of communicators and respective
influence on attitudes.
In this paper we propose to fill this research gap by showing
that the arguments of a message may influence attitudes in
two different (although not necessarily exclusive) ways when
a message is scrutinized: (1) Arguments may exert a direct
effect on attitudes, in this case, receivers change their

attitudes due to argument quality; (2) arguments may exert an
indirect effect by changing perceived source expertise.
According to this interpretation, there are contexts in which
receivers still apply the expertise heuristic but systematically
process information pertaining to communicator expertise.
Heuristic
processing

Expertise

Attitude
Systematic
processing

Argument
quality

Figure 1: Heuristic and systematic information processing are
assumed to exert different attitude effects.
Thus, in contrast to situations in which a direct effect of the
expertise cue arises, source expertise is derived from
argument quality. Therefore, in this situation, argument
quality would have an indirect attitude effect (see dashed line
in Figure 1: argument quality→ expertise→attitude path).

Direct and Indirect Effects of Argument Quality
Studies that systematically varied both expertise and
argument quality dimensions provide some evidence that
receivers use argument quality to derive information on
source expertise (e.g., Chaiken & Maheswaran, 1994; Petty et
al., 1981; Ziegler, Diehl, & Ruther, 2002). For example, in a
classic study, Petty et al. (1981) had their students hear a tape
advocating that seniors be required to take a comprehensive
exam in their major area as a prerequisite to graduation.
Participants either learned that the tape was based on a report
of a class at a local highschool (low expertise) or on a report
prepared by a commission chaired by a professor of education
at Princeton University (high expertise). Additionally,
argument quality and topic relevance were varied as further
experimental factors: The message comprised either strong or
weak arguments and the instatement of the exams was either
said to take place in one year (high relevance) or in ten years
(low relevance). In order to check the success of their
manipulations, Petty et al. (1981) measured perceived
argument quality and expertise. Because they obviously
expected the variation of argument quality would affect
perceived source expertise they asked participants to judge
expertise independently of the message (Petty et al., 1981, p.
851): „Regardless of how you felt about what the author had
to say, how qualified did you think he was to speak on the
topic?” Notably, a strong effect of argument quality was
found with this measure of message-independent expertise,
and this effect was much stronger than the effect of the
description (Fs: 39.20 vs. 4.86).

1834

As predicted by Petty et al. (1981), argument quality and
expertise interacted with topic relevance. The argument
quality manipulation exerted stronger attitude effects when
topic relevance was high, whereas the cue on expertise only
affected the attitude towards the proposed exams when topic
relevance was low. The authors concluded that when a
persuasive message concerns an issue of high personal
relevance the effectiveness of the appeal is more a function of
the cogency of the arguments presented than of the perceived
expertise of the source. Conversely, when the message
concerns an issue of relatively low personal relevance,
effectiveness is more a function of source expertise.
However, because of the dependency of the experimental
factors, the results do not rule out that the receivers in the
high relevance condition still used the expertise heuristic.
According to our alternative explanation, the difference
between the conditions of low and high relevance consists of
how participants arrived at their source expertise judgments.
Receivers in the low relevance condition may have used the
information provided by the description (direct effect of the
expertise cue), whereas receivers in the high relevance
condition could have derived expertise from the quality of the
message (indirect effect of argument quality). Thus, some
participants may have applied the expertise heuristic even in
the high relevance condition, that is, in the systematic
processing condition.
In the next section, we outline a study (see Reimer, 2003,
for details) in which we sought to: (a) replicate the effect of
argument quality on perceived expertise; (b) test if the judges
are able to evaluate expertise independently of argument
quality; and (c) test if the effect of argument quality on the
attitude is mediated by perceived source expertise (indirect
effect). Given our hypotheses concerning systematic
processing of message content we chose a topic that could be
assumed to be relevant to all participants in our study: the
new set-up of the credit point system in their major.
As in the classic study by Petty et al. (1981), we
experimentally varied argument quality and source expertise.
In order to have a baseline for possible effects of argument
quality that are independent from the description of the
communicator, an additional control condition was included
in which participants did not receive any communicator cue.

Method
Participants were provided with a fictitious magazine article
on the new set-up of the credit-point system in psychology at
the University of Basel. Thereby, the description of the author
(high expertise, low expertise, or no information) and
argument quality (high vs. low) were varied between
participants.

Participants
The sample consisted of one hundred undergraduate students
in psychology with a mean age of 23.1 years.

Material
The Department of Psychology at the University of Basel
started a new curriculum some years ago, which established a
credit point system within the B.Sc. studies in psychology.
According to the new regulations, undergraduates need 12
credit points for the module „Biological psychology and
neuropsychology.” Participants received a fictitious article
from a university magazine (Uni Nova) in which the author
proposed to reduce the number of obligatory credit points in
this module to 6 points and increase instead the number of
credit points for optional subjects that can be freely chosen by
students from 30 to 36 points. In the condition of high [low]
expertise, the author was introduced as a 25 [22] year old
psychology [chemistry] student from the University of
Hamburg currently finishing his M.Sc. [intermediate exam].
After a short introduction to the topic, the author explicitly
stated that, from his point of view, the proposed renewal of
the credit point system had only advantages. Overall,
arguments on six different topics were provided in each of the
two conditions of strong and weak argument quality. Each
topic was presented as a separate short paragraph.
The arguments were selected from a list of potential
arguments produced by five students who were interested in
the topic and had participated in the discussion of the renewal
of the credit point system. Their task consisted of listing
potential arguments in favor of the renewal. After discussing
each item, we selected twelve arguments on which there was
agreement as to whether they were weak or strong. For
example, in the condition of strong arguments, the author
cited a fictitious study showing that students who attended
courses in subjects outside psychology found a job faster and
had higher incomes. Moreover, the opportunity to choose
subjects was said to enhance the students’ motivation and
performance. In the condition of weak arguments, the renewal
was said to enable students to meet more students from other
sciences and to choose courses that fit better individual time
schedules and save time by requiring shorter distances
between classes.

Measures and Procedure
Argument quality All items were measured on a nine-point
Likert scale (–4, totally disagree to +4, totally agree).
Perceived argument quality was measured by asking whether
or not arguments were: a) persuasive and b) good
(Cronbach’s α = .96).
Source expertise Perceived source expertise was measured
by the following items (Cronbach’s α = .96): a) „The author
is competent;” b) „The author knows the regulations in
psychology quite well;” and c) „The author has a high
expertise with regard to the regulations.” Except for the
control condition, participants were additionally asked to
evaluate the expertise independently from the arguments used
(„I would judge the author as qualified, regardless of what the
author had to say”).

1835

Attitude The following three items were administered to
measure the attitude towards the proposed renewal: a) „The
proposed change between the modules ‘Biological
psychology and neuropsychology’ in favor of ‘optional
subjects’ is useful;” b) „The proposed change should be
introduced in October 2002;” and c) „I would prefer to study
under the curriculum of the 26th of June 2001.” After
converting the third item, the three items were aggregated to
form an overall attitude measure (Cronbach’s α = .87).
The items concerning participants’ attitudes, perceived
source expertise, and perceived argument quality were
administered in a random order along with various additional
measures (e.g., on the perceived relevance of the topic and on
participants’ need for cognition; see Reimer, 2003).

Results
Argument quality The means of the attitude towards the
proposal as well as of perceived argument quality and
perceived expertise are shown in Table 1. As expected, the
strong arguments (M = 1.92; SD = 1.35) were judged to be
better than the weak arguments (M = –2.74; SD = 1.64;
F(1,94) = 236.56; p < .01). The expertise manipulation did
not affect perceived argument quality (main effect of
expertise: F(2,94) = 0.87; p = .42; interaction: F(2,94) = 0.30;
p = .74).
Source expertise In contrast, perceived source expertise was
affected by both factors, the description of the author (F(2,94)
= 4.16; p < .05) as well as argument quality (F(1,94) = 40.57;
p < .01; interaction: F(2,94) = 0.48; p = .62). Obviously,
when judging the author’s expertise, both information sources
were taken into consideration. Moreover, as in the Petty et al.
(1981) study, perceived source expertise was affected by
message quality if participants were explicitly asked to judge
the author’s expertise independently from the quality of his
message (see Reimer, 2003).

Attitude The attitude towards the proposed renewal was
exclusively affected by argument quality (F(1,94) = 38.36; p
< .01), but was independent from the description of the author
(F(2,94) = 0.8; p = .45; interaction: F(2,94) = 1.91; p = .15).
Mediation analysis: Direct and indirect effects of
argument quality The manipulation of source expertise did
not exert a significant direct or indirect effect on participants’
attitudes or perceived argument quality. Thus, there was no
evidence for the expertise→argument quality→attitude path
(see dotted line in Figure 1). Because participants were
provided with a topic they judged to be personally relevant
(Reimer, 2003), such an effect was also not expected. The
main purpose of our study was to test for an indirect effect of
argument quality (see dashed line in Figure 1). Thus, the
crucial question was: Is the effect of the argument quality
manipulation on participants’ attitudes mediated by perceived
source expertise?
As shown before, the manipulation of argument quality had
a direct effect on the perceived expertise of the author as well
as on the attitude towards the proposal (see Figure 2).
Additionally, these two variables correlated significantly (r =
.50; p < .01). In order to test if the attitude effect of argument
quality is mediated by perceived source expertise, two
regression analyses were run (cf. Baron & Kenny, 1986; p.
1177). A significant mediation requires that the effect of
argument quality on the attitude is substantially reduced when
perceived expertise is included as a further predictor. In line
with this criterion, the inclusion of perceived source expertise
reduced the β-coefficient of argument quality from .54 (p <
.01) to .38 (p < .01). The indirect effect was significant (z =
4.19; p < .01; see Baron & Kenny, 1986, p. 1177).

Expertise
.53**

Table 1: Means of attitudes, perceived argument quality, and
perceived source expertise.

Argument
quality

Source expertise
High

Low

Control

Argument quality
Strong arguments
Weak arguments

1. 83
–2. 79

1. 87
–3. 14

2. 06
–2. 36

Source expertise
Strong arguments
Weak arguments

1. 46
–0. 91

0. 16
–1. 45

1. 50
–0. 63

Attitude
Strong arguments
Weak arguments

2. 28
–0. 11

2. 16
1. 02

2. 77
0. 07

.50**
.54**
(.38**)

Attitude

Figure 2: Direct and indirect attitude effects of argument
quality.
Thus, the effect of argument quality on receivers’ attitudes
was partially mediated by perceived source expertise. The
main results remained stable when the control condition, in
which participants did not receive any information on the
communicator, was excluded from the analyses. Then, the
effect of argument quality on attitudes was somewhat smaller
(the respective β-coefficients were .48 and .31) whereas the
other two β-coefficients were almost identical.

1836

Follow-Up Studies:
The Role of Perceived Self-Expertise
One issue that arises from the multistage perspective is the
identification of variables that determine whether and to what
extent a direct or indirect path is taken. In other words, when
do receivers use the expertise heuristic? We addressed this
issue in two follow-up studies, which considered one
potential moderator: perceived self-expertise. In the risk
communication literature there is evidence that perceived
source characteristics, such as trustworthiness and expertise,
determine judges’ risk perceptions in domains in which
judges do not have much knowledge—judges seem to apply
the expertise heuristic if they are not themselves experts (e.g.,
Siegrist & Cvetkovich, 2000). In the follow-up studies, we
included these insights from the risk-communication
literature by testing if judges’ perceived self-expertise
moderates the indirect attitude effect of argument quality
(moderated mediation).
In the first follow-up study (see Reimer, Mata, & Stoecklin,
2004, for details), we used the same materials concerning the
renewal of the credit point system but additionally considered
receivers’ perceived self-expertise. As in the study described
above, the effect of argument quality on receivers’ attitudes
was partially mediated by perceived source expertise. This
indirect effect tended, as expected, to be more pronounced
among judges who reported low self-expertise—all judges
used argument quality to evaluate source expertise, but those
who judged themselves as non-experts tended to base their
attitude more strongly on perceived source expertise.
The second follow-up study replicated the effect of
perceived self-expertise in the domain of risk
communication (Reimer, Mata, & Kuendig, 2004).
Participants were provided with a website that suggested a
certain vaccination when traveling to India. As before,
argument quality affected perceived source expertise as well
as the attitude towards the vaccination. In line with the
expected moderated mediation, the attitude effect was
mediated by perceived expertise for low-expertise but not
high-expertise participants. This pattern of results was stable
over a four-week time period. Taken together, the follow-up
studies suggest that indirect effects of argument quality
seem to be particularly likely if the issue at hand is relevant
and if receivers do not judge themselves to be experts.

Discussion
In general, only those features of a message that are
sufficiently processed and discriminated can have an impact
on a receiver’s attitudes. Usually, in studies on persuasion,
communicator cues are easier to discriminate than argument
quality (Erb, Kruglanski, Chun, Pierro, Mannetti, & Spiegel,
2003; Kruglanski & Thompson, 1999). Thus, if a receiver
does not process a message systematically, these easy-toprocess cues (Bohner & Siebler, 1999) are more likely to
exert an effect than argument quality. However, one should

be careful in concluding that the perception of source
expertise does not matter during systematic information
processing. There is ample empirical evidence showing that
communicator cues can (a) influence how systematically
messages are processed (cf. Petty & Cacioppo, 1986;
Ziegler et al., 2002); (b) determine the interpretation of
ambiguous arguments (cf. Chaiken & Maheswaran, 1994);
and (c) instigate expectancies to which arguments are then
contrasted (cf. Bohner et al., 2002). These various effects
are examples of indirect effects of communicator cues: the
cues affect attitudes by directing processing goals and the
interpretation of the arguments (see dotted line in Figure 1:
expertise→argument quality→attitude path).
We showed that the findings of the Petty et al. (1981) study
can be alternatively explained by a multistage process in
which people first derive source expertise from argument
quality and then apply the expertise heuristic (see dashed line
in Figure 1: argument quality→expertise→attitude path).
Thus, systematic processing of information does not rule out
the use of heuristics. Our main goal was to provide an
alternative to a strict dichotomization of higher cognitive
processing by proposing the idea of multistage processing.
This general view is compatible with contemporary
approaches to higher-order cognition in cognitive science
(Gigerenzer, Todd, & The ABC Research Group, 1999).
Even though our work points to an alternative to standard
dual-process models it is worth noticing that the observed
mediation is based on correlational data and thus does not
allow determining the causal relationship between the main
variables. Rather, there are several possible causal
relationships between these variables and other models could
potentially account for our findings. This sort of problem is
pervasive in persuasion research; the most prominent models
such as the heuristic systematic processing model (Chaiken,
1987), the elaboration likelihood model (Petty & Cacioppo,
1986), and the unimodel (Kruglanski & Thompson, 1999)
greatly overlap in explanatory power. One direction that
might further our understanding of the processes involved in
persuasion and their interrelations is to specify the underlying
mechanisms in more detail so that we can study these directly
(Gigerenzer & Regier, 1996; O’Keefe, 2003).
Concerning future directions, it would be fruitful to link
research on persuasion with that on impression formation,
which has traditionally focused on impressions based on
agents’ behaviors (Srull & Wyer, 1989). Issues of
theoretical and applied interest are, for instance, the
differential stability over time and resistance to
counterfactual evidence of impressions derived on
systematic processing (e.g., through argument evaluation)
vs. heuristic processing.

Acknowledgment
We thank Nathalie Erpelding, Maureen Groeben, Sascha
Kuendig, Mattias Leimgruber, and Daniel Meier for their
help in producing materials and data collection.

1837

References
Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderatormediator variable distinction in social psychological
research:
Conceptual,
strategic,
and
statistical
considerations. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 51, 1173-1182.
Bohner, G., Moskowitz, G., & Chaiken, S. (1995). The
interplay of heuristic and systematic processing of social
information. European Review of Social Psychology, 6,
33-68.
Bohner, G., Ruder, M., & Erb, H.-P. (2002). When expertise
backfires: Contrast and assimilation effects in persuasion.
British Journal of Social Psychology, 41, 495-519.
Bohner, G., & Siebler, F. (1999). Paradigms, processes,
parsimony, and predictive power: Arguments for a
generic dual-process model. Psychological Inquiry, 10,
113-118.
Cacioppo, J. T., Petty, R. E., & Morris, K. J. (1983). Effects
of need for cognition on message evaluation, recall, and
persuasion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
45, 805-818.
Chaiken, S. (1987). The heuristic model of persuasion. In M.
P. Zanna, J. M. Olson, & C. P. Herman (Eds.), Social
Influence: The Ontario Symposium (Vol. 5, pp. 3-39).
Hillsdale: Erlbaum.
Chaiken, S., & Maheswaran, D. (1994). Heuristic processing
can bias systematic processing: Effects of source
credibility, argument ambuigity, and task importance on
attitude judgment. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 66, 460-473.
Chaiken, S., & Trope, Y. (Eds.) (1999). Dual-process
theories in social psychology. New York: Guilford.
Chen, S., & Chaiken, S. (1999). The heuristic-systematic
model in its broader context. In S. Chaiken & Y. Trope
(Eds.), Dual-process theories in social psychology (pp. 7396). New York: Guilford.
Erb, H.-P., Kruglanski, A. W., Chun, W. Y., Pierro, A.,
Mannetti, L., & Spiegel, S. (2003). Searching for
commonalities in human judgement: The parametric
unimodel and its dual mode alternatives. European
Review of Social Psychology, 14, 1-47.
Gigerenzer, G., & Regier, T. (1996). How do we tell an
association from a rule? Comment on Sloman (1996).
Psychological Bulletin, 119, 23-26.
Gigerenzer, G., Todd, P. M., & the ABC Research Group
(1999). Simple heuristics that make us smart. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Kruglanski, A. W., & Thompson, E. P. (1999). Persuasion by
a single route: A view from the unimodel. Psychological
Inquiry, 10, 83-109.
O’Keefe, D. J. (2003). Message properties, mediating states,
and manipulation checks: Claims, evidence, and data
analysis in experimental persuasive message effects
research. Communication Theory, August, 251-274.

Pantaleo, G. (1997). Explorations in orienting vs. multiple
perspectives. Lengerich: Pabst Science Publishers.
Pantaleo, G., & Wicklund, R. A. (2000). Multiple
perspectives: Social performance beyond the single
criterion. Zeitschrift für Sozialpsychologie, 31, 231-242.
Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T. (1986). The elaboration
likelihood model of persuasion. In L. Berkovitz (Ed.),
Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 19, pp.
123-205). New York: Academic Press.
Petty, R. E., Cacioppo, J. T., & Goldman, R. (1981). Personal
involvement as a determinant of argument-based
persuasion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
41, 847-855.
Petty, R. E., & Wegener, D. T. (1998). Attitude change:
Multiple roles for persuasion variables. In D. T. Gilbert,
S. T. Fiske, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), The handbook of social
psychology (Vol. 1, pp. 323-390). New York: Oxford
University Press.
Petty, R. E., Wells, G. L., & Brock, T. C. (1976).
Distraction can enhance or reduce yielding to propaganda:
Thought disruption versus effort justification. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 34, 874-884.
Reimer, T. (2003). Direkte und indirekte Effekte der
Argumentqualität: Der Einfluß der Argumentstärke auf die
wahrgenommene Expertise eines Kommunikators [Direct
and indirect effects of argument quality: The impact of
argument strength on the perceived expertise of a
communicator]. Zeitschrift für Sozialpsychologie, 34, 243255.
Reimer, T., Mata, R., & Kuendig, S. (2004). Argument
quality can affect attitudes by its impact on perceived
expertise: Evidence for a moderated mediation in
persuasion. Manuscript under review.
Reimer, T., Mata, R., & Stoecklin, M. (2004). The use of
heuristics in persuasion: Deriving cues on source expertise
from argument quality. Current Research in Social
Psychology, 10, 69-83.
Rossetti, Y., & Rovonsuo, A. (Eds.) (2000). Beyond
dissociation: Interaction between dissociated implicit and
explicit processing. Amsterdam: John Benjamin.
Siegrist, M., & Cvetkovich, G. (2000). Perception of hazards:
The role of social trust and knowledge. Risk Analysis, 20,
713-719.
Sloman, S. A. (1996). The empirical case for two systems of
reasoning. Psychological Bulletin, 119, 3-22.
Srull, T. K., & Wyer, R. S., Jr. (1989). Person memory and
judgment. Psychological Review, 96, 58-83.
Wood, W., & Kallgren, C. A. (1988). Communicator
attributes and persuasion: Recipients’ access to attituderelevant information in memory. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 14, 172-182.
Ziegler, R., Diehl, M., & Ruther, A. (2002). Multiple source
characteristics and persuasion: Source inconsistency as a
determinant of message scrutiny. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 28, 496-508.

1838

