UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Organization and Emergence of Semantic Knowledge: A Parallel-Distributed Processing
Approach

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/60f4v55f

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
McEleney, Alice

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Organization and Emergence of Semantic Knowledge:
A Parallel-Distributed Processing Approach
James L. McClelland (jlm@cnbc.cmu.edu)
Department of Psychology and Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213
How do you know that Socrates is mortal? More generally,
how do you know what properties to attribute to an object?
How is the relevant knowledge acquired? How is the
knowledge organized in the brain, and how is it affected by
brain damage? My colleagues and I have been seeking to
answer such questions by developing computational models
of semantic cognition and its development.

Differentiation and Disintegration of
Conceptual Knowledge
In our approach, cognition begins not so much with
booming buzzing confusion but with a bland conceptual
uniformity. At first, all things are represented with highly
similar, undifferentiated patterns of activation. As the
network experiences the various properties different things
manifest in different contexts, it gradually comes to
differentiate them. This differentiation process is sensitive
to patterns of coherent co-variation of properties of objects.
That is, it picks up on the fact that there are many objects in
the world that have wings and feathers and can fly and many
others that have four legs, a tail, a wet nose, and can bark.
First general and subsequently more specific differentiations
occur. The representations of objects reflect their underlying
conceptual similarity even as they become more and more
differentiated. After learning, progressive damage to the
network results in gradual disintegration of the conceptual
knowledge, largely reversing the patterns seen in
development.
These differentiation and disintegration
processes closely follow patterns seen in children’s
cognitive development and in the progressive loss of
conceptual knowledge in patients with semantic dementia
(Rogers et al, 2005). These effects coexist, in both the
model and in human performance, with early emergence of
the ‘basic level’, and with frequency, typicality, and
expertise effects.

Parallel-Distributed Processing
Our overall framework relies on an approach to semantic
cognition first suggested by Hinton (1981).
Hinton’s
proposal was that our knowledge of the properties of objects
as expressed in propositions about them, such as ‘A canary
can fly’, is not stored directly in propositional form but in
the strengths of connections between simple processing
units that allow propositions to be formed mentally by
pattern completion – e.g. filling in a pattern of activation
representing ‘fly’ when probed with patterns representing
‘canary’ and ‘can’. After the introduction of the backpropagation algorithm, Hinton (1989) and Rumelhart (1990;
Rumelhart and Todd, 1993) showed how this learning
algorithm could discover useful internal representations that
would support generalization. In work building on their
efforts, my colleagues and I have proposed an overall
architecture for the representation, learning, and processing
of semantic information. This architecture provides the
context in which we have gone on to address questions like
those enumerated above.

Complementary Learning Systems

Capturing Phenomena Others have Attributed to
Innately Constrained Naïve Domain Theories

A key element of the approach is that semantic cognition
takes place within a distributed network of contributing
brain areas that work together to allow us to learn, represent,
and process semantic and other types of information
(McClelland, McNaughton, and O’Reilly, 1995). One part
of this network, the neocortical learning system, allows for
the developmental elaboration of organized semantic
representations through a gradual learning process. The
other, located in the medial temporal lobes, provides a
mechanism for learning new information rapidly, while
avoiding catastrophic interference that would otherwise
occur if the new information were quickly incorporated into
the neocortical learning system. For present purposes I
focus here on recent work (Rogers & McClelland, 2004)
addressing processes we think of as taking place primarily
within the neocortex.

Beyond capturing developmental and neuropsychological
progressions, the model can address several findings others
have attributed to naïve domain theories constrained by
innate knowledge. These include:
1.

2.
3.

Early signs of sensitivity to domain- and propertyspecific patterns of generalization of attributions
from one object to another (Macario, 1991;
Gelman and Markman, 1986)
Illusory attribution of properties to objects, e.g.
attributing legs to animals that do not have them
(Williams and Gelman, 1998).
Conceptual reorganization and coalescence of
categories with the accumulation of experience
across varied contexts (Carey, 1985).

The model exhibits these phenomena as a result of gradual
learning sensitive to the structure present in its inputs,
3

unaided by innate domain-specific constraints. Thus the
model reopens the question of whether we need to invoke
such constraints. It also raises questions about how useful it
is to characterize conceptual knowledge as theory-like.

References
Carey, S. (1985). Conceptual change in childhood.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Damasio, A. R. (1989). The brain binds entities and events
by multiregional activation from convergence zones.
Neural Computation, 1, 123-132.
Gelman, S. A., & Markman, E. M. (1986). Categories and
induction in young children. Cognition, 23, 183-209.
Gelman, R., & Williams, E. M. (1998). Enabling constraints
for cognitive development and learning: A domainspecific epigenetic theory. In D. Kuhn & R. Siegler
(Eds.), Handbook of child psychology, Volume II:
Cognition, perception and development (Vol. 2, 5 ed., p.
575-630). New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Gopnik, A., Glymour, C., Sobel, D. M., Schulz, L. E.,
Schulz, T., & Danks, D. (2004). A theory of causal
learning in children: Causal maps and Bayes nets.
Psychological Review 111, 3-32.
Hinton, G. E. (1981). Implementing semantic networks in
parallel hardware. In G. E. Hinton & J. A. Anderson
(Eds.), Parallel models of associative memory (p. 161187). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hinton, G. E. (1989). Learning distributed representations of
concepts. In R. G. M. Morris (Ed.), Parallel distributed
processing:
Implications
for
psychology
and
neurobiology (p. 46-61). Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press.
Macario, J. F. (1991). Young children’s use of color in
classification: Foods and canonically colored objects.
Cognitive Development, 6, 17-46.
McClelland, J. L., McNaughton, B. L., & O’Reilly, R. C.
(1995). Why there are complementary learning systems in
the hippocampus and neocortex: Insights from the
successes and failures of connectionist models of learning
and memory. Psychological Review, 102, 419-457.
McClelland, J. L. & Rogers, T. T. (2003). The Parallel
Distributed Processing Approach to Semantic Cognition.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 4, 310-322.
Rumelhart, D. E. (1990). Brain style computation: Learning
and generalization. In S. F. Zornetzer, J. L. Davis, & C.
Lau (Eds.), An introduction to neural and electronic
networks (p. 405-420). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Rumelhart, D. E., & Todd, P. M. (1993). Learning and
connectionist representations. In D. E. Meyer & S.
Kornblum (Eds.), Attention and performance XIV:
Synergies in experimental psychology, artificial
intelligence, and cognitive neuroscience (p. 3-30).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Rogers, T. T., Lambon Ralph, M. A., Garrard, P., Bozeat,
S., McClelland, J. L., Hodges, J. R., & Patterson, K.
(2004). The structure and deterioration of semantic
memory: A neuropsychological and computational
investigation. Psychological Review, 111, 205-235.
Rogers, T. T. & McClelland, J. L. (2004). Semantic
Cognition: A Parallel Distributed Processing Approach.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Architectural Constraints on the Neocortical
Learning System
The successes of the model are heavily dependent on
properties of its architecture: crucially, its reliance on
distributed representations constrained to reflect all aspects
of the properties that objects exhibit across different
contexts. These observations provide the basis for a new
way of construing the functions of the anterior temporal
neocortex, the region implicated most strongly in the
disintegration of conceptual knowledge in semantic
dementia. Similarly to Antonio Damasio (1989), we see
this region as a ‘convergence zone’ where from different
modalities and different contexts is brought together about
the same object (McClelland and Rogers, 2003). For us it is
brought together not only to bind the different elements of
the conceptual representation, but also to allow the learning
process to shape these convergent representations in a way
that captures coherent co-variation of properties objects may
have across modalities and contexts.

Using and Inferring Causal Properties
Gopnik et al (2004) review an interesting series of
experiments on children’s ability to attribute causal powers
to objects. These authors argue that their findings implicate
an innately pre-specified causal inference mechanism that
enables children to make such attributions. However, we
have implemented a model within our approach that uses
the same mechanisms that address the phenomena above to
address the bulk of the Gopnik et al. findings. The results
suggest that within the domain of causal inference, as well
as in other aspects of semantic and conceptual cognition,
domain-general mechanisms based on the principles of
parallel distributed processing may be sufficient. Surely
there are innate biases that guide our semantic cognition, but
we suggest that they are domain general principles
embodied in PDP networks organized to promote crossdomain convergence of constraints on conceptual
representations.

Acknowledgments
Many colleagues have contributed to the ideas presented
here, most notably Tim Rogers. The work was supported by
a National Institute of Mental Health Interdisciplinary
Behavioral Science Center Grant (MH 64445).

4

