UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Overshadowing as a Mechanism Underlying the Effect of Labels on Categorization

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4rx484x7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
Rutlegde-Taylor, Matthew F.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Overshadowing as a Mechanism Underlying the Effect of Labels on Categorization
Vladimir M. Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science
The Ohio State University
208C Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place
Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Christopher W. Robinson (robinson.777@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science
The Ohio State University
208F Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place
Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Calvin M. Timbrook (timbrook.8@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science
The Ohio State University
207D Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place
Columbus, OH 43210, USA
According to the language-specific explanation, even
young children understand that entities belong to categories,
with labels highlighting categories (Gelman & Markman,
1986). Young children may also have broad assumptions
about the importance of labels. According to Waxman and
colleagues (e.g., Balaban & Waxman, 1997; Waxman &
Booth, 2003, see also Waxman, 2003 for a review), children
have broad assumptions that labels refer to categories, and
hearing the same word associated with different objects
directs infants’ attention to commonalities among the to-becategorized entities.
According to the general-auditory explanation, effects of
labels may also stem in part from auditory input
overshadowing
(i.e.,
attenuating
processing
of)
corresponding visual input (Napolitano & Sloutksy, 2004;
Robinson & Sloutsky, 2004; Sloutsky & Napolitano, 2003).
Although complete overshadowing should hinder object
recognition and the formation of perceptual categories,
partial overshadowing may facilitate category learning.
More specifically, labels may facilitate category learning by
overshadowing differences between compared entities.
Therefore, these approaches hypothesize different
mechanisms underlying the effect of labels on
categorization. According to the former approach, labels
facilitate categorization by attracting attention to
commonalities among the to-be-categorized entities. At the
same time, according to the latter approach, labels facilitate
categorization by overshadowing differences among the tobe-categorized entities. Because both mechanisms should
result in successful categorization, a simple categorization
task cannot differentiate between these mechanisms.
One way of distinguishing between these mechanisms is
to compare discrimination within and outside the trained set.
In particular, if labels overshadow differences between
compared entities, then discrimination in the trained set may

Abstract
It has been suggested that labels facilitate categorization because
children assume that labels refer to categories and hearing the
same label associated with different entities directs attention to
commonalities. However, it is also possible that labels facilitate
categorization, not by directing attention to commonalities, but
by overshadowing differences between compared entities. The
current study tested this overshadowing hypothesis in 4-yearolds and adults. The results of the current study provide evidence
suggesting that hearing the same label or hearing the same
speech-like sound associated with two different entities
decreased 4-year-olds’ discriminabilty of these trained entities.
Furthermore, accuracy was less likely to decrease when children
were presented with stimuli that shared many of the same
commonalities as the two trained stimuli. Experiment 3
demonstrated that these effects attenuated in adults. These
findings provide a novel mechanism that may underlie how
labels affect category formation.
Keywords: Cognitive Development, Attention, Categorization,
Psychology; Human Experimentation.

Introduction
Language plays an important role in conceptual
development. When two entities share a common label,
children are more likely to perceive these entities as being
more similar to each other (Sloutsky & Lo, 1999), more
likely to group these entities together (Sloutsky & Fisher,
2004; Sloutsky, Lo, & Fisher, 2001), and more likely to
make inferences from one entity to the other (Gelman &
Markman, 1986; Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004; Welder &
Graham, 2001). Although effects of labels are well
documented, explanations of these effects differ
considerably across theoretical positions.

2033

were in the baseline condition, and they heard no labels
during training. Images were presented on a Dell Inspiron
laptop computer with Presentation software, and
experimenters controlled the timing of the experiment by
pressing the spacebar to start each trial.

decrease, whereas, untrained entities that share
commonalties with the trained entities should not be
affected. At the same time, if labels direct attention to
commonalities, then trained entities as well as untrained
entities that share commonalities with the trained entities
should be affected by training.
The aim of the current study was to determine if hearing
the same label associated with two different entities affects
the perceived similarity of these entities by directing
attention to commonalities or by overshadowing differences
(Experiment 1), whether these effects are specific to count
nouns produced by a person (Experiment 2), and how these
effects change throughout development (Experiment 3).
Given that previous studies showed that auditory input often
overshadows visual stimuli, and that these effects are not
specific to labels (Napolitano & Sloutsky, 2004; Robinson
& Sloutsky, 2004; Sloutsky & Napolitano, 2003), it was
expected that both labels and speech-like sounds would
decrease the discriminabilty of trained entities in young
children by overshadowing the differences between these
entities.

V1

Experiment 1
Method
Participants Thirty-five four-year olds (22 girls and 13
boys, M = 4.55 years, SD = .27 years) participated in this
experiment. Children were recruited through local day-care
centers located in middle- and upper-middle-class suburbs
of Columbus, Ohio. The majority of children were
Caucasian.

V2

V3

Figure 1. Example of Stimuli used in Experiments 1-3
After the training phase, children were presented with 24
test trials. The testing phase was identical for both the label
and baseline conditions: No labels were provided at test.
During testing, children had to determine if two
simultaneously presented images were the same or different.
The experimenter recorded children’s responses by pressing
1 of 2 buttons on the computer. Stimulus pairs were
presented until children made a response. Twelve of the
testing trials were same trials in which children were
presented with two identical stimuli (V1-V1 trials). The
remaining 12 trials were different trials: Six of the different
trials consisted of simultaneously presenting the two trained
stimuli (i.e., V1-V2 trials), and the other six different trials
consisted of pairing one of the trained images with an
untrained image that shared many commonalities with the
trained stimuli (i.e., V1-V3 trials). The order of test trials
was randomized.
An additional six trials were randomly presented with the
test trials to insure that children were paying attention.
These catcher trials consisted of pairing V1 with a
completely novel animal. One child was excluded because
s/he missed more than two catcher trials.

Stimuli Children were presented with 3 visual stimuli (see
Figure 1). Visual stimuli were constructed so that all three
images shared many features (i.e., V1, V2, and V3 shared
many commonalities), whereas, there was only one feature
that distinguished V1 from V2 (e.g., mane) and a different
feature that distinguished V1 from V3 (e.g., darkened spots).
Each visual stimulus was presented at approximately 8 cm x
13 cm. The auditory stimulus consisted of a nonsense label
(i.e., “This is a gatu.”). Nonsense labels were presented by a
female experimenter and lasted approximately 1500 ms.
Procedure The procedure consisted of two phases: a training
phase and a testing phase. During training children were
presented with two different images (V1 and V2). Each
image was presented individually six times (1500 ms
stimulus duration) for a total of 12 training trials, and the
order of stimulus presentation was randomized. Prior to
training, children were explicitly told they were going to see
two different animals, and these animals were going to be
very similar to each other so they had to pay close attention
because they were going to be asked about them later.
Approximately half of the children heard labels during
training (N = 19). In particular, on each training trial, the
experimenter labeled the visual images (both V1 and V2) by
saying, “This is a gatu”. The remaining children (N = 16)

2034

differences between the trained items (i.e., helped children
overlook the mane on V2) then accuracy on untrained items
should be less likely to drop because the feature that
distinguished V1 from V2 was different from the feature
that differentiated V1 from V3. The results of Experiment 1
support the latter explanation.

Results and Discussion
Accuracy (i.e., hits – false alarms) was calculated for trained
and untrained sets. In the current experiment and all
following experiments, outliers above or below 2 SD of the
mean were not included in the following analyses. Two
children were excluded from the current experiment. Mean
accuracy by condition and trial type are presented in Figure
2. As seen in Figure 2, accuracy was more likely to drop for
the trained set than for the untrained set. A two-way
(Condition by Trial Type) ANOVA confirmed a significant
Condition x Trial Type interaction, F (1, 33) = 6.84, p < .05.
Independent sample t-tests revealed that children were less
accurate at discriminating trained items in the label
condition than in the baseline condition, t (33) = 3.25, p <
.005, whereas there was no significant decrease in accuracy
on untrained items, t (33) = 1.35, p = .19.

Experiment 2
The goal of Experiment 2 was to further investigate the
overshadowing hypothesis by determining whether the
findings of Experiment 1 are restricted to count nouns or if
they can be generalized to other auditory stimuli. This time,
auditory stimuli were strings of vowels that were shown to
overshadow corresponding visual input (Napolitano &
Sloutsky, 2004).

Method
Condition
1

Hits - False alarms

0.9

Participants Eighteen four-year olds (8 girls and 10 boys,
M = 4.48 years, SD = .36 years) participated in this
experiment. Participant demographics were identical to
Experiment 1. Three children were not included in the
following analyses: Two children missed more than two
catcher trials and one child’s data was an outlier.

Baseline
Label

0.8
0.7
0.6

Stimuli and Procedure The procedure was similar to
Experiment 1, except for two changes. First, the nonsense
label in Experiment 1 (i.e., “This is a gatu”) was replaced by
a three-vowel sequence (e.g., “[ā] [ōō] [a]”). As in
Experiment 1, the same auditory stimulus was associated
with both V1 and V2 across training, and no auditory input
was provided at test. Second, the vowel sequence was
produced by the computer instead of the experimenter. The
auditory stimulus was recorded as a high quality 44.1 kHz
wav file and was presented for 1500 ms at approximately
65-68 dB.

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Trained Set

Untrained Set
Trial Type

Note: Error bars represent Standard Errors.

Results and Discussion

Figure 2. Children’s discrimination across Condition
and Trial Type in Experiment 1

Children’s accuracy on trained and untrained sets in the
current experiment were compared to baseline performance
from Experiment 1. As can be seen in Figure 3, the vowel
sequences had a larger effect on discriminating trained items
(d = 1.34) than on discriminating untrained items (d = .77).
A two-way (Condition by Trial Type) ANOVA confirmed
the significant Condition x Trial Type interaction, F (1, 32)
= 6.42, p < .05. Independent sample t-tests revealed that
children were less accurate at discriminating the trained
items in the vowel string condition than in the baseline
condition, t (32) = 5.21, p < .001. In contrast to Experiment
1, children were also less accurate at discriminating the
untrained items in the vowel string condition than in the
baseline condition, t (32) = 2.40, p < .05.

The findings of Experiment 1 demonstrate that hearing the
same label associated with two discriminable objects (V1
and V2) influences the discriminabilty of these objects:
Under testing conditions where labels were introduced, the
ability of children to discriminate these objects dropped
dramatically. At the same time, accuracy on untrained
stimuli (V1-V3 trials) was less likely to decrease. This
finding is important when considering possible mechanisms
underlying effects of labels on categorization. Recall that
labels can facilitate categorization by directing attention to
commonalities or by overshadowing differences. If labels
directed children’s attention to the commonalities of trained
items then accuracy on untrained items should have also
dropped because V1, V2, and V3 all share many of the same
commonalities. However, if labels overshadowed the

2035

adults were excluded because they missed more than two
catcher trials.

Condition

0.4
0.3

Results and Discussion

0.9
Hits - False alarms

Baseline

Stimuli and Procedure With the exception of two changes,
the procedure was similar to Experiment 1. First, the
nonsense label (i.e., “This is a gatu”) was produced by the
computer rather than a female experimenter. The auditory
stimulus was recorded as a high quality 44.1 kHz wav file
and was presented for approximately 1500 ms at 65-68 dB.
Second, adults recorded their own same-different response
via computer. The stimuli used in the current experiment
were identical to Experiments 1 and 2 (see Figure 1).

1

Vowel string

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5

0.2

Accuracies on trained and untrained trials by condition are
presented in Figure 4. As can be seen in the Figure, in
contrast with Experiments 1-2, labeling the entities during
training did not attenuate discrimination in adults,
independent sample ts < 1.

0.1
0
Trained Set

Untrained Set
Trial Type

Note: Error bars represent Standard Errors.

Condition

Figure 3. Children’s discrimination compared to the
baseline condition from Experiment 1

1
0.9
Hits - False alarms

The results of Experiments 1 and 2 demonstrate that when
the same label or same vowel string is associated with
different entities, discriminabilty of these entities decreases,
even under testing conditions where no auditory input is
provided. Furthermore, these effects were stronger for the
trained stimuli (V1 and V2) than for stimuli that share many
commonalities with the trained stimuli (i.e., V3). These
findings support the general-auditory explanation,
suggesting that effects of labels on categorization may stem
from labels overshadowing differences between compared
entities. In both experiments, when two entities were
accompanied
by
the
same
auditory
stimulus,
discriminability of these entities decreased, whereas
untrained entities that shared commonalities with the trained
entities, were less likely to be affected by training.

Baseline
Label

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Trained Set
Untrained Set
Trial Type

Note: Error bars represent Standard Errors.

Experiment 3

Figure 4. Adults’ discrimination across Condition and
Trial Type in Experiment 3

The goal of Experiment 3 was to investigate the
developmental trajectory of these findings. While labels and
other speech sounds influence similarity judgments in young
children, there is little support for this finding in adults
(Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004; Sloutsky & Lo, 1999). Therefore,
it is expected that overshadowing effects would be
attenuated in adults.

General Discussion
The results of the current study point to several important
findings. First, when the same label (introduced by
experimenter) or the same speech-like sound (introduced by
computer) was associated with two different entities,
discriminabilty of these entities decreased in young children,
even under testing conditions where no auditory input was
provided. Second, stimuli that shared many of the same
commonalities as the trained stimuli were less likely to be
affected by this training. Finally, these effects of labels were
not found in adults.

Method
Participants Twenty-two adults (11 women and 11 men, M
= 20.24 years, SD = 2.83 years) participated in this
experiment. The majority of adults were Caucasian. Two

2036

These findings have important implications for the
understanding of possible mechanisms underlying the
effects of labels on categorization and induction. In
particular, many studies have demonstrated that very young
children are more likely to group two objects together when
they are associated with the same label (e.g., Balaban &
Waxman, 1997). It has also been demonstrated that children
are more likely to ignore appearance and rely on shared
labels when inducing non-obvious properties (e.g., Welder
& Graham, 2001). From one perspective, it has been argued
that: (a) children have assumptions that words and
categories are linked, and (b) hearing the same word
associated with different objects directs attention to
commonalties (e.g., Waxman, 2003). Or, more specifically,
children understand that count nouns highlight category
membership (Gelman & Coley, 1991).
The general-auditory explanation argues that the effects of
labels found early in development may stem from auditory
input overshadowing visual information (Napolitano &
Sloutsky, 2004; Robinson & Sloutsky, 2004; Sloutsky &
Napolitano, 2003). Furthermore, these overshadowing
effects are not driven by strategic considerations: When
presented with auditory-visual compounds and told to pay
attention to the visual information, young children often had
difficulty inhibiting their attention to auditory information
(Napolitano & Sloutsky, 2004; Robinson & Sloutsky, 2004).
Results of current research support the latter explanation –
labels
accompanying
visual
stimuli
attenuated
discrimination of these stimuli, whereas untrained visual
stimuli that shared many similarities were not affected.
These results provided an important insight into
mechanisms underlying effects of labels on categorization.
These findings are novel, and the hypothesized mechanism
can explain previous research findings. Furthermore, the
general-auditory effects are not specifically tied to word-like
stimuli, and the mechanism does not assume conceptual
knowledge on the children’s behalf.
However, it is important to note that future research will
need to systematically manipulate the relative
commonalities and differences between compared entities.
For example, many entities in the environment differ from
other category members by more than one feature, thus,
potentially requiring more training to overshadow
differences. At the same time, many entities also have fewer
commonalities than the stimuli used in the current study.
Understanding how different training regimes direct
children’s attention to commonalities and/or overshadow
differences, and whether these shifts in attention are childinitiated, are necessary for fully understanding how labels
affect category formation at different points in development.

Acknowledgments
This research has been supported by grants from the
National Science Foundation (REC # 0208103 and BCS #
0078945) to Vladimir M. Sloutsky.

References
Balaban, M.T., & Waxman, S.R. (1997). Do words facilitate
object categorization in 9-month-old infants? Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 64, 3-26.
Gelman, S. A., & Coley J. (1991). Language and
categorization: The acquisition of natural kind terms. In
S.A. Gelman, & J.P. Byrnes (Eds.). Perspectives on
language and thought: Interrelations in development
(146-196). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Gelman, S. A., & Markman, E. (1986). Categories and
induction in young children. Cognition, 23, 183-209.
Napolitano, A. C., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2004). Is a Picture
Worth a Thousand Words? The Flexible Nature of
Modality Dominance in Young Children. Child
Development, 75, 1850-1870.
Robinson, C.W. & Sloutsky, V.M. (2004). Auditory
dominance and its change in the course of development.
Child Development, 75, 1387-1401.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Fisher, A. V. (2004). Induction and
categorization in young children: A similarity-based
model. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
133, 166-188.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Lo, Y. (1999). How much does a shared
name make things similar? Part 1: Linguistic labels and
the development of similarity judgment. Developmental
Psychology, 6, 1478-1492.
Sloutsky, V. M., Lo, Y., & Fisher, A. V. (2001). How much
does a shared name make things similar? Linguistic
labels, similarity, and the development of inductive
inference. Child Development, 72, 1695-1709.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Napolitano, A. (2003). Is a picture worth
a thousand words? Preference for auditory modality in
young children. Child Development, 74, 822-833.
Waxman, S. R. (2003). Links between object categorization
and naming: Origins and emergence in human infants. In
D. H. Rakison & L. M. Oakes (Eds.), Early category and
concept development: Making sense of the blooming,
buzzing confusion (pp. 213-241). London, UK: Oxford
University Press.
Waxman, S. R., & Booth, A. E. (2003). The origins and
evolution of links between word learning and conceptual
organization: New evidence from 11-month-olds.
Developmental Science, 6, 130-137.
Welder, A.N., & Graham, S.A. (2001). The influences of
shape similarity and shared labels on infants’ inductive
inferences about nonobvious object properties. Child
Development, 72, 1653-1673.

2037

