UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Point and Click or Build by Hand: Comparing the Effects of Physical vs. Virtual Materials on
Middle School Students' Ability to Optimize an Engineering Design

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/530914dc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Klahr, David
Triona, Lara M.
Williams, Cameron

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Point and Click or Build by Hand:
Comparing the Effects of Physical vs. Virtual Materials on
Middle School Students’ Ability to Optimize an Engineering Design
Lara M. Triona (triona@ucsc.edu)
Psychology, UC Santa Cruz, 1156 High Street
Santa Cruz, CA 95064 USA

David Klahr (klahr@cmu.edu)
Psychology, Carnegie Mellon, 5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Cameron Williams (cammie@cmu.edu)
Center for Automated Learning and Discovery, 5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Abstract
The widespread availability of computers in science
classrooms makes them an appealing instructional medium.
However, the embodied nature of cognition would seem to
suggest that the type of materials (i.e., whether they are
physical or virtual) would influence students’ learning.
However, Triona and Klahr (2003) found that elementary
school children learned how to design unconfounded
experiments equally well when trained on either physical
materials (using real springs and weights) or virtual materials
(using a computer presentation of springs and weights). In the
present study, we compared the effect of using either physical
or virtual materials in an engineering design task in which
middle school students had to determine the most effective
properties of “mousetrap cars”. On a variety of measures, we
found that physical and virtual materials were also equally
effective at facilitating substantive learning about the domain.
Keywords: computer simulation, engineering, hands-on,
learning.

Introduction
The use of computers in science classrooms raises questions
about whether students learn more or less when pointing
and clicking than when physically manipulating materials.
Recent theorizing on the embodied nature of cognition
would seem to suggest that the processes of perception
fundamentally effects thinking (e.g., Barsalou, 1999; Clark,
1999). Manipulating materials physically would change the
nature of the knowledge relative to using a computer
interface and using a mouse to manipulate symbolic
representations of the materials.
Triona and Klahr (2003) compared physical and virtual
materials for fourth and fifth graders who were learning how
to design unconfounded experiments. They used a computer
interface that closely mimicked the physical materials and
used the same instructional script for both physical and
virtual conditions. They found that students in both the
virtual and physical conditions learned to design
unconfounded experiments, transferred this skill to a new

domain, and learned a similar amount of information about
the domains.
Although provocative, these findings are limited to a
single study. There may be other learning contexts in which
an effect of medium – virtual or physical – exists. The
current study examines an engineering task in which middle
school students were asked to design and build different
“mousetrap cars” (described below) so as to maximize the
distance they would travel. Mousetraps powered all of the
cars and the students selected various features of the cars
(e.g., body length, back axle width). Students in the current
study were not given instruction, but instead built and tested
different cars to learn the effects of the various features on
the distance that the mousetrap cars traveled. We expected
students’ learning to be more likely to be affected by type of
materials for an engineering task than the science task
because it required learning specific factors that affect the
mousetrap car rather than a general principle about
designing scientific experiments. The domain specific
learning goal of the physical features that influence the
distance the mousetrap cars travels might be easier to learn
during the handling and assembling the physical parts,
which could give students a better sense of the mechanical
forces involved. A counter hypothesis is that that assembly
problems, irrelevant details, and random variability, which
are associated with physical assembly, would sidetrack
students, whereas the virtual materials focus students
attention just on the features and their effects on the
mousetrap cars.
In contrast to the Triona & Klahr (2003), the virtual
materials for this study were designed to look very different
than the physical materials. Simple shapes and animations
were used to represent the different features of the car and
the results of the test. The lack of learning differences found
in the prior study could have been due to the visual
similarity between physical and virtual materials. By
making the visual features of the two types of materials
different, we can explore whether learning is affected by the
similarity between the visual features of the materials.

2202

Middle school students were used in the current study
rather than elementary school students because they may be
more likely to pick up on the subtle extra information
available with the physical materials. The younger students
in the prior study may not have had the capability to
integrate and use this extra information to their learning
advantage.
One of the primary advantages of using a computer
interface is the potential for more efficient learning.
Completing one trial on a computer interface can be much
quicker than using physical materials because setting up the
test is just a few clicks and the results are shown almost
instantaneously. However, amount of time spent on a task is
often positively related to learning and, thus, the timesavings may decrease learning. The current study examines
the association between learning and type of materials by
comparing children who tested the mousetraps cars for a set
amount of time and those who tested a set number of cars.

Figure 1: An example of a mousetrap car in the physical
materials condition. This car has a short body, a thick back
axle, large thick back wheels, and small front wheels.

Method
Participants
Fifty-six seventh and eighth-grade students (mean age =
13.1, 20 girls and 36 boys) from two private middle schools
participated. Participants were recruited through notices sent
to the students parents.

Design
We used a 2 (materials) x 2 (constraints) x 2 (test phase)
design, with the first two factors between-subjects, and the
test phase as a repeated measure. The materials factor was
whether students assembled and ran mousetrap cars from a
set of physical materials (see figure 1 for an assembled
physical car) or by using a computer interface in which they
pointed and clicked on idealized components and ran their
assembled cars in a virtual window (see figure 2). The
constraints factor was whether children were given a fixed
amount of time (20 minutes) to build as many cars as they
could or a fixed number of cars (6) to build with an
unlimited amount of time. Students were randomly assigned
to one of the four cells of this design. The test phase
included a pretest and a posttest that measured children’s
responses to questions about how different features of a
mousetrap car affect its traveling distance.

Materials
Mousetrap Cars A mousetrap provides the energy source
for propelling the car as the mousetrap’s spring is released.
A string attached to a long lever arm is secured to a hook on
the back axle and then the string is wound around the back
axle by turning the back wheels, causing the arm to rotate all
the way to the back axle. When the mousetrap car is placed
on the floor and released, the potential energy of the spring
returns the arm towards the front of the car, unraveling the
string while rotating the back axle, which propels the
mousetrap car forward.

Figure 2: A screen shot of the computer interface that
children used in the virtual condition. This car has a long
body, a thick back axle, large thin back wheels, and large
thin front wheels.
In both the physical and virtual conditions, students
designed mousetrap cars by choosing from two different
bodies (short or long), two different back axles (thin or
thick), three different pairs of back wheels (large thick, large
thin, or small), and three different pairs of front wheels
(large thick, large thin, or small). Students in the physical
condition built their mousetraps cars from parts that were
constructed from wood, metal rods, plastic wheels, and a
mousetrap. They tested their car designs in the hallway of
their school where they would measure the distance traveled
in feet. Students in the virtual condition used a computer
program that showed graphical representations of the parts
needed to build the mousetrap cars and they “built” their
cars by clicking on their feature selections. They tested their
car designs by clicking a button, which activated an
animation of their car design traveling across the screen and
provided the distance traveled in feet.
Pretest/Posttest The purpose of the pretest and posttest was
to assess students knowledge about the effects of different
features before and after they had built and tested their set of
cars. For each feature, children were asked which type (e.g.,

2203

Procedure
The experimenter provided all students with an overview of
the parts of the mousetrap cars and demonstrated how the
mousetrap powered the car using the physical materials. The
experimenter told the students that their goal was to find the
combination of parts that would make the best “distance
car” (i.e., one that traveled the farthest). At this point
students filled out a paper-and-pencil pretest to assess their
initial beliefs about the effects of the different parts on how
far the car would travel.
After completing the pretest, the students were randomly
assigned to use either the physical materials or the computer
interface to test different mousetrap car designs. Depending
on the assigned condition, the experimenter told them to
continue testing different car designs for twenty minutes or
to test six car designs. Students recorded the parts selected
for each mousetrap car tested and the distance it traveled.
When the students finished testing their mousetrap car
designs, they completed a posttest, while having access to
their results from their car design tests. After completing the
posttest all children were asked to make and run their
“maximum distance car” using the physical materials.

Results
Our primary question was whether students would learn
more about mousetrap cars using physical or virtual
materials. A secondary question was whether having either a
set amount of time or a set number of cars would interact
with this potential effect.
First, we compared the number of cars tested in the set
time condition and the time used in the set number
condition. As expected, children using the computer
interface took less time to test each car than those children
using physical materials: in the 20 minutes allotted for the
set time condition, students using the computer interface
tested more than three times as many car designs (M = 20.1,
SD = .9) as children using physical materials (M = 6.1,
SD = .3), t (26) = 15.8, p < .0001. Similarly, in the set
number condition, students using the computer interface
took less time to test their six car designs than children
using physical materials.
Next we addressed the question of whether the physical
and virtual conditions influenced students learning about the
features. Our analysis focused on the percentage of the
features that students learned. A two (materials: physical or
virtual) by two (constraint: 20 minutes or six-cars) by two
(test: pre or post) repeated measures ANOVA, with test as a
within-participant factor, showed a main effect for test,
F (1, 53) = 54.0, p < .0005. There were no main effects of
materials, F (1, 53) = 0.04, ns, or for constraint,
F (1, 53) = 0.6, ns, and no interactions. As can be seen in
figure 3, children in all conditions learned about the features
between pretest (M = 42%, SD = 24%) and posttest
(M = 67%, SD = 15%) but their learning was not affected

by their condition. This finding is surprising considering the
big differences in the number of cars tested in the twenty
minutes and the amount of time spent testing the six car
designs. Similar learning effects are found when children’s
choice of features for their maximum distance car is
compared between pretest and posttest; their posttest cars
typically traveled 14 feet farther than we would expect their
pretest car to travel, but there were no main effects or
interactions between conditions.
80%
Percentage Correct

large or small back wheels) would make a car go farther. In
addition, they were asked to select which parts to use to
make a “maximum distance car” and, in the posttest, to
provide additional factors that might help a car to go farther.

60%

Physical six-cars
Physical 20-mins

40%

Virtual six-cars
Virtual 20-mins

20%
0%
Pretest

Posttest

Figure 3: Percentage of correct responses about the feature
effects on pretest and posttest (Main effect for pre-post,
p < .0005, no other main effects or interactions).
We expected a main effect of materials in how far
children’s “maximum distance car” traveled, following the
posttest because children in the physical condition had, on
average, already built six cars while this was the first
physical car that children in the virtual condition had made.
There was a marginal effect of material used on this final
distance, F (1, 53) = 3.31, p = .08, but not in the expected
direction. On average, the “maximum distance cars”
designed by children who had been in the virtual condition
traveled a bit farther (M = 39 feet, SD = 0.6) than those
designed by children who had been in the physical materials
condition (M = 38 feet, SD = 3.5). (However, this effect
disappears if two outliers in the physical condition are
removed from the analysis.) There was no main effect of
testing constraint, F (1, 53) = 0.02, ns, nor an interaction
between material and testing constraint, F(1, 53) = 0.46, ns.
We also looked at children’s responses to the final question
on the posttest about other factors that might influence the
distance that a car travels. Children who used physical
materials provided slightly more appropriate features (M =
1.6, SD = 1.0) than children who used the computer
interface (M = 1.1, SD = 1.0), F(1, 53) = 3.69, p = .06, but
there was no effect of testing constraint, F(1, 53) = .301, ns,
nor an interaction between material and testing constraint,
F(1, 53) = 1.21, p = .28. Working with physical mousetrap
cars gave students more appropriate ideas about other
factors that might influence car distance, but in all
conditions students learned equally about the parts of the car
designs that influenced the distance.

2204

Discussion
The purpose of this study was to extend Triona and Klahr’s
(2003) findings to understand the circumstances in which
using a computer interface would result in a different
amount of learning than using physical materials. In
addition, this study examined how time efficiency of the
computer interface influenced students’ learning. The results
suggest that children learn equally well in all conditions,
despite the large differences in time needed for the different
materials. Even in a final test in which all children worked
with physical materials to build their final distance car,
children who had tested all of their designs on physical cars
did not have an advantage over children who tested their
designs using a computer interface. These unexpected
results provide evidence of the generalizability of the
original findings from Triona and Klahr (2003) and suggest
that using less time with the computer interface does not
necessarily reduce learning.
These finding seem to suggest that the different
information acquired thorough the different perceptual
pathways of physical and virtual materials did not affect
students’ learning as we had expected. The embodied nature
of cognition does not exclude similar learning through
different means.
Overall, these results suggest that using virtual materials
in classrooms may provide an important opportunity that is
more accessible because it is less time consuming, often
cheaper, and, in some cases, safer to implement than

physical materials. However, caution must be taken before
generalizing these results too much because in some
situations there may be differences in children’s learning
with different materials and further research is needed to
tease these apart for a variety of learning goals.

Acknowledgements
We thank the administrators, teachers, parents, and
especially the children from the Carlow College Campus
School and The Winchester-Thurston School for their
enthusiastic support, cooperation and participation. Thanks
also to the various members of the Klahrlab research group
for their suggestions as this project evolved: Mari Strand
Cary, Norma Chang, Amanda Jabbour, Elida Laski, Juinlei
Li, Amy Masnick, Audrey Russo, and Stephanie Siler. This
research was supported in part by a grant from the National
Science Foundation to the second author (BCS-0132315),

References

2205

Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 577-660.
Clark, A. (1999). An embodied cognitive science? Trends in
Cognitive Science, 3, 345-351.
Triona, L. M, & Klahr, D. (2003). Point and click or grab
and heft: Comparing the influence of physical and virtual
instructional materials on elementary school students’
ability to design experiments. Cognition and Instruction,
21, 149-173.

