UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Preliminary Analysis On: The Induction of Communication Protocols

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4tg5w2ks

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Abdullah, Nik Nailah Binti
Cerri, Stefano A.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Preliminary Analysis On: The Induction of Communication Protocols
Nik Nailah Binti Abdullah (BINTI@Lirmm.Fr) and Stefano A.Cerri (CERRI@Lirmm.Fr)
LIRMM:CNRS & Université Montpellier II,
161 Rue Ada, Montpellier Cedex 5, 34392 FRANCE.

exchanges of communicative acts (i.e. performatives). These
translated conversations were analyzed for identifying
regularities that emerge from the exchanges; enabling us to
identify how communication protocols may be induced. This
paper is organized as follows: (i) motivation and related
work; (ii) activity states; (iii) observing communications; (iv)
preliminary results, and (v) conclusions.

Abstract
This paper describes our preliminary analysis on the induction
of communication protocols. Our work has two goals: (i) to
recognize rules (i.e. protocols) from the communicative
behavior of people in daily activities and; (ii) to understand how
a person learns to infer communication protocols. Our research
aim is to conceive an effective Autonomous Agent and Human
Agent communication. We record sequences of communication
exchanges of computer scientists collaborating online as a
benchmark for the analysis of regularities that emerge from the
exchanges of those communications. We analyze their
conversation structures and interaction. We found a particular
event where person A had applied a similar manner of
communicating as person B did in a similar situation (learning
rules as a side effect of communicating). We demonstrate this
analysis.

Motivation and Related Work
We briefly review the motivation and related work in this
section on (i) Learning and Communication (Bateson, 1972);
and (ii) Situated Cognition and Activity Theory (Clancey,
1997; Leont’ev, 1977).

Learning and Communication

The basis of our work for understanding communication is
rooted at the learning and communication theory of (Bateson,
1972). Bateson focused on how learning and communication
mutually influence each other. Learning is categorized into a
hierarchy structure following the laws of motion (i.e. rules for
describing motion).

Keywords: Learning and Communication; Situated Cognition;
Activity Theory; Agent Communication Language.

Introduction1
The foundation of our work is the investigation of problems
of communication protocols encountered in real world
scenarios as well as those emerging from the Multiagent
Systems domain. In particular, we have considered the
communication problems reviewed by (Clancey, 2001) of
several scientists collaborating in a joint work carried out
during the NASA Haughton-Mars Project. The focus of our
work is to study the communication protocols among group
members in a virtual joint work environment. We want to
investigate how they behave in different contexts of
communications. We focus on a particular scenario: computer
scientists collaborating online to prepare a deliverable before
a given deadline. We have kept track of the interaction among
the collaborators with their tools and recorded about 40,000
word exchanges, including chat jargon and errors. These
natural language conversations were converted into markup
agent messages (having equivalent semantics) based on the
formal model of the FIPA-ACL communicative acts2 using
the activity states framework. We have identified about 4,000

Figure 1: Hierarchy of learning types
Figure 1 illustrates the hierarchy of learning types. The
zero learning is the basics of all learning; it is in some degrees
stochastic and contains components of trial and error. The
curved arrows represent that the one level up in the hierarchy
of learning types is described by the motion of change of the
level below it. In short, we can summarize it as: (a) zero
learning: is described by deciding which response is right or
wrong and is not subjected to correction; (b) learning I: is
described by the change in the specificity of the response by
correction of errors of choice within a set of alternatives; (c)
learning II: is described as the change of process of learning I;
either a corrective change in the set of alternatives from
which choice is made, or a change in how the sequence of
experience is punctuated (see explanation in the next
paragraph); (d) learning III: is described as the change of
process in learning II, i.e.,: a corrective change in the system
of sets of alternatives from which choice is made. We study

1

Work partially supported by the European Community under the
Innovation Society Technologies (IST) programme of the 6th
Framework Programme for RTD - project ELeGI, contract IST002205. This document does not represent the opinion of the
European Community, and the European Community is not
responsible for any use that might be made of data appearing
therein.
2
FIPA-ACL communicative acts specification provides a
formalism for modeling agent messages. Agent communication
languages (ACL) are specification languages for agents to
communicate information and knowledge.
Link:http://www.fipa.org/specs/fipa00037/SC00037J.html

268

only the learning type zero, I and II. (Bateson 1972) also
discusses learning type IV; however we do not illustrate it
here as it involves a higher level of learning that is tied to
evolutionary processes.
The basic elements that distinguish one type of learning
from the other are characterized by contexts. These contexts
are repeatable but may never be the same, and may have
related classes of how a person may respond to it. For
example, we may have a case in which a person’s response at
Time 2 is different from the one of the same person at Time 1
(Bateson, 1972). From here, Bateson uses the notion of
external event systems that carry signals telling a person how
to respond to what and when. They might tell the person: (i)
from what set of alternatives she3 should take as her next
move (class); and (ii) which member of that set she should
choose. Bateson suggests that these streams of events
(sequences of experiences) are somehow punctuated into
contexts which may be equated or differentiated by the
person. The learning hierarchy may hold a key to how those
streams of events is punctuated in the first place. In a similar
notion, (Dewey, 1925) spoke of events that “turn into objects
turn into meanings”. Here Dewey focused on the aspects of
“transformation”: what goes on in-and between the stimulusaction/response which had been discussed by Bateson as
“communication sequence”. Dewey looked into the aspects of
how meanings are constructed in communications focusing
on events. Events are replaced by how each sequence of
communication go through some kind of transformation.
Quoting from (Dewey, 1925): “Events have meanings;
recognizing communication becomes an act of merely
perceiving them.” In other words, the ability to recognize a
certain communication protocol goes through the punctuation
of context (learning), markers that mark them as events with
experiences (having meaning), which are classified as
“classes.” We extend the example given by (Bateson, 1972).
Let us assume in a sequence of events, person A’s behavior is
perceived as a stimulus for person B’s behavior and how
person B responds to that behavior is by learning to select
from her set of contexts (i.e. all the related events) the next
alternatives she takes. In these sets of contexts, how does she
learn how to know what to respond with and when?

thought; (b) categorizations as being about something
(referential); (c) the thinking process itself as being part of an
activity (Clancey, 1997). The Activity Theory on the other
hand, emphasizes on what an organism is doing in the world
and that the subjectivity of that activity is realized within and
constructed by interaction (Clancey, 2002). Situated
Cognition serves as a complete research view for
understanding the integrated mechanisms of how humans
coordinate, and conceptualize their activities. The Activity
Theory (Leont’ev, 1977) provides a platform to analyze daily
activities of people; how consciousness (e.g., motives,
intentions) arise within-and during the coordination and
conceptualization of their daily activities. Since our aim is to
understand and explain how humans induce communication
protocols, it is necessary to relate: (i) Situated Cognition; (ii)
Activity Theory; (iii) Learning, and (iv) Communication. So
that we can explain how a person coordinates (i.e.(i)) as a
whole by conceptualizing her context (i.e.(i),(iii)) of what her
activity is (i.e. (i),(ii)) when communicating (i.e. (iv),(i))
structured by her internal rules. (when we speak of internal
rules 4, we refer to the manner a person structures her
learning and understanding).

Activity States
We have briefly described in the previous sections the state of
the art. Now we introduce our own framework: activity states,
which is inspired by these studies: (i) Transactional Dynamics
(i.e. Situated Cognition); (ii) Mental reflections on action and
operation (i.e. activity theory); (iii) Mental states (i.e. Beliefs,
Desires, Intentions); (iv) Transitional states and phases. The
activity states framework (Binti Abdullah, 2005) main
contribution is to provide for intermediary concepts that map
natural language conversations onto an equivalent agent
communication language (FIPA-ACL). FIPA-ACL is derived
from Speech Acts which were developed as a theory for
characterizing human conversations. Speech acts were later
employed in Agent Communication. The conversion step is a
sort of a full circle by then re-applying the agent language
back to human conversations5. Therefore, our work is
connected to the well-established framework of (Searle,
1983) at the same time extending the notion of intentionality
of (Clancey, 1997; Leont’ev, 1977). If we separate the
conversion steps from learning how the communication
protocols are induced, we would not be able to understand
how intentions arise in the first place within a person’s
activity. Then we would not achieve our aim to know how
those communication protocols are punctuated. So, we must
begin by understanding how intentions arise, meanings and
communications are formulated. The conversion steps
specifically focus on that.

Situated Cognition and Activity Theory
The definition of situated cognition is based on the idea that
every human thought and action is adapted to the
environment that is situated. Situated is then defined as
consisting of 3 elements which are: (a) What people perceive
(structural view); (b) How they conceive their activity
(functional view) and (c) What they physically do together
(behavioral view). It is also concerned with the
“representation”, that occurs in the brain like imagining a
scene, or speaking to oneself. This process of formulating the
representation, from the agent’s perspective involves
intentionality. Situated Cognition defines intentionality as
being about conceiving: (a) a categorization as being a
3

4
We cannot give a definite definition of internal rules at this
moment. Therefore, this definition is used loosely for now.
5
In (Searle, 1983), the author explores some connections between
Intentional States and Speech Acts in order to answer the question
“What is the relationship between the Intentional State and the
object or state of affairs that it is in some sense directed at?”.

We use she for he/she.

269

The center idea of activity states is that what a person
wishes to communicate to others is influenced by her current
mental activity states. Mental states6 are generally concerning
the beliefs, desires and intentions. We extend the notion to
mental activity states inspired by the concept of mental
reflections on action and operation (Leont’ev, 1977). We look
into: (i) the current activity the people is engaged in (i.e. what
is my current objective world); (ii) the flow of the
conversations (i.e. what is my relationship with what I was
doing previously, presently and what I would like to do in the
future); and (iii) changes of context during conversations (i.e.
my process is influenced by external factors that had triggered
me to change direction) as guidelines for identifying beliefs,
desires and intention. We also look at it from both views: (i)
activity states of the speaker and (ii) activity states of the
hearer.
A person'
s beliefs and desires thus her intention is a two
way relationship with her: (i) inner processes and (ii) the
activity that she is engaged in. They are always mutually
conceptualizing the context of her action. Therefore, the
choice of intention is more likely to be activity directed
depending on the task that the person has to do. In some cases
the activity direction can turn some task, into short term-goals
or long-term goals (i.e. persistent goal). We give a scenario
below to illustrate why we model the intentions as activitydirected:
I think I want to do C -(1) I am going to do C -(2)
I will do C -(3) I am doing C -(4) I have done C -(5)
As an example, these are representations of some mental
states of a person’s activity that have been manipulated
during time. What manipulates the “states” has direct
relationship to the activity states implying what the person is
actively conceptualizing. What happens when there is an
impeachment to do C during step (3)?
C can'
t be done -(6) I think I can'
t do C -(7) I think
maybe I won'
t do C -(8) I think I really won'
t do C -(9) I
won'
t do C- (10) C won'
t be done by me -(11)
For this, we argue that not all communication is goaldirected. The way one communicates normally reflects her
ongoing activities. These activities may influence the states of
beliefs and/or desires and thus her intention. As a
consequence, the current activity she is engaged in might
make her to change directions during the course of
communication. The next question is, how do we study these
“interruptions” of states? We relate this to the transactional
dynamics approach. Transactional dynamics is centered on
the idea that treats “events” as the fundamentals unit of study.
Events here are defined as a composition of psychological,
temporal and environmental aspects. Although we relate our
study to this approach, we do not use this term in our
framework for the reason that we look at the different phases
of behavior of the subject on the social tool (e.g. instant
messaging). We need to know at which point the
communication protocols had been induced by the subject,
and at that point, what changes had occurred (i.e. interruption
or pause). Therefore we replace the term “transactional
6

dynamics” with transitional states as a consequence of the
observation of the different states (i.e. phases) a person goes
through. And also the sequences of events that had
contributed to her change of behavior from one state to the
other.

Observing Communications
This section illustrates the daily communications scenarios
among the collaborators. We have analyzed daily chats
between two collaborators (period of 7 months) and minutes
of meetings which were held twice a month among five
collaborators (period of 2 months). In particular, we have kept
track on two person’s communicative behavior on the Web,
Pete and Mathew. We show samples of the environments in
figure 3 and 4 below.

Figure 3: Daily chats between Mathew and Pete.

Figure 4: A typical virtual meeting, held at least once in two
weeks among group members.

Our definition of mental states is within the study of “activity”.

270

(3) Mathew and Justine (M & J): Hi everybody, everybody
ok?
(4) Pete: Yes, good afternoon to everybody. I could see
somebody from X, not looking like Iris, maybe he can
introduce himself to us.
(5) Unknown: Hello everybody. I am the colleague of Iris,
she’s just coming up, and in a few moments she’s here.
(6) M & J: By the way, you all notice, there’s a slightly new
interface from what we used last time. So, now you notice,
down below, if you click on the little chat tab, you should see
it highlighted in green, actually makes it a little easier to have
a simultaneous chat while others discussion is going on.
(7) Craig: Hi, Iris, how are you doing?
(8) M: Hello iris, welcome to FlashMeeting. Hope the
technology is working well for you. You probably work out
on the hand button to raise your hand or you click on the
interrupt button if you have something urgent to say. It’s a
strictly push to talk model because that makes the audio
simply work a lot more reliably and it also it makes the replay
of the meeting well coz we know exactly who’s talking at any
moment. And you can stop broadcast anytime just by clicking
on the…, in fact un-broadcasting or broadcasting again and
someone will take the floor.

Figure 5: Observing transitional states of Mathew and Pete.
Figure 5 corresponds to figure 3. It is the representation of
the transitional states to identify, where, and how Pete had
applied different/new communication protocols. Activities are
labeled as a, b, c and d. c’ is a similar type of activity to c and
so is d’ to d. The arrow (
) denotes who changed the
context of communication. The double directed arrows denote
the exchanges of communication. The horizontal line denotes
the time of activity. Hereafter, we illustrate the steps for
identifying changes that have occurred during the transitional
states: (i) locate the point of changes of activities: (ii) look at
what are the events that had caused the activity to take a
change; (iii) locate at which event A’s behavior had
responded in a way similar to B’s; (iv) compare the
communication
structures
(e.g.
conversations
or
conversations and interaction with tools) of A (e.g., Pete’s) to
B (e.g., Mathew’s); (v) now, compare the communication
structures of A to any of his previous set of related events (i.e.
contexts); (vi) study the differences and then generalize the
changes; (vii) continue for related behaviors of A.

M2. Excerpted from FlashMeeting 2, Date: 22/09/2004.
Duration of meeting: 58 minutes
(1) Pete: Good afternoon everybody
(2) Craig: hi you
(3) Pete: Good afternoon Simon. Maybe it is your first time
practicing this kind of meeting. So there is 1 button to start
and to stop broadcasting and to join the queue. So you have to
press to start and to ask for the queue and to stop broadcasting
as well.

Preliminary results
We illustrate the collaborating scenarios. Pete is the project
manager for this joint project and he was new to this
environment (i.e. instant messaging and video-conferencing).
Mathew, on the other hand, is an experienced collaborator
and has run many virtual collaborations. Everyday Mathew
and Pete go online to chat about the project. Pete’s job was to
make sure everyone does his/her share of work, and respect
the deadlines in order to achieve their shared goals together.
So he had a tough job to make sure that everyone stays
focused and that the meeting does not run over an hour.
Before the FlashMeeting7 reported hereafter, at the start of the
collaboration, Mathew had taught privately Pete how to use
the tool. During the first meeting held among some of the
collaborating members, Pete carried out his role. We show
the excerpted natural language conversations of the two
meetings M1, M2:

Two similar events took place during meeting M1, M2.
Refer to M1: at (4), (5) and (8). We can conclude that: (i) Pete
knows Iris, but he does not know the colleague of Iris. (ii) On
the other hand, Mathew does not know Iris. So, he
immediately proceeds to give instructions to her on how to
use the tool. Refer to M2: Pete re-encountered, a “new face”,
Simon. However, this time he immediately proceeds to give
instructions on how to use the tool which is in a way similar
to how Mathew had done it, even if with modified structures.
We demonstrate the results of our interpretation of that
learned behavior below.

M1. Excerpted from FlashMeeting 1, Date: 17/09/2004.
Duration of meeting: 1 hour 34 minutes 51 seconds
(1) Pete: Craig, can you hear me?
(2) Craig: Yes, we hear you but Mathew is not there. Oh we
have Mathew and Justine. Hi Mathew.

7
FlashMeeting is a video-conferencing tool developed by the team
at kMi, Open University, The UK.

271

Table 1: Comparing the conversation structures of Mathew
and Pete on a similar context.
Mathew’s instruction to Iris on the
17/09/04, (context c1). Agent Messages
in this column correspond to M1;
sentence label (8) above.

Pete’s instruction to Sm on
the 22/09/04, (context c1’).
Agent Messages in this
column correspond to M2;
sentence label (3) above.

8

3 greet p10, sm û

31 inform-if m,iris (tch)(wk)(wl) = =true

4informp,sm (prc)(mtg)(1stm) ^
(t-is) (1) (bt11)

32 inform-ref m,iris (wk) (hnd)(bt)

5 inform-ref p,sm
(bt)(str)(brdc12)

33request whenever m,iris
(rs)(hnd)(clk)(hnd)(bt)

6 inform-ref p, sm (bt)(stp13)
(brdc)

34 inform-ref m,iris (clk)(int)(bt) ^

30 greet m9, iris û

Therefore, we now have e=greet; inform-if=h; inform-ref=b;
request whenever=f; confirm=q; inform=g; Ls = listener (i.e.
sm); xn=parameters and yn = parameters.
Table 2: A comparison of Pete’s conversation structures to his
own in a similar context.
Pete giving instruction t to Pete giving instruction t to Sm on
several people on the 17/09/04 the 22/09/04 (i.e. context c1’) .
(i.e. context c2)
54 cfp p,all (ag) (str)(ans-q)

4 inform p,sm (prc)(mtg)(1stm) ^ (tis) (1)(bt)

55 cfp p,all (tk)(us)(csd)

5 inform-ref p,sm
(bt)(str) (brdc)

7inform-refp,sm (bt)(to)(jn-q)

56 inform-ref p,all (qst1)(wht)(tdv)

6 inform-ref p, sm (bt) (stp) (brdc)

35 request whenever m,iris (nd-to)
(sy)(smtg)(urg)

8 request whenever p, sm (str)
(prs)(bt)

57 inform-ref p,all (qst2) (wht) (is) 7 inform-ref p,sm (bt) (stp) (jn-q)
(av-crt)

36 confirm m,iris (md)(fm)(psh-to)(tlk)

9 request whenever p, sm (as-q)
(prs)(bt)

58 inform-ref p,all (qst3) (cnbe)(dn)(14dys)

37 inform-ref m,iris (mk)(ad)(rlb)

10 request whenever p, sm (stp)
(brdc)(prs)(bt)

59 inform-ref p,all (qst1) (us)(nclr) 9 request whenever p, sm (as-q) (prs)
(bt)

38 inform-ref m,iris (mk)(repl) (wl)

8 request whenever p, sm (str) (prs)
(bt)

10 request whenever p, sm (stp)
(brdc) (prs) (bt)

39 inform-ref m,iris (knw)(wh)(tlk)(pt)
40inform-ref m,iris (cn)(stp)(brdc)(ayt)
41 request whenever m,iris
(clk)(stp)(ubrdc)(stp)(brdc)
42 request whenever m,iris (clk)
(brdc)(ag)(stp)(brdc)
43 inform m,iris fl (sm)(tk)

Figure 6: Communication protocol of Mathew at context c1.

We show in table 1, the converted conversations of Mathew
and Pete. This is a particular case, where the memory of Pete
has allowed him to act in a way similar to how Mathew has
acted before by re-sequencing and re-enacting learned
situations (Clancey, 1997). The words in bold
(stp),(brdc),(stp) are the parameters that had both appeared in
Mathew and Pete’s conversation structures. In table 2, we
show the comparison of the conversation structures of Pete to
his other conversation structures in a similar context; where
Pete had given instructions to several people on what to start
with for the meeting. We had done this in order to locate if
there were any changes in the internal rules of Pete after he
had observed and learned from Mathew during that particular
event. To show clearly how the communicative acts along
with the parameters had been re-sequenced, we re-translate
column 1 and 2 of table 1 into figure 6 and 7 respectively.

Figure 7: Communication protocol of Pete at c1’.
Refer to figure 6: (i) from sequence h-b-f-b and look at q and
the sequence b-f-f; had been re-sequenced into g-b-b-b-f-f-f
which is shown in figure 7. The parameters: x5= y6 (i.e.
button); x23=y9 (i.e. stop) and x24=y8 (i.e. broadcast) are the
ones that had re-appeared in Pete’s structures; (ii) now we
look at the interrelationships between the conversation
structures of Mathew’s and Pete’s. We denote mp: the
message number of Pete’s and mm: the message number of
Mathew’s. The Lhs and Rhs respectively are to denote the
causality relationship of messages.
Referring to table 3, at the beginning of Pete’s instructions,
he had generalized all the instructions previously given by
Mathew starting from message 31 until 43, then specialized
the functions of the features from message 5 to 7. Whereas
from message 8 to 10, he had related the functions with its
actions by indexing his messages in reference to his previous
messages 5, 6 and 7. Now we compare these findings to table
(2). We found what still remains as his internal rules: (i)
whenever the context is to only explain; start communication

8
The message format follows partly the FIPA-ACL format which
is in this order: message number, communicative act (e.g. greet),
sender (e.g. m), receiver (e.g. iris), content (e.g. û, which is an
abbreviation used for the sentence or (wk) which abbreviates
work). In this message, number 30, we denote the sentence simply
as û because of the nature of greeting.
9
m stands for Mathew.
10
p stands for Pete and sm stands for Simon.
11
bt stands for button.
12
brdc stands for broadcasting.
13
stp stands for stop.

272

the analysis of two person’s conversation structures. We
generalize for now that humans: (i) have internal rules; (ii)
learn from experience; (iii) internal rules and learning may be
monitored, modelled and used in real contexts (Learning
Agents in Multiagent System). We outline several points
from our observations and work. Firstly, people learn from
their experiences by observations. Secondly, they remember
and adapt the communication protocols as how they
remember them best. This is then influenced by their internal
rules. Thirdly, when they re-encounter similar situations, they
remember to how they have observed others handle the
situations, and proceed to handle them in a similar way. They
had merged and adapted the communication protocols of
others into their very own. Fourthly, observing transitional
states of human activities allows us to trace where changes in
communication protocol takes place. Fifthly, allowing the
conversations to be in a more or less formalized framework
has enabled us to know how the changes had taken place by
looking into the re-sequencing and the re-enacting of the
communicative acts and parameters. The re-sequencing and
re-enacting had happened by learning through experience. In
summary, the activity of learning and communicating has
faculties such as imagination, conceptualization, reasoning,
comparing, remembering, confirming and conviction. Our
next stage consists in further analyzing more corpuses. From
these findings, it can help us to understand how to design
effective communication among Autonomous Agents and
Human Agents that are able to infer each other’s
communicative behaviour.

Table 3: Causality relationships between Mathew’s and
Pete’s messages (i.e. context c1 and context c1’).
4p
5p
6p
7p
8p
9p
10 p

Lhs

Rhs
31m,-36 m,40 m -42m
36m,40m,-42m
40m ,-42m
32m-33m
5p
7p
6p

with the object (i.e. inform-ref) and follow by the description
in a pre-order relationship. Now, what had taken place during
this event? We notice that: (i) the protocol of Mathew has
been re-sequenced by Pete and improvised by induction;
generalizing and then conceptualizing the description and
functions of object w (i.e. w is button) to the context; and (ii)
the learned rules are then adapted to his own experience,
(Pete remembered that he had seen how Mathew had
encountered that context and had handled in a way similar to
the one of Mathew). The communication protocol of Mathew
was an efficient one as Pete had remembered well the
functions of the objects and what to execute in order to make
use of those functions. Pete had re-sequenced them to the way
his internal rules remember them best. When there are
changes, we know that there are differences. The differences
trigger the interaction between parts in the mind. By
recognizing those differences in internal rules, we can
recognize the learning operators that have been responsible
for those alterations in the internal rules that had enabled Pete
to induce communication protocols. We need to consider
other aspects. Firstly, when Mathew was giving the
instructions, what did he “perceive” from the user interface?
(See figure 4). We make an assumption that most probably
that moment when he begun by describing the hand button,
corresponds to the current state of the user interface. On the
other hand, Pete had not mentioned the hand button but the
broadcasting button because the current state of the user
interface was not similar to Mathew’s. Secondly, how did
Pete recognize a similar context of situation (is the “new
face” a part of the stimulus/signal in the external event system
as mentioned by (Bateson, 1972))? How did he recognize the
“instructions” of Mathew as a set of communication
protocols? Is “giving instruction to use the tool” a member of
the class context of “instructions”? How was the
communication protocol punctuated? Did he induce the
sameness of context; then recognize that particular way as a
set of communication protocols? In other words, are we
correct to a-priori assuming this: Pete had induced a sameness
of context (Mathew said “Welcome to FlashMeeting”. Later,
Pete said “Hi Simon, maybe this is your first time using”) and
looking that the context was about “using the tool for the first
time” for new users, Pete had remembered how Mathew had
handled that situation.

References
Binti Abdullah, N.N. (2005). The induction of communication
protocols. To appear in the proceedings of the Fourth
International Joint Conference on Autonomous Agents and
Multiagent Systems, AAMAS’05, ACM Press, Utrecht, The
Netherlands.
Bateson, G. (1972). Steps to an ecology of mind. Chandler and
Publications Co.
Clancey, W.J. (1997). Situated Cognition: On Human
Knowledge and Computer Representations. Cambridge
University Press.
Clancey, W.J. (2001). What we are learning about
communication protocols. Link:
http://www.spaceref.ca/news/viewsr.html?pid=3280
Clancey, W.J. (2004). Simulating Activities: Relating Motives,
Deliberation, and Attentive Coordination. In Cognitive
Systems Research, special issue “Situated and Embodied
Cognition” 34(2) 125-137.
Dewey, J. (1925). Nature, Communication and Meaning. The
Essential Dewey: Volume 2, Ethics, Logic, Psychology.
(Eds)Hickman, L.A., and Alexander, M, Indiana University
Press.
Leont’ev, A.N. (1977). Activity and Consciousness.
Psychology in the USSR, Problems of Dialectical
Materialism. Progress Publishers.
Searle, J.R (1983). Intentionality: An Essay in the Philosophy
of Mind. Cambridge University Press.

Conclusions
Our overall analysis has been based on the conversation
structures of five people. In this particular example, we show

273

