UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Problem-Structure and Format in Training Conditional and Cumulative Risk Judgments

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5559k7sc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Beaman, C. Philip
McCloy, Rachel

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Dissociation between Categorization and Induction Early in Development:
Evidence for Similarity-Based Induction
Heidi Kloos (kloos.6@osu.edu)
The Ohio State University, Center for Cognitive Science
211G Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place
Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Anna Fisher (fisher.449@osu.edu)
The Ohio State University, Center for Cognitive Science
208B Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place
Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Vladimir Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
The Ohio State University, Center for Cognitive Science
208C Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place
Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Inductive generalization is a critical aspect of human
cognition because it enables people to generate new
knowledge. For example, seeing claws on a cat allows us to
generalize that other cats have claws too. It is well
established that induction appears early in development
(Gelman & Markman, 1986; Mandler & McDonough, 1996;
Welder & Graham, 2001; Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004a, 2004b),
however, mechanisms of early induction remain unclear. In
an attempt to explain early induction, two theoretical
proposal have been formulated, the knowledge-based and
the similarity-based.

share many important properties. The linguistic assumption
is the belief that labels presented as count nouns denote
categories (for review of these assumptions see Gelman,
2003; Keil, et al, 1998; Murphy, 2002). When performing
inductive generalizations, people, including young children,
are believed to first identify entities that belong to the same
categories and then to generalize properties to the members
of common categories. In sum, the knowledge-based
approach argues that even early in development induction is
based on prior categorization of presented entities.
The main support for the category and the linguistic
assumptions came from the innovative research by Gelman
and Markman (1986, 1987). In a series of experiments they
presented young children with a triad task, in which stimuli
consisted of one target and two test items. The triad task
was designed to pit perceptual similarity against category
membership, with test item 1 looking more similar to the
target, and test item 2 sharing the category membership with
the target.
Note that category membership was
communicated by the common label. Participants were
informed that test item 1 had a hidden property (e.g.,
“hollow bones”), whereas test item 2 had a different hidden
property (e.g., “solid bones”). Participants were then asked
to generalize one of these hidden properties to the target.
Results indicated that children tended to generalize
properties from the identically labeled, but not from the
similarly looking items, which was interpreted as evidence
for category-based induction.

Knowledge-Based Approach

Similarity-Based Approach

Abstract
The goal of the current research is to examine mechanisms
underlying induction early in development. Artificial
categories were created in which the appearance of items
could be pitted against category membership. Children
between 4 and 5 years of age participated in two types of
tasks: categorization and induction. Although participants
readily classified items based on category membership, they
ignored category membership during induction, and instead
based their responses on the appearance of items. These
results support the idea that early in development induction is
similarity-based.
Keywords: Cognitive Science; Psychology; Cognitive development, Learning, Reasoning, Developmental experimentation.

Introduction

According to the “knowledge-based” approach (often
referred to as a “naïve theory” position), even early in
development, induction is driven by conceptual knowledge.
This knowledge is implemented as a set of conceptual
assumptions, such as the category assumption and the
linguistic assumption. The category assumption is the belief
that entities belong to categories, and that category members
1149

According to the alternative approach, conceptual
knowledge (i.e., knowledge that members of the same
category have many important properties in common) is a
product rather than a precondition of learning. This
approach argues that early in development cognitive
processes are grounded not in conceptual knowledge, but
rather in powerful learning mechanisms, such as statistical

and attentional learning (Smith, 1989; Smith, et al., 1996;
French, et al. 2004; Mareschal, Quinn, & French, 2002;
McClelland & Rogers, 2003; Sloutsky, 2003; Sloutsky &
Fisher, 2004a, 2004b). Within this approach, Sloutsky and
colleagues have recently proposed a similarity-based model
of early generalization – SINC, abbreviated for SimilarityInduction-Categorization (Sloutsky et al., 2001; Sloutsky &
Fisher, 2004a).
SINC argues that early in development both induction and
categorization are based on the overall similarity of
compared entities. One of the major assumptions of SINC is
the assumption that for young children labels are features of
objects contributing to the overall similarity, rather than
conceptual markers denoting category membership. Support
for this assumption comes from the finding that young
children, but not adults, perceive identically labeled entities
as looking more similar (Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004a) than
entities that do not share the same label.
SINC also assumes that (1) early in development,
attentional weights of labels are greater than attentional
weights of other perceptual attributes, and (2) that
attentional weights of labels decrease in the course of
development (Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004a). These
assumptions are driven by theoretical considerations about
allocation of attention in the course of cross-modal
processing, and there is empirical evidence supporting these
considerations. In particular, there is evidence that auditory
input overshadows (or attenuates processing of) the visual
input for infants and young children, but not for adults
(Sloutsky & Napolitano, 2003; Napolitano & Sloutsky,
2004; Robinson & Sloutsky, 2004).
Finally, SINC can successfully account for children’s
performance on the Triad Tasks involving novel as well as
previously used stimuli (Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004a), thus
challenging the idea that early induction is category-based.

Induction: Category-Based, Label-Based, or
Similarity-Based?
Note that proponents of both positions expect labels to
affect induction, however the mechanisms that drive these
effects differ radically across the positions. According to
the knowledge-based approach, labels affect induction
because they denote categories, whereas according to the
similarity-based approach, labels affect induction because
they contribute to similarity. Therefore, the analysis of
label-based induction is insufficient for distinguishing
between the two positions.
One way to distinguish between the two positions is to
create a novel “natural-kind” type of category and to pit
knowledge of the category-membership against appearance
in an induction task. If category-based induction is a default,
then young children should ignore appearances and rely on
category membership. At the same time, if similarity-based
induction is a default, then young children (even when they
learn the category) should disregard their knowledge of
category membership and rely on appearances.
The experiments presented here had the following
overall structure.
Participants were first trained to
categorize artificial animal-like creatures into two
categories. The two categories were rule-based, and hence,

participants had to ignore the appearance of items for
successful categorization. Then participants were presented
with a triad induction task. Each triad consisted of the target
and two test stimuli, with test item 1 belonging to the same
category as the target (i.e., sharing the rule) and test item 2
having the same appearance as the target. Participants were
familiarized with a quasi-biological property of the target,
and asked to generalize it to one of the test items. Finally,
they were given a post-induction categorization task, which
was identical to the pre-induction categorization task.
Predictions of both theoretical approaches are quite
straightforward: If children perform category-based
induction they should overlook conflicting appearances and
induce properties from an item that they know belongs to
the same category as the target. However, if early induction
is similarity-based, children should induce on the basis of
common appearances, despite their knowledge of what
categories test items belong to. Notice that the final
categorization task controls for the possibility that
participants might simply forget the rule during the course
of the induction task.

Experiment 1
The goal of this Experiment was to test the predictions
outlined above.

Method
Participants Participants were 16 4- and 5-year-olds (8
girls and 8 boys), recruited from suburban middleclass
preschools with a mean age of 61.2 months (SD = 2.9
months). Four more children were tested and omitted from
the sample because they did not meet the learning criterion
(see Procedure).
Stimuli The stimuli were colorful drawings of artificial buglike entities, created by combining the following six
attributes: a body, a tail, antennas, wings, buttons, and
fingers. These six attributes varied on two out of three
dimensions (i.e., size and color, color and shape, or shape
and size). The resulting 12 features represented the
‘appearance’ of a stimulus. Features were manipulated to
create two types of stimuli, those with appearance A1 and
those with appearance A2. Each of these features had three
levels (e.g., for the size of the wing: short, medium, and
long) referred to as levels 1, 2, or 3, respectively. For A1
stimuli, 75% of stimulus features belonged to level 1,
whereas for A2 stimuli, 75% of features belonged to level 3.
The rest of the features for both A1 and A2 stimuli belonged
to level 2.
Additionally, the buttons and fingers attributes also
differed in their number, ranging from 1 to 6. Category
membership was assigned on the basis of the relation
between these two features: Members of Category 1 (R1
stimuli) had more fingers than buttons, while members of
Category 2 (R2 stimuli) had fewer fingers than buttons.
Overall, four types of items were created: A1R1 and A2R1
(i.e., stimuli that were members of Category 1, with either
A1 or A2 appearance); as well as A1R2 and A2R2 (i.e., stimuli

1150

that were members of Category 2, with either A1 or A2
appearance). Figure 1 shows an example of each type of
item. Notice that A1R2 and A2R1 foils were critical items
because appearance was directly pitted against category
membership.
Procedure The experiment was administered on a computer
and controlled by SuperLab Pro 2.0 software. Children were
tested in a quiet room in their preschool by female
hypothesis-blind experimenters.
The cover story involved a boy named Fritz who lives on
planet Elbee and who would like to get a pet. Pets on planet
Elbee are called Ziblets and come from a magical store that
carries both pets and dangerous wild animals, called Flurps.
Children’s task was to determine whether an animal from
this magical store is a Ziblet or a Flurp.

Figure 1: Examples of stimuli in Experiment 1.
(a.) A1R1; (b) A1R2; (c) A2R1; and (d) A2R2.

After the initial categorization task, children were
presented with an induction task. They were told: “The pet
store owner has a few questions for those who want to buy a
pet. Can you help Fritz get those questions right?” In each
trial, children were shown a target stimulus and, underneath
the target, two testing stimuli. For a subset of children the
target was an A1R1 item (i.e., a Ziblet), and for the rest of
the children, the target was an A2R2 item (i.e., a Flurp). The
two testing stimuli were critical items (A1R2 and A2R1;
counterbalanced for position on the screen), identical for all
children. On each trial, children were told about a hidden
property of the target For example, they were told “Here are
three animals from the pet store. The store owner says that
this one (pointing to the target item) has thick blood. Which
one of these (pointing to the testing items) has thick blood
too?” Children completed 12 induction trials presented in
random order, with each hidden property being used twice.
After the induction task, participants were presented with
a final categorization task, in which their memory of the
rule for assigning category membership was tested. The
testing items used in the final categorization task were a
subset of the testing items used during induction (6 A1R2
foils, and 6 A2R1 foils), intermixed with four catch stimuli
(the catch stimuli were cartoon-like drawings of new
animals). Half of the children were asked to determine
whether or not a stimulus was a Ziblet, and the rest of the
children were asked to determine whether a stimulus was a
Flurp. Children who failed to correctly reject catch items or
to respond “yes” to at least one trial during the final
categorization task (i.e., participants with an obvious “yes”or “no”-bias) were excluded from the sample.

Results and Discussion
Children performed very well during the initial
categorization task. The mean proportion of correct
responses across all trials was M = 0.95 (SE = .02), with 9
children (out of 16) performing correctly on each trial.
Figure 2 shows the mean proportion of rule-based
responses during induction, as well as pre- and postinduction categorization (initial and final categorization
task). Despite understanding the relevant categorization rule
(pre-induction categorization was above chance rule-based,
p < .001), children did not base their induction on
knowledge about the rule. The mean proportion of trials in
which children extended the hidden property to the test item
with the same rule was only 0.27 (SE = .05), below chance,
one-sample t (15) = -2.78, p < .02. Therefore, children
based their induction on a match in appearance between test
and target and not on the common category.
It could be argued that children’s reliance on appearance
during induction could be explained by children simply
forgetting the relevant rule.
Results of the final
categorization task rule out this explanation: when presented
with the exact same test stimuli used during induction,
children could readily distinguish between Ziblets and
Flurps. Their mean proportion of correct responses was 0.82

The procedure consisted of four phases: training, initial
categorization, induction, and final categorization. During
training, children were given information about Ziblets. In
particular, they were told: “To tell if an animal is a Ziblet or
a Flurp, you have to count the buttons and the fingers.
Ziblets always have more fingers than buttons.” Two
examples followed, each consisting of the correct
combination of the number of fingers and buttons (with no
other features present). After that, children were presented
with 8 feedback trials (two trials per each of the four item
types), in which they were asked to determine whether each
presented animal was a Ziblet or a Flurp. After responding,
participants received corrective feedback and were
reminded of the rule for assigning category membership.
During the initial categorization task, a new set of 8 trials
was presented to children (again two trials for each type of
item), and they were asked to determine whether an item
was a Ziblet or a Flurp. No feedback was given during this
part, and the rule was not repeated. To be included in the
sample, children had to perform correctly in at least six of
these eight trials Note that during training and initial
categorization task, appearance was not correlated with
category membership.

1151

3.1 months). Five more children were tested and omitted
from the sample because they did not meet the learning
criterion (see Procedure).

(SE = .04), significantly above chance, one-sample t (15) =
7.46, p < .001.
1

Stimuli and Procedure Stimuli were identical to those used
in Experiment 1. The procedure was similar to the one used
in Experiment 1 (training, initial categorization, ‘induction’,
and final categorization), with one important difference
during part 3: instead of inducing hidden properties,
children were asked to pick the test stimulus they like best.
For each trial, they heard: “A friend of mine likes this top
one (the Target item). Which one of these bottom ones do
you like best?”

0.75

0.5

0.25

Results and Discussion
0
Initial
Catego rizatio n

Inductio n

Final
Catego rizatio n

Figure 2: Proportion of Rule-Based Responses during
Categorization and Induction. For the initial categorization
task, only performance on critical lures is included. Error
bars represent standard errors. The line represents chance
responding
Although the final categorization task generated highly
accurate responses, children’s accuracy in the final
categorization task (M = 0.82, SE = .05) dropped compared
to the initial categorization task (M = 0.95, SE = .02),
paired-sample, t(15) = 2.05, p < .03. This decrease in
performance could be either due to fatigue or it could be a
carryover from the induction task – having performed
induction in the similarity-based manner, participants could
be slightly more likely to perform categorization in the
similarity-based manner as well. The goal of Experiment 2
was to distinguish between these possibilities.

As was found in Experiment 1, children performed very
well during the initial categorization task. The mean
proportion of correct responses was M = 0.93 (SE = .03),
with 8 children (out of 15) performing correctly on every
trial.
The main result pertains to children’s performance during
the final categorization task. The proportion of correct
responses in Experiment 2 (M = 0.86) was not different
from the proportion of correct responses in Experiment 1 (M
= .82), p > 0.6.
Given that participants exhibited comparable drop in the
final categorization performance compared top the initial
categorization performance in both experiments, it is
unlikely that the drop in Experiment 1 stemmed from
carryover from induction to post-induction categorization.
It appears more likely that this drop was due to less
important factors, such as fatigue.

General Discussion

Experiment 2

The main finding of the two reported experiments is that
when category membership is pitted against appearance,
young children’s induction is driven by appearance and not
by category-membership. These findings are important for
two reasons.
First, the results question the claim that young children’s
induction with natural kinds is driven by the common
category. Instead we found that children’s induction is
driven by the similarity of the items. While not tested
directly, it is likely that the same findings would hold for
artifacts. This is because artifact categories might be bound
by similarity (e.g., by similarity of shape) even more than
natural kinds are (e.g., Gentner, 1978; Keil, 1989). Future
experiments will test this hypothesis.
Second, the reported research tests a novel paradigm that
couples category learning with the triad task, which has
been extensively used in previous research (e.g., Gelman &
Markman, 1986; Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004). The advantage
of the paradigm presented here enables to distinguish
category-based and label-based induction. Indeed in
Experiment 1, young children were trained to categorize
entities into Category 1 and Category 2, and yet this
categorization played little or no role in their induction.

Children were tested with the same procedure that was used
in Experiment 1, with the only difference being that the
induction task was replaced with an irrelevant task. In this
task, participants were presented with the same triads of
stimuli (a target and two test stimuli) as in the induction
task, but instead of extending a hidden property, they had to
simply pick the test stimulus that they liked best. Such a
like-best task is likely to put the same processing demands
on children as an induction task, however it is unlikely to
lead to similarity-based processing. Therefore, if children’s
lower performance during the final categorization task in
Experiment 1 was a result of fatigue, children’s performance
in the final categorization task of Experiment 2 should be
similar to their performance in Experiment 1.

Method
Participants Participants were 15 4- and 5-year-olds (5
girls and 10 boys), with a mean age of 60.2 months (SD =

1152

These findings, in conjunction with previous research on
induction (e.g. Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004) seem to support a
distinction between label-based and category-based
induction. While there is little evidence for category-based
induction in young children (see also Fisher & Sloutsky, in
press; Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004b, for further evidence
against category-based induction in young children), there is
much evidence that common labels do contribute to young
children’s induction (Gelman & Markman, 1986; Sloutsky
& Fisher, 2004a; Welder & Graham, 2001).
Therefore, findings presented here seem to support
prediction of the SINC model that labels contribute to
induction by contributing to the overall similarity of
compared entities (Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004a) rather than by
denoting a category. Overall, the reported findings support
the idea that early in development similarity-based
induction, rather than category-based induction, is the
default.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported by a grant from the National
Science Foundation (REC # 0208103) to Vladimir M.
Sloutsky.

References
Fisher, A.V., & Sloutsky, V.M. (in press). When induction
meets memory: Evidence for gradual transition from
similarity-based to category-based induction. Child
Development.
French, R. M., Mareschal, D., Mermillod, M., & Quinn, P.
C. (2004).
The role of bottom-up processing in
perceptual categorization by 3- to 4-month-old infants:
Simulations and data.
Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 133, 382-397.
Gelman, S. A. (1988). The development of induction within
natural kind and artifact categories. Cognitive Psychology,
20, 65-95.
Gelman, S. A., & Markman, E. (1986). Categories and
induction in young children. Cognition, 23, 183-209.
Gelman, S. A., & Markman, E. (1987). Young children’s
inductions from natural kinds: The role of categories and
appearances. Child Development, 58, 1532-1541.
Gentner, D. (1978). A study of early word meaning: What
looks like a jiggy but acts like a zimbo? Papers and
Reports on Child Language Development, 15, 1-6.
Keil, F. C. (1989). Concepts, kinds, and cognitive
development. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Keil, F. C., Smith, W. C., Simons, D. J., & Levin, D. T.
(1998).
Two dogmas of conceptual empiricism:
Implications for hybrid models of the structure of
knowledge. Cognition, 65, 103-135.
Mandler, J., & McDonough, L. (1996). Drinking and
driving don't mix: Inductive generalization in infancy.
Cognition, 59, 307-335.
Mareschal, D., Quinn, P. C., & French, R. M. (2002).
Asymmetric interference in 3- to 4-month olds' sequential
category learning. Cognitive Science, 26, 377-389.

McClelland, J. L., & Rogers, T. T. (2003). The parallel
distributed processing approach to semantic cognition.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 4, 310-322.
Murphy, G. L. (2002).
The big book of concepts.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Napolitano, A. C., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2004). Is a picture
worth a thousand words? Flexible attention in young
children. Child Development, 75, 1850-1870.
Robinson, C.W., & Sloutsky, V.M. (2004). Auditory
Dominance and its change in the course of development.
Child Development, 75, 1387-1401.
Sloutsky, V. M., Lo, Y.-F., & Fisher, A. V. (2001). How
much does a shared name make things similar? Linguistic
labels and the development of inductive inference. Child
Development, 72, 1695-1709.
Sloutsky, V. M. (2003). The role of similarity in the
development of categorization. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 7, 246-251.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Fisher, A. V. (2004a). Induction and
categorization in young children: A similarity-based
model. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
133, 166-188.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Fisher, A. V. (2004b). When
development and learning decrease memory: Evidence
against
category-based
induction
in
children.
Psychological Science, 15, 553-558.
Sloutsky, V. & Napolitano, A. (2003). Is a picture worth a
thousand words? Preference for auditory modality in
young children. Child Development, 74, 822-833.
Smith, L. B. (1989). A model of perceptual classification in
children and adults. Psychological Review, 96, 125-144.
Smith, L. B., Jones, S. S., & Landau, B. (1996). Naming in
young children: A dumb attentional mechanism?
Cognition, 60, 143-171.
Welder, A. N., & Graham, S. A. (2001). The influences of
shape similarity and shared labels on infants' inductive
inferences about nonobvious object properties. Child
Development, 72, 1653-1673.

1153

