UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Processing and Integrating Multimodal Material — The Influence of Color-Coding

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5ch098t2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Folker, Sonja
Ritter, Helge
Sichelschmidt, Lorenz

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Processing and Integrating Multimodal Material – The Influence of Color-Coding
Sonja Folker (sonja.folker@uni-bielefeld.de) and Helge Ritter
Neuroinformatics Group, Faculty of Technology, Bielefeld University
P.O.-Box 100131, 33501 Bielefeld, Germany

Lorenz Sichelschmidt
Faculty of Linguistics and Literature, Bielefeld University
P.O.-Box 100131, 33501 Bielefeld, Germany

can switch between the sources of information at will, he
even can ignore one of the sources entirely or (re)consider
parts of the text and the picture in a self-determined
sequence and at his own pace. The aspect of control
becomes even more crucial with an increase in complexity:
our brain clearly evolved to process spoken language,
however, the advantage of using written language to convey
complex information is undeniable. And it has often been
documented that the combination of a text with illustrations
has a positive effect: illustrations are known to draw the
reader’s attention and to ameliorate motivation,
comprehension, and retention (see Carney & Levin, 2002).
While the demonstrated benefit of multimodal material is
highly relevant for instructional issues, the question of how
the processing of these materials is cognitively achieved
remains open. The first basic assumption concerning the
processing of multimodal material was made by Paivio
(1986), who postulated two interconnected but functionally
independent subsystems for human information processing,
a verbal and a nonverbal (pictorial) one. The verbal and
visual representations (logogenes and imagines) are
considered to be built up separately; nonetheless referential
links between corresponding logogenes and imagines can be
established. The dual coding assumption is preserved in
current cognitive models of multimodal information
processing: Mayer (1993) explicitly presents a dual coding
theory of learning from visual and verbal materials and later
models of Mayer (1997) and Schnotz and Bannert (1999)
also assume two clearly differentiated though in parallel
working channels for building up mental representations of
texts and pictures.
However, the goal of learning with multimodal material
does not consist in building up separate representations of
different sources of information but rather to build up
referential links and to integrate the information processed
in both channels. There are different views as to the
cognitive demands of this integration process: Rayner,
Rotello, Stewart, Keir and Duffy (2001: 219) affirm that
“[p]resumably, most skilled readers are adept at alternating
between text and pictures to produce a mental model of the
complete message”. Nevertheless it has to be kept in mind
that reading (as information processing in general) depends
on physiological processes and cognitive resources that are
necessarily restrained. Visual information intake is limited
to the area foveally and (depending on the type of stimulus
material) parafoveally perceived during the fixations, i.e. the
phases where the eye is kept relatively stable. Further

Abstract
Constructing effective learning material has always been a
central issue in education, and is even more so in the time of
international student assessment. In our experiment we
concentrated on the processing of typical multimodal
textbook material (i.e. a written text with accompanying
illustrations) and on how the processing and integration of
these different representational modalities can be improved by
color-coding. Color-codes reduce search effort and thus
produce similar effect to an increase in spatial or temporal
contiguity (Kalyuga, Chandler & Sweller, 1999). In this
context, contiguity is defined as the adjacency of distinct
elements in general. By using eye-tracking methodology we
chose a means that could provide detailed insights into the
actual process of information intake. Our results affirm the
differences in processing verbal and linguistic material and
show the advantage of color-coded material on processing
efficiency and integration. This leads us to the conclusion that
the genuine difficulty of multimodal material lies in the
integration of the different sources of information and that
especially learners with low prior knowledge can profit from
an increase in coherence and contiguity (see Mayer, 2001).
Keywords: color-coding; eye-tracking; multimodality; text
and picture processing; coherence formation.

Introduction
In oral communication and instruction it is natural to use
visual and linguistic sources of information simultaneously.
In line with the goal to provide more naturalistic learning
environments in educational contexts, multimedia
approaches therefore often favor a combination of spoken
text with moving or static pictures to avoid split-attention
effects (Mayer, 2001).
However, the research of Guan (2003) shows that the use
of different representational modes addressing only the
visual modality (e.g. written text and static pictures) can
prove just as efficient as a dual modality presentation where
spoken text and static pictures are presented. At first glance,
this might be a surprising result: in understanding an
illustrated text, text and pictures can only be considered
sequentially, which should complicate the integration
process, while in hearing a description of a picture while
looking at it, linguistic and pictorial information is accessed
simultaneously. At a second glance, good reasons can be
found for the use of "written-only" material: it gives the
reader more control over his intake of information, i.e. he
690

processing is limited by attentional mechanisms (Liversedge
& Findlay, 2000) and the capacity of our working memory.
These restrictions implicate that the use of written
multimodal material runs the risk of asking too much of the
reader, depending on the quality of the material on the one
hand and on the reader’s prior knowledge, his general
reading capacities and his interest and motivation on the
other hand. In the latter case, even “good pictures” can
“fail”, i.e. they might not lead to the frequently
demonstrated advantage over a text without illustrations
(Weidenmann, 1989, but cf. Mayer, 2001). Two possible
reasons for this failure can be identified: the reader might
concentrate entirely on the text, fail to process the pictures
sufficiently and therefore not profit from the additional
information they provide. Or else the reader might be able to
process the text as well as the pictures but not have
sufficient cognitive capacities to integrate the different
representations.
The research by Weidenmann (1989) focuses on
processing difficulties. In his view, pictures are conceived
as easily accessible, as the eye quickly identifies the most
informative details of the picture and adjusts the following
eye movements accordingly. Thus picture processing often
stops at a superficial level giving the learner the illusion of a
full understanding that is in fact not being achieved.
Following Weidenmann, this risk of underestimating
pictures is even higher if the picture is combined with a text,
as the text often is perceived as the better medium to
provide the content to be learned. Drawing attention to the
pictures by the means of instructions can therefore foster the
learning process (Peeck, 1993) - provided that the pictures
actually risk being underestimated. As Weidenmann points
out, this might not be the case if the task is perceived as
demanding, thus inducing a sufficient level of processing of
the text and its illustrations.
But even if the two distinct sources of information are
sufficiently processed, the difficulty of integrating the
information remains: to build up an integrated
representation, the reader has to recognize the referential
connections between the two sources; he has to align the
sources in order to match corresponding parts, to detect
inconsistencies and to add complementary information.
Even without having detailed theoretical assumptions on
how the integration process is actually accomplished, the
alignment can be assumed to be facilitated if the material
itself underlines the existing referential connections between
text and pictures. Following this view, good multimodal
material therefore is characterized by a high degree of
contiguity and coherence.
Text
+ Contiguity
Picture

Previous studies on multimodal material have indeed
documented the positive influence of an increase in
contiguity on different levels. As Mayer and Anderson
(1992) have shown, high tempo-spatial contiguity
constitutes the basis for a successful integration: pictures
have to be shown in the same time and spatially close to the
passages of the text they illustrate. Moreover, a high degree
of contiguity should exist on the semantic level, i.e. text and
pictures should be closely related to each other in regard to
the content (Carney & Levin, 2002) and superfluous
information should be suppressed to facilitate the integration
process (Mayer, Heiser, & Lonn, 2001).
Up until now, studies on the contiguity of multimodal
material mainly assessed the retention performance
depending on significant changes in the degree of contiguity
(i.e. showing text and pictures simultaneously vs.
sequentially or suppressing superfluous information). There
are few studies using eye-tracking in combination with
multimodal material; they reveal reciprocal influences of
picture and text processing. If the text is longer and the
illustrations closely related to the text, switches of attention
to the illustrations necessarily interrupt the text processing
sequence. These switches generally occur at major syntactic
and semantic boundaries (Hegarty & Just, 1989). The
picture viewing process is highly text-directed, i.e. the
pictures are only considered after having read the text and
according to the information the text provides (Hegarty &
Just, 1993; Carroll, Young & Guertin, 1992).
As color-codes strengthen the referential connections
between separate information sources, the can create the
same effects as an increase in contiguity. Parting from the
idea that color can produce strong bottom-up effects on the
attraction of gaze and assist higher cognitive processes such
as structuring and coherence formation (Marcus, 1992),
structures in the illustration corresponding to words or
phrases in the text were colored identically (see Fig. 2). For
example: if the word “chromosome” was colored in blue,
the fibrous structures in the schematic cell representing the
chromosomes as well as the corresponding labels were
colored identically. The introduction of these color codes
should have the same effect as an increase in contiguity,
facilitate the alignment and matching processes, and thus
lead to an enhanced integration process (see Kalyuga,
Chandler and Sweller, 1999).

Experiment
The experiment we conducted was designed both to gain
insight into the processing of multimodal material in general
as well as to test whether the use of color-codes can foster
the processing and integration of this type of material.
Standard material and color-coded material was tested on
two separate groups of participants (control group and color
group). The data of the control group serves to discuss
general processing issues while a comparison between
groups should yield information about the influence of
color-coding.
The changes in our material were rather subtle: content
and configuration of the material remained unchanged.
Moreover, the learning outcome mainly served as a control
as our main interest lay on the actual processing. Therefore

Verbal
representation
+ Integration
Pictorial
representation

Figure 1: The influence of contiguity on integration.
691

the understanding and as highly related to the text (median
of 4.0 and 4.5 on a five-point scale resp.). Moreover, the
topic had the advantage of being in principle known to the
subjects (the mitosis is an obligatory matter in biological
education in German High school) – and at the same time
not too familiar. The choice of topic and a preliminary
questionnaire assessing the subject’s expertise allowed for
the control of prior knowledge, holding it at a consistently
low level. This is especially important as prior knowledge
can be considered as one of the most decisive factors for
effective processing (Mayer, 2001).
The pictures were identically colored in both conditions.
In the color condition, passages of the text corresponding to
structures or labels in the picture were colored additionally
(see Fig. 2). As the subjects were informed about the fact
that the material was color-coded and even received an
example of color-coded stimulus material before starting the
trial, they could consciously use the color to direct their
attention.

we decided to use eye-tracking methodology to gain a finely
grained and on-line access to multimodal information
processing. As eye movements are closely correlated to the
reader’s allocation of attention and the accompanying intake
of information (Just & Carpenter, 1987), their analysis
allows for conclusions to cognitive processes.

Method
Participants A total of 20 subjects with normal or
corrected-to-normal vision were tested individually. The
color-blind or color-impaired subjects were allocated to the
normal stimulus group. All subjects were students, 14
females and 6 males, aged 20 to 34 years with a mean age of
24.3 years with a standard deviation of ± 4.0 years. They
were paid for their participation in the experiment.
Material We designed effective multimodal material, i.e.
material already displaying a high degree of contiguity. To
guarantee tempo-spatial contiguity, a standardized design
was chosen. A text with an average of 118.1 words was
presented on the left hand side of the screen whereas the
right side was divided in two equal parts, showing two
pictures related to the text in chronological order (i.e. the
upper picture referring to the upper part of the text and the
lower picture to the lower part of the text, see Fig. 2). The
pictures were schematized, suppressing superfluous
information like details of cell structure (semantic
contiguity).
The material described the function and the different
phases of mitotic cell division. The choice of the topic was
motivated by the following two aspects: the description of
the spatial configuration of cell bodies in the different stages
of mitosis necessitates the use of pictures (semantic
contiguity). An evaluation of the material showed that the
subjects indeed perceived the pictures as being important for

Recording and analysis of eye movements Eye
movements were registered using the SMI EyeLink I eyetracker. Only fixations exceeding a threshold of 100 ms
were included in the analysis. In cognitive-oriented eye
tracking research, a fixation threshold is usually introduced
for the following reasons: due to saccadic suppression,
information intake is considered to be possible only during
longer fixations (Matin, 1974). In addition to this, the
threshold also serves to eliminate the noise due to unsteady
fixations (i.e. one long fixation is recorded as a suite of short
fixations in one region).
Both eyes were tracked. It is typically assumed that left
and right eye movements are conjugated (Rayner, 1998) and
therefore could be expected to lead to the same experimental
results. We also tested the ocular dominance of the subjects:
as expected most of them showed a right eye-dominance. As
cell membrane

Interphase
In the interphase, the genetic material can be found
in the nucleus in the form of chromatin fibres. In
this “unwound” form, reduplication of the genetic
material is possible. The duplicated fibres remain
attached to each other at one specific point of the
fibres, the centromeres. At the end of the
interphase, the nucleus contains two sets of genetic
information that have to be separated and
distributed in the following five phases of the
mitosis.

centrioles
nucleus
chromatin fibers
Fig. 1: Cell in the interphase

Mitosis - Prophase

reduplicated
centrioles

In the first phase of the mitosis, the prophase, the
chromatin fibre pairs start condensing into
chromosomes. The centrioles reduplicate, and
the pairs move to the opposite poles. Between
them, the mitotic spindle develops. The
membrane of the nucleus begins to dissolve.

dissolving
nucleus
membrane

mitotic spindle

Fig. 2: Cell in the prophase

Fig. 2: Example of color-coded stimulus material (translated).
692

Discussion In line with existing studies our data show
significant differences in the attention allocation between
text and pictures (see Rayner, 1998): significantly more time
is spent and more fixations are made on the text region than
while studying the illustrations. The results seem to support
the hypothesis of Weidenmann (1989) that pictures in
multimodal material are processed insufficiently and that the
text is considered as the main source of information.
Furthermore, this view is buttressed by the introspective
data collected in the knowledge test: if the question related
to information that could be found in the text as well as in
the picture, the subjects mostly named the text as their most
relevant source of information.
However, one can argue as well that few fixations are
sufficient to understand the gist of a scene, given that,
compared to reading, an increased extra-foveal intake of
information is possible in scene perception (Pollatsek,
Rayner, & Collins, 1984) and that the pictures only illustrate
part of the information given in the text. Following this
assumption, the small number of fixations would only
underline the processing differences between text and
pictures. The control group data alone therefore does not
seem to provide grounds to argue for one of these
assumptions.
In fact, some of our results confirm the typical differences
in the processing of texts and pictures stated in literature:
texts are processed with many short fixations, pictures with
few and longer fixations. Interestingly, the difference in
fixation duration is not as pronounced as in processing text
or pictures alone: in his review, Rayner (1998) gives values
of an average fixation duration of 330 ms during scene
perception and 225 ms during reading. While our reading
data approximates this value, fixation durations on pictures
in a multimodal context seem to be clearly reduced
compared to scene perception. The text seems to provide
constraints for the picture perception process, rendering the
picture viewing process more effective. The analysis of the
first ten fixations underlines the directive function of the
text: in spite of the property of pictures to attract attention, it
is mainly the text that is considered first (Hegarty & Just,
1989).
As the discussion shows, an analysis of the control group
data alone necessarily remains descriptive; it cannot yield
results on the quality of the processing or the degree of
integration achieved. Differences in processing times
between text and pictures might simply be due to
differences in information content (i.e. the text might simply
be more complex than the picture); differences in processing
of pictures between conditions, however, should be due to
color-coding as the content of the material itself remained
unchanged.
Therefore, a comparison to the data of the color group is
necessary to determine if color-coding actually leads to an
enhanced processing and integration of the material. As
presentation in a multimodal context has a stronger
influence on picture processing than on the highly
constrained text processing, we also expect changes to be
more pronounced in picture processing. Therefore, a
comparison might provide evidence on the question of
(in)sufficient picture processing as well.

the issue of whether to use only the dominant eye for
analysis is an issue under current debate (Goldberg &
Wichansky, 2003), we decided to use the right eye for
analysis.
Procedure First the subjects were asked to fill in a
questionnaire assessing their prior knowledge on the topic.
All subjects then performed a visual acuity test with Landolt
rings as well as the Ishihara test for color-blindness.
All experiment-relevant instructions were presented in
written form on the computer screen in the course of the
experiment. The subjects were instructed to read the
presented material thoroughly in view of a test that would
be given afterwards. To familiarize the subjects with the
design, they first saw a stimulus example showing the same
configuration as the test material; the example was unrelated
in regards to the content, offering a short account of blood
transfusion. Subsequently, two example questions were
presented (one text related multiple choice and one picture
related recall question) to give the subjects an idea of what
would be asked of them in the knowledge test. During the
reading of the stimulus items eye movements were recorded.
Between each item a drift correction was conducted.
The reading task was followed by the test for ocular
dominance, i.a. to prevent recency effects in the knowledge
test. Then the subjects performed a computer-based
knowledge test consisting of 24 questions referring either to
the text or to the pictures or to both sources of information.
The test comprised multiple-choice questions (i.e.
recognition) as well as fill-in-the-blank tasks (i.e. recall) and
two sorting questions.
For each answer they gave, the students had to decide
whether they considered the text, the picture or their own
prior knowledge as their main source of information for
answering the question. The subjects always had the
possibility to answer “I’m not sure” to the knowledge as
well as to the information source questions to prevent them
from just answering by chance.

Results and Discussion
Differences in text and picture processing
Results Statistical analysis of the control group data with
pair wise t-tests yields the following results: There are
significant differences in the cumulated fixation duration.
On average, subjects spent 56.5 seconds on reading the text
and only 20.8 seconds on the equally sized picture region
(t(9)=8.496, p<.001). The pictures are processed with
significantly less fixations (text average of 261.7 vs. picture
85.5, t(9)=8.961, p<.001) of a significantly longer mean
duration (text 216.9 ms, picture 243.6 ms, t(9)=5.139,
p<.01). If subjects received a question in the knowledge test
that related to information occurring in the picture as well as
in the text region, the subjects perceived the text as the main
source of information, (t(9)=2.493, p<.05). Analyzing the
scan path, we found that of the first 10 fixations, 7.8 are on
the text, only 2.2 on the picture region (t(9)=5.979, p<.001).

693

Effects of color-coding

Discussion The shorter processing times on the reading task
show that the material in the color condition is easier to
process than the standard material. Color-codes seem to
provide orientation and reduce search processes, thus
freeing cognitive capacities (Kalyuga, Chandler & Sweller,
1999). The differences in processing the knowledge test are
approaching significance, the color group being faster in
answering the questions. The time advantage is not due to a
less intensive reading or superficial completion of the
knowledge test, as the scores on the test do not differ
between the groups. Color-coding therefore seems to
facilitate the processing of multimodal instruction material
and might even lead to more efficiently accessible
representations.
As the text is accompanied by two different pictures, a
minimum of four switches (from text to picture 1 and back
and from text to picture 2 and back) should occur. Given the
complexity of the text, an average of 9.47 or 12.12 switches
does neither appear excessive nor represent a more or less
isolated processing as found by Carroll, Young and Guertin
(1992). Due to the significant differences in processing time
between the two groups, the relative number of switches
over time seems more appropriate to reflect differences in
the efficiency of the integration process. As the number of
switches per second is significantly higher in the color
condition, a more integrated processing can be postulated.
Therefore our results indicate that the use of color-codes
in multimodal material has similar effects as an increase in
contiguity and fosters its processing and integration. The
detailed analysis of the eye-tracking data documents that
this amelioration is not achieved by paying more attention to
the pictures. In contrast to Weidenmann’s (1989) hypothesis
the data shows that the number of fixations on the picture
section as well as their duration is still reduced, this
reduction being significant in contrast to the reductions on
the text regions. Even fewer and shorter fixations than in the
control condition seem to be sufficient for processing the
picture.
The fact that the pictures are sufficiently processed even
in the color condition is corroborated by the data from the
knowledge test. Questions concerning pictures are answered
as well as text questions although the amount of free recall
tasks is higher than for text related questions (90.91% vs.
57.14% recall questions) and therefore should have been
more difficult to answer. The higher difficulty might have
been balanced out by the fact that pictorial material in
general proves to be more efficiently remembered (picturesuperiority effect (Paivio, 1986)) and by the fact that
pictorial presentation of test items leads to better results in
the knowledge test, especially if the subjects received the
learning material in a pictorial form as well (Brünken,
Steinbacher, Schnotz & Leutner, 2001).
The reduced fixation times are worth further discussions.
The reduction can be interpreted as an increase in
processing efficiency; parts of the picture are more easily
identified (i.e. aligned with their verbal description). The
results of Carroll, Young and Guertin (1992), however,
seem to contradict this interpretation: if the caption of a
cartoon is shown before the picture longer fixations can be

Results The subjects of the color group were significantly
faster in processing the multimodal material: on average, it
took them 76.6 sec to process one page of the test material
while the subjects of the control group needed 97.1 sec
(t(18)=2.223, p<.05). However, an analysis of variance
(ANOVA) reveals that the differences in the number of
fixations and the cumulated fixation duration are only
approaching significance, lower values were found in the
color group (284.0 vs. 347.2 fixations, F(1,18)=3.677, p<.1
and 63.5 vs. 77.3 sec. fixation duration, F(1,18)=3.371,
p<.1). The ANOVA confirms the known differences in
attention allocation between text and picture as to the
number of fixations (F(1,18)=241.658, p<.001) and the
cumulated fixation duration (F(1,18)=207.629, p<.001) but
yields no significant interaction effect. Although there is a
slight increase in the number of switches between the
control condition and the color condition, this difference is
not significant (9.47 control vs. 12.12 color, t(18)=1.518,
p>.1). But the number of switches/second is significantly
higher in the color condition than in the control condition
(0.157 vs. 0.097, t(18)=4.344, p<.001).
The significant differences in picture and text processing
together with our expectation that an increase in contiguity
influences picture processing in particular motivate a more
detailed between-groups analysis. In fact, the cumulated
fixation duration as well as the number of fixations on the
picture region are significantly reduced the color condition
(15.04 sec. vs. 20.80 sec., t(18)=2.120, p<.05, 62.56 vs.
85.50 fixations, t(18)=2.182, p<.05). The comparison of the
fixation duration on the text region between the two
conditions, however, yields no significant results.
The two groups do not differ significantly in prior
knowledge or in performance on the knowledge test (mean
score prior knowledge: 23.4 (control) vs. 26.1 (color),
t(18)=.489, p>.1; mean score knowledge test: 33.1 (control)
vs. 34.1 (color), t(18)=.310, p>.1). However, the difference
in the overall time for answering the questions is
approaching significance, the color-group being faster than
the standard group (337.8 vs. 434.7 seconds, t(18)=2.023,
p<.1).
Aside from the attention allocation, the capability to
answer the picture-related questions in the knowledge test
correctly is an important indicator for sufficient picture
processing. An ANOVA reveals that no significant
differences can be found between the two conditions in
answering the knowledge questions correctly (F(1,18)=.027,
p>.1) and no interactions exists between the condition and
the question type (i.e. questions relating to text, pictures or
text and pictures in combination). However, a significant
effect as to the type of question can be found
(F(2,36)=16.505,
p<.001).
Subsequent
pair-wise
comparisons of the mean values show that no significant
differences exist in the amount of correct answers to picture
and text questions (57.14% text and 63.64% picture
questions, t(19) =1.684, p>.1). Only the performance on
questions relating to information represented in the text as
well as in the pictures significantly surpasses the
performance on text and picture questions (t(19)=5.605,
p<0.001 and t(19)=4.383, p<.001).
694

Department of Linguistics and Literature, University of
Bielefeld.
Goldberg, J. H., & Wichansky, A. M. (2003). Eye tracking
in usability evaluation: A practitioner's guide. In J.
Hyönä, R. Radach & H. Deubel (Eds.), The mind's eye.
Amsterdam et al.: Elsevier.
Hegarty, M., & Just, M. A. (1989). Understanding machines
from text and diagrams. In H. Mandl & J. R. Levin (Eds.),
Knowledge acquisition from text and pictures.
Amsterdam et al.: Elsevier.
Hegarty, M., & Just, M. A. (1993). Constructing mental
models of machines from text and diagrams. Journal of
memory and language, 32, 717-742.
Just, M. A., & Carpenter, P. A. (1987). The psychology of
reading and language comprehension. Boston: Allyn &
Bacon.
Kalyuga, S., Chandler, P. & Sweller, J. (1999). Managing
split-attention and redundancy in multimedia instruction.
Applied Cognitive Psychology, 13, 351-371.
Liversedge, S. P., & Findlay, J. M. (2000). Saccadic eye
movements and cognition. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
4, 6-14.
Marcus, A. (1992). Graphic design for electronic documents
and user interfaces. New York: ACM Press.
Matin, E. (1974). Saccadic suppression: A review and an
analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 81, 889-917.
Mayer, R. E. (1993). Comprehension of graphics in texts:
An overview. Learning and Instruction, 3, 239-245.
Mayer, R. E. (1997). Multimedia learning: Are we asking
the right questions? Educational Psychologist, 32, 1-19.
Mayer, R. E. (2001). Multimedia learning. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Mayer, R. E., & Anderson, R. B. (1992). The instructive
animation. Journal of Educational Psychology, 84, 444452.
Mayer, R. E., Heiser, J., & Lonn, S. (2001). Cognitive
constraints on multimedia learning. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 93, 187-198.
Paivio, A. (1986). Mental representations: A dual coding
approach. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Peeck, J. (1993). Increasing picture effects in learning from
illustrated text. Learning and Instruction, 3, 227-238.
Pollatsek, A., Rayner, K., & Collins, W. E. (1984).
Integrating pictorial information across eye movements.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 113, 426442.
Rayner, K. (1998). Eye movements in reading and
information processing: 20 Years of research.
Psychological Bulletin, 124, 372-422.
Rayner, K., Rotello, C. M., Stewart, A. J., Keir, J., & Duffy,
S. A. (2001). Integrating text and pictorial information.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 7, 219-226.
Schnotz, W., & Bannert, M. (1999). Einflüsse der
Visualisierungsform auf die Konstruktion mentaler
Modelle beim Text- und Bildverstehen. Zeitschrift für
Experimentelle Psychologie, 46, 217-236.
Weidenmann, B. (1989). When good pictures fail. In H.
Mandl & J. R. Levin (Eds.), Knowledge acquisition from
text and pictures. Amsterdam et al.: Elsevier.

found on the cartoon than if the material is presented in
reverse order. Carroll and colleagues attributed this to a less
explorative viewing pattern, indicating a more careful
processing of the picture with the objective of integrating
linguistic and pictorial information. In contrast to the
experimental design by Carroll and colleagues, a less
explorative viewing pattern can be expected in both our
conditions as the subjects always tend to consider the text
first. If the fixation duration indeed reflects the duration of
the integration process, introducing color codes seems to
accelerate it. As the performance on the knowledge test does
not differ between groups, it is improbable that the
shortening of the fixation duration reflects an inferior degree
of integration or intensity of processing.

Conclusion
Our results underline the fact that texts and pictures are
indeed processed differently. No indications of insufficient
picture processing can be found, as the time allocated to the
pictures can even be reduced in the color condition without
deterioration of performance on the knowledge test. It is
possible that the readers perceive the task as too complex
and the pictures as too important not to sufficiently process
them.
The data also shows that the text is perceived as the main
medium for the acquisition of information. In trying to
guide the reader’s attention one should therefore start from
the text (as color-codes do). In our opinion the importance
and guiding function of the text justify the use of traditional
textbook material even with a variety of other media at
hand. This holds especially if the presented information is
extensive and complex and an audio presentation risks to
exceed working memory capacity (Kalyuga, Chandler &
Sweller, 1999). The use of color-codes as a means of
achieving contiguity effects and reducing search processes
can also be recommended; color-codes increase the
efficiency of processing for subjects with low prior
knowledge and can easily be used in standard textbook
material. Most importantly, they seem to lead to a more
integrated processing, thus maximizing the benefit of
multimodal material.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by the German Research Council
(Graduate Program 256, Task Oriented Communication).

References
Brünken, R., Steinbacher, S., Schnotz, W., Leutner, D.
(2001). Mentale Modelle und Effekte der Präsentationsund Abrufkodalität beim Lernen mit Multimedia.
Zeitschrift für Pädagogische Psychologie, 15, 16-27.
Carney, R. N., & Levin, J. R. (2002). Pictorial illustrations
still improve students' learning from text. Educational
Psychology Review, 14, 5-26.
Carroll, P. J., Young, J. R., & Guertin, M. S. (1992). Visual
analysis of cartoons. In K. Rayner (Ed.), Eye movements
and visual cognition. New York et al.: Springer.
Guan, Y.-H. (2003). The effects of multimedia presentations
on information processing. Doctoral dissertation,
695

