UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Propane Stoves and Gas Lamps: How the Concept Hierarchy Influences the Interpretation of
Noun-Noun Compounds

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/20z4b1jb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Costello, Fintan
Devereux, Barry

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Propane Stoves and Gas Lamps: How the Concept Hierarchy
Influences the Interpretation of Noun-Noun Compounds
Barry Devereux and Fintan Costello ({Barry.Devereux, Fintan.Costello}@ucd.ie)
Department of Computer Science, University College Dublin
Dublin, Ireland

Abstract

influence what relational link is selected for a particular
compound.
One of the most successful theories of conceptual
combination in recent years has been the Competition
Among Relations In Nominals (CARIN) model, introduced by Gagné and Shoben (1997). One of the key
assertions of this theory is that the speed and ease with
which a compound is interpreted depends on how often
the type of relation used in the interpretation of that
compound has been used with the modifier (i.e. the
first word) in previously interpreted compounds. For
example, the theory predicts that the compound mountain stream is easier to interpret than mountain magazine because the H LOCATION IS M relation used with
mountain stream (i.e. stream LOCATION IS mountain)
is also used in a great many other compounds which
have mountain as their modifier (mountain cabin, mountain goat, and so on) whilst the H ABOUT M relation
(i.e. magazine ABOUT mountain) is not commonly used
with other compounds which have mountain as their
modifier.
This approach assumes that there is a small number
of general relations and that the same general relation
can be used with a great many compounds. Gagné and
Shoben therefore adopt a taxonomic approach to representing relations, defining a set of semantic primitives
called thematic relations, following linguistic theories of
compounds (e.g. Levi, 1978). The meaning of a compound is then specified simply by a classification of that
compound into one of these 16 thematic relations (see
Table 1).
The first aim of this paper is to investigate this taxonomic representation of relations. We ask whether the
specific, concrete relations1 used in the interpretation of
compounds fall naturally into broad semantic relation
categories. A finding that the specific relations used in
the interpretations of compounds do not fall by similarity into distinct groupings would be problematic for
taxonomic approaches as it would suggest relations have
an internal structure that interacts in a non-trivial way
with the two constituent concepts.

When people understand noun-noun compounds such
as kitchen mirror they generate a relationship between
the two constituent nouns, combining them together in
a new concept. How do people determine or construct
the correct relational link between the constituents?
In our first experiment, we present evidence against
one approach to noun-noun compounds, namely that
of specifying the meaning of a compound with a single
relation from a small taxonomy of general semantic
relations. We found that people often select not one but
several relations in the taxonomy for each compound
meaning; for example, people classify coffee stain
(meaning “a stain caused by the spilling of coffee”) as
stain MADE OF coffee, coffee MAKES stain, stain
BY coffee, coffee CAUSES stain and stain DERIVED
FROM coffee. We also found that compounds which
had similar constituent concepts tended to be classified
into similar relations. Our second experiment examines
the role of the constituent concepts in determining
the correct relation directly: again similar constituent
concepts give rise to similar interpretations. Also,
the results show that the constituent concepts’ position in the conceptual hierarchy tends to influence
interpretation: for example the compounds propane
stove and gas lamp, which have conceptually similar
constituents, tend to be interpreted in very similar ways.
Keywords:
Conceptual combination;
compounds; CARIN; thematic relations.

noun-noun

Introduction
In English and other languages, novel noun-noun compound phrases such as kitchen mirror and pear bowl
are commonly used. When people encounter such compounds they interpret them quickly and easily, determining that kitchen mirror means a mirror located in
a kitchen and pear bowl means a bowl that is used for
holding pears. How do people do this? Conceptual combination, the process that people use to determine the
meaning of compounds, is non-trivial: to determine the
meaning of a compound such as kitchen mirror people
must instantiate the correct relational link between the
head noun (H) and modifier (M) of the compound (yielding, for example, a mirror located in a kitchen) and discount the potentially infinitely many relational links that
do not lead to plausible interpretations (for example, a
mirror used for holding kitchens or a mirror covered with
kitchens). In this paper our aim is to understand the nature of the relational links and examine the factors that

1
Throughout this paper, we use the word relation in two
contexts. A thematic relation is a broad semantic category
that compounds can be classified as belonging to. A specific
relation is the actual, concrete, fully-elaborated relationship
between the two concepts in a particular interpretation of a
noun-noun compound.

589

the interpretations of compounds into categories in the
taxonomy. Compounds can potentially be ambiguous; a
compound can have two or more distinct meanings that
fall into different taxonomic categories. (For example,
the compound cat rash may be interpreted as either “a
rash found on a cat” or “a rash caused by cats”). Previous research (e.g. Gagné & Shoben 2002) has assumed
that each interpretation is specified by a particular relation; only in the case when a compound is ambiguous
can people select more than one relation for it. What
is of interest to us is what thematic relations are selected for a single interpretation of a compound. In our
experiments, therefore, to avoid the possibility that participants select more than one relation for a compound
only because the compound has more than one possible meaning, the participants are presented on each trial
with both a compound and a single possible interpretation of it and are asked to make their relation selections
on the interpretation of the compound.

Table 1: The taxonomy used in the CARIN model
No.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16

Relation

Example

H causes M
M causes H
H has M
M has H
H made of M
H makes M
H location is M
H for M
H is M
H uses M
H derived from M
H about M
H during M
H used by M
M location is H
H by M

flu virus
job tension
college town
lemon peel
chocolate bar
honey bee
office friendships
plant food
canine companion
machine translation
peanut butter
budget speech
summer clouds
servant language
murder town
student vote

Experiment 1
If a taxonomy is a true description of how relations are
organized in the world, then compounds should tend to
fall into one and only one taxonomic category, namely
the one that forms the basis of the interpretation. However, if a taxonomy is an insufficient representation for
relations, we would expect to find that people classify
the interpretations of compounds into various different
relation categories, that there is overlap between the relations selected for certain types of compounds, and that
there is an interaction between what the constituent concepts are and what the chosen relations is, all of which
would indicate that relations have a complex representational structure that interacts in a non-trivial way with
the structure of the constituent concepts. Though our
interest is in the validity of taxonomic approaches in general, we focused on the taxonomy of 16 thematic relations used with the CARIN model. To this taxonomy
we added the relations M IS H and M MAKES H (plausible relations that were not included in that taxonomy).
The primary question our experiment is designed to address is whether there is simply one correct relation for
each compound meaning, or rather would the participants select more than one relation as being appropriate
for a given compound interpretation.

The second aim of the paper is to investigate the influence of the constituent concepts on how people construct
the correct specific relation for a given compound. In
particular, we aimed to investigate how the head and
modifier’s position in the conceptual hierarchy might
lead to particular types of relations being selected for
the compound. For example, compounds that have a
type of artifact as their head noun (e.g. juvenile underwear ) may tend to be interpreted with a FOR type
relation, whereas compounds that have a type of substance as their modifier (e.g. chocolate rabbit) may tend
to be interpreted with a MADE OF type relation. This
question has implications for the CARIN model of conceptual combination, as the key prediction of the model
(which is supported by the empirical evidence) is that it
is the modifier and not the head noun that determines
the speed with which compounds are interpreted. Evidence that the modifier tends to be more influential than
the head in determining how a compound is interpreted
would support this asymmetry between the roles of the
head and the modifier. However, evidence that the head
noun is as influential as the modifier in determining an
interpretation would suggest that the situation is more
complicated, with the modifier alone being the important factor in determining the ease of a particular interpretation but with both the head noun and the modifier
being important in determining what that interpretation
should actually be.
The two experiments described here use the same experimental procedure: participants were presented with
a compound and an interpretation of it and were asked
to select which thematic relations in the taxonomy they
felt were appropriate paraphrases for the interpretation.
In the context of such a relation selection task, it is important to make the distinction between classifying compounds into categories in the taxonomy and classifying

Method
Materials Both authors generated interpretations for
each of the 300 compounds presented in the appendices
of Gagné (2001), yielding a total of 600 interpretations.
Compounds that are very common (such as “air power”)
and therefore possibly lexicalized were removed from this
potential set of materials. Compounds for which we
could not find or deduce the correct thematic relations
were also removed2 . The materials were also subject
2
Indeed, our experiment was in part motivated by our
inability to confidently deduce the correct thematic relation
for all 300 compounds. For example, it is difficult to decide
whether vapour humidifier is properly classified as humidifier
FOR vapour or humidifier CAUSES vapour.

590

to the constraint that, though each compound had two
interpretations (one from each author), each compound
could only appear once in the materials. The 60 experimental materials were selected from the remaining set
of 382 compound and interpretation pairs. There were
three factors in the experiment, which we omit here for
brevity. Each participant saw half of the experimental
items.
Participants Participants were 34 students of University College Dublin.

Figure 1: Distribution of relation selections for coffee
stain = “a stain caused by the spilling of coffee”

Procedure The 30 items were presented to participants sequentially on a Web page. For each experimental item, the Web page displayed a compound (for example dog bed ) and an interpretation of that compound
(for example “a bed where a dog sleeps”), followed by a
scrollable list of the 18 relations (presented in the format
bed ABOUT dog, bed FOR dog, and so on) which participants could move through by clicking the provided
buttons. Participants could select relations by checking
the checkbox that accompanied each relation. At the top
of the page participants were instructed to select any of
the 18 relations they felt were an appropriate paraphrase
of the interpretation. They were instructed to select only
one relation if they felt only one relation was appropriate
or to select more than one relation if they felt that more
than one relation was appropriate. The order of the 18
relations and of the 30 experimental were randomized
for each participant. Each trial was self-paced.

pairs of response relations (e.g. for M CAUSES H and
M BY H, r = 0.688; for M CAUSES H and H DERIVED FROM M, r = 0.633; all p’s < 0.01) that would
support this hypothesis. However, if two or more relations in the taxonomy really had the same or similar
meanings, we would expect these relations to co-occur
consistently across items: that is, for every compound
meaning people should not select one of the relations
without also selecting the other. This is not observed
in many instances. For the interpretation of job anxiety,
for example, people select the M CAUSES H relation
but not the H BY M relation, in spite of the fact that
there is a high correlation between these two relations.
If M CAUSES H and H BY B mean the same or nearly
the same thing, then it would be as natural or nearly
as natural to say “anxiety that is by a job” as it is to
say “anxiety that is caused by a job”. Our correlation
data support the hypothesis that the thematic relations
intersect, in the sense that sometimes many relations are
valid for a single compound meaning. But our data also
suggest that all the relations in the taxonomy are distinct in the sense that it is not possible to replace one
relation by another or merge two relations into one in a
way that is meaningful for all compound interpretations.
Both conclusions are problematic for the taxonomic approach. Furthermore, because we present people with
a single concrete interpretation for a compound as well
as the compound itself, it cannot be the possibility that
the vagueness, ambiguity or the poorly-defined nature of
compounds is resulting in more than one relation being
selected; rather, it must be the result of the vagueness,
ambiguity or the poorly defined nature of the thematic
relations.
So, given these results, what are we to make of the
relational link between the two constituent concepts of
a compound? A possible shortcoming of the taxonomic
view of relations is that there is no real interaction between the relations in the taxonomy and the semantic
content of the concepts that they link. The CARIN
model, for example, uses only distributional information about how frequently different thematic relations
occur with the modifier concepts of previously encountered compounds. We wished to address how the meaning of the constituent concepts influenced our participant’s relation selections. In particular, we were interested in whether our participants made similar relation
selections for compound interpretations which had sim-

Results
Across all 34 subjects and all 60 compoundinterpretation items, a total of 3,296 relations were selected as being appropriate paraphrases, yielding an average of 3.23 relations being selected for each item by
each participant. In only 288 (28.2%) of the 1,020 trials is just one relation selected, as assumed by the taxonomic approach. Figure 1 presents a histogram detailing
the distribution of relation selections over all subjects for
coffee stain = “a stain caused by the spilling of coffee”
(classified as M CAUSES H in Gagne, 2001). Following
the taxonomic approach, which assumes that one relation in the taxonomy is used to interpret a compound,
we would expect participants to select one and only one
relation for each compound meaning. Instead, we see
a spread of relation selections over several different categories: for example, stain MADE OF coffee, coffee
MAKES stain, stain BY coffee, coffee CAUSES stain
and stain DERIVED FROM coffee are consistently selected by participants.
Why does more than one relation get selected? A possible explanation for why many different relations are being selected might be that the taxonomy is too large or
possesses too much redundancy. For example, we might
hypothesize that the H BY M and M CAUSES H relation
categories are really two versions of the same relation: a
law is BY a government if and only if the government
CAUSES the law, and therefore both of these relations,
rather than just one of them, tend to be selected for
particular items. There are indeed correlations between

591

ilar constituent concepts. For example, for items with
compounds such as coil lock and electric brake, which
have similar head concepts (lock and break ), would participants make similar relation selection judgements (and
therefore produce similar relation frequency distributions)?
To test this hypothesis we required both a measure of
concept similarity and a measure of the similarity of relation selection distributions for items. To measure how
similar or different the constituent words used in our
compounds were, we applied the Intrinsic Information
Content (IIC) metric for semantic similarity in WordNet (Seco, Veale & Hayes, 2004). This metric calculates
semantic similarity between nouns using the hierarchical
structure in WordNet: the similarity between nouns is
taken to correspond to the amount of intrinsic information in the two nouns’ most specific common abstraction;
that is, their relative closeness in the conceptual hierarchy. Hence, film and magazine have similarity of 0.74
with this metric by virtue of the fact that that they both
have the abstract concept MEDIUM as an abstraction.
For measuring the similarity of participants’ relation
selection distributions for items in our experiment, we regarded frequency distributions (like those in Figure 1) as
points in an 18-dimensional space, where the 18 thematic
relations correspond to the space’s dimensions. Applying the standard Euclidean metric gives us a measure of
all the pairwise distances between experimental items in
this space. We applied correspondence analysis to produce a 2-dimensional projection of this space. This graph
is intuitively sensible: items with similar frequency distributions (and which therefore use similar specific relations) tend to be close together, dissimilar ones do not
(we omit the graph for brevity; a similar graph for different materials is presented in Figure 2). For example,
the minimum distance between two distinct points in this
space is 4.0, between the interpretations of propane stove
= “a stove that uses propane” and gas lamp = “a lamp
that uses gas as fuel” (for which the thematic relations
H HAS M and H USES M tended to be selected), indicating that participants produced similar histograms of
relation selections for these items. The distance between
the points for these compound interpretations is small
because the specific relations used to link the constituent
concepts in the interpretations of these compounds are
very similar.
The metric for relational distance described above
was transformed into a measure of relation similarity
by the transformation 1/ed(r1 ,r2 ) , where d(r1 , r2 ) is the
distance between items r1 and r2 in the relation space.
We computed all distinct pairwise relation similarities
for the 60 items in our experiment. We also computed the pairwise similarity scores for the head concepts and the modifier concepts using the IIC metric. The more similar the head concepts in a pair of
compounds were, the more similar the selected relation distributions were for those compounds (Spearman’s
ρ = 0.214, n = 1770, p < 0.001)3 . How similar the modi-

fier concepts were also had a significant, though weaker,
influence on how similar the relations used in the corresponding compound interpretations were (Spearman’s
ρ = 0.057, n = 1770, p = 0.017). That the influence of
the head noun is as strong as the influence of the modifier is surprising in light of previous evidence suggesting the importance of the modifier alone in determining
the speed with which an interpretation can be produced.
Therefore, the influence of the head noun and the modifier were investigated further in a second experiment.

Experiment 2
The aim of the second experiment is to examine in closer
detail how the correct relationship between the two constituent concepts is formed, and investigate the possible factors that influence this process. In particular,
we aim to separate out the influence of the head and
the influence of the modifier and examine the role both
these factors play in determining the correct specific relation. For example, the compound summer rain might
be interpreted using a DURING type of relation because
summer is an interval of time and this property might
guide the interpretation process towards that kind of relation. Alternately, perhaps the head concept influences
the type of interpretation constructed. For example, perhaps party girl is interpreted using a LIKES type of relation because girl is a person, and this property might
guide the interpretation process towards a LIKES relation.
Many theoretical accounts of conceptual combination
have examined the role of the properties of the two
constituent concepts in a noun-noun compound in the
interpretation process (e.g. Costello & Keane, 2001).
These approaches typically take an explicit representational framework for a concept’s properties and explicitly
enumerate a set of attributes for the concept. We take
a different approach: we examine how a concept’s position in a conceptual hierarchy such as WordNet influences compound interpretation. We were interested in
whether compounds with similar constituent concepts
(i.e. concepts located close together in the hierarchy)
would tend to have similar relations selected by participants (indicating that similar specific relations are used
in their interpretations). We chose three groups of modifiers and three groups of head nouns from the hierarchy, and head group and modifier group were used as
the two (three level) experimental factors of our experiment. The experiment is designed to examine whether
either the head or modifier is dominant in influencing
participants’ relation selections.

Method
Materials Again, our materials were selected from the
300 compounds in the appendices of Gagné (2001) and
their associated interpretations. Compounds that used
an adjective in the modifier position (such as underdeveloped gland ) were removed from the potential set of
materials. We first performed a Ward’s Method cluster
analysis on both the set of head nouns and the set of

3
Spearman’s ρ was used as the data are not normally
distributed. Qualitatively similar results are obtained using

Pearson’s r.

592

modifiers, using the semantic similarity metric, obtaining 18 clusters for each. These clusters were then used
as the basis for our common abstraction groupings. For
example, the modifiers peasant, doctor, employee and so
on were grouped together in the same cluster; therefore
the common abstraction PERSON from the WordNet
hierarchy was used as one of the modifier groupings.
Each compound in the set of available experimental
stimuli belonged to one modifier grouping and one head
noun grouping. As it was impossible to use all 18 levels
of both modifier grouping and head grouping in a factorial design, we chose three of the most populous groupings
for both the modifier and the head as these groupings allowed us to maximize the number of experimental items
used in the experiment. The three modifier groups corresponded to the abstractions ACT (e.g. murder ), PERSON (e.g. infant) and SUBSTANCE (e.g. grain) in
WordNet. The three head groups corresponded to the
abstractions ACT (e.g. attempt), ARTIFACT (e.g. pill )
and RELATION (e.g. law ) in WordNet. The noun-noun
compounds used as our experimental stimulus fell into
both one of the modifier groupings and one of the head
groupings (e.g. murder attempt, infant pill and grain
law ). The use of these particular three modifier abstractions and these particular three head abstractions allow
us to select three experimental items for each modifier
grouping × head noun grouping cell, producing a 3×3
factorial design with a total of 27 items. This design
maximizes the number of items in the experiment: no
other symmetrical factorial design could be constructed
from the available materials that used more than 27
items.

Figure 2: Correspondence analysis graph of the relation
space.

The primary question investigated by the experiment
is whether the specific relation generated between the
modifier and the head is influenced by the abstractions
that the head and modifier belong to. Also, the experiment is designed to address whether there is any difference between how much influence is exerted by the head
and how much influence is exerted by the modifier. Following the methodology described in the results of Experiment 1, we used the frequency with which relations
were selected for items to plot the specific relation used
with every compound interpretation as a point in a 16
dimensional space. We applied correspondence analysis
to explore this relation space (Figure 2); again the 2dimensional graph was intuitively sensible: items using
similar specific relations fall very close together in the
graph, whereas items using dissimilar specific relations
do not. For example, the two points that are closest
in the 16-dimensional space are sewing magazine = “a
magazine about sewing” and plastic report = “a report
about the plastic industry”, which are both also close to
war report and adventure commercial, and other items
that use similar specific relations in their interpretations.
Other groupings by specific relation similarity can also
be discerned in the graph.
As before, the pairwise similarity scores for compound
interpretations were calculated, as were the pairwise similarities between all modifiers and all head nouns. As in
the first experiment, how similar the head concepts were
had a significant influence on how similar the specific
relations used in the corresponding compound interpretations were (Spearman’s ρ = 0.133, n = 351, p = 0.013).
How similar the modifier concepts were also had a significant, though slightly weaker, influence (Spearman’s
ρ = 0.119, n = 351, p = 0.026). The results therefore corroborate the findings of the first experiment, and
again suggest that both the abstract features of the head
noun and of the modifier are important in determining
what specific relation is instantiated for compounds.
For further analysis, we found the number of times the
most frequently selected thematic relation was selected
for compound interpretations in each head category and
the number of times the most frequently selected thematic relation was selected in each modifier category.
The statistic of interest was whether the most frequently
selected thematic relations for the three head categories
were selected more frequently than the most frequently

Participants Participants were 44 current undergraduate Computer Science students of University College
Dublin.
Procedure Each participant saw all 27 experimental
items, presented in the manner described for Experiment
1. The original set of 16 thematic relations used in the
CARIN model were used as the relations participants
could select.

Results
Across all 44 subjects and 27 items, 3,035 relations were
selected as being appropriate paraphrases, yielding an
average of 2.55 relations being selected for each item by
each participant. In 40.9% of trials exactly one relation is selected. (The primary reason this is higher than
for Experiment 1 is that six of the 44 participants always selected no more than one relation.) As was the
case for the first experiment participants do not consistently select one appropriate relation for each compound interpretation, as is implied in the methodology
of the CARIN model. Again, there were examples of significant correlations between pairs of response relations
(e.g. for M LOCATED H and H HAS M, r = 0.862;
for H CAUSES M and H HAS M, r = 0.846). The experiment therefore corroborates the evidence from the
first experiment suggesting that a taxonomic approach
to representing relations is insufficient.

593

previous empirical results (e.g. Gagné & Shoben, 1997)
showing that the modifier in a compound has a stronger
influence than the head in determining the speed with
which people interpret compounds.
It may be possible to explain this apparent divergence
between speed of interpretation (influenced only by modifier relation distribution and not by head relation distribution) and the selected relations (influenced by both
head and modifier) by proposing a ‘generate-and-test’
model of conceptual combination. In this ‘generate-andtest’ approach people would interpret a compound by
first using the modifier to select a set of candidate relations for that compound (explaining the modifier’s influence on speed of interpretation) and then using both concepts to select the correct relation from that set of candidates (explaining why compounds with similar heads
tend to use similar relations). Indeed, Gagné and Shoben
(2002) discuss the possibility that the head noun is primarily used to assess the plausibility of the relation suggested by the modifier. The modifier may act as a heuristic identifying which candidate relations should be considered first, whilst both the head and modifier’s position in the conceptual hierarchy may be used to evaluate
which of these candidate relations are acceptable or plausible. Such a theory is attractive as it would unify the
relation-focused approach of the CARIN model with the
concept-focused approaches of the other main theories of
conceptual combination.

selected thematic relations for the three modifier categories. For each subject, the average number of times
the most frequently selected relations were selected for
the head categories and the average number of times
the most frequently selected relations were selected for
the modifier categories was calculated. Again, the results suggest that the head is of slightly greater influence than the modifier (averaging across subjects as well
as categories, µH = 3.713, µM = 3.507), but again the
difference is not significant (t(43) = 1.648, p = 0.107).

Conclusion
In the experiments we investigated conceptual combination using a task where people were shown an interpretation for compounds (like pumpkin sauce = “a sauce
which contains pumpkin”) and were asked to indicate
which relation or relations they thought were appropriate paraphrases for those interpretations. In the taxonomic approach to conceptual combination, each interpretation for a given compound is the result of selecting
a single general taxonomic relation to use in interpreting that compound. The taxonomic approach thus expects that every compound interpretation belongs in one
particular taxonomic relation category (the relation that
was used to generate that interpretation). Our results,
however, suggest that this is not the case: participants
in our experiment typically felt that the interpretations
we showed them belonged in more than one taxonomic
category. For example, most participants felt that job
anxiety = “anxiety about losing a job” was an example
of the relations H ABOUT M, H DERIVED FROM M
and M CAUSES H: most participants placed this interpretation into those three different taxonomic categories.
In light of these findings, the taxonomic theory does
not appear to be correct. So how do we explain people’s
interpretation of noun-noun compounds? One possibility would be to retain the set of relations used in taxonomic theories of compounding, but allow that most
interpretations are produced by a combination of multiple relations. In this approach, relations would not
be seen as taxonomic categories into which compounds
must be placed, but rather as atoms which could be used
to construct interpretations for compound phrases.
This is the approach we took: we represented the specific relations used in compound interpretations as points
in a relation space. Our results suggest that such a representation for relations is meaningful in the sense that
similar specific relations are grouped close together in
the relation space and dissimilar specific relations are
not. We have shown that similar relations in this space
tend to have similar heads and similar modifiers. This result is important because it suggests that a compound’s
constituent words play a significant role in determining
which specific relation is constructed for that compound
(more specifically, the position of a compound’s words in
WordNet’s lexical hierarchy seems to be important in relation selection). Furthermore, we have shown that the
head in a compound has at least as strong an influence
on relational similarity as the modifier. This is interesting because it contrasts with (but does not contradict)

Acknowledgements
This research is funded by a grant from the Irish Research Council for Science, Engineering and Technology.
We also thank Georgios Tagalakis for providing a Prolog implementation of Seco et al ’s semantic similarity
metric.

References
Costello, F. J., & Keane, M. T. (2000). Efficient creativity: Constraint guided conceptual combination. Cognitive Science, 24(2).
Gagné, C. L. (2001). Relation and lexical priming during the interpretation of noun-noun compounds. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory &
Cognition, 27(1), 236–254.
Gagné, C. L., & Shoben, E. J. (1997). Influence of thematic relations on the comprehension of modifier-noun
combinations. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory & Cognition, 23(1), 71–87.
Gagné, C. L., & Shoben, E. J. (2002). Priming relations
in ambiguous noun-noun combinations. Memory &
Cognition, 30(4), 637–646.
Levi, J. N. (1978). The Syntax and Semantics of Complex Nominals. New York: Academic Press.
Seco, N., Veale, T. & Hayes, J. (2004). An Intrinsic
Information Content Metric for Semantic Similarity
in WordNet. In the Proceedings of ECAI’2004, the
16th European Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
Valencia, Spain.

594

