UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Propagation of Innovations in Networked Groups

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6rc4q6xq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Goldstone, Robert L.
Jones, Andy
Mason, Winter A,

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Propagation of Innovations in Networked Groups
Winter A. Mason (wimason@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1101 E. 10th St.
Bloomington, IN 47408 USA

Andy Jones (andjones@cs.indiana.edu)
3406 S. Oaklawn Circle
Bloomington, IN 47401 USA

Robert L. Goldstone (rgoldsto@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1101 E. 10th St.
Bloomington, IN 47408 USA

deeper than this, and people continue to conform to the
group’s opinion even privately (Sherif, 1935).
Much of the work on conformity focuses on opinions,
information that does not have a verifiable component in the
world. In other cases, however, information obtained from
others is actually right or wrong. When a person discovers a
truly better solution to a problem, this innovation spreads
through a population just like any kind of information,
including opinions. Innovations are especially like opinions
when it is difficult to determine if the innovation is better
than current practice or if there is no inherent difference, or
when the benefits of adopting an innovation are largely due
to others using it (e.g., Macintosh vs. IBM or BetaMax vs.
VHS).
The choice between relying on information from others
and obtaining information on one’s own must be made often
in everyday life. Seeking out information on one’s own
requires time and energy, but is often more trustworthy and
individually tailored than information learned by word-ofmouth. On the other hand, choosing to use information
provided by others can be cost-effective, especially if past
experience suggests that the source is reliable. This
attractiveness of exploiting information from others can
have an impact on the population, because in cases like
these, the “I’ll do it if you do it” mentality can lead to
“tipping points,” (Gladwell, 2000) in which a small number
of people initiate a positive feedback cycle, leading to an
exponential increase in the number of users for a period.
Banerjee (1992) modeled situations where information is
collected and distributed sequentially and showed that when
the behavior of other agents was considered equally
informative as personally obtained information, rational
agents repeated the best solution found by the first few
agents regardless of the information they obtained
themselves. Bikhchandani, Hirshleifer, and Welch (1992)
called this an “information cascade” and suggested this
process could be the cause of fads, fashion, and other
cultural phenomena.
Valente (1996) looked at individuals with different
“adopter thresholds” in the context of their social network.
This supported work by Granovetter (1978) who first
suggested that people act as though they have a threshold

Abstract
A novel paradigm was developed to study the behavior of
groups of networked humans searching a problem space. We
examined how different network structures affect the
diffusion of information about good solutions. Participants
made numerical guesses and received scores that were also
made available to their neighbors in the network. When the
problem space was monotonic and had only one optimal
solution, groups were fastest at finding the solution when all
of the groups’ information was presented to them. However,
when there were good but suboptimal solutions (i.e., local
maxima), the group connected via a small-world network
(Watts & Strogatz, 1998) was faster at finding the best
solution than all other network structures.
Keywords: Social networks; group behavior; small-worlds;
information diffusion; innovation diffusion

Background
Humans are uniquely adept at adopting each other’s
innovations.
Cultural identity is largely due to the
dissemination of concepts, beliefs, and artifacts across
people. Our capacity for imitation has been termed “no-trial
learning” by Bandura (1965), who stressed that people
perform behaviors that they would not have otherwise
considered by imitating one another. While imitation is
commonly thought to be the last resort for dull and dimwitted individuals, cases of true imitation are rare among
non-human animals (Blackmore, 1999), requiring complex
cognitive processes of perception, analogical reasoning, and
action preparation. When combined with variation and
adaptation based upon reinforcement, imitation is one of the
most powerful methods for quick and effective learning.
One early line of research on when people imitate others
focuses on conformity in social groups. To some degree,
conformity is found when people desire to obtain social
approval from others. For example, when people give their
answers privately, they are less likely to conform to the
group’s opinion than when responding publicly (Deutsch &
Gerard, 1955). However, the conformity sometimes runs

1419

Table 1: Actual average geodesic path length, clustering
coefficient, and closeness centrality for the networks used in
the experiment.

Full
Lattice
Small-World
Random

Path Length
1.00
3.08
2.61
2.57

Clustering
1.00
0.35
0.09
0.37

the average path length connecting two randomly selected
nodes in a random network is ln(N)/ln(K) where N is the
number of nodes and K is the degree of each node. With a
large number of nodes random networks tend to have a
small clustering coefficient, although with fewer nodes the
probability of three nodes forming a triangle is higher, and
so the clustering coefficient tends to be higher. However,
even with fewer nodes they have a greater closeness to each
other on average than other networks.
Another useful network structure is a completely regular
network, such as a lattice or ring, in which the structure of
edges defines a spatial structure solely made up of local
connections. In regular lattices, the average path required to
connect two individuals requires going through N/2K other
individuals. Thus, the paths connecting people are much
longer, on average, for lattice than random networks.
Additionally, in these networks, the clustering coefficient
tends to be high, since nodes that are spatially close tend to
be connected to each other, and the closeness tends to be
low, because nodes are “farther” from each other on
average.
Watts and Strogatz (1998) demonstrated that by starting
with a regular structure such as a lattice and randomly
rewiring a small number of connections, the resulting
“small-world” network still maintains a sort of regular
structure because nodes that are connected to the same node
tend to be spatially close themselves (and so have a greater
closeness), but also has a small average geodesic path
length. From an information processing perspective, then,
these are attractive networks because the spatial structure of
the networks allows information search to proceed
systematically, and the short-cut paths allow the search to
proceed quickly (Kleinberg, 2000).
Allen Wilhite (2001) compared market trading over
various network structures. In one condition, all agents were
allowed to trade with any other agent. In another, agents
could only trade locally, in small cliques. In a third
condition, most agents could only trade locally, but a few
could trade globally (i.e., outside of the local clique). In this
small-world network, the market reached Pareto equilibrium
(the state where no more trades that mutually benefit both
traders can be made) even faster than the condition where
everyone could trade with everyone. This is further
evidence that small-world networks have unique features in
the dissemination of information.
There is excellent work studying the diffusion of
innovation in real groups (e.g., Ryan & Gross, 1943;
Rogers, 1962, 1995), social psychological research on how
individuals use information provided by others (Sherif,
1935; Cialdini & Goldstein, 2004), as well as computational
models of information transmission (Nowak, Szamrej, &
Latané, 1990; Axelrod, 1997; Kennedy, Eberhart, & Shi,
2001). The study reported in this paper tie together these
diverse areas by exploring the diffusion of innovative ideas
among a group of networked participants, each of who is
trying to individually find the best solution to a search
problem. This provides a unique method for studying the

Closeness
0.00
0.014
0.026
0.050

number of friends (or neighbors) that must adopt a solution
before they will also adopt the solution. He found that the
people who were early in adopting a solution (those with a
low threshold) were most influential in causing
bandwagoning in a population. Michael Chwe (1999)
extended this threshold model and found that the network
position of an individual could be more important than their
threshold with respect to causing other people to revolt (or
adopt an innovation, depending on your chosen metaphor).
This highlights the importance of another factor in the
diffusion of innovation, the social network structure.
The properties of network topologies have been studied in
many different arenas, including neural networks, actor
collaboration networks, power grids (Watts & Strogatz,
1998), citation links (Newman, 2001), metabolic networks
(Jeong, Tombor, Albert, Oltvai, & Barabasi, 2000), Web
links (Albert, Jeong, & Barabasi, 1999), and many more. A
wide range of statistics has been developed to describe the
global properties of these networks. These properties are
usually defined in terms of the nodes, which are the units or
individuals in a network, and edges, the connections
between them.
First, the degree of a node is the number of edges
connecting that node to other nodes. The degree of a
network is the average degree of all nodes. Second, the
average geodesic path length is the smallest number of
nodes a message needs to go through to link two nodes,
averaged across all pairs of nodes. This property has been
popularized as the notion of “six degrees of separation”
connecting any two people in the world, and has been
experimentally supported (Milgram, 1967). The clustering
coefficient is the proportion of directly connected neighbors
of a node that are themselves directly connected with each
other, which can be thought of as the “cliquishness” of a
network. The closeness centrality measure of a network,
developed by L. C. Freeman (1979), amalgamates the
closeness of all of the nodes in a network into a single
measure. The closeness of a node is the inverse of the sum
of the geodesic path lengths to all other nodes, which means
that on average, a message will reach a node faster if it has a
greater closeness. The actual values of these measures for
the networks used in the experiment are listed in Table 1.
Erdös & Rényi (1959) were first to thoroughly describe
the properties of random networks, in which edges between
nodes are generated such that node i and node j are
connected with some probability p. These networks tend to
have a small average geodesic path length. More formally,
1420

a)

b)
Figure 1: Examples of the different network structures for
groups of 10 participants. Circles represent participants,
lines indicate communication channels.
properties of networks using actual human behavior.
In choosing a paradigm for studying information
dissemination, we sought to find a case with: 1) a problem
to solve with answers that varied continuously on a
quantitative measure of quality, 2) a problem search space
that was sufficiently large that no individual could cover it
all in a reasonable amount of time, and 3) simple
communications between participants that would be
amenable to computational modeling. We settled upon a
minimal search task in which participants guess numbers
between 0 – 100 and the computer tells them how many
points were obtained from the guess. There was a
continuous function that related the guesses to the points
earned, but this function was not revealed to the
participants. The participants received information on their
own guesses and earned points, as well as obtained
information on their neighbors’ guesses and outcomes. In
this manner, participants could choose to imitate highscoring guesses from their peers.
Examples of the network structures we compared are shown
in Figure 1 for groups of 10 participants. Circles indicate
participants and lines connect participants that directly
exchange information.
To generate our small-world
networks we started with a spatially ordered network (i.e.,
the ring structure of the regular lattice) and added edges
between random nodes. Although this caused the clustering
coefficient to be low, because neighbors of a node were not
more likely to be neighbors of each other, they still had a
small average geodesic path length and maintained the
spatial structuring of the lattice network, as evidenced by
the greater closeness centrality of the networks.

1421

Figure 2: Examples of the a) unimodal and b) multimodal
fitness functions
Notice in Figure 1 that three of the networks have a total
of 12 connections between participants. Thus, if there is a
difference in information dissemination in these networks,
then it must be due to the topology, not density, of the
connections. In addition to these three network structures,
we also used a fully connected network (also called a
“complete graph” in graph theory), in which everyone had
access to the guesses and scores of everyone else.
In this experiment, we compared two fitness functions.
The unimodal function has a single peak that could be found
with a hill-climbing method. The multi-modal function
increased the difficulty of the search and introduced local
maxima. A local maximum is a solution that is better than

all of its immediate neighboring solutions, yet is not the best
solution possible. In this case a simple hill-climbing method
might not find the best possible solution. Figure 2 shows
one of the multi-modal functions used, which has three
peaks, but one of the peaks is somewhat higher than the
other two. One interesting prediction is that participants
may prematurely converge on a local maximum, thus
precluding exploration of better, uninhabited regions of the
problem space.
The basic prediction is that the small-world network will
allow fast dissemination of information that will lead to
rapid convergence on a maximum, but the early distribution
will be divided into clusters that allows for more exploration
and thus less likelihood of early convergence on a local
maximum when compared to less cliquish network
configurations like the fully connected networks. In the
unimodal landscape there are no local maxima, so we expect
that when the spread of information is fast (i.e., shorter
average path length), convergence on the maximum will
also be fast.

Participants signed onto the computer and gave
themselves a handle or were assigned an ID. Once they had
signed onto the computer, the experimenter started the
session and the following instructions appeared to each of
the participants:
Thank you for participating in this experiment on how
ideas move from person to person in a social group. Your
task is to try to accumulate as many points as possible. On
each trial, you will type in a number between 0 and 100, and
the computer will tell you how many points your number
receives. There is a systematic relationship between the
number you put in, and the points you receive, but the
relationship will often be difficult for you to understand.
Every time you type in the same number, it will be worth
about the same number of points, but there may also be a bit
of randomness added in to the earned points. Usually,
numbers that are close to each other will receive similar
points. At the end of each block of trials, you will be told
how many points you earned, and how many points people
earned in general.
In addition to telling you how many points your guess was
worth, after each round of guesses, the computer will show
you what numbers other people guessed, and how many
points those guesses earned. You can use this information to
help you decide what number to guess on the next round.
Other people will also see the number that you entered, and
how many points you received.

Method
112 groups of Indiana University undergraduate students
ranging in size from 5 – 18 people with a median of 12
people per group participated for partial course credit, for a
total of 1358 participants. Each session was run in a
computer lab with 20 client computers used by the
participants and one server operated by the experimenter.
Before each session, the experimenter set up the server with
one of two fixed random orderings of 8 series, each of
which had a different fitness function and network structure.
The fitness functions in each series were either unimodal or
trimodal, but the positions of the global maximum (and
local maxima in the trimodal conditions) were different for
each of the 8 series. The network structure in each series
was either full, lattice, small-world, or random, similar to
those in Figure 1.
To create a network, the server takes all of the client
computers and treats each as a node. For the random
network, the server creates a number of edges equal to 1.3
times the number of nodes connecting random nodes under
the constraint that a path exists between every node (i.e.,
that the graph is connected). This is conceptually equivalent
to the algorithm proposed by Malloy and Reed (1995) for
generating random networks with a pre-defined degree
distribution. For the lattice network, the server connects the
clients in a ring and then randomly picks 30% of the nodes
and connects each of these nodes to a neighbor two steps
away. For the small-world network, the server begins by
putting the clients in a ring and then picks 30% of the nodes
randomly and adds a connection to another random node
under the restriction that the connected nodes are at least 3
nodes apart following the lattice path. These probabilities
ensure that the average degree is roughly equivalent for all
of the network structures. Thus, the experiment was a 2
(fitness function) x 4 (network structure) within-subjects (or
rather, within-groups) design.

After they read this, the controlling program created the
network neighborhood and the first round in the first series
began. Each series consisted of 15 rounds in which
participants had 20 seconds to guess a number between 0 100. When a round ended, the guesses were sent to the
server, which calculated each participant’s score (which was
always between 0 and 50), added normally-distributed noise
with a variance of 25, and returned the feedback. This
began the next round, and participants now had available a
list of the their own and their neighbors’ ID, guess, and
score while they decided on their next guess.

Results
We examined several measures of search performance to
compare the different network structures on different fitness
functions. To determine speed of convergence we looked at
the average number of guesses the agents made before
reaching the global maximum.
To compare overall
performance we looked at the percentage of the participants
within one standard deviation of the global maximum on
each round and across all rounds. To see how clustered the
guesses were, we used the Kullback-Leibler 1, or relative
entropy statistic, to compare the spread of guesses to a
uniform distribution. The relative entropy increases as the
distribution of guesses deviates more from a uniform
1

The Kullback-Liebler is Σpilog(pi/qi) where pi is the actual
frequency and qi is the expected frequency of guesses in each “bin”
summed from i = 0 to N, or the number of bins that segment the
range of guesses.

1422

distribution. For our purposes we divided the range of
guesses form 0 - 100 into 20 bins of 5 points each.
While the average number of rounds before any single
individual reached the global maximum did not differ
between network structures for the unimodal function, the
lattice network had a significantly smaller percentage of
people (M = 0.66) within the global maximum than all of
the other networks (full: M = 0.82; small: M = 0.80;
random: M = 0.77) (F(3,50) = 4.191, p = 0.01), which is
most likely due to the longer average path lengths and thus
slower spread of information through the network.
This is supported by examination of the percentage of
participants within one standard deviation of the global
maximum after each round. As can be seen in Figure 3a,
the fully connected, small-world, and random networks have
almost 80% of participants in the global maximum by
Round 3, while the lattice network does not reach this level
until round nine, and never reaches the percentages the other
networks attain. Additionally, the low average relative
entropy of the lattice network (M = 1.43, SD = 0.42)
compared to all of the other networks (full: M = 1.71, SD =
0.36; small: M = 1.61, SD = 0.45; random: M = 1.71, SD =
0.41) indicates that the distribution of guesses in the lattice
network was typically less clustered than for the other
networks (F(3, 791) = 17.259, p < 0.001).
In the multimodal landscape we again expect shorter path
lengths to correspond with faster convergence on the global
maximum, but we anticipate that lack of spatial structure
could lead to less exploration, and thus early convergence
on a local maxima and a slower convergence on the global
maximum.
As predicted, the average number of steps for the first
person to reach the global maximum was significantly less
in the small-world network (M = 3.47) than even the fullyconnected network (M = 5.10), and this difference was
significant (t(21) = 2.9, p < 0.05). The efficiency of the
small-world network is also evidenced in the average
percentage of participants within the global maximum
across all rounds (M = 0.674), which is significantly higher
than the other network structures (full: M = 0.53; lattice: M
= 0.43; random: M = 0.40) (F(3, 53) = 5.692, p < 0.005).
An examination of the percentage of participants within the
global maximum on each round highlights the advantage of
the small-world network. As can be seen in Figure 3b, the
small-world network consistently dominates the other
network structures, approaching the highest percentage
(80%) by round nine while the other networks do not reach
that level until the last round, if at all.

a)

b)

Figure 3: Percent of participants within 1 standard deviation
of the global maximum on each round in the a) unimodal
and b) trimodal fitness function.
path lengths for these three networks. The lattice network
took longer to converge on the best solution because the
advantageous innovations had to work their way through
longer chains of people. However, when the problem space
had good solutions that were nonetheless sub-optimal, as in
the multimodal fitness function, the story was different. In
this case the small-world network groups found the best
solution faster than every other network, even the fully
connected network in which everyone had the information
about every other participants’ guesses and scores.
This somewhat counter-intuitive result, that limiting the
available information might actually improve a group’s
performance, is a result of the way the groups were
searching the problem space. In the fully-connected
network, participants would latch onto the first good
solution that was found, and this was only the best solution
a third of the time. When the group converged prematurely
on a local maximum, it took them longer for an adventurous
(or bored) participant to explore and find the globally best
solution. In the small-world network, however, the
participants were segregated into different spatial regions,

Discussion
When there was only one good solution – when the fitness
function was unimodal – there was a direct relationship
between the average shortest path length and the speed with
which the group converged on the best solution. In this
case, the fully connected network performed only slightly
and nonsignificantly better than the random or small-world
networks, as is predicted by the approximately equally short
1423

but the information could travel quickly through “shortcuts,” allowing for different locally connected groups to
explore various regions of the problem space. Thus, while
one locally connected group might latch onto a local
maximum, the small-world topology decreases the
probability that everyone will follow their lead before
another sub-group finds the global maximum. Once any
subgroup finds the global maximum, the information can
spread quickly to other subgroups, unlike the lattice
structure.
Ultimately, the paradigm developed here can be used to
study the problem-solving abilities of groups under a wide
range of conditions. For instance, different communication
structures could be tested, such as scale-free networks
(which are increasingly observed in a wide range of real
networks), or hierarchies, which are interesting because they
are a typical organizational structure.
Additionally,
different problem spaces remain to be explored, including
multidimensional and dynamically evolving problem
spaces. It seems reasonable to predict that a network
structure that permits a group to quickly converge upon a
solution may be less fit when the problem space changes.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by NSF grant 0125287 to the third
author.

References
Albert, R., Jeong, H., & Barabasi, A.-L. (1999). The
diameter of the World Wide Web. Nature, 401, 130-131.
Axelrod, R. (1997). The dissemination of culture: A model
with local convergence and global polarization. Journal of
Conflict Resolution, 4, 203-226.
Bandura A. (1965). Behavioral modification through
modeling procedures. In L. Krasner & L. P. Ulmann
(Eds.), Research in behavior modification: new
development and implications. (pp. 310-340). New York :
Rinehart and Winston.
Banerjee, A. V. (1992). A simple model of herd behavior.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(3), 797-817.
Bikhchandani, S., Hirshleifer, D., & Welch, I. (1992). A
theory of fads, fashions, custom, and cultural change as
informational cascades. The Journal of Political
Economy, 100(5), 992-1026.
Blackmore, S. J. (1999). The meme machine. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Chwe, M. S-Y. (1999). Structure and strategy in collective
action. American Journal of Sociology, 105, 128-156.
Cialdini, R. B. & Goldstein, N. J. (2004). Social influence:
Compliance and conformity. Annual Review of
Psychology, 55, 591-621.
Deutsch, M. & Gerard, H. B. (1955). A study of normative
and informational social influences upon individual
judgment. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology,
51, 629-636.
Erdös, P. & Rényi, A. (1959). On random graphs.
Publicationes Mathematicae, 6, 290-297.
1424

Freeman, L. C. (1979). Centrality in social networks:
Conceptual clarification. Social Networks, 1, 215-239.
Gladwell, M. (2000). The tipping point. London: Little
Brown and Company.
Granovetter, M. (1978). Threshold models of collective
behavior. American Journal of Sociology, 83, 1420-1443.
Holland, J. H. (1975). Adaptation in Natural and Artificial
Systems. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Jeong, H., Tombor, B., Albert, R., Oltvai, Z. N., & Barabasi,
A.-L. (2000). The large-scale organization of metabolic
networks. Nature, 407, 651-654.
Kennedy, J., Eberhart, R. C., & Shi, Y. (2001). Swarm
intelligence. San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann
Publishers.
Kleinberg, J. (2000). Navigation in a small world. Nature,
406, 845.
Malloy, M. & Reed, B. (1995). A critical point for random
graphs with a given degree sequence. Random Structures
& Algorithms, 6, 161-179.
Milgram, S. (1967). The small world problem. Psychology
Today, 2, 60-67.
Newman, M. E. J. (2001). The structure of scientific
collaboration networks. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 98, 404-409.
Nowak, A., Szamrej, J., & Latané, B. (1990). From private
attitude to public opinion: A dynamic theory of social
impact. Psychological Review, 97, 362-376.
Rogers, E. M. (1962). Diffusion of Innovations. New York:
Free Press.
Rogers, E. M. (1995). Diffusion of Innovations (4th ed.).
New York: Free Press.
Ryan, B. & Gross, N. C. (1943). The diffusion of hybrid
seed corn in two Iowa communities. Rural Sociology, 8,
15-24.
Sherif, M. (1935). A study of some social factors in
perception. Archives of Psychology, 187, 60.
Valente, T. W. (1996). Social network thresholds in the
diffusion of innovations. Social Networks, 18, 69-89.
Watts, D. J. & Strogatz, S. H. (1998). Collective dynamics
of “small-world” networks. Nature, 393, 440-442.
Wilhite, A. (2001). Bilateral trade and ‘small-world’
networks. Computational Economics, 18, 49-64.

