UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Reasoning Counterfactually in Chinese: Picking up the Pieces

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7wt3q4jt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Gentner, Dedre
Yeh, David

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Reasoning Counterfactually in Chinese: Picking up the Pieces
David Yeh (d-yeh1@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 N. Sheridan Road Evanston, IL 60208-2710 USA

Dedre Gentner (gentner@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 N. Sheridan Road Evanston, IL 60208-2710 USA

Abstract
We review the controversy concerning whether the lack of a
clear counterfactual marker in Chinese results in a deficiency in
counterfactual reasoning (Au, 1983, 1984; Bloom, 1981, 1984;
Liu, 1985). We describe a study in which we compared two
kinds of counterfactual assertions. The results showed an
accuracy advantage for English speakers over Chinese speakers
when specific contextual information was required to detect the
counterfactual, but not on other counterfactual sentences.
Implications for language and thought are discussed.

Introduction
I shall be telling this with a sigh
Somewhere ages and ages hence:
Two roads diverged in a wood, and I—
I took the one less traveled by,
And that has made all the difference
--Robert Frost
Counterfactual thought refers to a mode of thinking that
is literally contrary to fact. In practice, counterfactual thought
often supports speculation as to what might have been or
what could have happened had some detail or event in the
past occurred differently; as in the assertion, “If I had
practiced more, I might have been a rock star.”
Roese (2005) points out that counterfactual reasoning is
employed in many cognitive processes. It permits the
exploration of causation and, in some cases, the
acknowledgement of blame; it occurs in reflection upon
opportunity cost; it can lead one to experience feelings of
regret; and finally it provides benchmarks and standards by
which we recognize deviation from normalcy (Kahneman &
Miller, 1986; Roese, 2005). The counterfactual provides us
with an alternative to the current state of affairs that is
grounded in logical chains of causation. It allows us to judge
reality by comparing it to what could have very easily
happened instead, as is demonstrated above in the excerpt
from Robert Frost’s The Road Not Taken.
Despite this apparent pervasiveness, the counterfactual is
undeniably a somewhat complex form of thought. As Byrne
(2002) notes, counterfactual thinking requires simultaneously
holding two different construals of a given state of affairs.

Harris (2000) discussed counterfactual thinking as an instance
of theoretical thought, distinguishing it from empirical
thought. In reviewing Luria’s studies of Uzbekistani peasants
in the 1930’s, he considers that their failure to deal with
logical reasoning from premises stemmed in large measure
from their habit of adopting the empirical mode, in which one
reasons about things that are factually true in the world.
Counterfactual thinking and other instances of the theoretical
mode may in part be culturally learned. Indeed, some
evidence suggests that mastery of the counterfactual mode
occurs rather late in cognitive development (Markovitz &
Vachon, 1989; Wing & Scholnick, 1986; Guttentag & Ferrell,
2004).
What are the cultural practices that foster counterfactual
thinking? One obvious candidate is the linguistic forms that
serve to signal a needed shift to counterfactual reasoning. For
example, in English the past subjunctive can be used, as in,
“Had he not gone to the forum that day, Caesar would have
lived longer.” An if-clause can be added to make the
counterfactual more salient, as in, “If he had not gone to the
forum that day, Caesar would have lived longer.”
These forms as demonstrated above signal the need for
counterfactual reasoning in English. It is natural, then, to ask
whether comparable forms exist in other languages; and if
not, whether there are accompanying differences in
counterfactual reasoning. We can distinguish a weak and a
strong view of what these effects might be. On the weak view
(the signaling view) the clarity with which a standard signal
indicates a shift to counterfactual reasoning allows the listener
to make this shift more immediately, thereby increasing
processing efficiency. This weak view posits that there is no
general deficiency in counterfactual ability resulting from
language, but that differences in how clearly a language
marks the need for counterfactual reasoning may influence
processing efficiency, particularly in nontransparent contexts.
The strong (habitual thought) view includes the
assumption of the weak view that having a standard cue
marking the necessity for counterfactual reasoning can
increase the efficiency with which speakers of this language
shift to that mode when appropriate. However, it also
assumes that having this kind of convenient cue permits more
frequent use of the counterfactual mode. By that same token,
speakers of a language that either lacks a standard cue or
employs an ambiguous cue will be less likely to engage in
counterfactual reasoning. This view essentially argues that

2410

speakers of a language with a standard counterfactual cue will
simply be better at counterfactual reasoning.
The strong version of the idea that language could affect
the understanding and use of the counterfactual was
developed in large part by Alfred Bloom (1981, 1984).
Bloom observed that unlike English with its use of the past
subjunctive, Chinese lacks any syntactic, semantic or
intonational cue that distinctly signals a shift to the
counterfactual mode. Consider the following English example
and its Chinese equivalent:
(1) “If I had gone to the movies that evening, I could not have
had dinner with my mom.”
The counterfactual mode is signaled by having the verb of the
suppositional clause in the past perfect tense and that of the
main clause in the conditional form. The Chinese equivalent
is
(2) “Ru guo wo na tien wan shan qu kan le dien ying, wo jiu
bu neng gen wo ma qu chi wan fan.”
This translates roughly to the English: If that night I go watch
(past particle) a movie, I then cannot accompany my mom to
go eat dinner. The detailed gloss is
“Ru guo
“If

wo
I

qu
kan le
go watched
gen
with

na
that

tian
day

wan shang
evening

dian ying, wo jiu bu
movie,
I then not

wo ma
my mom

qu
go

chi
eat

neng
able

wan fan.”
dinner.”

In Chinese, which lacks verb inflections, a counterfactual
is signaled by comparing the tense information—e.g., the past
tense particle (le) after the verb—with contextual information
as to whether the event actually occurred. The second clause
is simply a consequence clause; it has no internal marker of
counterfactuality. To detect counterfactuality, the hearer must
compare the sentential assertion with context. (The Chinese
ru guo, like the English if, is ambiguous; both can mark
hypothetical reasoning (such as syllogistic reasoning) as well
as counterfactual reasoning.)
Bloom hypothesized that because English had a specific
syntactic structure for the counterfactual, its speakers may
develop a corresponding schema specific to counterfactual
reasoning. He further hypothesized that, because Chinese
does not grammatically differentiate between counterfactuals
and other implicational relations, Chinese speakers may never
develop such a specialized schema, and thus may be less
efficient or competent at reasoning counterfactually than
English speakers.
To test his theory, Bloom (1981) ran a study using two
versions of a counterfactual story about a fictional
philosopher named Bier. These texts were written in English
by Bloom and then translated to Mandarin Chinese by native
Chinese speakers. There were two versions of the story,
which differed in the salience of the counterfactual logic

employed. Version 2 logically permitted both a counterfactual
and a factual interpretation, thus minimizing the salience of
counterfactual logic. In Version 3, the only reasonable
interpretation was counterfactual, and thus this version
maximized the salience of the counterfactual logic. (Version
1, used in pilot studies, will not be discussed here.) These
stories in English followed the abstract structure, “A was not
the case. If A had been the case, B would have been the case;
C would have been the case; D would have been the case; E
would have been the case.”
The striking results of these studies seemed to offer
convincing support for Bloom’s hypothesis. For Bier Version
2, which afforded both a factual and counterfactual
interpretation, only 6-7% of Taiwanese participants
interpreted the story counterfactually, as compared to 98% of
American participants given the English version of the same
text. Results from Bier Version 3 indicated that increasing the
salience of counterfactual logic led to an increase in
counterfactual responses from Chinese speakers.
Bloom also found that Chinese-English bilinguals
performed considerably better on the English version of
Version 3 than Chinese monolingual speakers given the
Chinese version of the same story. Bloom found this to be the
most compelling evidence for the effect of language on
counterfactual thought and argued that “...for many, if not
most, of the bilinguals in the study, the counterfactual mode
of thought remains associated in their minds with the English
linguistic world, activated more readily when cognitive
processing is elicited by that linguistic world rather than by
their native Chinese” (Bloom, 1981, pp. 31-32).
Bloom’s paper incited considerable controversy, most
notably by Terry Au. Although she was sympathetic to
Bloom’s theoretical assertions, Au argued that his study itself
had many serious flaws. Upon reading over the Bier story, Au
(1983) found that the Chinese translations of the texts were
not as idiomatically written as the original English versions, a
difference that could have contributed to the lower rates of
counterfactual interpretation among Bloom’s Taiwanese
participants.
Au (1983) created stories that were idiomatically written
and found that Chinese bilinguals had little difficulty
understanding the counterfactual logic of her stories in either
language insofar as they were written idiomatically. Bloom
countered by arguing that Au’s stories were highly concrete
and too simple to provide a good test. Au also asked native
Chinese speakers to translate Bloom’s original Chinese
Version 3 to an English version as unidiomatically worded as
it was in Chinese. She found that English-speaking
participants presented with this text showed low rates of
counterfactual interpretation, much like Bloom’s Chinese
participants.
Au (1984) argued more specifically that Bloom had
misused two crucial Chinese adverbs of contingency that
occur in counterfactuals—jiu (“then”) and cai (“then and only
then”)—such that the counterfactual intention of Bloom’s
assertions was not properly signaled. Au rewrote the texts and
presented them to students in the Hong Kong Anglo-Chinese

2411

secondary school system. She found that 88% responded
counterfactually, as compared to only 23% of the Chinesespeaking participants in Bloom’s study. Au concluded that
there was no convincing evidence that the lack of a distinct
counterfactual marker in Chinese hinders its speakers’ ability
to reason counterfactually.
Liu (1985) noted, however, that there were still some
methodological discrepancies between the Au and Bloom
studies. While Bloom’s Chinese-speaking participants had
come from Taiwan, Au’s came from an Anglo-Chinese track
of secondary education in Hong Kong, where English is a
more prominent influence. Also, Liu noted that despite some
discussion of the importance of concreteness and complexity
of the stimuli, neither Bloom nor Au had manipulated these
variables. Liu thus reran the reading comprehension tasks
used by Bloom and Au using participants from Taiwanese
secondary schools. In a separate task, she varied stimuli on
an abstract-concrete spectrum using items from Paivio, Yuille
and Madigan’s (1968) list of nouns rated for concreteness,
imagery, meaningfulness and frequency.
In her reading comprehension trials Liu, like Au, found
that Chinese speakers displayed no difficulties with reasoning
in the counterfactual mode as long as texts were written
idiomatically. Her analysis of the effects of concreteness and
complexity of stimuli produced no significant effects.
However, post-hoc analyses suggested that the intelligibility
of a counterfactual statement may be influenced by topic
familiarity. Chinese participants seemed to perform better
when the counterfactual dealt with things encountered on a
daily basis rather than things rarely encountered.
Several lines of evidence point to the importance of
context for comprehension of counterfactuals in Chinese. Au
(1983) noted the importance of providing the factual
background to be negated by an unfamiliar Chinese
counterfactual. Such information is not necessary for the
processing of a familiar Chinese counterfactual nor is it
necessary for the processing of both familiar and unfamiliar
English counterfactuals.
Bloom (1984) also acknowledged that receivers of
information might draw upon their world knowledge and
familiarity with a given context in a manner independent of
linguistic restraints in order to construct an enriched
interpretation of that context and subsequently formulate a
response to it.
We thus proposed to directly manipulate the degree to
which context made it easy to determine counterfactuality. To
do this we presented counterfactual statements in either
transparent or non-transparent contexts. We define these
terms as follows: In the transparent contexts the information
needed to detect the counterfactual could be drawn from
general world knowledge, including facts about well-known
public figures and historical events. Such knowledge is well
entrenched and highly accessible. In contrast, in the nontransparent contexts the topic or story line was relatively
novel or unpredictable. Although the general area might have
been well understood or even familiar to the reader, the
specific events described were not; thus, the information

needed to identify the assertion as counterfactual had to be
derived from comparisons with the specific story context.
Consequently, for transparent stories, the suppositional
clause by itself was sufficient to reveal the counterfactuality
of the assertion. For example, the suppositional statement
If antibiotics had never been discovered…
can be understood as counterfactual even without the rest of
the story. In contrast, for the non-transparent stories, a more
detailed comparison with context was required. For example,
one story concerned Michael, a college student whose
academic diligence so alienates his girlfriend that she
eventually leaves him. Here, the counterfactual suppositional
clause
If Michael had gone out with his girlfriend that
night…
can only be interpreted as counterfactual by attending to the
specific context provided (since obviously college students do
sometimes go out with their girlfriends and sometimes not).
In all cases, the information necessary to detect the
counterfactual was present; what differed was the
accessibility and immediacy of that information.
Our logic here is that, on the signaling view (the weak
view), Chinese speakers should be more affected than English
speakers by the degree to which factuality information is
readily accessible. This is because detection of a
counterfactual in Chinese requires some judgment of
factuality. If the judgment can be made within the supposition
(by referencing general world knowledge) then processing
can be quite efficient. However, when this is not possible (in
the non-transparent cases), Chinese speakers must compare
the sentence with the context in order to determine its
counterfactuality. Thus Chinese speakers should show
difficulty with non-transparent counterfactuals, relative to
their performance with transparent counterfactuals and
relative to English speakers in both conditions.
On the signaling view, counterfactuals whose proper
interpretation is transparent without external contextual
support should not be hindered by the ambiguity of Chinese
grammar in expressing counterfactuals. On the strong
(habitual thought) view, Chinese speakers should perform
worse than English speakers on all types of counterfactuals.
As an added measure, we recorded participants’ response
time to answer questions. This allowed us to assess the
possibility that Chinese speakers are less efficient at
counterfactual processing, as suggested by Bloom. Such an
effect would be manifest as longer reaction times amongst
native Chinese speakers (relative to English speakers) on nontransparent counterfactuals, and, on the strong view, on
transparent counterfactuals as well.

Methods
Participants

2412

The Chinese speaking participants were volunteers recruited
from top 5 universities in the Taipei area. Ages of participants
ranged from 19-27. Participants had on average 11 years of

formal English training (exposure to English training was
unavoidable for this age bracket and education level, as
English classes are part of the standard curriculum starting in
Taiwanese middle schools). However, participants’ self
reports indicated that they did not use English proficiently on
a daily basis. Participants’ average self rating for English
fluency was a 2.5 on a 7-point scale (7 being most fluent).
When asked how they believed their fluency in English
compared to their fluency in Chinese, participants gave an
average self-rating of 1.5 (7 indicating that English fluency
was on par with Chinese fluency). 84 participants were tested
in total, with the results from 5 participants being omitted
from analysis due to problems when testing. The data from 3
additional participants were discarded due to low accuracy
(criteria elaborated below).
The
English-speaking
participants
were
30
undergraduate students at Northwestern University, who
participated in the study for class credit. The data of 3
participants were omitted due to low accuracy.

slightly shorter than experimental stories, and were followed
by only 3 true/false statements to be evaluated by participants.
The experiment was run on the Macromedia Authorware
platform which recorded the accuracy with which each
participant responded to the T/F statements as well as the
time it took for the participant to respond to each statement.
The study was presented on an IBM ThinkPad notebook for
Taiwanese participants and Dell PCs for American
participants at Northwestern University. All instructions were
presented on this program and participants were debriefed at
the conclusion of the study with a closing slide.
Participants were informed that they were participating in
a study examining the effects of literary techniques on
comprehension and memory. There were not informed of the
bilingual dimension of the study.

Removing Outliers

Materials and Procedure

We discarded one non-transparent counterfactual statement,
as both American and Taiwanese participants performed
significantly below chance. Further analysis and interviews
with participants revealed that the question was in fact faulty.
Participants’ data were discarded on the following bases:
those whose overall accuracy was more than two SDs from
the mean and individual responses from the remaining
participants taking longer than 10,000 ms. This resulted in
discarding 6.8% of the data from Taiwanese participants and
11.5% of the data from American participants.

We composed 4 experimental stories. Two concerned a topic
area allowing for transparent counterfactual assertions and
two for non-transparent counterfactual assertions. To clarify,
our use of this label “non-transparent” is meant to indicate
that the counterfactuality of the assertion in this story cannot
be locally interpreted as such simply by resorting to one’s
world knowledge. To ensure non-transparency, we created
fictional topics. Both transparent and non-transparent stories
contained information presented both factually and
counterfactually. The stories had an average length of 192
words (sd = 26) in English and 315 words (sd = 45) in
Chinese. The design included two within-subject variables—
factuality of the statement and transparency of the content—
and one between-subject variable—English or Chinese.
The structure of the stories was based on the stimuli used
by Bloom and Au. The first half of the story consisted of
factually presented information; this was followed by a
counterfactual antecedent and four counterfactual
consequences. The counterfactual statements were unique in
that they were not based on one another nor were they merely
counterfactual reiterations of things stated in the factual half.
Participants were presented with each story and allowed
as much time as necessary to finish reading it. They then
advanced to a series of eight true/false statements by pressing
the space bar; at this time the story would disappear from the
screen. The eight statements were presented in random order.
Of the eight statements, four were based on information
presented factually; four were based on information presented
counterfactually. Within each of these two categories, two
statements were true, two were false.
Participants were instructed to identify these statements
as either true or false according to the context of the story by
pressing the arrow keys. This process was repeated for each
subsequent story.
Four additional distracter stories were dispersed at
random between experimental stories. These stories were

Results
Accuracy

2413

In non-transparent contexts, English speakers demonstrated
significantly
greater
comprehension
accuracy
for
counterfactual statements than did Chinese speakers (m =
91.52% for English, m = 76.69% for Chinese). Such a
difference in accuracy was not observed for counterfactual
statements in transparent contexts (m = 96.09% for English,
m = 95.56% for Chinese). This pattern is consistent with the
signaling hypothesis, but not with the strong habitual thought
hypothesis (which predicts poorer performance on all
counterfactuals).
Taiwanese and American participants performed equally
accurately for transparent (m = 91.78% for Chinese, m =
94.53% for English) and non-transparent (m = 91.61% for
Chinese, m = 89.84% for English) factual statements; thus
there was no overall difference in comprehension accuracy.
A repeated-measures ANOVA revealed a significant 3way interaction of language, transparency and factuality, F (1,
106) = 16.27, p < .001, as well as all possible 2-way
interactions between the three variables—transparency by
language: F (1, 106) = 4.46, p < .05; factuality by language: F
(1, 106) = 8.80, p < .01; transparency by factuality: F (1, 106)
= 15.88, p < .001. The analysis also showed significant
effects of language, F (1, 106) = 12.441, p < .01, and
transparency, F (106, 1) = 37.387, p < .001, but no main
effect of factuality.

Non-Transparent Condition

Reaction Time (ms)

Non-Transparent Condition

Accuracy (%)

100
80
60
Chinese
English

40
20
0

5000
4000
3000
Chinese

2000

English

1000
0

Factual

Counterfactual

Factual

Factuality

Counterfactual

Factuality

Figure 1: Summary of Accuracy

Figure 2: Summary of Reaction Time

As illustrated in the figure 1, Taiwanese and American
participants differed significantly in accuracy of response
only when presented with a counterfactual statement
concerning a non-transparent topic area, t (106) = 4.42, p <
.001. Whereas Chinese speakers in this condition performed
at only 76.7% accuracy, English speakers had 91.5%
accuracy. Differences in response accuracy between all other
conditions were non-significant.

Discussion

Reaction Time

Although Chinese speakers’ overall comprehension accuracy
was equal to that of English speakers, they showed a specific
difficulty with counterfactuals concerning non-transparent
topic areas—that is, with counterfactual statements that were
not readily identifiable as such by drawing from world
knowledge. For these counterfactuals, English-speaking
subjects could take advantage of the presence of a clear
syntactic marker. However, Chinese-speaking participants
had to match the sentence with contextual information to
discover that it was counterfactual.
Our findings differ somewhat from those of prior
researchers. We found an accuracy disadvantage for Chinese
speakers for non-transparent counterfactuals. The narrative
stimuli used by Bloom and Au in their respective studies both
fall into our category of non-transparent, as they are both
fictional stories. Yet Liu found that native Chinese speakers
displayed no difficulty on these counterfactual stories when
written idiomatically. How do we reconcile these findings?
There are two major differences in our methods. First, in
our study, although participants were self-paced in reading
the stories, the stories disappeared once test questions
appeared. In contrast, in the prior research, participants were
able to reference the stories while answering test questions.
This seems likely to have resulted in increased accuracy.
Indeed, Vorster & Schuring (1989) argue that “the Bloom-Au
response-elicitation procedure contains a systematic bias
toward responses suggesting counterfactual thinking.”
The second difference is in the time spent per story.
None of our subjects took longer than 20 minutes to complete
our task, which required them to read 4 experimental stories
(of comparable length to the Bloom’s and Au’s stories, as
well as 4 additional distracter stories only slightly shorter in
length), and to answer a total of 44 T/F questions. In
comparison, Liu, the only experimenter to make a note of the
time her participants spent, states that most of her participants
needed 25 minutes to complete 2 stories and answer a total of
4 multiple-choice questions.

Our measures of response time showed no significant
difference between Chinese-speaking and English-speaking
participants in the time required to respond to either factual
(m = 3568 ms for Chinese, m = 3647 ms for English) or
counterfactual (m = 3342 ms for Chinese, m = 3536 ms for
English) statements in the transparent condition. The same
similarity held true for the time required to respond to factual
(m = 3404 ms for Chinese, m = 3500 ms for English) and
counterfactual (m = 3855 ms for Chinese, m = 4179 ms for
English) statements in the non-transparent condition.
A repeated-measures ANOVA failed to reveal a
significant 3-way interaction. The ANOVA did reveal
significant effects of transparency, F (1, 106) = 10.59, p <
.01, and factuality, F (1, 106) = 12.21, p < .01 as well as a
significant two-way interaction of transparency and factuality,
F (1, 106) = 51.14, p < .001. Neither transparency nor
factuality interacted significantly with language. In fact,
English speakers took nonsignificantly longer than Chinese
speakers to respond in all conditions.

2414

We emphasized in our instructions that the task was
being timed, and participants may have felt some pressure to
complete the task quickly. In addition, participants could not
re-read the text once they began answering questions. These
two factors may have resulted in lower accuracy on the nontransparent counterfactuals than was found by Au and Liu.
An interesting follow-up to these studies would be to
limit the time allowed for reading the story. If, as proposed,
Chinese speakers need more extensive contextual processing,
they should show an even greater relative disadvantage in
accuracy than was found here. It would also be valuable to
run our studies using the look-back methods of Bloom, Au
and Liu while recording processing time. Such a design
would allow us to assess the possibility of a speed-accuracy
tradeoff. When allowed to consult the story as needed during
the test phase, Chinese speakers’ accuracy should increase for
non-transparent counterfactuals, but with a corresponding
increase in processing time.
Our data provide support for the signaling hypothesis,
that counterfactual reasoning amongst Chinese speakers will
be compromised in some situations—namely, those in which
general world knowledge is insufficient to indicate the
counterfactual nature of the premise. However, our data do
not support the strong conclusion that the lack of a standard
signal in Chinese results in less practice and therefore in
lower fluency in counterfactual reasoning. Chinese speakers
showed no deficiency with transparent counterfactuals, as
would have been expected had they suffered from a general
deficiency in counterfactual reasoning..
Our data do not support a strong Whorfian position that
language determines the ability to reason counterfactually.
Rather, we conclude that Chinese speakers may be
disadvantaged when counterfactuals must be detected with
respect to specific current context. But this conclusion has
cognitive consequences of its own. For if detecting a
counterfactual in Chinese requires more active processing of
context, and therefore more cognitive resources than are
needed in English, then (1) the likelihood of missing a
counterfactual is greater (as in our results) and (2) detection
of counterfactuality may be delayed, resulting in the need for
reprocessing previous information, with a concomitant risk of
other kinds of inaccuracies. These results thus suggest a
possible effect of language on the efficiency of everyday
counterfactual processing.

References
Au, T. K. (1983). Chinese and English counterfactuals: The
Sapir-Whorf hypothesis revisited. Cognition, 15, 155187.
Au, T. K. (1984). Counterfactuals: In reply to Alfred Bloom.
Cognition, 17, 289-302.
Bloom, A.H. (1981). The linguistic shaping of thought: A
study in the impact of language on thinking in China and
the West. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum Associates.
Bloom, A.H. (1984). Caution—The words you use may affect
what you say: A response to Terry Kit-fong Au’s
“Chinese and English counterfactuals: The Sapir-Whorf
hypothesis revisited”, Cognition, 17, 275-287.
Byrne, R.M.J. (2002). Mental models and counterfactual
thoughts about what might have been. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 6, 426-431
Guttentag, R. & Ferrell, J. (2004). Reality compared with its
alternatives: Age differences in judgments of regret and
relief. Developmental Psychology 40, 764-775.
Harris, P.L. (2000). The Work of the imagination. Malden,
MA: Blackwell Publishers.
Kahneman D. & Miller, D.T. (1986). Norm Theory:
Comparing reality to its alternatives. Psychological
Review, 93, 136-153.
Liu, L.G. (1985). Reasoning counterfactually in Chinese: Are
there any obstacles? Cognition, 21, 239-270.
Markovits, H & Vachon, R. (1989). Reasoning with contraryto-fact propositions. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology. 47, 398-412.
Paivio, A., Yuille, J.C. & Madican, S.A. (1986).
Concreteness, imagery and meaningfulness values of 925
nouns. Journal of Experimental Psychology Monograph
Supplement, 76, No. 1, Part 2.
Roese, N. (2005). If only: How to turn regret into
opportunity. New York, NY: Broadway Books.
Vorster, J & Schuring, G. (1989) Language and thought:
Developmental
perspectives
on
counterfactual
conditionals. South African Journal of Psychology 19,
34-38.
Wing, C.S. & Scholnick, E.K. (1986). Understanding the
language of reasoning: Cognitive linguistic, and
developmental influences. Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research. 15, 383-401.

Acknowledgments
This study was supported by NSF-ROLE award
27010NW/M1 // REC-0337360 and by the CLC group and
URGC at Northwestern University. We thank the Cognition
and Language group for intellectual support, Stefan
Kaufmann and Caitlin Fausey for linguistic and conceptual
insights, Kathleen Braun for help in conducting the study,
Ingrid Ke for assistance in translations, and Yeh Ling, Xiao
Ru, A Di and Wei Lian for assistance in recruiting Taiwanese
participants.

2415

