UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Regularity and Length Effects in Word Naming: A Test of the Dual Route Cascaded Model

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/36h160bd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
Adelman, James S.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Regularity and Length Effects in Word Naming:
A Test of the Dual Route Cascaded Model
James S. Adelman (J.S.Adelman@warwick.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Warwick,
Gibbet Hill Road, Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK

they generate lag behind the other phonemes in activation, and are hence slower to reach threshold, delaying
the pronunciation of the entire word. Since pseudowords
are read entirely by the non-lexical route, length effects
are predicted to be greater for pseudowords than words,
as is indeed the case (Weekes, 1997).
Given the balance between the two routes in this dual
route model, one could (possibly simplistically) predict
that whilst the influence of the sequential, non-lexical
route will cause an effect of orthographic length for regular words, these effects will be absent or reduced for
exception words, as their pronunciation is largely driven
by the lexical route. Here, regression analyses were used
to examine the predictions of the DRC for such an effect,
and a comparison was made with the same effect in the
Spieler and Balota (1997; Balota & Spieler, 1998) word
naming databases.

Abstract
According to some dual-route theories of word naming, an inhibitory effect of length is caused by assembled phonology. Exception words are read via addressed
phonology, and so should be immune from length effects.
Analyses reported here show, however, that there is an
inhibitory length effect for both regular and exception
words, and this effect is no smaller for exception than
regular words. The DRC, a computational implementation of dual-route theory, does not produce this pattern,
instead showing a facilitatory length effect for exception
words. This is partially due to the correlation between
length and position of irregularity, but length effects are
predicted to be smaller for exception words than regular
words at all positions of irregularity by the DRC, contrary to the data. This suggests that length effects occur at the letter identification stage and a smaller length
effect for words than nonwords may be due to lengthsensitivity of word superiority effects.

The dual-route theory of reading (e.g., Monsell, Patterson, Graham, Hughes, & Milroy, 1992) proposes that
there are two mechanisms for converting print to sound:
a lexical route that retrieves known pronunciations (addressed phonology), and a non-lexical route that assembles pronunciations from grapheme-phoneme correspondences (assembled phonology). These mechanisms compete to produce the pronunciation of a written word.
Regular words are read equally well by both routes; exception words are only read correctly by the lexical route;
and nonwords are read by the non-lexical route.
The dual-route cascaded (DRC) model of reading
aloud (Coltheart, Curtis, Atkins, & Haller, 1993; Coltheart, Rastle, Perry, Langdon, & Ziegler, 2001) is a computational instantiation of the dual-route theory. Its lexical route is an extension of the interactive-activation
model of McClelland and Rumelhart (1981; Rumelhart & McClelland, 1982), which processes letters in
letter strings in parallel, and its non-lexical route processes letter strings sequentially left-to-right with a set of
grapheme-phoneme rules. According to Coltheart et al.
(2001), the slowing of exception words relative to regular
words is due to the conflict between the pronunciations
generated by the rule-based and lexical routes. That is,
exception words are read primarily by the lexical route,
but regular words are read with a contribution from the
non-lexical route. Moreover, in the DRC, length effects
are the signature of the non-lexical route, as later letters
influence the production of pronunciation by the nonlexical route slower due its seriality: the phonemes that

Method
Empirical Data
Empirical data were the mean item naming latencies for
young and old adults reported by Spieler and Balota
(1997; Balota & Spieler, 1998)1 . These are reaction
times, for a set of monosyllables that has been used in
the testing of computational models, in a standard word
naming task using 31 young adults (mean age 22.6 years)
and 29 older adults (mean age 73.4 years).

DRC
The predictions from the DRC analysed here are the
number of cycles needed by the model to produce the
correct pronunciation with the standard parameters examined by Coltheart et al. (2001)2,3 .

Variables
Covariates were obtained from the CELEX database.
These were log frequency, orthographic neighborhood
1

These are made available by Spieler and Balota at
http://www.artsci.wustl.edu/~dbalota/naming.html .
2
These are made available by Coltheart and colleagues at
http://www.maccs.mq.edu.au/~max/DRC/words.html .
3
An alternative set of parameters was also examined. Its
predictions for the Spieler and Balota (1997) response times
were improved: R2 = 9.71% for these parameters compared
with R2 = 4.24% for the standard parameters on the words
examined here. The broad pattern of results was nonetheless
similar.

57

Response Time (ms)

Response Time (ms)

680

Exception
Regular

485
480
475
470

Exception
Regular

675
670
665
660
655

465
3

4
5
6
Number of Letters

7

3

4
5
6
Number of Letters

7

Figure 1: Young adult word naming response times from
Spieler and Balota (1997) as a function of length and
regularity (covariate adjusted).

Figure 2: Older adult word naming response times from
Balota and Spieler (1998) as a function of length and
regularity (covariate adjusted).

size (N), rime consistency (by types) and first phoneme.
In all analyses, the multiplicative interaction between
log frequency and N was included, following Balota,
Cortese, Sergent-Marshall, Spieler, and Yap (2004), and
first phoneme was used as a factor with 33 levels without any attempt to code phonetic features. Position of
irregularity was defined in the manner of Rastle and
Coltheart (1999) as the position of the first phoneme
not corresponding to the output of the Coltheart et al.
(2001) rules.

an increase in cycles to pronunciation 2.02 cycles/letter
(p < .0001), but a reversed -3.66 cycles/letter effect was
found for exception words (p < .0001). Long regular
words were read slower than short regular words, but
long exception words were read faster than short exception words; the disordinal interaction was significant
(p < .0001).

Position of Irregularity
This effect may obtain in the DRC’s predictions because
of the inherent confound between length and position of
irregularity. Longer words are more likely to have their
first irregularity at a later position in the word. When
the irregularity is later in the word, the exception effect
will be smaller (Rastle & Coltheart, 1999). This means
that the DRC would predict that short exception words
are slowed relative to long exception words because they
are more penalised for their earlier irregularities. If such
an effect is too strong in the DRC with the standard parameters, this would counteract a effect of length occurring within each position of irregularity. This suggests
that the data should be analysed separately for each position of irregularity.
The length effect in the young data is broken down
for the first three positions of irregularity in Figure 4.
The corresponding regression coefficients are shown in
Table 1. There are significant length effects for regular
words, and for exceptions with irregularities at positions
2 and 3, and these effects for exceptions are greater than
those for regular words. In all but the fourth position of
irregularity, which shows a non-significant reverse length
effect, the length effect is at least numerically greater for
exception words than regular words.
A similar pattern may been seen for the same comparisons in the data from older participants shown in Fig-

Stimuli
Once heterophonic homographs, words not listed as first
variants in CELEX, and words not modeled by Coltheart
et al. (2001) were excluded, 2728 monosyllabic words
were available for analysis.

Results
First, length effects were sought for regular and exception words in the word naming response times after the covariates (log frequency, N, consistency, first
phoneme) had been partialled out. In the young adult
data, there was a 3.27 ms/letter effect for regular words
(p < .0001), and a 4.40 ms/letter effect for exception
words (p < .0001). This ordinal interaction between
length and regularity was not significant (p > .2). This
pattern may be seen in Figure 1. In the older adult data,
the length effect for regular words was 5.70 ms/letter
(p < .0001), and for exception words 5.42 ms/letter
(p < .01), and there was no interaction between length
and regularity (p > .8). This pattern may be seen in
Figure 2.
The relevant predictions of the DRC may be seen in
Figure 3: for regular words, increases in length lead to

58

Table 1: Length effects by position of irregularity in young and older adult word naming response times from Spieler
and Balota (1997) and Balota and Spieler (1998) (after covariates and main effect of position of irregularity) in
ms/letter, and in DRC predictions (after other variables) in cycles/letter.
Regular
3.23*
5.57*
1.89*
2282

Young
Old
DRC
Number of Words
* indicates different from 0 at p < .05.

†

Position of Irregularity
1
2
3
4
4.37
8.59*†
8.06*† -6.22
13.09*
8.04*
13.15*† -8.06
†
†
-.07
-2.26*
-.23 †
-.18
50
250
116
24

500
Response Time (ms)

Number of Cycles

85
80

4
5
6
Number of Letters

Regular
Exc. Pos. 1
Exc. Pos. 2
Exc. Pos. 3

490

480

470

Exception
Regular
3

†

indicates different from effect for regular words at p < .05.

90

75

†

7

3

Figure 3: DRC predictions for response times as a function of length and regularity (covariate adjusted).

4
5
6
Number of Letters

7

Figure 4: Young adult word naming response times from
Spieler and Balota (1997) by length and position of irregularity (covariate adjusted). (Points with fewer than
ten words are omitted.)

ure 5, with the regression coefficients in Table 1. There
are significant length effects for regular words, and those
with irregularities at positions 1, 2, and 3. At all except the fourth position of irregularity, the length effect
is at least numerically greater for exception words than
regular words.
The pattern that the DRC predicts, which is shown
in Figure 6, differs markedly from the data. The coefficients in Table 1 show a length effect for regular words,
but reversed length effects for exception words, except
at position 4; the effect was significant at position 2.
Critically, at the first three positions of irregularity, the
length effect for exception words was significantly different from that for regular words.

exception words were absent or reversed after this factor
had been controlled. This ran counter to the effect found
in the data, which showed no tendency for the length
effect to differ between regular and exception words.
The non-lexical route of the DRC produces a length
effect for regular words because it generally provides
a boost in activation for the last (rightmost) phoneme
later for longer words, as it processes the letters in serial, and the stopping rule is that all phonemes must
exceed a threshold. This means that pronunciation of
the entire word must wait for this last phoneme. By contrast, an exception effect is produced because the irregular phoneme receives no boost at all from the non-lexical
route, and the regular phoneme incorrectly activated in
that position inhibits the correct phoneme, and so it is often this irregular phoneme for which pronunciation must
wait, rather than the last phoneme. Thus, exceptions are
relatively immune from the effect of length.

Discussion
As expected, the DRC predicted that the length effect
was reduced for exception words compared to regular
words. Overall, the predicted length effect was reversed
for exception words, although this was partially due to
position of irregularity. Nonetheless, length effects for

59

95

Regular
Exc. Pos. 1
Exc. Pos. 2
Exc. Pos. 3

690

Number of Cycles

Response Time (ms)

700

680
670

90
85
80

660

75

650

70
3

4
5
6
Number of Letters

7

Regular
Exc. Pos. 1
Exc. Pos. 2
Exc. Pos. 3

3

Figure 5: Older adult word naming response times from
Balota and Spieler (1998) as a function of length and position of irregularity (covariate adjusted). (Points with
fewer than ten words are omitted.)

4
5
6
Number of Letters

7

Figure 6: DRC predictions for response times as a function of length and position of irregularity (covariate adjusted). (Points with fewer than ten words are omitted.)
for longer words, this tendency would counteract a general perceptual slowing effect of length, producing the
observed lexicality by length interaction.
Even if the relationship between lexicality and length
effects is due to the superiority of words over nonwords,
the lack of a reduction in length effect for exception
words requires that the effects of length on the two routes
in a dual-route model are equivalent, either by chance or
due to a common locus in perception. The finding that
exception words show length effects that are no smaller
than those of regular words is incompatible with dualroute models that have routes that are differentially sensitive to length, such as the DRC.

In principle it might seem possible that an alteration
to the stopping procedure would allow a length effect for
exception words. However, in the model, a delay occurs
in the last phoneme, and another delay occurs in the irregular phoneme; if these phonemes are processed in parallel, their influence when both occur must be subadditive. Further, any stopping measure designed to equalise
the influence of each phoneme must still show a reduced
exception effect for longer words, as the weak activation
of the irregular phoneme will tend to be eclipsed by the
increasing number of other phonemes.
Instead, it would appear to be necessary, if there are
two routes to pronunciation, that the lexical route is
also sensitive the lengths of words. Were the lexical
route as sensitive to length as is the non-lexical route,
though, there would be no reason for there to be a greater
length effect for pseudowords than words. However, such
an interaction between lexicality and length is observed
(Weekes, 1997).
Further, given that there are length effects in lexical decision (Balota et al., 2004) and other word identification tasks (Pelli, Farell, & Moore, 2003) that do
not involve pronunciation, it is not parsimonious to attribute length effects to pronunciation mechanisms. If
instead length effects arise from inefficient letter recognition, whose source may be seriality, limited-capacity
parallel processing, or visual crowding, then effects for
regular and exception words would be equivalent.
However, were this the case, the effect for nonwords
would be equivalent to both effects for regular and exception words. The smaller length effect for words than
nonwords could, though, have a different source in word
superiority effects. Were word superiority effects greater

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by a Warwick Postgraduate
Research Fellowship. I thank Gordon Brown, Marjolein
Merkx, Matthew Roberts and Neil Stewart for comments
on the manuscript.

References
Balota, D. A., Cortese, M. J., Sergent-Marshall, S. D.,
Spieler, D. H., & Yap, M. J. (2004). Visual word
recognition of single-syllable words. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 133 , 283–316.
Balota, D. A., & Spieler, D. H. (1998). The utility of
item-level analyses in model evaluation: A reply to
Seidenberg and Plaut. Psychological Science, 9 , 238–
240.
Coltheart, M., Curtis, B., Atkins, P., & Haller, M.
(1993). Models of reading aloud: Dual-route and
parallel-distributed-processing approaches. Psychological Review, 100 , 589–608.

60

Rastle, K., & Coltheart, M. (1999). Serial and strategic effects in reading aloud. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 25 ,
482–503.
Rumelhart, D. E., & McClelland, J. L. (1982). An interactive activation model of context effects in letter
perception: Part 2. The contextual enhancement effect and some tests and extensions of the model. Psychological Review, 89 , 60–94.
Spieler, D. H., & Balota, D. A. (1997). Bringing computational models of word naming down to the item
level. Psychological Science, 8 , 411–416.

Coltheart, M., Rastle, K., Perry, C., Langdon, R., &
Ziegler, J. (2001). DRC: A dual route cascaded model
of visual word recognition and reading aloud. Psychological Review, 108 , 204–256.
McClelland, J. L., & Rumelhart, D. E. (1981). An interactive activation model of context effects in letter
perception: Part 1. An account of basic findings. Psychological Review, 88 , 375–407.
Monsell, S., Patterson, K. E., Graham, A., Hughes,
C. H., & Milroy, R. (1992). Lexical and sublexical
translation of spelling to sound: Strategic anticipation
of lexical status. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 18 , 452–467.

Weekes, B. S. (1997). Differential effects of number of letters on word and nonword naming latency. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 50A, 439–456.

Pelli, D. G., Farell, B., & Moore, D. C. (2003). The
remarkable inefficiency of word recognition. Nature,
423 , 752–756.

61

