UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Relational Words as Handles: They Bring Along Baggage

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8f1705g9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Goldstone, Robert L.
Son, Ji Y.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Relational Words as Handles: They Bring Along Baggage
Ji Y. Son (jys@indiana.edu)
Robert L. Goldstone (rgoldsto@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychology, Indiana University
1101 E. 10th Street, Bloomington, IN 47401
Abstract
Two experiments examined the role of relational language on
analogical transfer. Participants were taught Signal Detection
Theory (SDT) embedded in a doctor story. In the
experimental condition, relational words accompanied the
story. Relational words that shared superficial similarity with
the contextual elements facilitated transfer. Without the
shared semantics, relational words were detrimental to
transfer performance. A computational model lends a more
structured perspective on how language changes cognition.

learned in a rich context so the most conservative similarity
(identity) might at first be the only way to preserve the
abstraction. Linguistic labels can shift attention to other
types of similarity and relational similarity requires the
largest shifts.
How do words get this power to highlight relations? An
experiment reported by Ratterman and Gentner (1998)
showed that brief training with words children
spontaneously use to mark monotonic change (Daddy,
Mommy, and Baby) significantly increased relational
responding over “no word control” children. However, this
benefit of language was not found with arbitrary labels
(jiggy, gimli, fantan). This result indicates that associations
between relational words and other experi ences significantly
influences how words can highlight relations.
This relational benefit from words has often focused on
language’s provision of symbol-like handles for rich
experiences (Clark, 1998; Gentner, 2003). Words are
relatively unperturbed by idiosyncratic differences in
context (i.e. tokens of the word dog said at different times
are perceived as highly similar). This perceptual stability
also makes words seem object-like. Labels are arbitrary in
the sense that words are non-iconic to their referents.
Because of these qualities, language can act as an attentionshifter. Being relatively context-free and non-i conic allows
language to represent or point out the non-obvious. Objectlike words can m ake relations seem more concret e.
However, theories about the m echanism of language (e.g.
Elman, 1995) suggest that language has the appearance of
being symbolic and context-free even though the underlying
mechanism may be dynamic, continuous, and sensitive to
context in real-time (for more about this cl aim see Clark,
1998, Dennett, 1991). The fact that jiggy doesn’t work well
as a relational l abel may be a consequence of the dual
function of words to dramatically compress information and
represent rich associative connections to other words and
experiences. Jiggy lacks the rich associative connections for
a child that Mommy possesses, despite its providing an
effici ent symbolic handle.
This paper examines this dual role of language in
relational reasoning. Most of the experiments reviewed here
illustrate difficulties that toddlers have with relational
similarity, but even for adult learners, abstract relations are
difficult to extract from a novel context (e.g. Goldstone &
Sakamoto, 2003). Our hypothesis was that cert ain words
might promote relational thinking.
In the following
between-subject experiments, there are two conditions: the
word condition with relational labels included in the cover
story, and the control condition without labels. The

Introduction
Most people simply expect learning words to lead to
learning concepts because we use l anguage to communicate
ideas. Evidence of this intuition is found in the emphasis on
vocabulary and “bolded words ” in educational settings.
Lexical categorization is considered equivalent to
possessing certain concepts. Indeed, language has played a
significant role in the development of human thought not
only as a means of communication but also as a tool that
augments our computational abilities (Clark, 1998; Gentner,
2003).
Language dovetails with other cognitive functions well
becaus e it can act as a filter for complex perceptual
experience by directing our attention to particul ar
similarities. Relational language is a particularly powerful
illustration of these qualities of language since relations are
not as perceptually salient or stable as objects (Gentner,
2003). For our purposes, objects are loosely defined as
things that are immediately process ed and relations exist
between such objects making them more cognitively
demanding.
A simple example comes from a study on four-year-olds
who show sensitivity to higher-order relations such as
symmetry after being exposed to triads like xXx that were
labeled “even” (Kotovsky & Gentner, 1995). Even when
the relational answer was not perceptually salient (e.g.
matching color symmetry to size symmetry), these children
were abl e to make relational choices. Consistent use of the
word “even” gave rise to a stable perception of similarity.
The stability that relational language provides across
contexts allows us to create equivalence cl asses that are
otherwise difficult to pick out.
As helpful as language might be, relational words are
notoriously difficult for children to learn (Keil & Batterman,
1984; Hall & Waxman, 1993). One reason for this
difficulty can be found in Linda Smith’s developmental
account of similarity (1989) as shifting from global identity
to part similarity to relational similarity. Relations are often
2050

behavior of interest was the ability of l earners to t ransfer
relational knowledge from the learning situation to a new
context. The underlying system of relations that participants
learned and trans ferred was Signal Detection Theory (SDT).
The relational words that we used were: target, distracter,
hit, miss, correct rejection, false alarm. We did not use the
traditional SDT terms signal and nois e becaus e those are
grounded in particular examples of SDT that are probably
not familiar to our participants. Since target (especially in
comparison to distracter) is a positive term, Experiment 1
paired it with a positive element in the cover story (healthy
athletes) while distracter was paired with the corresponding
negative el ement (unhealthy athlet es). The relational labels
were semantically aligned with the relations embedded in
the context. Experiment 2 goes on to ask whether the
semantic alignment is redundant and symbolic function of
words is enough to produce t ransfer. The labels have been
aligned with their corresponding story elements in Table 1.
Relational Label

Contextual Words (Exp. 1)

Contextual Words (Exp. 2)

Target
Distracter

Healthy athlete
Unhealthy athlete

Sick patient
Healthy patient

Evidence

Cell strength

Cell distortion

Hit

Healthy diagnosed “healthy”

Sick diagnosed “sick”

Miss
False alarm

Healthy diagnosed “unhealthy”
Unhealthy diagnosed “healthy”

Sick diagnosed “healthy”
Healthy diagnosed “sick”

After reading through the tutorial at their own pace,
participants answered eight multiple choice questions about
the tutorial’s doctor situation that could be answered
correctly by applying SDT principles. All quiz questions
were purpos efully made diffi cult to ensure that they had to
use SDT rather than relying on common sense. Participants
had an opportunity to trans fer what they had just learned to
a different cont ext because immediately following the
tutorial quiz, they read a few paragraphs des cribing a small
town that wants to export sweet melons and avoid sending
out bitter melons. Sweet melons, laden with nectar, tend to
be heavier so this town decides to sort the melons by weight
(even though weight is not perfectly correlat ed with
sweetness). Consumer reports allow them to find out which
melons are actually sweet/bitter. An eight-question transfer
quiz was administered. At the end of the experiment
participants are told that these two stories are analogous and
asked to explicitly map elements of the two stories to each
other in a multiple choice quiz.

Results and Discussion

Correct rejection Unhealthy diagnosed “unhealthy” Healthy diagnosed “healthy”

The relationship between the quizzes and the experimental
manipulation were analyzed with a mixed-design 2x2
ANOVA (quiz type x word/no-word). There were no main
effects for quiz type, F(1, 85)=.040, nor word manipulation,
F(1, 85)=.077, but this analysis confirmed that there was a
significant interaction, F(1, 85)=8.627, p<.01.
Separate analyses carried out on the quizzes revealed that
the relational words made initial learning more diffi cult but
produced a significant benefit for transfer to a new situation.
Figure 1 illustrates a tendency for the control condition to
do better, relative to the word condition, on the tutorial quiz
for the initial learning situation, but this difference was only
marginally significant, t(86) = 3.032, p<.1.
An ANCOVA on transfer scores reveal ed that when the
tutorial quiz score is considered as a significant covariat e,
F(1, 84)=32.172, p<.001, the word manipulation is a
significant factor of t ransfer performance, F(1, 84)=5.617,
p<.05. Overall the tutorial score influenced transfer score
but even when the word participants did not do as well on
the tutorial quiz, they were able to t ransfer more of what
they learned. There were no differences in performance

Table 1: The relational labels paired with their contextual
referents from Experiments 1 and 2. Control conditions
only had contextual words.

Experiment 1
Method
Eighty-seven undergraduates from Indiana University
participated in this experiment for credit. Half were
randomly assigned to be in the word condition and half were
assigned t the control condition.
All undergraduates read through a computer-based SDT
tutorial made up of pictures and explanatory t ext. The
principles of SDT are embedded in the context of a doctor
trying to pick out healthy athletes to play for the university
by examining blood cell strength. In the story, athletes with
strong cell samples were more likely to be healthy than
those with weak cell samples. Although cell strength was
an imperfect indicator of health, the doctor tried to optimize
his decisions. Within this cover story, the word condition
also had relational labels for el ements of the story. Healthy
athletes were labeled target and the unhealthy athlet es were
distracters. Those that the doctor deemed “healthy” were
labeled “target” with the quotation marks around both the
contextual term and the relational term indicating that this is
only the doctor’s decision rather than the actual status of the
athlete. Hit, miss, correct rejection, and false alarm were
also included in the word condition’s tutorial. Other than
the addition of the labels, the tutorials for the word and
control conditions were identical.

2051

Figure 1: The interaction from Experiment 1.

on the mapping quiz, t(86)=.470, with control and word
participants scoring well, 85.5% and 82.4%, respectively.
The control participants who did well on the tutorial did
not transfer their learning to the new situation. Part of the
difficulty for those in the word condition may have been
that the relational words were not used in the quiz questions
rendering their hard-to-master words l ess useful in the t ask.
The word participants who did not seem to learn as much in
the tutorial were able to improve thei r performance in the
transfer quiz. This interaction underscores the importance
of separating variables that affect immediate learning versus
those that make knowledge readily transferable (Goldstone
& Sakamoto, 2003; Chi, Feltovich, & Glaser, 1981). The
slight disadvantage of words in the tutorial quiz supports the
notion that relational words are difficult to learn, not only
for children (Keil & Batterman, 1984; Hall & Waxm an,
1993) but also for adults. The success of the word condition
on transfer could be interpreted as evidence for words
making relations more salient, thereby allowing the two
situations to seem more similar.
The labels used in this experiment had little in common
with the contextualized item but most of the commonality
was relational.
Exposure to words might basically
encourage trans fer by directing attention to these few
relational properties. However, the benefit of words might
not exist if other non-relational aspects of the words seemed
to run contrary to the context. To illustrate this point, since
Ratterman and Gentner (1998) found that Daddy-MommyBaby were good terms for children to map according to
monotonic decreas e, then perhaps relational responding
would be hampered if they labeled the small object Daddy
and large object was called Baby. Even though words seem
like powerful symbols, even when they are used
systematically (i.e. pres erving the monotonic changes of
size), they may not be completely free of associations.
Experiment 2 examined the consequences of labels that do
not semantically correspond to the context.

transfer story and quiz were identical to Experiment 1. Note
that the relational words preserve the structure of SDT and
are correctly applied to the doctor context. However we
will refer to Experiment 2’s manipulation as the inconsistent
word condition to indicate that these words are semantically
inconsistent with the story.
The elem ents included in the mapping quiz were
accordingly adjusted but the questions remained structurally
the same. However, the grading of this quiz was different
becaus e there are two viabl e answers for each mapping
question. For example, for a mapping question such as,
“What in the melon export story is most analogous to the
sick patient in the doctor scenario?” students could pick the
other target-like elem ent (sweet melon), but answering bitter
melon still preserves the structure of SDT since signal and
noise are mathematically equivalent. In fact, in an
impoverished setting like multiple choice, matching sick
patients with bitter melons is more appealing than matching
sick patients with sweet melons based on semantic overl ap.
Since the experimenters were familiar with SDT, the tutorial
and transfer situations were designed with the sick personsweet melon match (the signal/target mat ch) in mind. One
reflection of that intention is found in the spatial
organization with cell distortion and m elon weight
increasing from left to right (for a schematic illustration see
Figure 2). Thus the sick patients and sweet melons were
usually presented on the right side of the computer screen.
We will call this the structural answer. The mapping quiz
was graded in three ways: a structural score, a semantic
score, and a total mapping score (both answers counted as
correct).
.

Experiment 2
Method

Forty undergraduates were randomly assigned in a similar
paradigm of learning SDT as Experiment 1. The main
departure from Experiment 1 was a change in the tutorial’s
cover story. In the new story the doctor is trying to
diagnose leukemia patients by examining blood samples.
People with distorted cell samples are more likely to have
leukemia than those with pure cell samples. Although cell
distortion is an imperfect indicator of leukemia, the doctor
must try to optimize his decisions.
The relational labels are the s ame as Experiment 1 only
applied to the elements of the new story. The targets are
now sick peopl e and the distracters are healthy peopl e.
Those that the doctor has diagnosed are marked as “si ck”
and in the word condition they are accompanied by the label
“target.” Those that have been diagnos ed as “healthy” are
labeled “distracters.” The tutorial quiz questions were
reworded to reflect the changes in the story. The melon

Figure 2: This shows the underlying structure of the SDT
cover stories used in Experiment 2. Note that participants
never saw this figure.

Results and Discussion
When the words were inconsistent with the story el ements,
the word condition did not experience the benefits normally
associated with rel ational language. In both the tutorial and

2052

transfer quizzes, the control condition was superior to the
word condition (shown in Figure 3). The tutorial quiz
analysis revealed a t rend that favored the cont rol group
although this difference was only marginally significant,
t(39)=2.83,
p<.1.
However
control
participants
outperformed those given inconsistent relational words on
transfer, t(39)=5.98, p<.05.
There was no reliable
interaction between test type and word conditions according
to a mixed-design ANOVA, F(1, 38)=.991. However there
were significant main effects. Participants had significantly
higher scores on the tutorial quiz, 53.8% (SD=.240), than
the transfer quiz, 41.6% (SD=.266), F(1, 38)=12.462,
p<.001. This should be expect ed considering that they just
had a tutorial for the first quiz and only minimal background
information for the trans fer qui z. This analysis also
confirmed that the control condition had better quiz scores
than the word condition, F(1, 38)=5.391, p<.05. This
transfer result counters the speculation that relational
overlap between the l abel and the contextual referent
generically leads to the correct abstraction.
Total mapping scores were not significantly different with
the control group at 85.8% and the word condition scoring
80.0%, t(39)=1.064. The separated scores, shown as
structural and semantic types of mapping in Figure 4, were
analyzed with a mixed-design ANOVA. There was a main
effect of mapping type with participants preferring to map
by semantics, 50.42% (SD=.288), than pure structure,
32.5% (SD=.297), F(1, 38)=4.405, p<.05. There was no
main effect of word condition, F(1, 38)=1.064, but there
was a marginally significant interaction between these
variables, F(1, 38)=3.624, p<.07.
Closer examination revealed that the control condition
made significantly more s emantic choi ces than the word
condition, t(39)=4.84, p<.05. The semantic m apping result
supports the notion that superfi cial similarity strongly
influences mapping (Gentner & Toupin, 1986) but these
mappings may or may not have been used in transfer (Ross,
1987). Since the structural choice is unintuitive, the poorly
performing word condition did not show a significant
tendency to make structural over sem antic choices,
t(38)=2.070. These mapping results imply that the word
condition is confused. Instead of a consistently aligned
view of the analogy, they seem to switch back and forth
between structural and semantic construals. Words may
cause some pull towards a structural perspective but cannot
completely overcome the attractive semantic account.
There is enough uncertainty to prevent word participants
from settling on one coherent perspective. This instability
may have contributed to their dismal results on transfer.

Figure 3: Tutorial and transfer quiz results of Experiment 2.

Figure 4: The mapping results from Experiment 2.

General Discussion

how learning and applying deep principles (such as SDT) is
sensitive
to
interactions
between
similarity,
contextualization, and language.
Similarity is a major player in analogical mapping and
usually object similarity is the least effortful mapping
(Gentner & Toupin, 1986). Mapping with semantic or
structural similarity is confounded in Experiment 1 but
when they are in conflict as in Experiment 2, participants
were more likely to map according to semantic similarity.
However the perception of similarity is affected by
language. When relational words are included, there is a
shift in perspective and the highly intuitive semantic match
becomes less attractive. However, since mapping was done
at the end of the t ask, the participants may not have used
these correspondences in the transfer task.
Understanding abstract concepts is a daunting task but
inlayed in familiar and concrete contexts, those abstractions
are more intelligible (Wason & Shapiro, 1971; Goldstone &
Sakamoto, 2003). In both Experiments 1 and 2, the control
group learned the abstractions complet ely embedded in the
doctor context whereas the experimental participants also
had exposure to decontextualized descriptors. Since the
tutorial questions were also embedded in the doctor story,
control participants did better. But sometimes a highly
contextualized construal of a learning situation results in
restricted trans fer (Goldstone & Sakamoto, 2003; Anderson,
Reder, & Simon, 1996). The control participants may have
relied more heavily on the context that scaffolded

Taken in tandem, these relational word experiments
reveal a system of effects that connect to import ant themes
of research in analogical reasoning. There is much to find
out about this remarkable ability to use abstract
commonalities to solve superfi cially dissimilar problems,
often the very goal of learning. These experiments explored

2053

perform ance on the tutorial quiz thus showing no
improvement in transfer becaus e that contextual support was
no longer present. Relating context to language, Experiment
1 showed that the payoff for the difficult task of learning
decontextualized relational words was found later in transfer
perform ance.
Experiment 2 found a significant decline from scores on
the tutorial to the transfer task. But there was no overall
decrease from tutorial to transfer in Experiment 1. However,
most of the decline in Experiment 2 is due to the poor
perform ance of the word condition on transfer. These
inconsistent words did not necessarily m ake the tutorial
harder to underst and for Experiment 2 because word
conditions in both experiments had similar differences on
the tutorial quiz compared to their respective control
conditions. However, this result did not doom Experiment
1’s word participants to worse transfer performance. Also
note that in making the relational labels more dissimilar to
the corresponding contextual item (target-sick patient), we
did not experimentally change the similarity between the
label and the corresponding element in the transfer story
(target-sweet melon). Even so, the semantic inconsistencies
between the relational labels and the learning situation were
powerful enough to cause poor transfer in Experiment 2.
The benefit of relational words on transfer between
semantically aligned cont exts fits with other res earch on
words and conceptual transfer (Kotovsky & Gentner, 1996;
Ratterman & Gentner, 1998). Relational concepts made
more object-like through words are easier to pick out of the
surrounding context. However, the detrimental effect of
superficially conflicting words on t ransfer reveals that the
symbolic qualities of language alone are not enough to
promote usable abstractions. In fact, it is the combination of
grounded associations (Moyer & B ayer, 1976) and neat
symbol-like qualities of words that allow language to act as
a bridge across situations. The words that were slightly
abstract ed from the story yet shared some superficial
similarities served as guides to deeper principles. However
words that had conflicting superfi cial features could not
achieve the same result.
As in many cas es of learning, abstractions here were
learned in situ with no immediate need for
decontextualization. We propose that words facilitate
abstraction by separating the relations from the features of
context. This differentiation allows relational similarities to
be selectively highlighted. For example, the features that
were lumped into the concept of “healthy patient” could be
split apart into “healthy patient” and “target” when
presented with the relational word. Now the rel ations
represented by “t arget ” could have a larger influence on
how the context is perceived.
However, the label “target” means lots of things including
“goal (SDT signal)” and “good thing” and even though the
label was us ed with only the form er in mind, the latter
comes along for the ride. If the contextual item also shares
these meanings, the label acts as an abstraction that supports
the story. On the other hand, if the relational label has

conflicting features with the contextual item there are two
ways of construing the original cont ext: a rel ational version
that contradicts the semantics of the story and a semantically
aligned construal that goes against some of the relations.

A Potential Model

2054

A model of the role of language in cognition would need to
account for the symbol-like and associ ation-driven qualities
of human language use. Hybrid models that implement
connectionist networks as well as a system of symbols are a
good place to begin exploratory models of the cognitive
consequences of language (Hutchins & Hazelhurst, 1991;
Hummel & Holyoak, 1997). Since LISA (Learning and
Inference with Schemas and Analogies, Hummel &
Holyoak, 1997) is conveniently designed to simulate
mapping between analogs and we have m apping results
from these experiments, we will use it to illustrate how
language might facilitate analogical mapping.
LISA was originally intended to be a model of analogical
reasoning though analog retrieval and m apping (s ee
Hummel & Holyoak, 1997 for a thorough treatment) with
no explicit claims about the role of language in analogy.
However, the architecture is a good illustration of the more
qualitative theory proposed here concerning the interaction
between the amodal symbol-like qualities and the contextsensitive flexibility of language.
LISA implements a hi erarchical architecture built upon a
constraint-satisfaction network (Holyoak & Hummel, 1997).
The underlying web of associations in this network makes
the hierarchical structures s ensitive to semantic associ ations
while being able to represent static structure. Dynamic
synchrony in LISA allows the underlying associationist
network to influence which symbolic structures become
active. Co-activation leads to mapping. This duality of
static structure and dynamic binding reflects the stability
and flexibility of relational language found in the results
reported here.
Consider a situation where all of the features of sick
patient from the story are bound to the object sick patient
and all features of healthy patients bound to healthy patient
(see Figure 5a). When sweet melon gets active a portion of
the relations in the associative layer (such as looked for,
goal) are shared with sick patient but more object features
are shared with healthy patient. This leads to co-activation
and mapping between sweet melon and healthy patient.
The introduction of relational words changes this
situation. If the sick patient semantics were split between
sick patient and target shown in Figure 5b, LISA represents
that sick patient is a target by learning to dynamically bind
them together. Then when sweet melon becomes active,
despite sharing som e of the healthy patient sem antics,
almost all the target s emantics become active. Since target
is dynamically bound to sick patient, there is co-activation
between target, sick patient, and sweet melon. The semantic
match, healthy patient, is no longer the obvious mapping.
The relational word allows the structural match to become a
contender.

Figure 5: (A) The control condition of Experiment 2
implemented in LISA architecture; (B) The word condition
of Experiment 2.

Explorations in the Dynamics of Cognition. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Gentner, D. (2003). Why we’re so smart. In D. Gentner
and S. Goldin-Meadow (Eds.), Language in Mind:
Advances in the Study of Language and Thought.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gentner, D., & Toupin, C. (1986). Systematicity and
surface similarity in the development of analogy.
Cognitive Science, 10, 277-300.
Goldstone, R.L., & Sakamoto, Y. (2003). The transfer of
abstract principles governing complex adaptive systems.
Cognitive Psychology, 46, 414-466.
Hall, D.G., & Waxman, S.R. (1993). Assumptions about
word meaning: Individuation and basic-level kinds. Child
Development, 64, 1550-1570.
Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (1997). Distributed
representations of structure: A theory of analogical access
and mapping. Psychological Review, 104, 427-466.
Keil, F.C., & Batterman, N. (1984). A charact eristic-todefining shift in the development of word meaning.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 23,
221-236.
Kotovsky, L., & Gentner, D. (1996). Comparison and
categori zation in the development of relational similarity.
Child Development, 67, 2797-2822.
Moyer, R.S., & Bayer, R.H. (1976). Mental comparison
and the symbolic distance effect. Cognitive Psychology,
8, 228-246.
Ratterman, M.J., & Gentner, D. (1998). The effect of
language on similarity: The use of relational labels
improves young children’s performance in a mapping
task. In K. Holyoak, D. Gentner, & B. Kokinov (Eds.),
Advances in Analogy Research: Integration of Theory and
Data from the Cognitive, Computational, and Neural
Sciences. Sofia: New Bulgarian University.
Ross, B.H. (1987). This is like that: The use of earlier
problems and the separation of similarity effects. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 13, 629-639.
Smith, L.B. (1989). From global similarities to kinds of
similarities: The construction of dimensions in
development. In S. Vosniadou and A. Ortony (Eds.),
Similarity and Analogical Reasoning. New York, NY:
Cambridge University Press.
Wason, P.C., & Shapiro, D. (1971). Natural and contrived
experience in a reasoning probl em. Quarterly Journal of
Psychology, 23, 63-71.

Using LISA to understand how language specifically
interacts with analogical reasoning is a first pass attempt to
look at the impact of language on cognition. Models of
analogical res earch should be abl e to account for effects of
context, similarity, and relational language working as a
coherent system. Connecting the themes of analogical
research into a computational model is a practical way of
using previous research to constrain future proposals.
Whether cognition with words occurs primarily in the mind
or in seamless flow with external scaffolding, models of
conceptual transfer should be sensitive to both the “handle”like aspects of language as well as the “baggage” that comes
with it.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by Department of Education,
Institute of Education Sciences grant R305H050116.

References
Anderson, J.R., Reder, L.M., & Simon, H.A. (1996).
Situated learning and education. Educational Researcher,
25, 5-11.
Chi, M.T.H., Feltovich, P.J., & Glaser, R. (1981).
Categorization and represent ation of physics problems by
experts and novices. Cognitive Science, 5, 121-152.
Clark, A. (1998). Magic words: How l anguage augments
human computation. In P. Carruthers & J. Boucher
(Eds.), Language and Thought: Interdisciplinary Themes.
Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Dennett, D. (1991). Consciousness Explained. NY, NY:
Little Brown & Co.
Elman, J.L. (1995). Language as a dynamical system. In
R.F. Port and T. Van Gelder (Eds.), Mind as Motion:

2055

