UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Relevance Theory through Pragmatic Theories of Meaning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9zw713p6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Pinales, Jose Ruiz
Rivas, Rene Jaime

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Relevance Theory through Pragmatic Theories of Meaning
Ahti-Veikko Pietarinen (ahti-veikko.pietarinen@helsinki.fi)
Department of Philosophy; P. O. Box 9
FIN-00014 University of Helsinki, Finland

Abstract
A century ago, Peirce developed a pragmatic theory of
meaning. The theory appeals to the Pragmatic Maxim.
It says that the meaning of a concept is the sum total
of its implications for possible observations and actions.
The Relevance Theory of Sperber & Wilson is classified
according to that criteria to the category of pragmatic
theories of meaning. It is argued that relevance is an
instance of the application of the Pragmatic Maxim.
Keywords: Relevance theory, pragmatic theory of
meaning, Peirce, pragmatic maxim, pragmatics, compositionality.

Introduction
Peirce’s Pragmatic Theory of Meaning
Charles Sanders Peirce (1839–1914), the noted American
philosopher and scientist, took pragmatic meaning as a
rule of logic embodied in the Pragmatic Maxim (PM):
Consider what effects, that might conceivably have practical bearings, we conceive the object of our conception to
have. Then our conception of these effects is the whole of
our conception of the object (5.402, 1878, How to Make
our Ideas Clear ).1 When considering whether a thought
is logical, one has to take the practical consequences of
that thought into account. These consequences do not
have to be actually acted out, but one has to consider
them and take them to be conceivable if any thought was
to be complete at all.
Such pragmatic forms of meaning are of utmost importance not only in linguistic pragmatics and communication, but also in current theories of knowledge representation, conceptual graphs in computer and cognitive
sciences, as well as in the upcoming vision of a ‘semantic
web’ (Pietarinen, 2003a). All of the applications have
enormous potential for the future societies and methods
of communication. Among others, the prominent role of
such thinking is recognised in recent logical and topological approaches to space and time (Pietarinen, 2005a).

Sperber & Wilson’s Relevance Theory
Peirce developed a pragmatic theory of meaning, which
appeals to the PM. It says that the meaning of a concept
1
The reference is to Peirce (1931–1958) by volume and
paragraph number.

1767

is the sum total of its implications for possible observations and actions. I argue that we may classify the Relevance Theory (RT) of (Sperber & Wilson, 1995) within
the framework of such pragmatic theory of meaning.
The RT claims to provide a logical and cognitive account of relevance. It attempts to capture the notion of
relevance in communicative situations through contextual effects. Since it is impossible to know in advance
which descriptions of circumstances or parts of the common ground will actually be relevant to the dynamic,
on-going processes of linguistic communication, Sperber
& Wilson define the notion in terms of a context-change
potential.
In other words, relevant factors or properties of an
expression are those which intrude into the context of
discourse. This is an argument from cognitive economy:
the goal of communication is to maximise the relevance
of the phenomena available to language users while minimising the amount of mental or cognitive processing effort. The grounds for believing in cognitive economy are,
in turn, evolutionary.

Relevance Theory and the Pragmatic
Maxim
Preamble
The Inferential Model of Communication According to RT, the inferential model of communication
involves attempts to share, distribute and recognise acts
of intention, emotion and other modalities delivered in
communication. These attempts are what contribute
to the relevance of utterances intended to communicate
particular pieces of information. What agents recognise
as relevant is largely related to common traces in their
experience.
Context The notion of context is therefore central to
this theory, since what is relevant is that which produces
a tangible contextual effect, or which penetrates the context of discourse.2 The goal of RT is to provide a theory
of communication that would function as a reference for
a host of pragmatic phenomena running wild in linguistic
populations.
2

Apart from cognitive economy, the idea hints at an element of utilitarianism in the definition of communicative
goals in terms of the maximisation of something (in this context, relevance).

Moderate Psychologism The basic idea of RT is
thus neither entirely psychological nor epistemic, though
admitting a modicum of both. It aims at providing a theory which is psychologically and psycholinguistically realistic, but not overly so. It is an attempt to make sense
of linguistic pragmatics at the cognitive level which, according to (Carston, 1988, p. 713), is “the first account
of pragmatics which is grounded in psychology”.
Note that this may not be a major compliment. Most
have regarded H. Paul Grice’s program of analysing literal meaning in public language through conversational
maxims as psychological, since it involves speakers’ and
hearers’ intentions and beliefs (Grice, 1989). I consider
this assimilation to be a gross oversimplification even on
Grice’s own account (Pietarinen, 2004b).
That the aim of relevance would be in psychological
explanation backfires. Even though announced as one of
the main aims of RT, the idea of relevance has not been
tame enough to suit the needs of a rigorous logical modelling of discourse, since such an enterprise would hinge
on effective ways of representing contextual information
and its change.

The Pragmatic Maxim
Formulation My key concern, given Peirce’s pragmatic outlook on the meaning of concepts, is the placing
of Sperber & Wilson’s proposal in a wider perspective. I
wish to suggest that relevance may be thought of as an
instance of Peirce’s PM, which says that the meaning of
a concept is the sum total of its implications for possible
observations and actions.
The formulation of PM first appeared in the January
1878 issue of Popular Science Monthly. Several versions
of it exist in Peirce’s large corpus. A very succinct and
unambiguous one says that “the maxim of logic [is] that
the meaning of a word lies in the use that is to be made
of it” (CN 2.184, 2 February 1899, Matter, Energy, Force
and Work ).3
Unfolding the PM For initial purposes, PM may
be read such that, in assessing the scores and the overall scale according to which items of information are
weighted depends to a large extent on (i) practical consequences of accommodating the chosen piece of information introduced in communication, and (ii) what will
ensue as a consequence of actually using that piece in
further cycles of discourse.4 According to PM, the most
relevant information is that which provides the best toehold for agents to continue the dialogue or action.
We may thus think of practical bearings as contextual
bearings which an item of information, or a belief, has on
the context within which it is located. The implications
3
The reference is to Peirce (1975–1987) by volume and
paragraph number. The quotation is a striking foreshadowing of Wittgenstein’s mantra that “the word has meaning by
the particular use we make of it” (Wittgenstein, 2000, item
147: 39v, Grosses Notizbuch, cf. Pietarinen, 2003b). Notable
differences obtain between the two, however.
4
Witness the infamous Frame Problem in AI: it is only
the most idiotic robots who would not distinguish between
relevant and non-relevant input from their environment, and
those are unlikely to survive for long.

1768

that the infiltration of such items into that context have
may thus be read as Sperber & Wilson’s preferred properties of relevance in linguistic utterances, which balance
the inferences made in choosing between possible rival
interpretations against the notion of the cost of making
such inferences. In the light of PM, and mutatis mutandis, RT turns out to be a markedly pragmatic theory of
pragmatics.5
The Subjunctive Formulation The PM also states
that practical consequences need not be actualised, even
though they need to be actualisable. They illustrate a
‘would-be’, a modality presented to the consciousness
of future deliberation. According to Peirce’s scholastic
realism, possibilities are just as real as actual objects and
events. Meaning as a list of practical consequences of a
concept is characterised in terms of subjunctive rather
than indicative conditionals.
This subjunctive nature of meaning is central to RT,
in which it is exceedingly difficult to say which among
the wide variety of relevant semantic attributes would
finally materialise. Such hypotheticals manifest themselves in the relevance of the proposition “Diamonds are
hard but not very firm” as expressed by a conditional
such as “If diamonds are rubbed then they are unlikely
to be scratched” as well as in “If diamonds are struck
against something rock hard they are likely to break into
pieces”.
Note that this later subjunctive formulation has
caused some to consider the PM to be both too liberal
and too broad in its characterisation of concept meaning in terms of possible, potential or expected practical
effects that may never be manifested.
Subjunctive Contextual Change This criticism is
nevertheless not effective in formulations of PM that
take relevance into account. What is expected to be relevant is often not only sufficient for a contextual change
to happen. A mere potentiality may also intrude into
the context and change the constitution in a hypothetical
way, as a form of possible or subjunctively accounted contextual change, rather than actually realising and bringing any observable effect into existence.
One example of a potential effect is the asymmetric
case of the hearer’s determination of what would count
as relevant in contradistinction to what the speaker intended to be relevant. In other words, relevance to the
hearer may remain a potential change, given the shared
environment of the utterance.
Relevance as a Constraint According to Sperber &
Wilson’s original formulation of RT, relevance is something that is not determined by context but constrained
by context. On the contrary, thus, a particular context
is determined by the search for relevance, the interpreter
acting according to the version of the Principle of Charity that concerns relevance maximisation.
5

Not all theories of pragmatics are pragmatic in the same
sense. For instance, Montague’s theory of grammar claims to
explain the resolution of contextual matters using a hybrid
of higher-order and possible-worlds concepts.

The Least Effort But this has the unfortunate effect
that the power of RT ceases precisely at the point in
which an utterance makes the earliest contribution to
context, since the theory does not presuppose computing the effects in all contexts — doing so would be cognitively too complex and thus costly. The evolutionarilyhardwired principle of least effort will kick in and select
the first and most-accessible contextually-effective interpretation (see below).
Suboptimality I believe that acquiring a comprehensive account of the strategic nature of communication
compels us to also bring suboptimal relevancies within
the scope of the theory. This makes RT bi-directional
in terms of accommodating also what the hearer takes
to be relevant into the formal framework of computing
relevance in terms of possible contextual change instead
of actual change.

Compositionality, Context and Relevance
Meaning Referring to his logic circa 1905, Peirce
made the following note in unpublished papers:
The meaning of any [assertion] is the meaning of the
composite of all the propositions which that [assertion] would under all circumstances [= in all contexts, A.-V.P] empower the interpreter to scribe.
(MS 280).6
What the interpreter is empowered to scribe are thus,
on the one hand, experimental and evidenced facts derived from experiments upon these assertions, and on
the other, inferential propositions that follow from assertions by the same rules of valid inference. Meaning
therefore involves both inductive and deductive elements
of reasoning.
Pragmatic Principle of Compositionality The
above passages also suggest that, given PM according to
which the meaning of an assertion is the sum totality of
all its actual and possible practical consequences under a
given interpretation, Peirce had in mind an approach to
compositionality quite close to PM. A pragmatic principle of compositionality would be thus:
The Pragmatic Principle of Compositionality (PPComp): The meaning of a sentence is the meaning
of all sentences that follow from that sentence either
by inductive or deductive principles and permissions
under all authorised circumstances. 7
Here we have an outward-looking, indefinitelyprogressing principle for meaning.
Noteworthy is
6
The reference is to Peirce (1967) by manuscript and, if
applicable, page number. A similar statement exists among
the assorted draft pages of the same manuscript: “The meaning of any [assertion] is the meaning of the sum total or aggregate of all the propositions which that [assertion] enables
the interpreter to scribe, over and above what he would have
been able to scribe” (MS 280: assorted pages 35).
7
The authorisation refers to the semiotic interpretation
between the Utterer and the Interpreter of an assertion.

1769

the employment of both inductive and deductive
reasoning.8
Experimental Verification Experimental verification is one aspect of the logic of induction, and Peirce
indeed claimed that further clarification of the meaning of assertions is attained by rationally experimenting
upon them to form beliefs about the relations involved
in their logical representations.
Suc representations should not be equated with “protocol sentences”, which were once meant to provide the
robust, independent logical bedrocks of scientific theories. For, protocol sentences that can be “confirmed”
or “disconfirmed” relate to the practical consequences
of assertions that are being experimented upon for the
purpose of hypothesis generation. In this wider sense,
the consequences may be directly and inductively tested
and be prone to the kind of logical atomism that at one
time was claimed to be the proper way of constructing
protocol sentences from simple sense data.
Hence, some protocol representations may well be subject to compositionality. But there is no logical atomism in the kind of representations that generate these
sentences, since they admit of multiple interpretations
depending on the purpose of the theory at hand.
Pragmatic Context Principle As regards the formulation of meaning in terms of its consequences, one
may claim that it no longer deals with compositionality
of an expression E, as the term is intended to refer to
the inner constituents of E. If so, we may then think of
PPComp as a pragmatised version the Context Principle (CP) of meaning. According to CP, a word meaning cannot exist unless there is sentence in which words
are embedded. Such views are found in Frege’s (1884)
Grundlagen der Arithmetik : “The meaning [Bedeutung]
of a word must be asked for in the context of a proposition [Satzzusammenhang], not in separation” (Beaney,
1997, p. 90).9
Translated into pragmatistic nomenclature, CP may
be stated thus:
The Pragmatic Principle of Context (PPCont): A
proposition has no meaning in isolation from its consequences.
If a proposition has no consequences, it is meaningless.
PPCont is how Peirce would have restated CP, had he
been informed of its existence in Frege’s writings.
8
What exactly is meant by them falls outside the scope
of the present treatise. In general, they are intended to account for what all those practical, conceivable, observable or
sensible effects referred to in PM would ideally amount to in
logical terms.
9
Wilhelm Wundt made similar but slightly earlier remarks on contextual meaning in his first volume of Logik
(1880–1883). Unlike Frege’s overly anti-psychologistic stance,
Wundt’s approach was prone to psychological undertones,
and characteristically so in relation to context-dependent expressions that deal with the ‘psychic’ associations of lexical
meaning. Peirce was well versed in Wundt’s writings, the
psychologism of which he disapproved.

Relevance and Strategic Communication
Returning to our blanket topic, several further congenialities obtain between Peirce’s pragmatism and RT than
until now has met the eye. I list here five of perhaps the
most vital such connections, and supplement these with
some wider issues pointing out the existence of a couple
of crucial differences between the two, mostly pertaining
to strategic aspects of relevance in communication.

Cognitive Economy
Evolutionary Roots First, as noted in the introduction, the relevance-theoretic principle of least effort used
in choosing the first and the most accessible interpretation or interpretive hypothesis as the relevant one turns
on an argument from cognitive economy. This argument
is closely related to Peirce’s evolutionary principles, including his quality of incomplexity in the economics of research, which suggests that the hypotheses requiring the
least effort should be tested before any others. Incomplete hypotheses, which in rational inquiry are bound to
be so, should in Peirce’s own words “give a good leave”
(Peirce, 1998, p. 110), because they are in any case likely
to be eventually overridden by new hypotheses. They
should point towards future investigation rather than
past. Hypotheses per se are closer to the good and
fruitful conducts to be followed than any static set of
scientifically-tested propositions.
Cognition vs. Biology In communicative situations,
this method may be understood to refer to things such
as the acceptance of both micro- and macro-level data in
recreating contexts, in other words, the taking into account of evidence from both the cognitive and biological
sides of a given set of theoretical assumptions.
The method of economy is also closely related to the
Principle of Charity, of taking others’ utterances, in large
respect and under normal circumstances, as communicating optimal relevance.

Habits and Interpretants
Habit-change Second, supplementing the effect of
belief-strengthening in relevance-theoretic comprehension tasks has its correlate in Peirce’s notion of a habitchange, which means an updating of the belief set held
by the communicators, and which gives rise to logical
interpretants.
Whenever a habit-change occurs, what has been communicated must be taken as relevant. What is also notable in RT is the appeal to interaction between relevant information and the already-existing assumptions of
speaker and hearer concerning the world. This innocentlooking notion implicit in the theory may be unravelled
by reflecting it against Peirce’s interactional interpretation between the producer of the information (the utterer) and the receiver who has assumptions about the
world which are contested by the information produced
by the utterer.
Interpretants in Communication To make the
close connections between Peirce’s philosophy and later
notions in pragmatics absolutely clear, the notion of ut-

1770

terance meaning, or in relevance-theoretical terms the
“assumption ostended by an utterance” can be assimilated with Peirce’s notion of the intentional interpretant
that he introduced in his correspondence with Lady Victoria Welby (Peirce, 1977). Peirce terms the meaning
that the interpreter has to work out the effectual interpretant. Their mutual merger produces the communicational interpretant, which ultimately accounts for how
any form of communication is possible in the first place.
The relevance-theoretic outlook on communication has
now come strikingly close to this time-honoured Peircean
perspective.

Game-Theoretic Principles
Strategies Third, since the degree of effort required
in changing the background assumptions measures the
degree of relevance, the induced minimax reasoning may
be fitted into the strategic framework of game theory,
making it explicit that context update in discourse is a
rational matter of (optimal) strategy selection. However,
as soon as we do this, we are close to what Peirce’s ‘Endoporeutic Method’ is intended to achieve, as it may be
re-instantiated as a form of strategic evaluation method
in the sense of game-theoretic semantics (Hintikka, 1973;
Pietarinen, 2005a).
Payoffs Whether the effort of bringing forth relevant
information is, or is not, to be recommendable, depends
largely on the outcomes (payoffs) of the relevant strategies in the associated game of discourse interpretation.
Likewise, it is necessary to deduct the costs incurred by
inferences to the best (in the sense of the most-relevant)
interpretation from the payoff values assigned to such
strategies.
Rationality While the strategies are chosen according
to the general principle of rationality of actions, since
they encode information about the context in which discourse is performed and are not confined to isolated utterances, they make the relevance-theoretic notion of the
context-change potential of information introduced in
communication amenable to rationalistic (but not hyperrationalistic) game-theoretic analysis.

Maxims of Conversation and Relevance
Fourth, as far as the history and the emergence of the
idea of relevance is concerned, it would be make-believe
to claim that the core component of relevance (or maxim
of relation) would have been something novel with Grice,
let alone Sperber & Wilson’s RT. From a purely textual
viewpoint, Peirce offered the following passage:
If the utterer says “Fine day!” he does not dream of
any possibility of the interpreter’s thinking of any
mere desire for a fine day that a Finn at the North
Cape might have entertained on April 19, 1776. He
means, of course, to refer to the actual weather,
then and there, where he and the interpreter have
it near the surface of their common consciousness.
(MS 318: 32–33, c.1907, Pragmatism).
The answer to what relevance theorists have been searching for is implicit in this example: it is the collateral-

ity of what is given in observation for both the utterer
and the interpreter of the utterance that determines relevance. In the light of Peirce’s phenomenology, the notion
of “what is given” naturally refers not only to real, dynamic, or physical objects, but also to the ideas that
signs produce in consciousness. They thus consist of
both factual and conceptual elements. There is no analytic/synthetic division in such collaterality.
The ideas evoked by conscious minds thus depend on
the situations or environments in which collateral observations can be made, even though the assertions that
the signs make in such situations are independent of
them. They can be made just as well in other situations, in which case the interpretants produced are, of
course, likely to be different.
Since Peirce’s logic and his theory of communication
(Pietarinen, 2003c) is purpose-driven and full of accounts
of meaningful intention, and especially since every utterance is made with some goal in sight that an agent tries
to reach, the notion of what is relevant must also be assessed with that purpose in mind. What is relevant is
relative to the circumstances prevailing in the communicative situation, but what is truly relevant is also, and
most likely first and foremost, calculated to be so.

Dewey’s Pragmatic Account of Contextual
Effect
Fifth, it was not only Peirce’s pragmaticism (and pragmatics) that foreshadowed the ideas of relevance theorists. Also the other renowned American pragmatist
John Dewey argued for relevance as a context-effective,
context-changing potential: “The existence of the problematic situation to be resolved exercises control over the
selective discrimination of relevant and effective evidential qualities as means” (Dewey, 1925, my emphasis).
I suppose it will be tedious to find any textual evidence from the early pragmatists’ writings that would
come closer than Dewey’s remarks to the essentials of
the later relevance-theoretic idea of relevance as an effective, inferential, context-sensitive and context-affecting
notion. From the pragmatist perspective, such effects
are natural consequences of the open-systemic nature of
language and the organisms that utilise it, embedded
as they are in the background from which mutual collaterality is gained, and which is both affected by and
constituted via the selective bias of actions by these organisms.

Critique and Outlook
Revisiting the Roots: Peirce vs. Grice
Considerable differences also obtain between Peirce and
the kind of pragmatics set up by Grice and his followers
and pseudo-followers. The communicative dimensions of
Peirce’s sign theory are by no means exhausted by what
RT attempts to achieve. What is avoided in Peirce’s
theory of communication is the untoward tendency in
current theories to reduce variability in linguistic meaning into the one-sided problem of the speaker’s meaning
and recognition of his or her intentions. In RT, for in-

1771

stance, the hearer’s role has not been incorporated in
full.
No one-shot interpretation would have been approved
of by Peirce, for whom the reciprocal, open-ended and
triadic nature of sign meaning is irreducible. I suppose
that the reason for the mild reductionism advocated by
Sperber & Wilson lies in the unpremeditated domination
of Grice’s original proposal, in which he laid considerable emphasis on the role of speaker-meaning in linguistic comprehension. Grice’s followers took his suggestions
too literally: he never claimed that by focussing on what
is different and what is similar in speaker-meaning vs. literal meaning one would reach an exhaustive account of
what linguistic and logical meaning amounts to in general.

Grice’s Anti-psychologism
Moreover, the soi-disant followers of Grice were misled by what they took to be his key suggestion: that
the proper exposition of speaker-meaning ought to be
conducted, first and foremost, by psychological means.
In sober reality, this suggestion was an afterthought for
Grice. He de-emphasised the use of psychological notions in explaining speaker-meaning. This comes out
very distinctly in his writings once it is realised that
(i) Grice’s main occupation was the meaning of logical
particles (most notably of conditionals and other logical
connectives) rather than linguistic utterances, and that
(ii) his remark that psychological concepts, required for
the formulation of an adequate theory of language, refers
to intensional concepts of believing and intending which
may be tackled in a logical manner.
After all, in Grice’s writings, references to psychological terminology are few and far between. His theory of
meaning is no more psychological than, say, game theory
or epistemic logic are matters concerning psychic activity (Pietarinen, 2003d; 2004c).

Rationality and Relevance Theory
RT may have emerged in the wake of Grice, but it subsequently redefined its goals to the extent that it is now
somewhat of a rival. The emphasis on the search for
principles of cognitive processing, from which it is hoped
that implicatures and other pragmatic notions ensue, has
had the effect of diminishing the force and depth of the
all-powerful rationality postulate upon which Grice’s programme was built.
In so doing, relevance theorists have rubbed shoulders with the computational sciences, sciences for the
efficient accounting of information transmission and manipulation, but at the same time turned a blind eye
to the conceptual analysis of information. Accordingly,
RT has gained in status compared to theories of lessthan-hyperrational reasoning and action. They all share
the methodological concern that effort spent on any act
of uttering and interpreting, or believing and decisionmaking, should be weighed against the practical consequences of such acts, and they thus continue the venerable economy of research methodology and pragmatism
that was originated by Peirce. This methodological attitude was also Grice’s main preoccupation.

Conclusions
Lessons from the Pragmatic Maxim
Relevant items of information are those that are contexteffective. This means that they are context-dependent.
In communicative situations, context-dependence is inferred by the interpreter who is given evidence concerning the intended meaning by the utterer. This account
of relevance is nothing like a coding-encoding method of
expressing thought and then comprehending the meaning or content of the expressed thought, let alone an
endorsement of the view that the actual meaning or content resides in such expressions. The hearer has to infer
the intended meaning, and the speaker has to effectuate
the intended meaning. Varieties of meaning cannot be
lumped together under any single method.

Outlook
What will happen to RT in the light of pragmatic theories of meaning and the PM? RT is now being built
upon cognitive theories of the competence of intelligent
agents while simultaneously one should support its inferential and logical dimensions.
In contrast, Peirce’s goal was not to spell out the theory of cognition of intelligent agents, let alone their psychology, but to dispense with these as much as possible.
This may not have been an undertaking that was invariably realistic. In the very least, however, he set out
the priorities he thought were required in the brands of
rational inquiry that concern language and thought.
Aside from RT, Fauconnier & Turner (2002)’s mental
spaces and conceptual blending may be improved upon
via pragmatic meaning theories (Pietarinen, 2004a).
Also, the original statement of the speech-act theory 10
is to be counted along. Accordingly, Grice and his followers may be aligned with with the historical line-up
that began with pragmatic theories of meaning (Pietarinen, 2004b).

Acknowledgments
Supported by the Academy of Finland (1103130, Logic
and Game Theory). My thanks to the three anonymous
reviewers for advice.

References
Beaney, M. (Ed.) (1997). The Frege Reader. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Carston, R. (1988). Implicature, explicature, and truththeoretic semantics. In R. Kempson (Ed.), Mental
Representations: The Interface between Language and
Reality. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dewey, J. (1931). Context and thought. University of
California Publications in Philosophy, 12, 203–224.
(Reprinted in Bernstein, R.J. (Ed.), On Experience,
Nature, and Freedom: Representative Selections by
John Dewey. New York: Bobbs Merrill Company.)
10

That is to say, not the one suggested by John Searle and
J.L. Austin, but by Peirce and his followers, especially those
affiliated with the Significs Movement in 1920s and 1930s,
e.g. Gerrit Mannoury and L.E.J. Brouwer.

1772

Fauconnier, G. & Turner, M. (2002). The Way We
Think: Conceptual Blending and the Mind’s Hidden
Complexities. New York: Basic Books.
Grice, H. P. (1989). Studies in the Way of Words. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Hintikka, J. (1973). Logic, Language-Games and Information. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Peirce, C. S. (1967). Manuscripts in the Houghton Library of Harvard University, as identified by Richard
Robin, Annotated Catalogue of the Papers of Charles
S. Peirce (Amherst: University of Massachusettes
Press, 1967), and in The Peirce Papers: A supplementary catalogue, Transactions of the C. S. Peirce
Society, 7, (1971), 37–57.
Peirce, C. S. (1975–1987). Contributions to The Nation. Four volumes, ed. by Kenneth Ketner and James
Cook. Lubbock: Texas Tech University Press.
Peirce, C. S. (1977). Semiotic and Significs: The Correspondence Between Charles S. Peirce and Victoria
Lady Welby. Ed. by C. S. Hardwick and J. Cook.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Peirce, C. S. (1998). The Essential Peirce 2. Peirce Edition Project, Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Pietarinen, A.-V. (2003a). The semantic + pragmatic
web = the semiotic web. Proceedings of the International IADIS/WWW Conference, (pp. 981–984),
IADIS Press.
Pietarinen, A.-V. (2003b). Logic, language games and
ludics. Acta Analytica, 18, 89–123.
Pietarinen, A.-V. (2003c). Peirce’s theory of communication and its contemporary relevance. In K. Nyı́ri
(Ed.), Mobile Learning: Essays on Philosophy, Psychology and Education. Vienna: Passagen Verlag.
Pietarinen, A.-V. (2003d). What do epistemic logic and
cognitive science have to do with each other? Cognitive Systems Research, 4, 169–190.
Pietarinen, A.-V. (2004a). Agenda cognitive linguistics:
C. S. Peirce and the emergence of the common ground.
In Text Processing and Cognitive Technologies, 9, (pp.
208–214). Moscow: MISA.
Pietarinen, A.-V. (2004b). Grice in the wake of Peirce.
Pragmatics & Cognition, 12, 295–315.
Pietarinen, A.-V. (2004c). Towards cognitive informatics: Awareness in the brain, logic and cognitive neuroscience. In Y. Wang (Ed.) Cognitive Informatics:
Exploring the Natural Intelligence. Singapore: World
Scientific.
Pietarinen, A.-V. (2005a). Signs of Logic: Peircean
Themes on the Philosophy of Logic, Language and
Communication (Synthese Library Series). Dordrecht:
Springer.
Sperber, D. & Wilson, D. (1995). Relevance Theory:
Communication and Cognition. Oxford: Blackwell.
Wittgenstein, L. (2000–).
Wittgenstein’s Nachlass,
The Bergen Electronic Edition. The Wittgenstein
Trustees, The University of Bergen, Oxford University Press.

