UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Relevant Concreteness and Its Effects on Learning and Transfer

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6wg9h4dc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Heckler, Andrew F.
Kaminski, Jennifer A.
Sloutsky, Vladimir M.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Relevant Concreteness and its Effects on Learning and Transfer
Jennifer A. Kaminski (kaminski.16@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science, Ohio State University
210F Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place
Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Vladimir M. Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science, Ohio State University
208C Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place
Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Andrew F. Heckler (heckler@mps.ohio-state.edu)
College of Mathematical and Physical Sciences, Ohio State University
425 Stillman Hall, 1947 College Road
Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Abstract
The effects of relevant concreteness on learning and transfer
were
investigated.
Undergraduate
students
learned
instantiations of an algebraic group. Some students were
presented with representations that communicated concreteness
relevant to the to-be-learned concept, while others learned
generic representations involving abstract symbols. Results
suggest that while relevant concreteness may facilitate learning,
it hinders transfer of learning to novel isomorphic situations.
Keywords: Cognitive Science; Psychology;
Learning; Transfer; Analogical reasoning.

Education;

Introduction
Support for the use of concrete representations for teaching
abstract concepts is widespread in the education community.
Concrete representations including physical manipulatives
and concrete, contextualized instantiations of abstract
concepts have been advocated by the National Council of
Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM, 1989, 2000) for teaching
mathematics in grades K-12. Proponents of such
representations ground their position in constructivist theories
of development (e.g. Inhelder & Piaget, 1958) that posit that
development proceeds from the concrete to the abstract and
therefore learning and teaching should do the same.
However, evidence for the effectiveness of such
representations is often anecdotal. At best such evidence is
limited to demonstrations of students’ ability to manipulate
the representations in the context of learning. For example,
children can manipulate fraction bars as analogues to
arithmetic with fractions. However, the extent to which these
manipulatives provide insight into magnitude judgments and
operations in the field of rational numbers is unclear (Ball,
1992). Effective representations should help students
recognize the to-be-learned concept not only in the context of
learning, but also in novel situations. In other words, effective

representations must promote two processes, learning and
transfer. Learning is evidenced by the application of acquired
knowledge within the learning domain, while transfer is the
ability to apply such knowledge to novel isomorphic
domains.
While many believe that concrete representations are more
appealing to students than traditional symbolic notation (Ball,
1992; Moyer, 2001), there are reasons to be skeptical of their
effectiveness. Both acquisition and transfer of knowledge of a
structured concept require recognition of relevant relational
structure without being distracted by superficial details.
Generally speaking concrete representations communicate
more information than their abstract counterparts. This
additional information is nonessential to the concept and may
hinder learning and transfer for a number of reasons. First,
superficial features of a representation may compete with
relational structure for attention (Goldstone & Sakamoto,
2003). Second, relational structure common to two situations
is less likely to be noticed when the situations are represented
in a more concrete, perceptually rich manner than in a more
generic form (Genter & Medina, 1998; Markman & Gentner,
1993). Third, irrelevant information can be misinterpreted as
part of the relevant structure (Bassok & Olseth, 1995; Bassok,
Wu, & Olseth, 1995). And finally, it may be difficult to use
concrete objects as signs denoting other entities, which makes
them poor symbols. Not only do young children have
difficulty using concrete objects as symbols (DeLoache,
2000), adults tend to reason differently about images when
they are represented in more realistic, detailed fashion than
when they are represented schematically (Schwartz, 1995).
Perceptually rich images encouraged adults to think about
those specific objects, thus decreasing the likelihood that an
image might represent something other than itself.
Most recently, concreteness was shown to hinder learning
and transfer across artificially constructed isomorphic
domains (Sloutsky, Kaminski, & Heckler, in press). In a
series of studies, undergraduate students learned different
instantiations of the concept of an algebraic commutative

1090

group. The concreteness of the representations was varied by
varying the perceptual richness of the symbols denoting the
group elements. In transfer studies, participants were trained
and tested in two domains. One domain included abstract,
generic symbols and the other used perceptually rich images
of concrete objects. Half of the participants learned the
system with generic symbols first and with concrete symbols
second, while the other half had the reverse learning order.
Transfer was measured by comparing mean test scores in
each condition as a function of learning order. It was found
that transfer was significantly higher from the generic symbol
condition to the concrete symbol condition than the reverse.
Furthermore, in a separate study in which concreteness was
varied between subjects, learning was significantly higher for
students who were taught using generic symbols than for
those who learned with perceptually rich objects. Compared
to concrete representations, abstract generic representations
have benefits for both learning and transfer.
This research, however, used concrete materials whose
concreteness was not relevant for the task at hand. For
example, if the task is to learn addition, the color and size of
numbers adds perceptual richness, which is irrelevant for
learning of addition. Therefore, our previous findings
indicting hindering effects of concreteness on learning and
transfer are limited to “irrelevant concreteness”
At the same time, concreteness could be relevant, with
concrete representations communicating relevant aspects of
the to-be-learned information (see Goldstone & Sakamoto,
2003, for a review). For example, two closed and connected
containers with a fixed amount of fluid, which can freely flow
between the containers, may more easily communicate the
idea of two players involved in a zero-sum game than the
equation x+y= K. Similarly, Dienes blocks (Dienes, 1960)
can communicate the idea of the base 10 number system, thus
possibly facilitating learning of the system. However, even if
this “relevant concreteness” facilitates learning, its effects on
transfer are questionable (e.g., Goldstone & Sakamoto, 2003).
The goal of the present research is to investigate the effects
of relevant concreteness on learning and transfer. Because the
potential effects of concreteness exist at any stage of
knowledge acquisition, undergraduate college students were
chosen as study participants to provide a conservative
measure of the effects of relevant concreteness. If
concreteness is found to hinder learning or transfer even with
adult participants, it is reasonable to think these effects would
be magnified for children.
The to-be-learned domains were instantiations of an
algebraic commutative group. Relevant concreteness was
constructed by creating a representation in which results of
algebraic transformations can be perceived directly. Irrelevant
concreteness was a function of perceptual richness of the
symbols of the domain. While the domains considered in this
research were artificially constructed, they were designed to
resemble mathematical concepts and real-world instantiations
that students may encounter in the classroom. A commutative
group is a well defined mathematical concept. In a
mathematics classroom, such concepts would be represented

with standard variables and numbers. Real-world
instantiations of these concepts would convey additional
information, both perceptual and conceptual. In this study, to
avoid biases involving mathematics, standard mathematical
notation was replaced with novel symbols.
The goal of Experiment 1 was to examine the impact of
relevant concreteness on learning. The goal of Experiment 2
was to examine the effect of relevant concreteness on
transfer. Participants learned the rules in a Base domain with
type of concreteness as a between-subjects factor. Then they
were tested on a novel isomorphic Transfer domain. Transfer
was considered by comparing performance on the Transfer
domain as a function of the Base domain.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants Eighty undergraduate students from Ohio State
University participated in the experiment and received partial
credit for an introductory psychology course. Twenty students
were assigned to each of four conditions that specified the
type of representation they learned.

1091

Materials and Design The experiment had a betweensubjects design with two factors: Relevant concreteness (Yes,
No) and Perceptual richness (Perceptually rich, Perceptually
sparse). Therefore, there were four experimental conditions:
relevantly concrete/ perceptually rich; relevantly concrete
/perceptually sparse; not relevantly concrete/ perceptually
rich; and not relevantly concrete/ perceptually sparse.
The structure of systems was that of a commutative group
of order three. In other words the rules were isomorphic to
addition modulo three. The idea of modular arithmetic is that
only a finite number of elements (or equivalent classes) are
used. Addition modulo 3 considers only the numbers 0, 1, and
2. Zero is the identity element of the group and is added as in
regular addition: 0 + 0 = 0, 0 + 1 = 1, and 0 + 2 = 2.
Furthermore, 1 + 1 = 2. However, a sum greater than or equal
to 3 is never obtained. Instead, one would cycle back to 0. So,
1 + 2 = 0, 2 + 2 = 1, etc. To understand such a system with
arbitrary symbols (not integers as above) would involve
learning the rules presented in Table 1. However, a context
can be created in which prior knowledge and familiarity may
assist learning. In this type of situation the additional
information is relevant to the concept.
To construct a condition that communicates relevant
concreteness, a scenario was given for which students could
draw upon their everyday knowledge to determine answers to
test problems. The symbols were three images of measuring
cups containing varying levels of liquid (see Table 1).
Participants were told they need to determine a remaining
amount when different measuring cups of liquid are
combined. In particular,
So for example, combining

and

will fill a container.
and

would have

remaining. Additionally, participants were told that
they should always report a remainder. Therefore they should
report that the combination of
have remainder

and

. In this domain,

under addition (the group identity element).

Table 1: Stimuli and rules across domains.
Relevant
Concreteness

would
behaves like 0

No Relevant
Concreteness

Elements

acts like 1;
Rules of Commutative Group:

and

acts like 2. For example, the combination of

and
does not fill a container and so
remains. This
is analogous to 1 + 1 = 2 under addition modulo 3.
Furthermore, the perceptual information communicated by
the symbols themselves can act as reminders of the structural
rules. In this case, the storyline and symbols may facilitate
learning. Black symbols were used for the relevantly
concrete/ perceptually sparse condition (RC-PS) and colorful,
patterned symbols for the relevantly concrete/ perceptually
rich condition (RC-PR).
The conditions with no relevant concreteness were
presented to the participants as a symbolic language in which
three types of symbols combine to yield a resulting symbol
(see Table 1). Combinations are expressed as written
statements. Again, the symbols were either black for the not
relevantly concrete / perceptually sparse condition (No RCPS) or colorful and patterned for the not relevantly concrete/
perceptually rich condition (No RC-PR).
Training and testing in all conditions were isomorphic and
presented via computer. Training consisted of an introduction
and explicit presentation of the rules through examples. For
instance, participants in the relevantly concrete conditions
were told that combining

and

Associative

For any elements x, y, z:
((x + y) + z) = (x + (y + z))

Commutative

For any elements x, y: x + y = y + x

Identity

There is an element, I, such that for any element, x:
x+I=x

Inverses

For any element, x, there exists another element, y,
such that x+ y = I

Specific Rules:
is the identity

has a remainder

These
combine

is the identity

Remainder

Operands

Result

(1) What can go in the blanks to make a correct statement?

of
. Analogously, in the not relevantly concrete
conditions where students were told that symbols combine to
yield a resulting symbol the analogue to the above rule was

___ ,

, ___ ,

Æ

?

(2) Find the resulting symbol:

presented as
,
Æ
. To illustrate a more
complex combination, an additional example was given in
which three operands combine. Training in Experiment 1 was
considered to be minimal because it consisted only of
presentation of each of the rules and one additional example.
With minimal training, participants in the relevant
concreteness conditions should have a greater advantage over
participants in the no relevant concreteness conditions. If
additional examples and practice were to be given, this
advantage would be likely to decrease.
After training, the participants were given a 24-question
multiple choice test designed to measure the ability to apply
the learned rules to novel problems. Many questions required
application of multiple rules. The following are examples of
test questions in the not relevantly concrete conditions.

,

,

,

Æ

_____.

Participants in the relevantly concrete conditions saw the
analogues of these questions.
Procedure All training and testing was presented to
individual participants on a computer screen in a quiet room.
They proceeded through training and testing at their own
pace; and their responses were recorded.

Results and Discussion

1092

The data are presented in Figure 1. Participants in all
conditions were able to learn the presented set of rules. Mean
scores were significantly above chance score of 9, one sample

22
Mean Score ( /24)

20
18
16
14
12
10
RC-PS

RC-PR

No RC-PS

No RC-PR

Condition

Figure 1: Mean Test Scores in Experiment 1.
Note: Error bars represent standard error of mean.

t-tests, ts (19) > 5.97, ps < .001. There was a significant
difference in test scores across conditions, one-way ANOVA
F (3, 76) = 4.781, p < .005. In particular, participants in the
relevant concreteness conditions scored significantly higher
than participants in the no relevant concreteness conditions,
post-hoc LSD, for all differences ps < .05. There was no
effect of perceptual richness, post-hoc LSD, p > .47. Clearly
under these conditions of minimal training, students were
better able to learn rules expressed by relevantly concrete
symbols.
These results support the idea that under conditions of
minimal training, representations conveying relevant
concreteness have an advantage for learning over
representations that do not. Does this advantage also hold for
transfer? Or might relevant concreteness have a different
effect? The purpose of Experiment 2 was to investigate the
effect of relevant concreteness on transfer.

the transfer domain score in a given condition was greater
than the mean transfer score of the baseline group.
In the four experimental conditions, the base domain tests
were the same 24-question tests used in Experiment 1. The
transfer domain test was isomorphic to these tests. Training in
the base domain across the four conditions was isomorphic
and was similar to, but more detailed than that of Experiment
1. Questions with feedback were given and complex
examples were shown.
The transfer domain was described as a children’s game
involving three objects (see Table 2). Children sequentially
point to objects and a child who is “the winner” points to a
final object. The correct final object is specified by the rules
of the game (rules of an algebraic group). Participants were
not explicitly taught these rules. Instead they were told that
the game rules were like the rules of the system they just
learned and they need to figure them out by using their prior
knowledge (i.e. transfer). After being asked to study a series
of examples from which the rules could be deduced, the
multiple-choice test was given. Questions were presented
individually on the computer screen along with four key
examples at the bottom of the screen. The same four
examples were shown with all test questions. Following the
multiple choice questions, participants in the four
experimental conditions were asked to indicate a level of
similarity between the base and transfer domains.
Procedure As in experiment 1, training and testing were
presented to individual participants on a computer screen in a
quiet room. They proceeded through training and testing at
their own pace; and their responses were recorded.

Results and Discussion

Experiment 2
Method
Participants One hundred one undergraduate students from
Ohio State University participated in the experiment and
received partial credit for an introductory psychology course.
Students were randomly assigned to each of five conditions
that specified the domain they learned in the first phase of the
experiment.

Participants in all four experimental conditions successfully
learned in the base domains (see Figure 2). Mean scores were
significantly above chance score of 9, one sample t-tests, ts >
6.25, ps < .001. Comparison of test scores revealed a
significant difference in mean scores across conditions; oneway ANOVA F (3, 77) = 2.752, p < .05, with irrelevantly

Materials and Design The experiment included two phases:
(1) training and testing in a base domain and (2) testing of the
transfer domain. The five conditions specified what base
domain was learned by participants, whereas the transfer
domain was the same for participants in all conditions. Four
of the base domains were the same four used in Experiment 1
and were isomorphic to the transfer domain. The fifth base
domain was constructed as a baseline for spontaneous
performance in the transfer domain. This domain involved
unrelated arithmetic and matching questions, thus training in
the base domain should not facilitate performance in the
transfer domain in this condition. Transfer was indicated if

1093

Table 2: Stimuli for transfer domain.

Elements:
Examples:

If the children point
to these objects:

The winner points
to this object

concrete/ perceptually rich condition yielding lower learning
scores than the other conditions, post-hoc LSD, ps < .05, for
all differences. In other words, longer, more detailed training
than in Experiment 1, resulted in comparable learning scores
for the other three conditions, post-hoc LSD, ps > .41.
Most interestingly a different pattern of performance was
found on the transfer domain than on the base domain (see
Figure 2). Mean transfer domain scores were submitted to an
ANCOVA with condition as a factor and base domain score
as a covariate. The analysis indicated significant effects of
condition, F (4, 95) = 16.359, p < .001 as well as base score,
F (4, 95) = 41.747, p < .001. To further analyze the transfer,
gains were considered for each individual participant. Gain
was defined to be transfer score less the mean transfer score
for the baseline group (10.75). Three individuals were
removed from this analysis because their gains were more
than two standard deviations away from the mean gain under
their respected experimental conditions. Gains were
submitted to a one-way ANOVA. Condition was found to be
a significant factor, F (3, 74) = 8.169, p < .001. In addition,
gain for the no relevant concreteness / perceptually sparse
(No RC-PS) was significantly higher than for the other three
conditions, post-hoc LSD, ps <.03. Therefore, the generic
representation promoted more transfer than the irrelevantly
concrete (perceptually rich) representation and both the
relevantly concrete representations.
In addition to different levels of performance between
relevant concreteness and no relevant concreteness
conditions, similarity ratings were significantly different (see
Figure 3). Participants were asked to rate the similarity of the
base and transfer domains on a scale from one (completely
dissimilar) to five (structurally identical).
The mean rating given by participants in no relevant
concreteness conditions (M = 4.58, SD = .636) was
significantly higher than that given by participants in relevant
concreteness conditions (M = 3.07, SD = 1.47), independent
samples t (79) = 5.982, p < .001. Within these two groups,
there were no differences in similarity ratings due to
irrelevant concreteness (perceptual richness), independent

5

Rating

4

1
RC-PS

Mean Score ( /24)

Base
Domain

14

Transfer
Domain

samples t-tests, ps > .46. In sum, while relevant concreteness
may offer an advantage for learning, it appears to hinder
transfer.

General Discussion
Experiment 1 demonstrated that concrete representations that
communicate relevant aspects of a to-be-learned situation can
facilitate learning. However, the results of Experiment 2 show
that this benefit does not carryover to other domains. Both
relevant and irrelevant concreteness were shown to hinder
transfer, while abstract, generic representations promoted
transfer.
Furthermore, findings of Experiment 2 suggest that the type
of concreteness affects transfer in different ways. In
particular, while participants in the No RC-PR condition did
not demonstrate the high level of transfer of the No RC-PS
participants, both groups rated the base and the transfer
domains as highly similar. In the relevantly concrete
conditions, similarity ratings were considerably lower. In fact,
many of these participants commented that they saw no
relationship between the two domains.
These differences in similarity ratings suggest that relevant
concreteness hinders transfer by hindering the recognition of
analogy between the trained and the novel domains. At the
same time, in the irrelevant concreteness conditions,
participants ably recognized the analogy between the trained
and novel domains. Therefore, it is possible that negative
effects of irrelevant concreteness on transfer stem from
factors other than the failure to recognize the analogy.
These findings, in conjunction with our earlier results
indicating that irrelevant concreteness hinders both learning
and transfer (Sloutsky, et al., in press), contradict the widely
held belief that concreteness facilitates learning. If indeed a
primary goal of education is transfer, educators should
reconsider broad recommendations for the use of concrete
representations. When teaching abstract concepts such as
mathematics, relevant concreteness may give a leg-up in the
initial learning process. However, this benefit comes at the
cost of transfer. Knowledge acquired from concrete
representations does not easily transcend the learning domain.

8
No RC-PS

No RC-PR

Figure 3: Mean Similarity Ratings.

10
RC-PR

No RC-PS

Note: Error bars represent standard error of mean.

12

RC-PS

RC-PR

Condition

20

16

3
2

22

18

1 - Completely Dissimilar
2 - Structurally Identical

No RC-PR

Condition

Figure 2: Mean Test Scores in Experiment 2.
Note: Horizontal line represents mean transfer score in baseline
condition. Error bars represent standard error of mean.

1094

Acknowledgments
This research is supported by a grant from the National
Science Foundation (REC # 0208103) to Vladimir M.
Sloutsky.

References
Ball, D. L. (1992). Magical hopes: Manipulatives and the
reform of math education. American Educator, 16, 14-18.
Bassok, M., & Olseth, K. L. (1995). Object-based
representations: Transfer between cases of continuous and
discrete models of change. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 21, 15221538.
Bassok, M., Wu, L., & Olseth, K. L. (1995). Judging a book
by its cover: Interpretative effects of context on problemsolving transfer. Memory & Cognition, 23, 354-367.
DeLoache, J. S. (2000). Dual representation and young
children’s use of scale models. Child Development, 71,
329-338.
Dienes, Z. P. (1960). Building up mathematics. London:
Hutchinson Educational Ltd.
Gentner, D., & Medina, J. (1998). Similarity and the
development of rules. Cognition, 65, 263-297.

Goldstone, R. L. & Sakamoto, Y. (2003). The transfer of
abstract principles governing complex adaptive systems.
Cognitive Psychology, 46(4), 414-466.
Inhelder, B., & Piaget, J. (1958). The growth of logical
thinking from childhood to adolescence. New York: Basic
Books.
Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (1993). Structural alignment
during similarity comparisons. Cognitive Psychology, 25,
431-467.
Moyer, P. S. (2001). Are we having fun yet? How teachers
use manipulatives to teach mathematics. Educational
Studies in Mathematics, 47, 175-197.
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (1989).
Curriculum and evaluation standards for school
mathematics. Reston, VA: NCTM.
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (2000).
Principles and standards for school mathematics.
Reston, VA: NCTM.
Sloutsky, V. M., Kaminski, J. A., & Heckler, A. F. (in press).
The advantage of simple symbols for learning and
transfer. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review.
Schwartz, D. L. (1995). Reasoning about the referent of a
picture versus reasoning about the picture as the referent:
An effect of visual realism. Memory & Cognition, 23, 709722.

1095

