UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Rules of Physics can be Learned Implicitly

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5t061458

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Hupp, Julie M.
Sloutsky, Vladimir M.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Rules of Physics can be Learned Implicitly
Julie M. Hupp (hupp.34@osu.edu)
Department of Psychology
1179 University Drive
The Ohio State University-Newark
Newark, OH 43055, USA

Vladimir M. Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science
1961 Tuttle Park Place
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210, USA
Abstract
Learning about one’s physical environment is an important task
that must be accomplished early in life to be able to
successfully navigate and operate. In an attempt to explain
infants’ great success in this endeavor at such an early age, it
has been proposed that infants are ready-equipped with some
basic knowledge of physics. However, it is also possible that
infants possess powerful learning mechanisms enabling them to
implicitly learn rules of physics at a very young age. The two
reported experiments were designed to answer this question.
Participants were presented with the demonstration of object
behaviors that followed a set of artificial rules. Both adults and
infants implicitly learned the novel rules of object behavior well
enough to predict and interpret the outcome of events.
Keywords: Cognitive Science; Psychology; Cognitive
Development; Learning; Developmental Experimentation;
Human Experimentation.

Introduction
One of the most important tasks that an infant must undertake
is to develop an understanding of how his/her physical world
operates. Although this understanding develops throughout
childhood into sophisticated beliefs about the physical world
(Baillargeon, 2004b), an important question focuses on how
infants acquire such knowledge.
The violation of expectation method is often used to
demonstrate infants’ early knowledge about physical events
(e.g., Baillargeon, 2004b). Baillargeon (e.g., 2004a; 2004b)
presents infants with events that either violate physical laws
or not, and then she compares infants’ level of surprise to
each of these events. This method has revealed that infants
clearly demonstrate knowledge about their physical world at a
very young age by demonstrating a surprise response to
events that should not be physically possible. This research
has provided evidence that even very young infants
understand such physical principles as continuity and solidity
(e.g., Baillargeon, 2004a; 2004b; Spelke, 1990; 1994).
From this early demonstration of knowledge about the
physical world, Baillargeon (2004a; 2004b) and Spelke
(1994) have concluded that such general physical principles

are innate. However, it could be argued that early competence
does not necessarily present evidence for innateness.
In particular, infants possess powerful learning mechanisms
that enable them to learn regularities in their environment,
including implicit statistical learning. There is ample evidence
that both infants and adults can extract statistical regularities
from sequentially presented information (e.g., Conway &
Christiansen, 2005; Creel, Newport, & Aslin, 2004; Fiser &
Aslin, 2001; Thiessen & Saffran, 2003). This research
proposes that infants do not come into this world with innate
knowledge about the physical environment; rather, they may
simply be readily equipped to detect statistical regularities in
the environment.
Additional evidence comes from other infancy researchers.
For example, Schilling and Clifton (1998) found that infants
are capable of learning about real physical events in just one
session. These researchers presented infants with a novel
action that followed the natural laws of physics. This action
demonstrated issues of gravity and weight using balls. Prior
to viewing this event, the infants did not demonstrate
knowledge about the physical concept in this task. After a
single session, Schilling and Clifton violated this physical law
and the infants demonstrated a violation of expectation about
the ball’s movement. These researchers claim that infants
quickly come to understand their physical environment by
observing the behavior of objects.
However, it could be argued that the infants did have some
prior knowledge about the objects and the rules that were
used in the Schilling and Clifton study, and this may have
facilitated learning. Therefore, a minimal amount of learning
actually needed to take place in order for infants to
demonstrate their understanding of this physical law. At the
same time, if the learning claim is true, then infants would
also come to understand their physical environment by
observation even if the behavior is novel, the objects are
novel, and the rules that govern their behavior are novel. This
should be true for any type of object behavior, even beyond
the areas of physics normally investigated in infancy (e.g.,
solidity, continuity, etc.)

1007

the combinatory rules displayed in Figure 1). See Figure 2 for
some examples of impossible collisions. These collisions
were only used in the testing phase (8 test collisions, 6 filler
collisions). Similarly to the possible collisions, specific
objects from each category that appeared in the training phase
did not appear in the testing phase.

To examine this issue, we conducted two experiments
using experienced rule learners (adults; Experiment 1) and
relatively novice rule learners (infants; Experiment 2).

Experiment 1: Implicit Learning in Adults
Method

Components that Collide

Participants There were 26 participants in this experiment.
The participants were undergraduate students from The Ohio
State University who participated to fulfill a psychology
course requirement. Five participants failed to correctly
respond to at least 75% of the catch items and were excluded
from this experiment.
Design and Materials There were a total of 21 3dimensional objects. The objects were divided into three
categories: 1) 7 objects that are blue, smooth, and have
convex curves; 2) 7 objects that are red, have the appearance
of a grid design, and are concave; and 3) 7 objects that are
green, have small craters and are both convex and concave.
The stimuli consisted of object collision videos created using
Macromedia Flash MX.
The collision of the objects was based on a system of
modular arithmetic. The structure of the system was that of a
commutative group of order three, with Category 1 objects
being an analog of 0, Category 2 being an analog of 1, and
Category 3 being an analog of 2. The collision is an analog of
the operation of addition in the group. Because 0 (i.e.,
Category 1 objects) is the identity element, collisions with
Category 1 objects do not change the identity of the category
(i.e., 0 + 0 = 0, 1 + 0 = 1, and 2 + 0 = 2). The rest of the rules
follow from addition in the commutative group of order 3: 1
+ 1 = 2, 2 + 2 = 1, and 2 + 1 = 0. Therefore, the resultant of
each collision followed directly from the set of rules. If the
collision abided by this rule system, the collision was deemed
a possible collision.
Based on this rule system, there were 6 types of possible
collisions between the categories of objects. See Figure 1 for
an example of each type of possible collision.
Each trial consisted of a collision of two objects that come
from either side of the screen. The collision occurred behind a
small occluder, which resulted in the production of a third
object (and disappearance of the original two objects and the
occluder). Each collision produced a video that lasted 4 sec.
Objects of each category were randomly combined to
create a set of 40 possible collisions (26 training collisions, 8
test collisions, and 6 filler collisions). These possible
collisions were used in both the training and the testing phase;
however, specific objects from each category were used in
only either the training or the testing phase, but not both.
In addition to these events that were deemed possible
collisions, there was also a set of impossible collisions that do
not abide by this system of modular arithmetic. For these
collisions, the resultant object does not follow the specified
combination rules (e.g., results in an object not specified by

Resultant

(1)

(1)

(1)

(3)

(1)

(3)

(2)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(3)

(2)

(2)

(2)

(3)

(2)

(3)

(1)

Figure 1: Sample Possible Collisions for Experiment 1.
Components that Collide

Resultant

(1)

(1)

(3)

(3)

(1)

(1)

(2)

(1)

(3)

(3)

(3)

(1)

(2)

(2)

(2)

(2)

(3)

(2)

Figure 2: Sample Impossible Collisions for Experiment 1.
There was an additional set of 8 collisions that were used as
catch trials. For these collisions, instead of resulting in an
object similar to the objects that collided, these collisions
resulted in the production of a cartoon animal (e.g., dog,
cow). These collisions were only used in the testing phase.
All collision types varied within participants.
Procedure Presentation software was used to deliver the
instructions, present the stimuli and record the responses.

1008

Each participant was instructed that they would be presented
with 3 kinds of particles from the planet Zoron, and they were
shown one object from each category, in random order. Then,
they were instructed that the particles interact according to
laws of Zoron physics. It was explained that when two
particles collide, a third particle will emerge. Then, the
participants were asked to try to remember these interactions
because they would be tested on them later.
The experiment was divided into a training phase and a
testing phase. During the training phase, the participants were
presented with 26 randomly presented examples of possible
collisions (all possible combinations occurred multiple times
during training). After each trial, the participants pressed the
spacebar to continue to the next collision.
After training, the participants were instructed that in the
first part, they were presented with interactions of Zoron
particles. Now, they would be presented with some more
interactions, some of which are from Zoron and some of
which are not. Their job was to determine whether these
particles followed the laws of Zoron physics or not. They
were notified that specific particles would differ from those
they saw in the first part, so when making a decision, they
were asked to pay attention to interactions and not to the
particles. They were also instructed that it was okay to guess
if they were unsure.
From there, the participants entered the testing phase.
During this phase, they were to press 1 after a collision if that
collision followed these rules (possible event), and 0 if it did
not (impossible event). During the first part of this phase,
there were 16 test videos, half of which were possible
collisions and half of which were impossible collisions,
randomly presented. In the second part of this phase, the
participants were presented with 12 additional test collisions
similarly divided (1/2 possible, and 1/2 impossible). These
collisions were used simply as filler collisions that
accompanied the 8 catch collisions. They were randomly
presented intermixed with the filler collisions during the
second half of the test phase. The catch collisions used
completely different objects, and their goal was to control for
the overall accuracy.

Results and Discussion
Overall, participants were accurate on catch trials, exhibiting
over 95% accuracy (M = 98.08), above chance, one-sample t
(25) = 53.3, p < .001.
However, the accuracy of participants’ responses on the
possible and impossible test items was of particular interest.
An accuracy score defined as the proportion of hits minus the
proportion of false alarms for the 16 test items was calculated
for each participant. Overall, participants were accurate in
determining whether a test item was possible or impossible
(MAccuracy = .33), above zero, one-sample t (25) = 4.85, p <
.001. Thus, as expected, the participants were able to learn the
rule implicitly during the training phase well enough to
accurately determine the possibility or impossibility of novel
examples during the testing phase.

Having established that adult participants were capable of
implicitly learning novel rules of novel object behavior, we
conducted Experiment 2 to determine if infants could also
implicitly learn rules of object behavior after only a relatively
small amount of training.

Experiment 2: Implicit Learning in Infants
Method
Participants Twenty-three 8-month-olds (14 boys and 9
girls, M = 245.91 days, Range = 237 - 270 days) participated
in this experiment. Parents’ names were collected from local
birth announcements, and contact information was obtained
through local directories. A majority of infants were
Caucasian and had no auditory or visual deficits, as reported
by parents. An additional 23 participants were excluded for
failure to demonstrate novelty preference (n = 18) and failure
to complete the experiment (n = 5).
Apparatus Infants were seated on parents’ laps
approximately 100 cm away from a 152 cm x 127 cm
projection screen, which was located approximately 5 cm
above the infant’s eye level. A Sony DCR-TRV40 camcorder
was used to capture infants’ fixations and was projected to
one of two Dell flat panel monitors in the observation room.
An NEC GT2150 LCD projector was mounted on the ceiling
approximately 30 cm behind the infant (130 cm away from
the projection screen). Two Boston Acoustics 380 speakers
were 76 cm apart from each other and mounted in the wall.
The speakers and camcorder were concealed by black felt and
located directly below the projection screen. Two small lights
were located behind the infant to ensure that the room was
dimly lit throughout the entire procedure.
In an adjacent room, a Dell Dimension 8200 computer with
Presentation software was used to present stimuli to the
infants, as well as to record the onset and offset of the infants’
visual fixations. Fixations were recorded online by pressing a
button on a 10-button USB game pad when infants were
looking at the stimulus and releasing the button when infants
looked away from the stimulus.
Materials The stimuli consisted of a small subset of
collisions from Experiment 1 (see Figure 3). In this
experiment, each video consisted of a collision repeated 3
times (13 sec/video). There were two training videos
(possible), and three test videos (2 impossible collisions and 1
novel collision).
Procedure The first training collision video was presented
and alternated with the second training video, for a total of 9
presentations of each video. This resulted in each infant
viewing a total of 234 sec worth of training.
After this training phase, the test phase began seamlessly.
For this phase, the two impossible test collisions were
randomly presented followed by the presentation of the novel
collision. For each infant, the amount of time looking to the

1009

screen for each video was recorded throughout both the
training and the testing phases.
Components that Collide

Train

Test

Novel

Resultant

(3)

(3)

(2)

(2)

(2)

(3)

(3)

(3)

(3)

(2)

(2)

(2)

(1)

(1)

(1)

During training, infants appeared to have implicitly learned
the rule of how the objects behave. This was evidenced by an
increase in looking to the test videos when there was a
violation of expectation (impossible collision).

General Discussion

Figure 3: Training, Testing, and Novel Collisions in
Experiment 2.

The results of the two reported experiments clearly indicate
that across both age groups, using isomorphic measures,
participants were able to implicitly learn about the behavioral
rules of objects. As a result, simple exposure to a rule led
participants to demonstrate awareness when this rule had
been broken.
In opposition to the supporters of the innate theory of
physical knowledge (e.g., Baillargeon, 2004b; Spelke, 1994),
the adults and infants were each able to learn the rule in one
relatively simple session. These researchers claimed that
since infants demonstrated such knowledge at the age of 2.5
months, then these abilities must have been innate. They
proposed that infants have not encountered enough
experience yet to have learned the laws of physics by this
young age. However, the current research demonstrates that
infants are able to learn completely arbitrary rules of object
behavior in less than 4 minutes of training. This finding casts
doubt on the innate theory of physical knowledge.
Therefore, this research provides evidence that both infants
and adults are capable of learning rule-like interactions even
when these interactions are arbitrary, with participants having
no previous experience with these interactions. While
presenting important evidence about the ability to learn, the
current research raises a number of important questions that
are to be addressed in future research.
First, the current research uses only deterministic rules, and
it would be necessary to examine the ability to learn when the
rules are probabilistic. In addition, it could be argued that
infants are not actually learning a rule; they are just detecting
a pattern of objects. Therefore, it would be necessary to
examine whether or not infants (similar to adults) can extend
rules to completely novel objects representing the same
categories. If infants learn probabilistic rules and extend them
to members of the same category (i.e., Category 1, Category
2, or Category 3), this would represent strong evidence for the
ability of infants to extract physical regularities amply present
in their environments and to abstract these regularities.
In sum, results of the current research suggest that when
presented with novel objects that behave according to novel
(but fixed) rules, both adults and infants are capable of
detecting these rules. These findings suggest that people have
learning mechanisms powerful enough to extract the
regularities amply present in the world around them.

Results and Discussion
Three scores were calculated for each infant: average
amount of time looking to the impossible test videos (test),
average amount of time looking to the last two possible
training videos (train), and amount of time looking to the
novel video (novel). See Figure 4 for average looking times
across each test trial type.
As expected, when comparing the novel events (M =
11970.84, SD = 2609.85) to the training events (M = 6403.1,
SD = 703.05), the infants demonstrated an overall novelty
preference, paired-samples t (23) = 9.57, p < .001.
However, of primary importance, is the comparison of test
and train. Overall, as predicted, when comparing the test (M =
7537.86, SD = 3428.65) to the train, infants demonstrated an
overall increase in looking to the videos that demonstrated an
impossible collision, paired-samples t (23) = 2.44, p = .02.

Looking Time (ms)

14000
12000
10000
8000
6000
4000
2000
0
Novel

Train

Test

Acknowledgments

Trial Type

We thank Jenny Volvovski for creation of the original
stimuli. This research is supported by grants from the
National Science Foundation (REC #0208103 and BCS
#0078945) to Vladimir M. Sloutsky.

Figure 4: Average Looking Time across Test Trials for 8Month-Olds

1010

References
Baillargeon, R. (2004a). Infants’ physical world. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 13, 89-94.
Baillargeon, R. (2004b). Infants’ reasoning about hidden
objects: evidence for event-general and event-specific
expectations. Developmental Science, 7, 391-414.
Conway, C. M., & Christiansen, M. H. (2005). Modalityconstrained statistical learning of tactile, visual, and
auditory sequences. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 31, 24-39.
Creel, S. C., Newport, E. L., & Aslin, R. N. (2004). Distant
melodies: statistical learning of nonadjacent dependencies
in tone sequences. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 30, 1119-1130.
Fiser, J., & Aslin, R. N. (2001). Unsupervised statistical
learning of higher-order spatial structures from visual
scenes. Psychological Science, 12, 499-504.

1011

Macromedia Studio MX (2002). Macromedia Flash MX
[Computer software]. San Francisco: Author.
Neurobehavioral Systems (2003). Presentation (Version .76)
[Computer software]. Albany, CA: Author.
Schilling, T. H., & Clifton, R. K. (1998). Nine-month-old
infants learn about a physical event in a single session:
Implications for infants’ understanding of physical
phenomena. Cognitive Development, 13, 165-184.
Spelke, E. S. (1990). Principles of object perception.
Cognitive Science, 14, 29-56.
Spelke, E. S. (1994). Initial knowledge: Six suggestions.
Cognition, 50, 431-445.
Thiessen, E. D., & Saffran, J. R. (2003). When cues collide:
Use of stress and statistical cues to word boundaries by 7to 9-month-old infants. Developmental Psychology, 39,
706-716.

