UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Self-Explanation, Feedback and the Development of Analogical Reasoning Skills:
Microgenetic Evidence for a Metacognitive Processing Account

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4mt9g0jb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Ball, Linden J.
Cheshire, Andrea
Lewis, Charlie

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Self-Explanation, Feedback and the Development of Analogical Reasoning Skills:
Microgenetic Evidence for a Metacognitive Processing Account
Andrea Cheshire (a.cheshire@lancaster.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Lancaster University,
Lancaster, LA1 4YF, UK

Linden J. Ball (l.ball@lancaster.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Lancaster University,
Lancaster, LA1 4YF, UK

Charlie Lewis (c.lewis@lancaster.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Lancaster University,
Lancaster, LA1 4YF, UK
These latter studies support the view that explanation
benefits learning and problem solving. However, such studies
involve explanation procedures that are potentially rather
different to asking children to explain their own responses.
The few studies that have examined the consequences of
explaining self-generated answers have mostly assessed
behaviour in either adolescent or adult populations (e.g.,
Bielaczyc, Pirolli, & Brown, 1995; Chi, Bassok, Lewis,
Reimann, & Glasser, 1989; Chi, deLeeuw, Chiu, &
Lavancher, 1994). These studies have revealed an association
between self explanation and facilitated learning and problem
solving. One exception to this body of work is the research
reported by Rittle-Johnson (2004), which examined
children’s self-explanation with mathematics problems and
found beneficial effects. However, the fact that this
experiment combined self-explanation requests with task
feedback means that we cannot know for sure whether simply
asking children to provide self-explanations of their responses
aids problems solving. We note, however, that some
developmental theorists (e.g. Crowley & Siegler, 1999; Pine
& Messer, 2000; Siegler, 2002; Siegler & Svetina, 2002)
appear to assume that because explanation of self-generated
responses is beneficial for adult learning then such effects
should extrapolate to children’s learning. There are good
reasons, however, for why this might not be the case. For
example, children’s language skills are not as sophisticated as
those of adults, and children may not, therefore, be able to
articulate their thoughts as effectively as adults can. Support
for these proposals has recently been demonstrated by
Cheshire and Lewis (2003) where it was found that asking
young children to provide explanations on the Tower of
Hanoi task failed to improve performance, whereas a similar
explanation requirement is known to facilitate enhanced
performance in adults (Berardi-Coletta, Buyer, Dominowski,
& Rellinger, 1995).
The aim of the present research was to examine the impact
of explanation of self-generated responses on children’s
development of problem-solving skills in an analogical
reasoning paradigm. This is important for two main reasons.
First, it allows for an examination of whether or not current
theories of explanation can be applied to children’s
explanations of their own answers. Second, it permits an

Abstract
It is generally accepted that providing explanations during a
task can facilitate problem solving performance in both adults
and children. This paper aims to answer two important
questions. First, can current theories of explanation be
generalised to children’s explanations of self-generated
answers? Second, what is the impact of such self-explanation
on the development of children’s analogical reasoning skills?
One-hundred-and-ten six- and seven-year-old children took part
in seven sessions of matrix completion trials in one of five
conditions: (1) explanation plus feedback; (2) explanation only;
(3) feedback only; (4) practice; and (5) control. Analysis
revealed that, contrary to existing theory, explanation of selfgenerated answers is not the most effective way to encourage
the development of analogical reasoning. Rather, feedback on
response accuracy is necessary for the attainment of heightened
levels of performance. Results also indicate that children shift
from using surface-level perceptual cues as a basis for their
responses to a more sophisticated strategy involving an
understanding of deeper-level relational structures. It is argued
that these results support a metacognitive processing account of
the development of analogical reasoning skills rather than an
account emphasising changes in mental representations.
Keywords: Analogical reasoning; self-explanation; feedback;
metacognitive processing; strategy development.

Introduction
As part of experimental procedures in developmental
research, children are often asked to justify answers they have
given on problem-solving tasks to provide a measure of their
understanding (e.g., Gentner, 1988; Inhelder & Piaget, 1964;
Tolme & Phillips, 2004). These studies, however, frequently
fail to consider the impact that explanation requests have on
the child’s actual problem-solving performance. The limited
research that has examined the effect of eliciting explanations
on children’s performance has typically required participants
to explain correct or incorrect answers supplied by someone
else such as the experimenter or a puppet (Muldoon, 2004;
Pine & Messer, 2000; Siegler, 2002) rather than their own
answers.

435

We note that these three proposals appear to dichotomise
on a ‘representational’ versus ‘process’ dimension that is very
similar to that which characterises alternative accounts of
self-explanation phenomena, outlined above. For example,
the ‘domain knowledge’ account proposed by Goswami
(1992, 2002) and the ‘multiple dimension’ proposal of
Halford (1993) both emphasise developments in the
representational aspects of task-based knowledge. In contrast,
Gentner’s ‘relational-shift’ account (e.g., Gentner & Toupin,
1986; Ratterman & Gentner, 1998) is more closely tied to
changes in metacognitive processing (e.g., concerning
identification and mapping of causal relations).
Recently, Siegler and Svetina (2002) have employed a
‘microgenetic’ methodology to examine the development of
analogical reasoning ability and have provided evidence that
is claimed to support Gentner’s relational shift hypothesis.
The microgenetic method involves intensive testing over a
period of developmental change, and provides a rich dataset
that can reveal more detail about how children’s skills
develop. The analogical reasoning paradigm that Siegler and
Svetina used involved ‘matrix completion’ (see Figure 1).
This entails a participant completing a part-filled grid of
items. If the correct item is selected, then the top items should
be related in the same way as the bottom items and at the
same time the left hand items should be related in the same
way as the right hand items. Siegler and Svetina provided
children with feedback and asked them to give explanations
of the correct answer. They observed that over a period of
three weeks of intensive testing children stopped using a
dominant incorrect strategy (based on perceptual similarity)
and began to implement the correct strategy (based on
relations between objects). Siegler and Svetina could not,
however, pinpoint what aided children’s shift to relational
responding. They suggest that it could have been due to
explanation or feedback or both - or even simply a
consequence of repeated exposure to the task.
The present experiment aimed to extend Siegler and
Svetina’s research using an equivalent microgenetic
methodology to discover whether self-explanation alone (i.e.,
without feedback) is sufficient to develop analogical
reasoning to the same extent as observed in Siegler and
Svetina’s study. If existing theories of explanation generalise
to children’s self-explanation of self-generated answers then
it would be predicted that children who are asked to provide
explanations would successfully develop their analogical
reasoning skills. However, there is some doubt that
explanation alone will be enough for children to refine their
analogical reasoning skills (e.g., Berardi-Coletta et al. 1995;
Cheshire & Lewis, 2003). There is little evidence to suggest
that children’s explanations will be based on anything other
than purely perceptual features of the task. In fact, Gentner
(1988) showed that the verbal justifications elicited from
children at early stages of cognitive development were
typically dominated by the mention of surface features of
objects. Therefore, it is predicted that children will need to be
given feedback as well as being asked to provide explanations
over the training period for them to reach high levels of
performance. Unlike most previous research on explanation
and problem solving, which has focused on effects arising at a
single point in time, our use of the microgenetic method also

investigation of the impact of providing explanations on the
actual development of reasoning skills.

Theories of Explanation and Problem Solving
Two main theoretical approaches can be identified that aim to
address the impact of explanation on learning and problem
solving. The ‘metacognitive processing’ approach emphasises
the notion that asking participants to provide explanations
promotes high-level cognitive processing. For example,
Berardi-Coletta et al. (1995) propose that when participants
are required to give explanations they shift their attention
from problem-based features (i.e., goals and rules of the
problem) to a processing level (i.e., whereby they consider
strategies, make subgoals and evaluate moves). Similarly,
Siegler (2002, in press) focuses on the issue of strategy
development and suggests that explanation helps children ‘to
decrease the strength of existing, incorrect ways of thinking’
(Siegler, in press, p.40 of ms). The alternative, ‘mental
representation’ account proposes that providing explanations
aids the formation of a complete and accurate mental
representation of the problem. For example, Newman and
Schwartz (1998) suggest that explaining helps learners to fill
the gaps in their mental representations of the problem space.
Similarly, Chi (2000) believes that explanation helps
participants to reorganise their knowledge to augment
incomplete ‘mental models’. Strikingly similar suggestions
have also been forwarded by researchers studying children’s
problem solving. For example, Pine and Messer (2000)
suggest that through providing explanations children are able
to combine new information with existing knowledge to gain
a more complete representation.

The Development of Analogical Reasoning
It is generally agreed that children’s analogical reasoning
develops significantly over the first few years of primary
school (Halford, 1993; Inhelder & Piaget, 1964; Siegler &
Svetina, 2002). There are three main suggestions as to what
enables increasingly more sophisticated analogical reasoning.
One proposal is that as children learn more about the world
they are then able to use that increasing domain knowledge to
reason about the relationships between items (e.g., Goswami,
1992, 2002). This account emphasises the role of domain
familiarity in the development of analogical reasoning.
Children who are reasoning in familiar domains can make
correct analogies, whereas children will have problems when
they do not understand the relations between items and will
then concentrate on surface features (Goswami, 1992, 2002).
A second proposal is that it is the occurrence of a ‘relational
shift’ that promotes the development of more sophisticated
analogical reasoning (e.g., Gentner & Toupin, 1986;
Ratterman & Gentner, 1998). This account claims that
children will initially make errors as they rely on perceptual
features of stimuli to reach an answer. These errors then
decrease with age and experience, as responses are then based
on relational cues. A third suggestion is that older children
have better analogical reasoning skills because of an
increased ability to represent ‘multiple dimensions’ arising
from age-related changes in the capacity of working memory
(Halford, 1993).

436

affords the advantage of allowing an assessment of the
dynamics of strategy change relative to explanation and
feedback.

Method
Participants
A total of 110 6- and 7-year-old children took part in this
experiment (mean 7:0; range 6:1 to 7:9). Fifty-seven were
female and fifty-three were male. The children came from
four different schools in rural Lancashire. If children scored
above 80% in Session 1 they did not take part in the rest of
the experiment as they were considered to have a high level
of understanding already.

Figure 1: Example of a Matrix Completion Trial

Procedure

Design

Children were presented with twenty-two matrix completion
trials in each of the seven sessions. In Session 1 children were
introduced to the task and given eight simple practice trials.
These trials changed on only one dimension. All children,
regardless of condition, were given the same instructions and
practice trials. Only Sessions 2-5 included the experimental
manipulations. The children who were required to provide
explanations were simply asked why they had selected a
particular answer on each trial. In the feedback groups
children were either told that they had chosen the correct
answer or the experimenter indicated which of the potential
answers was actually the right one. In the explanation plus
feedback group children received the same feedback after
they had given an explanation of their own answer. Children
in the practice group were given neither explanation nor
feedback. A common criticism of experiments that examine
explanation is that control groups often spend much less time
involved with the task than groups asked to provide
explanations (see Newman & Schwartz, 1998). Therefore, in
the present study measures were taken to reduce the
discrepancy between conditions in the amount of time
children spent engaged on the task. For example, in the
practice group children were asked questions about the
various dimensions of the stimuli to keep their attention
focussed on a task-related activity. An example of a question
that the child might be asked was “How many blue animals
are there?”

This experiment involved children taking part in six sessions
of training over a three-week period with a seventh follow up
session approximately nine weeks later. They were randomly
allocated to one of five conditions: (1) Explanation plus
feedback; (2) Explanation alone; (3) Feedback alone; (4)
Practice; and (5) Control. Children in the four experimental
conditions took part in all seven sessions, with the control
group only taking part in Sessions 1 and 7. In Sessions 1, 6
and 7 children in all conditions were given the matrices with
no experimental manipulation, so performance at these
specific times was more comparable. This was to avoid the
potential issue that asking children to provide explanations or
giving them feedback may only affect performance when they
are actually engaged in the given problems.

Materials
A series of matrices were developed based on the stimuli
created by Siegler and Svetina (2002). The stimuli were
depictions of large, four legged animals, that could change on
up to four relational dimensions: colour, size, type and
orientation. Stringent controls were applied to the stimuli so
that it was not possible for participants to reason based on
irrelevant aspects of them. The potential answers were
constructed so that there was one correct answer, one
response that was an incorrect colour, one an incorrect size,
one an incorrect type, one an incorrect orientation and one
that was incorrect on all four dimensions. On each trial these
potential responses were positioned randomly in a two by
three grid (see Figure 1).
Each microgenetic session involved twenty-two matrix
trials: twelve that changed on two dimensions, eight that
changed on three dimensions and two that changed on all four
dimensions. Within each of these subsets the order of trials
was randomised. Each child received a different set of
matrices in each session; the order in which they received
them was randomised. Children were required to select an
animal from the array on the right to complete the matrix on
the left. The example in Figure 1 is a trial that changes on two
dimensions: size changes vertically and colour changes
horizontally. The correct answer is the small yellow camel
facing right (i.e., the lower left-hand item).

Results
Correct Answers
Initial analyses of the number of correct answers that children
selected focused on the two end-points of the training
procedure (i.e., Session 1 vs. Session 7). This allowed for a
clear-cut examination of quantitative improvements in
analogical reasoning skill over time (see Figure 2). Analysis
of variance revealed that there was a significant increase in
correct responses between Sessions 1 and 7, F(1, 87) = 87.63,
p < .001, and a significant interaction between Group and
Session, F(4, 87) = 3.49, p = .01. Simple main effects
analyses revealed that there was no significant difference
between children in Session 1 (p = .95), indicating a common
level of initial performance. The improvement in performance

437

indicated a significant difference between the explanation
plus feedback group and the practice group (p = .046).
These data are complex and although there is a clear trend
in performance, these traditional methods of data analyses
were not powerful enough to completely unravel the findings.
Current analyses are exploring the data in terms of Binomial
Logistic Models which will be able to model the group
differences and also take into consideration individual
children’s performance. However, it is still possible to use
ANOVA to examine two specific aspects of the data. First,
there was a significant decrease in correct answers between
Session 5 and Session 6, F(1, 69) = 4.83, p = .03. However,
there was no main effect of Group (p = .08) nor an interaction
between Session and Group (p = .54). Post hoc tests revealed
that the only significant decline in performance was that of
the explanation group F(1, 17) = 5.98, p = .03. It seems
therefore, that the main effects of explanation without
feedback come at the time it is elicited. Second, there was no
significant decline in performance in any group between
Sessions 6 and 7 (ps > .06). This indicates that the level of
learning that participants had achieved did not significantly
decline over a substantial period of time.

over the sessions was reliable in all conditions (ps < .02) apart
from the control group (p = .07). There was a significant main
effect of group at Session 7 (p = .01). However, post hoc
analyses indicated that the only reliable difference was
between the explanation plus feedback and the control groups
(p = .02).
19

Number of Correct Answers

17

15

Group
Explanation

13

Feedback
11

Explanation and Feed
back

9

Practice
Control

7
1

7

Session

Figure 2: The improvement in children’s performance
between Session 1 and Session 7

Duplicate Errors
Children often incorrectly selected an answer which was a
duplicate of an item in the matrix (e.g., the large yellow camel
facing right in the example in Figure 1). Duplicate responding
is typical in young children (e.g., Ratterman & Gentner, 1998;
Siegler & Svetina, 2002) who are considered to rely on
perceptual features of stimuli to select an answer. Figure 4
illustrates the average number of duplicate errors made by
each group over the seven sessions.

To analyse the development of analogical reasoning skills in
more detail, the number of correct answers was also
examined on a per-session basis. Figure 3 illustrates the
performance of children in each condition. It is important to
reiterate that the explanation and feedback requirements only
pertained in Sessions 2-5. In addition, Session 7 was carried
out approximately nine weeks after Session 6.

7

21

Number of Duplicate Errors

6

Number of Correct Answers

19

17

15

Group
Explanation

13

Feedback

11

2

3

4

5

6

Feedback
Explanation plus
Feedback
Practice
1

Practice
1

Explanation
3

1

Feedback

7

Group
4

2

Explanation plus
9

5

2

3

4

5

6

7

Session

7

Figure 4: The number of duplicate errors children made over
seven sessions. (Note: The control condition have not been
included as they only took part in Conditions 1 and 7)

Session

Figure 3: The improvement in children’s performance over
seven sessions. (Note: The control condition have not been
included as they only took part in conditions 1 and 7)

Duplicate errors were seen to decline significantly over the
first five sessions, F(4, 256) = 34.67, p < .01. There was no
main effect of Group (p = .13) nor an interaction between
Session and Group (p = .44). It is interesting to note that after
Session 5 the level of duplicate errors that children made in
both the explanation and practice groups significantly
increased: explanation, F(2, 34) = 7.57, p < .01; practice, F(2,
34) = 4.37, p = .015. This pattern of duplicate errors between

The repeated measures ANOVA confirmed that children’s
performance improved over the seven sessions, F(6, 414) =
60.96, p < .01. There was also a main effect of Group, F(3,
69) = 2.77, p = .048, and an interaction between Session and
Group, F(18, 414) = 1.81, p = .02. Post hoc analyses

438

seems that explanation has an effect only on immediate
performance. This latter observation supports the proposals of
Berardi-Coletta et al. (1995) who suggest that explanation
guides participants to examine the underlying processes
required for problem solving rather than the surface level
features of the task. Our study has provided, to our
knowledge, a unique situation whereby participants who were
once asked to provide explanations no longer have to do so.
Therefore, what we have added to Berardi-Coletta et al.’s
suggestion is the notion that explanation alone does not
provide a deep enough level of learning to generalise
understanding to trials where explanation is no longer
required. Our proposal has implications for researchers who
believe that explanation aids the construction of complete
mental representations (e.g., Chi et al. 1994; Pine & Messer,
2000). If explanation alone did create a more complete mental
model, surely participants would be able to generalise such
representations to very similar trials in which they did not
have to explain?
Another finding that supports the metacognitive processing
account of explanation is the impact of feedback. It is evident
from the data that feedback is very useful in terms of the
development of reasoning skills; indeed, the two groups who
demonstrated the highest levels of learning both included a
feedback element. This is interesting on two counts. First, it
shows that children who received feedback reached a higher
standard of reasoning than children who did not. A potential
problem with the performance of the children in the
explanation group was that some used the same sub-optimal
explanations throughout the study (e.g., after selecting a
duplicate response these children stated that they chose an
answer ‘because it was the same’). Without providing
children with feedback, those who believe that their task is to
find a matching item are less likely to update their strategies.
Feedback may encourage children to engage in reflection on
why their explanation was wrong and thereby to update their
strategies. Second, the value of feedback ties in with existing
research showing that children’s explanations are beneficial.
In particular, previous research has typically asked children to
explain an answer provided by the experimenter. In such
studies, children are actually being given implicit feedback in
that they are told that the given answers are right or wrong.
This may provide clues as to the correct strategy that should
be adopted to solve problems.
Children who are given only feedback perform better than
those who are only required to give explanations. However,
being given feedback alongside explanation is even better.
We propose that children are gaining additive benefits. First,
they are told when they are wrong and can update their
strategies accordingly. On top of this, they are benefiting
from explaining - whereby they are more likely to attend to
the task processes rather than the problem features. Both of
these suggestions support the metacognitive processing
approach that is based on the notion of strategy development
and the optimisation of high-level cognitive processing.
In summary, the findings from this research have indicated
that to encourage children to adopt a relational strategy in
analogical reasoning they need to be provided with feedback
as well as being asked to provide explanations. Some children
who were asked to provide explanations gave explanations

Session 1 and 7 appears to fit a quadratic model in that the
mean number of duplicates falls and then rises again.
ANOVA confirmed the reliability of this quadratic pattern,
F(3, 69) = 3.84, p = .01. It is intended that these data will also
be examined further using Binomial Logistic Models to gain
a clearer understanding of the dynamics of children’s
erroneous strategies.

Discussion
The aim of the present research was to address: (1) whether
current theories of explanation can be generalised to
children’s explanations of their own self-generated answers,
and (2) the impact of self-explanation on the development of
children’s analogical reasoning skills. We found that selfexplanation alone was not sufficient to aid the development of
analogical reasoning to an equivalent standard as that which
arose when provided with feedback. It appears, therefore, that
feedback on responses is essential for the enhanced levels of
analogical reasoning performance. Our results also provide
support for a metacognitive processing account of the link
between self-explanation, feedback and the development of
analogical reasoning.
As expected, children’s performance on the matrix
completion task improved over the microgenetic sessions.
Analysis revealed that children’s skill developed in all
conditions, apart from the control group. This indicated that
there was no age-related change in the three-month testing
period and that repeated exposure to the task (with questions
to keep time spent on task equal across conditions) was itself
enough to improve children’s performance. The number of
duplicate errors (i.e., those made when basing answers on
perceptual features) was shown to decrease over the
microgenetic period. This finding provides support for the
relational shift hypothesis proposed by Gentner and
colleagues (e.g., Gentner & Toupin, 1986; Ratterman &
Gentner, 1998). This claims that children initially use
perceptual features of items to select answers (thus making
duplicate errors). The frequency of such errors decrease as
children start to reason using relations between the matrix
items (thus selecting more correct answers). We know that
children who perform well are reasoning using relations
between the items as this is the only plausible way that
children can consistently select a correct answer.
In relation to the issue of whether children’s explanations
of self-generated answers was beneficial to the development
of their analogical reasoning skills, our analysis indicated that
the performance of children who provided explanations
throughout the microgenetic training did improve
significantly. However, the trends in the data indicate that
improvement was not as pronounced as it was for the
feedback or the explanation plus feedback groups, and also
not much better than for the practice group. This pattern of
results provides evidence that explanation alone is not the
most successful method for encouraging children’s
understanding and that children benefit more from having
feedback on their answers.
One of the most interesting findings of our study was that
when children were no longer required to provide
explanations the number of duplicate errors increased. It

439

which fit with a perceptual-similarity strategy and did so
throughout the entire seven sessions. However, when asked to
provide explanations alongside feedback children were more
likely to update their strategy to one that was based on
relations between items. These findings can connect the
metacognitive processing approach to both explanation and
the development of analogical reasoning skills. It seems that
to make a complete relational shift children need feedback in
their training.
Our research has provided an important contribution to
both explanation and analogy research. The limitations of
explanation have been recognised and from this it should be
noted that assumptions about the usefulness of children’s selfexplanations should be made with care. The second important
finding is that explanations, to be most useful, need to be
combined with some kind of feedback, whether this comes in
the form of explicit answers or indirectly, when children are
asked to explain a correct or incorrect answer. Our results
thus provide clear support for a metacognitive account of the
roles of self-explanation and feedback in the development of
analogical reasoning.

Gentner, D., & Toupin, C. (1986). Systematicity and
similarity in the development of analogy. Cognitive
Science, 10, 277-300.
Goswami, U. (1992). Analogical reasoning in children. Hove,
UK: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Goswami, U. (2002). Inductive and deductive reasoning. In
U. Goswami (Ed.) Blackwell handbook of childhood
cognitive development. Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishing.
Halford, G. S. (1993). Children’s understanding: The
development of mental models. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates Inc.
Inhelder, B. & Piaget, J. (1964). The early growth of logic in
the child. (E. A. Lunzer & D. Papert, Trans.) London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Muldoon, K. P. (2004, September). Identifying predictors of
conceptual insight: a study of early numeracy. Paper
presented at a seminar series on Using the Microgenetic
Method to Investigate Cognitive Development, University
of St Andrew’s, Scotland.
Pine, K. J., & Messer, D. J. (2000). The effect of explaining
another’s actions on children’s implicit theories of balance.
Cognition and Instruction, 18, 35-51.
Ratterman, M. J., & Gentner, D. (1998). More evidence for a
relational shift in the development of analogy: Children’s
performance on a causal mapping task. Cognitive
Development, 13, 453-478.
Raven , J.C. (1947). Progressive Matrices: Set II. London:
Heron & Co. Ltd.
Rittle-Johnson, B. (2004). Promoting flexible problem
solving: The effects of direct instruction and selfexplaining. Proceedings of the 26th Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Siegler, R. S. (2002). Microgenetic studies of self
explanation. In N. Granott, & J. Parziale (Eds.),
Microdevelopment: Transition processes in development
and learning (pp. 31-58). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Siegler, R. S. (in press) Microgenetic analyses of learning. In
D. Kuhn, & R. S. Siegler (Eds.), Handbook of child
psychology (6th ed.).
Siegler, R. S., & Svetina, M. (2002). A microgenetic/crosssectional study of matrix completion: Comparing short-term
and long-term change. Child Development, 73, 793-809.
Smith, P. & Hagues, N. (1993). NFER-NELSON Non-Verbal
Reasoning 8-9 Test Series. Berkshire, UK: NFERNELSON.
Tolme, A. & Phillips, S. (2004, September). The effects of
parental support on the formation and development of
children's problem solving strategies. Paper presented at a
seminar series on Using the Microgenetic Method to
Investigate Cognitive Development, University of St
Andrew’s, Scotland.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the ESRC. The cooperation
of the teachers and pupils is greatly appreciated. Thanks also
to Brian Francis at the Centre for Applied Statistics, Lancaster
University for advice on data analyses.

References
Berardi-Coletta, B., Buyer, L. S., Dominowski, R. L., &
Rellinger, E. R. (1995). Metacognition and problem
solving: A process-oriented approach. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 21, 205-223.
Bielaczyc, K., Pirolli, P. L., & Brown, A. L. (1995). Training
in self-explanation and self-regulation strategies:
Investigating the effects of knowledge acquisition activities
on problem solving. Cognition and Instruction, 13, 221252.
Cheshire, A., & Lewis, C. (2003). Explaining the Tower of
Hanoi. Poster presented at the XIIIth Conference of the
European Society for Cognitive Psychology, Granada,
Spain.
Chi, M. T. H., Bassok, M., Lewis, M. W., Reimann, M. W.,
& Glasser, R. (1989). Self-explanations: How students
study and use examples in learning to solve problems.
Cognitive Science, 13, 145-182.
Chi, M. T. H., DeLeeuw, N., Chiu, M., & LaVancher, C.
(1994). Eliciting self-explanations improves understanding.
Cognitive Science, 18, 439-477.
Crowley, K., & Siegler, R. S. (1999). Explanation and
generalisation in young children’s strategy learning. Child
Development, 70, 304-316.
Gentner, D. (1988). Metaphor as structure mapping: The
relational shift. Child Development, 59, 47-59.

440

