UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Sentence Processing in Context: The Impact of Experience on Individual Differences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4fx748rd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Christiansen, Morten H.
Farmer, Thomas A.
Kemtes, Karen A.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Sentence Processing in Context:
The Impact of Experience on Individual Differences
Thomas A. Farmer (taf22@cornell.edu) and Morten H. Christiansen (mhc27@cornell.edu)
Department of Psychology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853 USA

Karen A. Kemtes (kkemtes@unlv.nevada.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Nevada-Las Vegas, 4505 Maryland Parkway MS 5030
Las Vegas, NV 89154 USA
Abstract

experienced-based approach often predicts more subtle
interactions between particular structural elements and
specific lexical items (see below for an example). In this
paper, we capitalize on such fine-grained predictions to
explore the manner in which individual differences in
reading experience influence on-line sentence processing
performance. In Experiment 1, we demonstrate that
performance on a traditional reading span task is predictive
of the degree to which individuals, during the processing of
complex sentences, are sensitive to subtle interactions
between specific verbs and preceding linguistic context, as
would be predicted by the experienced-based approach. In
Experiment 2, we present direct psychometric evidence that
reading span tasks do seem to be measuring language
experience instead of a verbal working memory capacity.

There exists considerable variation, at the level of the
individual, in human sentence processing performance. Here,
we aim to illuminate the degree to which experience with
language can account for these individual differences. In
Experiment 1, we demonstrate that subtle interactions between
specific verbs and preceding linguistic context can drive
reading times on complex sentences, but only in participants
with a high amount of reading experience. Experiment 2
demonstrates, psychometrically, that traditional reading span
tasks seem to measure language processing skill, heavily
influenced by experience with language, instead of a verbal
working memory capacity. In combination, these results
support the idea that reading span measures and sentence
processing tasks are tapping into the same underlying skill, and
crucially, that this skill is determined, primarily, by experience.

Experiment 1

Keywords: Ambiguity Resolution; Individual Differences;
Language Experience; Span Tasks

Although some theories of sentence processing maintain that
syntactic information is the primary factor influencing an
initial first-pass parse of a sentence (Frazier & Fodor, 1978),
other researchers have found that non-syntactic information
can also influence first-pass reading time patterns on complex
sentences.
Altmann, Garnham, and Dennis (1992) investigated the
manner in which discourse-context influenced processing of
the Sentential Complement/Relative Clause ambiguity (1).
1 (a) SC-Resolved: He told the woman / that he’d
misunderstood / the nature / of her / question.
(b) RC-Resolved: He told the woman / that he’d
misunderstood / to repeat / her last / question.
(c) Unambiguous Control: He asked the woman / that
he’d misunderstood / to repeat / her last / question.
The fragment …that he’d misunderstood… contains a
syntactic ambiguity because told can be followed by either an
NP + sentential complement (1a) or a relative clause (1b). In
the first case, that becomes a complementizer, thus resulting
in a sentential complement (SC) interpretation. In the second
case, that becomes a pronoun leading to a relative clause
(RC) interpretation. Disambiguation occurs in the segment of
the sentence occurring after misunderstood.
Research has demonstrated that when participants read
ambiguous sentences of this type, they experience an increase
in reading times (RTs) at the point of disambiguation when
the ambiguity is resolved in accordance with the more

Introduction
From what factors do individual differences in sentence
processing arise? One proposal is that performance on
language comprehension tasks varies as a function of verbal
working memory capacity (Just & Carpenter, 1992).
Proponents of the capacity argument often note that on
complex sentences, such as those containing relative clauses,
high span individuals elicit patterns of reading times distinctly
different from those elicited by low span individuals. Indeed,
these distinct processing patterns are attributed to differences
in the capacity of high versus low span individuals to
simultaneously store and process information.
Alternatively, MacDonald and Christiansen (2002),
arguing for an experience-driven comprehension system,
proposed that individual differences in language
comprehension are, in part, a product of differences in
language experience. Crucially, the authors proposed that
reading span tasks, traditionally thought to measure verbal
working memory capacity, actually measure differences in
language experience; given the highly linguistic nature of
these tasks, people with more language experience have
better language-related skills, and as such, exhibit superior
performance.
Although these two perspectives on individual differences
in sentence processing overlap considerably in terms of the
kinds of predictions they make for behavioral data, the
642

complex RC interpretation (Kemtes & Kemper, 1997;
MacDonald, Just, & Carpenter, 1992). This increase in RTs is
typically referred to as the garden-path effect.
Of interest, Altmann et al. found that the nature of the
referents contained within the discourse-context (full context
sentences can be seen in Table 1) could influence a reader’s
susceptibility to the garden-path effect. When the discoursecontext contained two similar referents (the two women), the
garden-path effect on RC-resolved sentences was attenuated.
Additionally, when the discourse-context contained two
distinct entities (the man and the woman), the SC
interpretation was facilitated. The attenuation of the gardenpath effect associated with the more complex RC-resolved
sentences was attributed to the fact that encountering two
very similar entities within a discourse sets up an expectation
that the entities will be differentiated, and a relative clause is
one primary way for that differentiation to occur.

Method
Participants Fifty-three undergraduates (mean age = 18.79
years, SD = .93) from a medium-sized Mid-Atlantic
university participated in this study
Materials The experimental sentences were adapted from
Altman et al. (1992), and were used because of the noted
distributional biases exhibited by the sentences. They were
constructed from 36 sentence frames. Each experimental
frame was altered in order to include an SC-resolved
sentence, an RC-resolved sentence, and an unambiguous
control sentence. Additionally, two different contexts, the SCsupporting context (2 distinct NPs, such as The man and the
woman in (1)) and the RC-supporting context (2 related NPs,
such as The two women in (1)), were created for each
sentence frame. All sentence types within each frame were
crossed with all possible contexts to form six possible
combinations from each sentence frame.
The experimental sentences were counterbalanced across
different presentation lists. Each list contained four instances
of each possible condition, but only one version of each
sentence frame. Additionally, eight unrelated practice items
and 22 filler items were incorporated into each list.

Table 1: Complete contexts for example (1).

Sentential Complement-Supporting Context
A bank manager was giving financial advice to a man and a woman. They were asking about
the benefits of a high-interest savings account. The bank manager had misunderstood the
woman's question about the account but understood the man perfectly.

Procedure All sentences were randomly presented in a noncumulative, word-by-word moving window format (Just,
Carpener, & Woolley, 1982) using Psyscope version 1.2.5
(Cohen, MacWhinney, Flatt, & Provost, 1993). Participants
were randomly assigned to one of the presentation lists.
Participants initially viewed a tutorial designed to acquaint
them with the task. Participants were then instructed to press
the ‘GO’ key to begin the task. The entire test item appeared
on the center (left-justified) of the screen in such a way that
dashes preserved the spatial layout of the sentence, but
masked the actual characters of each word. As the participant
pressed the ‘GO’ key, the word that was just read disappeared
and the next one appeared. RTs (msec) were recorded for
each word. Following each sentence, participants responded
to a Yes/No comprehension question, and upon another key
press, the next item appeared.
After having completed the sentence comprehension task, a
modified version of the Waters and Caplan (1996) composite
Z-score task was used to measure working memory capacity.
Participants first saw a sentence. After they read it, they first
had to memorize the final word of the sentence. Then they
had to make an acceptability judgment of the semantic
properties of the sentence by pressing the “YES” key if the
sentence they had just read made sense or the “NO” key if it
did not. Another sentence appeared after the semantic
judgment was made, and participants were asked to repeat the
process. An asterisk then appeared on the screen and
participants were requested to recall the last word of each
sentence in the set.
The number of words the participant had to maintain in
memory while making semantic judgments was increased
incrementally. Three sets of each level appeared in such a
way that participants had three attempts at the two-word

Relative Clause-Supporting Context
A bank manager was giving financial advice to two women. They were asking about the benefits
of a high interest savings account. The bank manager had misunderstood one of the women's
questions about the account but understood the other perfectly.
In Experiment 1, we administered the SC/RC ambiguous
sentences from Altmann et al., along with a reading span task.
Both the experience-based and the capacity-based
perspectives predict an effect of reading span on the ability to
utilize information contained within discourse-context during
syntactic ambiguity processing; namely, high span
individuals would be more garden-pathed than low span
individuals in situations where a mismatch existed between
the context and the ambiguity resolution (i.e., an SC-resolved
sentence occurring in a context that contains two related
entities, or vice versa). To further differentiate the two
perspectives, we exploit an interesting aspect of the stimuli
used by Altmann et al. All but one of the target sentences
used the verb told to introduce the SC/RC structural
ambiguity. Crucially, Spivey and Tanenhaus (1994)
conducted a corpus analysis in which they found that when
told creates an SC/RC ambiguity, it is always resolved with
an SC continuation. This kind of distributional asymmetry
would be predicted by the experience-based approach to
interact with linguistic context. Specifically, high span
subjects, due to their greater (distributional) experience,
should show stronger biases toward SC continuations,
overall, than low span subjects. There is no a priori reason to
assume that differences in working memory capacity, in and
of itself, would result in a similar prediction.

643

level, three attempts at the three-word level, and so on until
the final six-word level. Participants were instructed to keep
going all the way until the end of the task, even if they were
not able to remember some of the words.

2 Related NPs (RC Supporting Context)

Length-adjusted RTs (msec) +/- SE

120

Results and Discussion
The score on the modified version of the Waters and Caplan
(1996) span task was the number of levels for which
participants were able to recall all of the words from at least
two of the three sets for each level. Participants were also
given a half of a point if they got one of the sets correct from
the level appearing after the highest level fully completed.
This scoring procedure deviates from the method advocated
by Waters and Caplan (1996). Instead of creating a composite
score based on several different aspects of the task, as
advocated by the authors, we simply scored performance in
accordance with the method used to score the more traditional
Daneman and Carpenter (1992) reading span task. This was
done in order to ensure comparability with the results of other
studies investigating the relationship between reading span
and language comprehension. The Daneman and Carpenter
span task was not used here because the Waters and Caplan
task, even without the composite scoring method, has been
shown to be more reliable (Waters and Caplan, 1996).
RTs on each word were length-adjusted according to a
procedure described by Ferriera and Clifton (1986). First,
using the raw RTs on all words in both the experimental and
filler items, we computed a regression equation predicting
each participant’s overall RT per word from the number of
characters in each word. The equation was used in order to
generate an expected RT on each word given its length.
Expected RTs on each word were then subtracted from the
observed RTs, and the resulting difference score was used for
all analyses.
Experimental target sentences were divided into five
different regions (see segment delimitation, indicated by a “
/ “ in (1a-c)). The second segment constituted the point of
ambiguity, segment three was the point of disambiguation,
and segment four consisted of the remaining words up to, but
not including, the sentence-final word. Segment four will be
referred to as the carry-over segment because difficulty in
ambiguity processing may not end in segment three; the effect
of the ambiguity may be so strong that it exerts downstream
effects.
A 2 (SC vs. RC-supporting context) X 3 (SC-resolution vs.
RC-resolution vs. unambiguous) X 3 (ambiguity vs.
disambiguiation vs. carry-over) repeated-measures ANOVA
yielded a statistically reliable three-way interaction, F1(4,
208)=5.97, p<.0005, F2(4, 120)=5.9, p<.0005. As evident in
Figure 1(a and b), the garden-path effect on the RC-resolved
sentences appearing in the RC-supporting context was
reduced, although not completely attenuated. Interestingly,
when the ambiguity was resolved in accordance with the SC
interpretation, and the context supported the SC resolution,
the SC-resolved sentences were read significantly more
quickly than the unambiguous control sentences at
disambiguation, t(52)=2.33, p=.024.

a

SC-Res
RC-Res
Unamb

100
80
60
40
20
0
-20
-40

Ambiguity

Disambiguation

Carry-over

-60
Segment

2 Distinct NPs (SC Supporting Context)

Length-Adjusted RTs (msec) +/- SE

120

b

SC-Res
RC-Res
Unamb

100
80
60
40
20
0
-20
-40

Ambiguity

Disambiguation

Carry-Over

-60
Segment

Figure 1: The significant three-way interaction, before
accounting for span. Discourse-context does seem to be
influencing RTs on ambiguous sentences given the
fluctuations in RTs per target sentence across both contexts.
2 Related NPs (RC Supporting Context)
a

Length-Adjusted RTs (msec) +/- SE

140
120

SC-Res
RC-Res

100
80
60
40
20
0
-20
-40
-60
-80

Disambiguation
Low Span

Disambiguation
High Span

Carry-over
Low Span

Carry-over
High Span

Segment

2 Distinct NPs (SC Supporting Context)
b

Length-Adjusted RTs (msec) +/- SE

140
120

SC-Res
RC-Res

100
80
60
40
20
0
-20
-40
-60
-80

Disambiguation
Low Span

Disambiguation
High Span

Carry-over
Low Span

Carry-over
High Span

Segment

Figure 2: Span differences across segment and context.
Additionally, when the context supported the SC
interpretation, but the ambiguity was resolved with the RC
interpretation, participants were severely garden-pathed,
t(52)=5.35, p<.0005. Participants also garden-pathed at the

644

carry-over segment when the context supported the RC
interpretation but the ambiguity was resolved with the SC
interpretation, t(52)=3.158, p=.003.
More important to the goal of this study, however, are the
results after accounting for span. Regression analyses were
conducted with the continuous span scores. However, for
illustrative purposes, participants were placed in the high span
or the low span groups based on a median-split of span
scores. Span scores significantly predicted the difference
between the RC-resolved and unambiguous sentences at
disambiguation in the SC-supporting context, t(52)=2.04,
p=.047. As predicted, high span individuals exhibited a
preference for the SC-resolved sentences across both
conditions whereas low span individuals did not. Figure 2b
illustrates that high span individuals are more sensitive to the
mismatch created by the RC-resolved sentences in the SCsupporting context at disambiguation. Interestingly, in the
RC-supporting context, high span individuals were slower to
read RC-resolved sentences at disambiguation. Although not
a significant difference at disambiguation, the effect of the
ambiguity appears to have carried over into segment four,
where high span participants have significantly longer RTs
than do low span participants, t(51)=2.02, p=.049.
Given the high frequency with which ambiguities arising
from told are continued with an SC in naturally occurring
language, high span individuals appear to be biased toward
them when presented with SC/RC ambiguous sentences.
Moreover, this bias seems to be robust across both context
conditions, and is especially pronounced in the context that
favors SC resolution. Alternatively stated, the context
manipulation seems to work for low span, but not high span,
individuals. It is difficult for capacity-based theories to
account for this result given that there exists no substantial
reason why high span, but not low span, individuals would
possess such a bias. Indeed, these results can be seen as a
product of a more refined comprehension system that is more
experientially attuned to naturally-occurring language
patterns.

(Cacioppo, Petty, & Kao, 1984). As a traditional measure of
working memory, we administered the Backward Digit Span
(BDS) task (Wechsler, 1981). Notably, we also administered
the Waters and Caplan (1996) span task (vWM). Through
exploratory factor analysis, we present some direct
psychometric evidence indicating that reading span tasks
measure individual differences in language comprehension
skill, and that scores on an Experience factor (EX-Factor) are
significant predictors of individual differences on garden-path
relative clause sentences.

Method
Participants Seventy-two native English speakers (M=18.89
years, SD=.994) enrolled at a medium-sized Mid-Atlantic
university participated in this study for extra course credit.
One participant’s data was excluded due to errors in data
recording.
Materials The Author Recognition Test (ART) (West et al.,
1993) was used as a measure of print exposure, and involved
the presentation of a list of 82 potential author names; 41
were real authors and 41 were foil (false) names. The foil
names were presented in order to correct for guessing; final
scores on the task were penalized based on the number of
foils checked. Participants were instructed to read the list and
place a checkmark next to the names they believed to be real
authors. One additional aspect of the Author Recognition Test
was that two “effort probe” items were included. These effort
probe items (Edgar Allen Poe and Stephen King) were items
that, theoretically, every college student should be able to
recognize.
The Shipley (1940) vocabulary task was given to
participants as a measure of reading ability/reading
experience. Participants were presented with a target word,
and were required to choose the word most similar to it from
a list containing four choices. The task contained 40 target
words.
Need for cognition (COGNEED), a personality variable
that is typically defined as the need to be cognitively engaged,
was included under the assumption that people high in
COGNEED would also be people who read more frequently.
COGNEED was measured using a revised version of the
Need for Cognition (NCS) scale (Cacioppo, Petty, & Kao,
1984), which contained 18 items that have been shown to be
good predictors of Need for Cognition. Participants rated
themselves on each item (e.g. I would prefer complex to
simple problems.) on a nine-point Likert-type scale (4=extremely inaccurate, 4=extremely accurate).
The WAIS-R (Wechsler, 1981) backward digit span task is
similar to the vWM task, but without a strong grounding in
language comprehension processes. It was composed of 14
sets of digits, with two sets at each level of complexity.
Participants saw two digits presented rapidly. After all the
digits in each set were presented, an asterisk appeared, and
participants were instructed to recall the digits, not in the
order in which they were presented, but in a backwards order.
The number of digits that had to be recalled increased at each
set-level, starting with two and ending with eight.

Experiment 2
The interpretation of the results obtained in Experiment 1
rests, in part, on the notion that the modified Waters and
Caplan span task measures language comprehension skill.
One might assume that participants who do well on reading
span tasks are also participants who have had more
experience with language than those who do poorly on them.
In other words, we argue that reading span tasks measure
individual differences in reading skill, but that these
individual differences arise, to a large extent, via individual
differences in reading experience.
In order to test this assumption, we administered five tasks
we believed to measure either verbal working memory
(vWM) capacity or language experience. As measures of
language experience (or correlates thereof), we administered
the Author Recognition Task (ART) (West, Stanovich, &
Mitchell, 1993), a Vocabulary Task (VOCAB) (Shipley,
1940), and a Need for Cognition (COGNEED) scale
645

Verbal working memory (vWM) span was measured by the
modified version of the Waters and Caplan (1996) span task
(as described in Experiment 1).
On-line reading performance was assessed using the Main
Verb/Reduced Relative Clause (MV/RRC) ambiguity
materials from MacDonald, Just, and Carpenter (1992).
3 (a) The experienced soldiers / warned about the dangers
/ before the midnight / raid.
(b) The experienced soldiers / spoke about the dangers /
before the midnight / raid.
(c) The experienced soldiers / warned about the
dangers / conducted the midnight / raid.
(d) The experienced soldiers / who were warned about
the dangers / conducted the midnight / raid.
In example (3), the ambiguous sentences (3a and 3c)
become ambiguous at segment two. The verb “warned” may
be interpreted either as the main verb (MV) of the sentence
(3a) or as the beginning of a relative clause (RC) (3c).
Segment three, the point of disambiguation, contains the
information necessary to arrive at the correct interpretation of
the ambiguity. The MV unambiguous sentence (3b) is not
ambiguous because the verb “spoke” does not produce an
ambiguity. The unambiguous RC sentence is unambiguous
because the inclusion of the relative pronoun (plus the past
tense form of the verb “to be”) eradicates any ambiguity.
These sentence materials have been consistently shown to
elicit a garden-path effect when the ambiguity is resolved in
accordance with the RC interpretation (3c) (Kemtes &
Kemper, 1997; MacDonald et al., 1992).
Thirty-six sentence frames similar to the one above were
counterbalanced across four lists. Each list was comprised of
one sentence from each of the 36 sentence frames. As a result,
each participant saw nine of each sentence-type, but only one
sentence from each sentence frame. Fifty filler items, along
with eight unrelated practice items, were incorporated into
each list.

number of consecutive trials for which participants correctly
recalled all digits in the correct order (M=9.47, SD=2.48). The
score on the vocabulary task was simply the number of items
for which the participant answered with the correct synonym
(M=31.32, SD=3.14). The 18-item need for cognition scale
was scored by summing each participant’s responses. Given
that participants responded to each item on a nine-point
Likert-type scale ranging from –4 (low COGNEED) to +4
(high COGNEED), possible scores ranged from –72 to +72.
The mean need for cognition score was 10.68 (SD=22.76).
Exploratory factor analysis was conducted on the scores
derived from the five measures with a principal axis factoring
extraction method and varimax rotation. Two factors were
extracted accounting for 35.17% of the original variance (a
number commensurate with many published EFA studies).
Scores on the five tasks were considered in the interpretation
of a factor only if the factor loading value was .3 or above.
All rotated loading values for each factor can be seen in Table
1. It should be noted that the pattern of factor loadings was
the same across all types of non-orthogonal rotation methods
as well.
Table 2: Rotated factor loadings.
vWM

ART

VOCAB COGNEED

Factor 1
.413
(EX-Factor)

.629

.745

Factor 2

-.155

.168

.068

.378
-.006

BDS
.007
.661

Examining the values in Table 2 reveals that vWM, which
many argue to be a measure of verbal working memory,
actually appears to load on Factor 1, along with the three
measures hypothesized to measure language experience
(ART, VOCAB, COGNEED). More interestingly, scores on
the BDS task, the task that measures working memory, but
without being heavily grounded in language comprehension
processes, do not load on Factor 1. Instead, the BDS task
loaded by itself on Factor 2. All factor cross-loadings were
quite low, indicating that two separate factors were identified.
Given that ART, VOCAB, vWM, and COGNEED all
loaded together, Factor 1 was named and interpreted as the
experience factor (EX-Factor). Unfortunately, given that only
one task loaded on factor two, it was deemed unstable and
was not named or interpreted. Scores on the EX-Factor tasks
were converted to z-scores and those z-scores were summed,
resulting in a score on the EX-Factor for each participant.
Below, we demonstrate that scores on the EX- Factor clearly
predict RTs on RC garden-path sentences. Reading times on
the MV/RRC sentences were length-adjusted as explained in
Experiment 1. A 2 (MV vs. RRC) x 2 (ambiguous vs.
unambiguous) x 2 (ambiguity vs. disambiguation) repeatedmeasures ANOVA revealed a significant three-way
interaction, F(1, 70)=18.60, p<.0005.

Procedure Participants completed the vocabulary task first,
followed by the Need for Cognition scale. Then, the on-line
language comprehension task was administered as described
in Experiment 1. Participants subsequently completed the
modified version of the Waters and Caplan span task,
followed by the backwards digit span task. The Author
Recognition Task was administered last.

Results and Discussion
The score on the Author Recognition Test was simply the
proportion of real authors that were checked by each
participant minus the proportion of foil names checked. This
resulted in a mean score of .31 (interpreted as 31 percent)
with a standard deviation of .11. All participants checked at
least one of the effort probes.
The modified version of the Waters and Caplan span task
was scored the same way as detailed in Experiment 1,
eliciting a mean response of 4.43 (SD=1.09). Possible scores
on the BDS task ranged from 0 to 14 and were taken to be the
646

In combination, these results support the idea that reading
span measures and sentence processing tasks are tapping into
the same underlying skill, and crucially, that this skill is
determined, primarily, by experience. Investigations into the
role that reading experience exerts on language processing are
currently lacking. In light of these results, we argue that
current conceptualizations of individual differences in
sentence processing should be re-evaluated with a focus on
the effects of experience with language.

60

Length-Adjusted RTs (msec) +/- SE

50
40

MV-Amb
MV-UnAmb
RC-Amb
RC-UnAmb

30
20
10
0
-10
-20

References

-30
Ambiguity

Disambiguation

-40

Altmann, G. T. M., Garnham, A., & Dennis, Y. (1992). Avoiding
the garden path: Eye movements in context. Journal of Memory
and Language, 31, 685-712.
Cacioppo, J., Petty, R., & Kao, C. (1984). The efficient assessment
of need for cognition. Journal of Personality Assessment, 48, 306307
Cohen, J. D., MacWhinney, B., Flatt, M., & Provost, J.
(1992). Psyscope: A new graphic interactive environment for
designing psychology experiments. Behavioral Research
Methods, Instruments, and Computers, 25(2), 257-271.
Daneman, M., & Carpenter, P. A. (1980). Individual
differences in working memory and reading. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 19, 450-466.
Ferreira, F., & Clifton, C. (1986). The independence of syntactic
processing. Journal of Memory and Language, 25, 348-368.
Frazier, L., & Fodor, J. D. (1978). The sausage machine: A new
two-stage parsing model. Cognition, 6, 291-325.
Just, M. A., Carpenter, P. A., & Woolley, J. D. (1982).
Paradigms and processes in reading comprehension. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 111, 228-238.
Just, M. A., & Carpenter, P. A. (1992). A capacity-based theory of
comprehension: New frontiers of evidence and arguments.
Psychological Review, 103, 773-780.
Kemtes, K. A., & Kemper, S. (1997). Younger and older
adults’ on-line processing of syntactically ambiguous sentences.
Psychology and Aging, 12(2), 362-371.
MacDonald, M. C., Just, M., A., & Carpenter, P. A. (1992).
Working memory constraints on the processing of syntactic
ambiguity. Cognition, 24, 56-98.
MacDonald, M. C., & Christiansen, M. H. (2002). Reassessing
working memory: Comment on Just and Carpenter (1992) and
Waters and Caplan (1996). Psychological Review, 109, 35-54.
Shipley, W. C. (1940). A self-administered scale for measuring
intellectual impairment and deterioration. Journal of Psychology,
9, 371-377.
Spivey, M. J., & Tanenhaus, M. (1994). Referential context and
syntactic ambiguity resolution. In C. Clifton, L. Frazier, & K.
Rayner (Eds.), Perspectives on Sentence Processing. Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Waters, G. S., & Caplan, D. (1996). The measurement of
verbal working memory capacity and its relation to reading
comprehension. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
49, 51-79.
Wechsler, D. (1981). The Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale
– Revised. New York: Psychological Corporation.
West, R. F., Stanovich, K. E., & Mitchell, H. R. (1993). Reading in
the real world and its correlates. Reading Research Quarterly,
28(1), 35-50.

Segment

Figure 3: Length-adjusted RTs on the MV/RRC ambiguous
sentences administered in Experiment 2.
The pattern of the interaction, illustrated in Figure 3,
reveals that the garden-path effect did occur. There was a
significant difference in RTs between the RC-resolved
ambiguous sentences and the RC-unambiguous sentences at
the point of disambiguation, t(70)=6.72, p<.0005.
Subsequently, EX-Factor scores were used to predict RTs
at the point of disambiguation for each of the four sentencetypes. EX-Factor scores significantly predicted RTs at
disambiguation for the RC-resolved garden-path sentences,
t(70)=3.03, p=.003, but not for the other three sentence types
(all p’s > .1). More impressively, EX-Factor scores predicted
the difference in RTs between the RC-ambiguous and RCunambiguous sentences at disambiguation, t(70)=2.20,
p=.031. Additionally, although Factor 2 was considered
unstable, it should be noted that memory (BDS scores) did
not predict RTs at disambiguation for any of the four
conditions (all p’s > .1).
The factor analysis results suggest that the reading span
task is grounded more in experience than memory.
Furthermore, the predictive value of the EX-Factor scores in
segments of the sentence where an individual difference
effect would be expected offers some validity evidence in
support of the EX-Factor—i.e., experience—in explaining
individual differences in sentence processing.

General Discussion
Experiment 1 reveals that high span individuals seem to
possess a bias toward the SC resolution of the SC/RC
ambiguity. Given that there exists a strong bias in naturallyoccurring language for an ambiguity created by told to be
resolved with the SC interpretation, individuals with more
language experience are also more likely to exhibit a
preference for that resolution. As a result of the noted
difficulty in explaining these results under a capacity-based
view of individual differences in sentence processing, we
argue that these results support an experience-based
approach. Experiment 2, presenting additional support for an
experience-based approach, demonstrates that span tasks are
measuring processing skill instead of memory capacity.

647

