UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Similarity-Based Sampling: Testing a Model of Price Psychophysics

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1tp9m3pn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Brown, Gordon D.A.
Qian, Jing

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Similarity-Based Sampling: Testing a Model of Price Psychophysics
Jing Qian (j.qian@warwick.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Warwick
Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK

Gordon D.A. Brown (g.d.a.brown@warwick.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Warwick
Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK
Abstract

show that recent models of price psychophysics do not allow
for effects of similarity-based sampling, and note recent
psychophysical research that suggests that similaritysampling effects do occur when non-economic stimuli (tones
for different frequencies) are judged. Finally we describe a
new model of price psychophysics, GEMS (Qian & Brown,
2005), and apply the model to the results of two experiments
designed to test the prediction that similarity-sampling will
occur in price perception, paralleling processes involved in
the judgment of non-economic quantities.

How is the perceived attractiveness of a price influenced by the
context or sample within which it appears? Current models of
price judgment are often based on psychophysical models of the
contextual judgment of non-economic stimuli. These existing
models accommodate a number of contextual effects, but do not
allow for the possibility, motivated by independent
psychophysical data, that the weighting of comparison items
within a sample may vary with their similarity to the target.
Here we address this issue by using results from two
experiments to estimate the parameters of the GEMS
(Generalized Exemplar Model of Sampling) model. In both
Experiment 1, when prices are simultaneously presented, and in
Experiment 2, when prices are presented sequentially, some
evidence for similarity-based sampling is obtained.

Development of Price Psychophysics

Keywords: Economic Psychophysics; price perception;
similarity sampling; Range Frequency Theory; Generalized
Exemplar Model of Sampling.

Introduction
When people decide which product to buy or which job to
accept, the choice normally takes place within a context of
available or retrieved options. Given a large amount of
potentially available information, and limited processing time
and short-term memory capacity, people tend to sample only
a subset of possible alternatives and then form a judgment
based on the sample (Fiedler & Juslin, in press). Here we
address the question of how different prices within a sample
or choice context combine to determine the judgment of a
target price. More specifically, we use model-based analyses
to develop and test the hypothesis that sampled prices that are
similar to a target price will have a greater effect on the
perceived attractiveness of a target price than will less similar
prices within the sample.
The research falls within the domain of Economic
Psychophysics, defined in terms of the assumption that the
magnitudes of economic quantities such as prices and wages
are perceived in a similar manner to simple psychophysical
stimuli such as weights and loudnesses (see, e.g., Brown,
Gardner, Oswald, & Qian, 2004; Qian & Brown, 2005;
Stewart, Chater, Stott, & Reimers, 2003). The plan of the rest
of the paper is as follows. We first describe existing models
of context effects in price perception, emphasizing that such
models typically derive from psychophysical accounts
developed independently to account for contextual effects
observed when non-economic stimuli are judged. We then
1785

Classical models of price perception in economics assumed
that a rational consumer makes purchase decisions based on
the actual (absolute) prices and utilities of available options.
Research from the early 1970s subsequently demonstrated
that context effects are ubiquitous in price perception, and the
resulting models typically claimed that price evaluations are
based on the comparison of a target price to a reference price
(e.g., Emery, 1970; Monroe, 1973). A reference price is an
internal price to which consumers compare observed prices.
This concept originally came from Helson’s (1964)
Adaptation Level Theory, where each stimulus to be rated is
compared to an internal norm (adaptation level), which is
partly made up of a weighted mean of the stimuli presented
within a contextual set. In some instantiations, the reference
price has been assumed to be simply the average price of all
the contextual prices (e.g., Janiszewski & Lichtenstein, 1999).
Although the influence of Adaptation Level Theory is still
prominent in the price perception literature, the model has
been shown to be inadequate in the domain of non-economic
psychophysics (e.g., Parducci, 1995). Departures from the
predictions of single reference price models have
correspondingly been found in consumer price perception
research. For example, the range of prices within a contextual
sample appears to have an effect on judgment that is
independent of the mean of the contextual prices (Janiszewski
& Lichtenstein, 1999). Furthermore, the distribution
(skewness) of prices within a sample also has an independent
effect on the perception of prices within that context
(Niedrich, Sharma & Wedell, 2001; Qian & Brown, 2005),
consistent with multiple exemplar models.
Based partly on their evidence against alternative accounts,
Niedrich et al. (2001) successfully applied Range Frequency
Theory (RFT; Parducci, 1963, 1995) to price perception. Like
Adaptation Level Theory, RFT was originally developed to
account for context effects on the judgment of simple

psychophysical stimuli such as weights and loudnesses. RFT
assumes that the judgment of a stimulus magnitude is made
relative to all the contextual stimuli. Specifically, the
judgment is based on two principles: The range principle
specifies that the judgment of a stimulus is based on the ratio
of the distance in value between the target stimulus, xi, and
the minimum stimulus, xmin, to the whole stimulus range, xmaxxmin, (Ri: Equation 1). The frequency principle states that the
judgment of a stimulus also depends on its relative ranked
position within an ordered contextual set of N stimuli (Fi:
Equation 2). The overall judgment, RFTi, is a weighted
average of the results given by the above two principles
(Equation 3).

!

Ri =

x i " x min
x max " x min

(1)

Fi =

i "1
N "1

(2)

RFTi = wRi + (1" w)Fi

(3)

where w is a weighting parameter.
! RFT appears to provide a good account of price perception
in the limited number of studies that have examined it to date,
!with participants placing approximately equal weighting on
the range and frequency principles when prices are presented
simultaneously, but greater weight on the range dimension
when prices are presented sequentially (Niedrich et al., 2001;
Qian & Brown, 2005).
!

Similarity Sampling
The frequency principle states that the ranked position of a
price within a comparison set is an important factor
underpinning its perceived attractiveness. Implicit in this
formulation is the assumption that all comparator prices enter
into the comparison with equal weight; i.e., that a price just a
small amount higher than the target will have the same
influence on the target’s evaluation as a price that is
substantially higher. Such an assumption is also made by
models that assume only ordinal comparisons can be made
(Stewart, Chater, & Brown, 2004). However intuition
suggests that, when evaluating a price, prices that are similar
to the target price may carry more weight in the decision
process than prices that are dissimilar to the target price. For
example, if a consumer is evaluating a digital music player
priced $200, another music player priced $220 might seem
more relevant to the evaluation of the target price than a
music player priced $280 (i.e., similarity-weighted sampling
will occur).
A parallel idea has been tested in a psychophysical task
where the subjective frequency of each of a series of tones
must be judged. Brown and Stewart (2005) reported
subjective frequency judgments for tones drawn from
distributions that varied in skewness and were constructed to
enable test of the similarity sampling hypothesis. The central
finding was that a tone that has the same range and frequency
value in two different distributions may nonetheless receive a
different subjective judgment, contrary to RFT’s predictions.
Specifically, a target tone presented in a context of N lower
tones that are more similar to it than N higher tones is
1786

perceived as subjectively higher than the same tone presented
in another distribution where it is more similar to N tones that
are higher in pitch and less similar to N tones that are lower in
pitch. This effect suggests that the judgment context for a
tone consists mainly of similar tones (consistent with the
operation of similarity-based memory retrieval processes in
construction of a comparison set) or, equivalently, that similar
tones are (contrary to RFT) given greater weight in the
comparison process.
Will price attractiveness judgments mirror the similaritysampling effects seen in judgments of non-price stimuli? Here
we examine this issue by applying and testing the GEMS
(Generalized Exemplar Model of Sampling) model developed
by Qian and Brown (2005; see also Brown et al., 2004).
Crucially for present purposes, the model incorporates a
parameter that specifies the weighting given to prices as a
function of the similarity of each comparator price to the
target price. RFT is a special case of the GEMS model. The
specification of GEMS is as follows (Equation 4):
i"1
N
%
(
'
$ (x i " x j )# " $ (x j " x i )# * (4)
j= i+1
*
J i (x) = wRi + (1" w)'0.5 + j=1
i"1
N
'
*
#
#
2($ (x i " x j ) + $ (x j " x i ) ) *
'
&
)
j=1
j= i+1

where Ji is the subjective judgment of x, xi is the ith least
expensive price, and w is the weighting on the range
component. Ri is the range value for price i (see Equation 1),
and γ is the similarity sampling parameter. When γ=0, equal
weighting is given to all non-target items and Equation 4 is
equivalent to RFT. When γ<0, the equation implements a
similarity-based model, in which prices close to the target
prices are weighted more heavily. When γ>0, the model gives
greater weight to prices further away from the target price.
The above formulation produces judgments bounded between
0 and 1; in all model-fitting described below the ratings were
scaled monotonically in such a way that the highest and
lowest ratings produced by the model corresponded to the
highest and lowest ratings in the data to be fitted. (This
accommodated cases where participants failed to utilize the
full range of the scale.)
Qian and Brown (2005) applied GEMS to price perception
under conditions where a small number of prices were
presented for evaluation, and found partial evidence for
similarity sampling. In this paper, we further test the idea of
similarity sampling with a different experimental design to
allow a stronger test of the hypothesis. We hypothesize that,
when evaluating a price, similar prices are weighted more
heavily than less similar prices (i.e., γ<0). The two
experiments reported below use the same range and
distributions of prices. In Experiment 1, prices are presented
simultaneously, and in Experiment 2 prices are presented
sequentially.

Experiment 1
Participants
Ten undergraduate students from the University of Warwick
were tested. They were each paid two pounds (GBP) for
participation.

Materials
Two distributions of prices were constructed as described
below. The prices (in GBP) were presented as printed
numbers on small colored labels. A printed attractiveness
rating scale approximately 18 inches long was provided with
numbers 1-7 marked on it. “1” represented “extremely
unattractive” and “7” represented “extremely attractive”. The
small price-bearing labels could be placed at any location on
this scale.
Table 1: Price stimuli used in Experiment 1
Distribution 1
119.8
131.0
142.2
153.4
164.6
175.8
187.0
198.2
209.4
279.4
282.2
285.0
287.8
290.6
293.4
296.2
299.0

Distribution 2
119.8
122.6
125.4
128.2
131.0
133.8
136.6
139.4
209.4
220.6
231.8
243.0
254.2
265.4
276.6
287.8
299.0

110

160

210

260

310

Price

Figure 1: Price distributions used in Experiment 1 and 2.
Filled circles represent price stimuli in distribution 1, and
open circles represent price stimuli in distribution 2.
The experiment used a within-subject design; each
participant rated every price in the two distributions.
Distributions were presented one at a time, in
counterbalanced order.

Procedure
Participants were asked to imagine that they were planning to
buy a plane ticket and a packaged holiday to the same
destination. In each condition, participants were asked to
compare various products that were priced differently by
placing the associated price labels on the attractiveness rating
scale. The scale was continuous; participants could place the
labels at any point along the scale. Labels could be moved
along the scale as new labels were added. After participants
evaluated one condition, the price labels and scale were
removed, and participants were presented with the other set of
price labels and a new rating scale.

Results
The results are shown in Figure 2.

Design
Two distributions containing 17 prices each were used in the
experiment. The distributions were constructed to maximize
the differences in prediction made by similarity-based models
and RFT. Table 1 lists the prices used. The prices from the
two distributions have the same lowest and highest prices.
The middle price ranks 9th in both distributions. According to
RFT this price will be given the same rating in each
distribution because it has the same range value and also the
same rank/frequency value across the two distributions.
However, according to similarity sampling models, this price
will receive lower ratings in condition 1 than in condition 2,
because (in condition 1) it is more similar to lower prices than
to higher prices. Figure 1 illustrates the spacing of prices in
each distribution.

1787

Comparison Points The ratings of the comparison point
(price £209.4) from the two distributions were compared, and
a conventional t-test showed no significant difference
between them although the difference between the ratings
from the two distributions was in the direction similaritybased models would predict (3.76 for distribution 1; 3.86 for
distribution 2). We therefore undertook more sensitive modelbased analyses to take account of all data points
simultaneously.
Model Based Analyses First we fit RFT (a special case of
GEMS) to the mean data from each of the two distributions.
R2 was .991, with w=.31. We then examined the independent
contributions of range and rank by comparing residual sums
of squares of range-only (w=1) and rank-only (w=0) models’
predictions with those of RFT. As both alternative models are
nested within RFT, a generalized likelihood ratio test (GLRT;
Lamberts, 1997) can be used. Analysis revealed an
independent contribution of the range component
(χ2(1)=35.9, p<.005), and of the rank/frequency component
(χ2(1)=81.1, p<.005). We then estimated γ along with w, and

used GLRT to compare GEMS (γ free), and RFT (γ=0), as
RFT was nested within GEMS. The best fitting w was 0.45,
and γ was –0.13 (i.e., in the direction predicted by the
similarity sampling hypothesis). The improvement in fit
achieved by allowing γ to vary was only marginally
significant (χ2(1)=3.46, p<.1). The fit of the full GEMS
model, and the data, are shown in Figure 2. An R2 of .992 was
obtained.

When prices are presented simultaneously as in Experiment
1, the range and relative rank of a target price in relation to
the context is highly salient. This may be expected to
facilitate processing that leads to conformity with RFT. In
Experiment 2, we therefore examined the effect of similarity
sampling when prices are presented sequentially. We
hypothesized that when prices are presented in succession,
and not all previous prices will be recallable, it will be more
difficult to access the information about the relative rank and
range of a price. Therefore prices that are similar to a target
price may be more easily remembered and hence carry
heavier weight than other prices in the context. Thus a larger
similarity effect may be obtained.

Experiment 2
Participants
50 undergraduate students from University of Warwick were
tested and were paid 2 pounds (GBP) for their participation.
Five were excluded for failing to comply with the
experimental instructions (making incomplete or inconsistent
use of the rating scale).

Materials
Figure 2: GEMS model fit to the average data from the two
distributions.
We also fitted the GEMS model to individual participant
data, thus obtaining separate estimates of w and γ for each
individual. The average w estimate was .41, and the average
estimate of γ was –0.36. Consistent with the assumption of
similarity-based sampling, the best fitting γ obtained from
individual participants was significantly lower than zero
(t(9)=2.4, p<.05).

Discussion
The evidence for similarity sampling in Experiment 1 was
mixed. There was no clear evidence for similarity sampling
when we examined the averaged data from the two
distributions. With a R2 of .991, RFT provided an excellent fit
to the data, in line with previous research on price perception
when prices are presented simultaneously (see Qian &
Brown, 2005). However, when we examined the data from
each participant separately, we found some evidence of
similarity-based sampling. Moreover, the γ parameter
estimates that were obtained were meaningful. For example,
when participants are evaluating the middle price (£209.4) the
two adjacent prices in distribution 1 are £198.2 and £279.4.
The middle price is more similar to the former (£11.2 more
expensive) than to the latter (£70 cheaper). If a similarity
weighting γ of –0.36 is used, then the more similar price is
weighted almost twice as heavily (11.2-0.36=0.42) than the
more distant price (70-0.36=0.22).

1788

102 prices were presented one at a time on a computer screen.
E-prime was used to program the experiment. After each
price was presented, participants were required to enter a
number between 1 and 7 to represent their subjective rating of
the perceived attractiveness of the price. The experiment
lasted 15 minutes.

Design and Procedure
The price stimuli used in Experiment 2 were based on those
used in Experiment 1. Two distributions of the same shapes
were used. Gaussian noise (mean=0, SD=1.5) was added to
the basic prices used in Experiment 1. As participants needed
repeated exposure to become familiar with the contextual
distribution and stabilize their ratings, six blocks of prices
were created in this way. Each represented a noisy version of
the distribution of prices in Experiment 1. Prices within each
block were presented in random order, and six blocks were
presented without a break.
A between-subject design was used, and each participant
completed six blocks of prices evaluation of one distribution.
21 participants evaluated prices in distribution 1, and 24
evaluated prices in distribution 2. A similar cover story to the
one in Experiment 1 was given at the beginning of the
experiment.

Results
The results are shown in Figure 3.
Comparison Points The ratings of the comparison point
(price £209.4) in the two distributions were compared across
all six blocks. The mean rating was 3.15 for distribution 1 and
3.43 for distribution 2. However the effect of distribution was
not statistically significant in the conventional analysis:

F(1,22)=1.4, NS. We therefore turned to the more sensitive
model-based analyses, which effectively takes into account
all data points, not just the middle one.

We note that closer fits between model and data can be
achieved if additional parameters are included. For example,
including a power-law transformation of price prior to
application of Equation 4 increases R2 significantly. However
in order to maintain a clear focus on the effects of interest we
avoided adding additional complexity to the model.

General Discussion

Figure 3: GEMS model fit to the average data of 6 blocks
from the two distributions.
Model Based Analyses First we fitted RFT to the mean data
from each of the two distributions. The value of w that best fit
the data was 0.72, and a R2 of .990 was obtained. We then
examined the independent contributions of range and rank by
comparing nested range-only (w=1) and rank-only (w=0)
models. There was an independent contribution of the range
component (χ2(1)=75.3, p<.005), and of the rank component
(χ2(1)=25.8, p<.005). We then estimated γ and w
simultaneously, and used a GLRT to compare GEMS and
RFT (γ=0). The best fitting value of w was 0.87, and of γ was
–0.66. R2 was estimated at .991. γ made a statistically
significant contribution to the improvement of fit (χ2(1)= 4.2,
p<.05). The fit of GEMS to the average data is shown in
Figure 3.
As a between-subjects design was employed, it was not
appropriate to fit GEMS to individual participant data from
Experiment 2.

Discussion
Model-based analysis found a small but statistically
significant effect of similarity sampling in Experiment 2. This
result appears consistent with the possibility that similaritybased memory retrieval processes contribute to the online
construction of the sample that provides the context for
judgment.
Comparison of the parameter estimates obtained from
Experiment 1 and 2 suggests that, consistent with previous
studies, (e.g., Niedrich et al., 2001; Qian & Brown, 2005), the
weighting on the range component is larger in sequential
presentation than in simultaneous presentation.
1789

The studies reported here were motivated by the general
hypothesis of Economic Psychophysics. According to this
approach, the judgment of economic quantities such as prices
is governed by the same processes that govern the judgment
of the subjective magnitudes of unidimensional noneconomic stimuli.
Consistent with this approach, several previous models of
price perception have been derived from pre-existing
psychophysical models such as Adaptation Level Theory and
Range Frequency Theory. In the present paper we addressed
the possibility that similarity-based sampling, as already
observed in models of memory and perception of noneconomic stimuli, would be seen in subjective judgments of
price attractiveness.
In Experiment 1, where prices were presented
simultaneously, analysis using the GEMS model found a
small effect of similarity sampling in some analyses. It was
predicted that a larger effect of similarity would be obtained
when a large number of prices were presented sequentially
and hence demands on memory (and hence similarity-based
retrieval processes) were greater. This prediction was tested
in Experiment 2, and model-based analysis found a small but
statistically significant effect of similarity-based sampling.
However the effect was no greater than that observed in
Experiment 1.
Overall, the results suggest that models such as RFT
(Niedrich et al., 2001) may need to be supplemented by
similarity-based comparison processes. However, the effects
we obtained were small in magnitude, and RFT may provide
an excellent approximation in many circumstances. More
generally, the results provide further evidence consistent with
the overall claim that models developed in psychophysics
may usefully be extended and applied to subjective judgments
of economic quantities such as prices.

References
Brown, G.D.A., Gardner, J., Oswald, A., & Qian, J. (2004).
Does wage rank affect employees’ wellbeing? Unpublished
manuscript.
Brown, G.D.A., & Stewart, N. (2005). Similarity sampling in
judgment: Evidence against Range Frequency Theory.
Unpublished manuscript.
Emery, F.E. (1970). Some psychological aspects of price. In
B. Taylor & G. Willis (Eds.), Pricing strategy. NJ:
Brandon Systems.
Fiedler, K., & Juslin, P. (Eds.) (in press). Information
sampling and adaptive cognition. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.

Helson, H. (1964). Adaptation level theory. Oxford, England:
Harper & Row.
Janiszewski, C., & Lichtenstein, D.R. (1999). A range theory
account of price perception. Journal of Consumer
Research, 25, 353-368.
Lamberts, K. (1997). Process models of categorization. In
D.R. Shanks & K. Lamberts (Eds.), Knowledge, concepts,
and categories. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Monroe, K.B. (1973). Buyers’ subjective perception of price.
Journal of Consumer Research, 10, 70-80.
Niedrich, R.W., Sharma, S., & Wedell, D.H. (2001).
Reference price and price perceptions: A comparison of
alternative models. Journal of Consumer Research, 28,
339-354.

1790

Parducci, A. (1963). Range-Frequency compromise in
judgment. Psychological Monographs, 77, 1-29.
Parducci, A. (1995). Happiness, pleasure, and judgment: The
contextual theory and its applications. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Qian, J., & Brown, G.D.A. (2005). Loss aversion, anchoring
and similarity sampling in price perception: Towards an
integrated model. Unpublished manuscript.
Stewart, N., Chater, N., & Brown, G.D.A. (2004). Decision
by sampling. Unpublished manuscript.
Stewart, N., Chater, N., Stott, H.P., & Reimers, S. (2003).
Prospect relativity: How choice options influence decision
under risk. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
132, 23-46.

