UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Simulating the Fröhlich Effect of Motion Misperception as a Result of Top-Down Attentional
Modulation in the Visual System

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5dt689kz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Carbone, Elena
Pomplun, Marc

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Simulating the Fröhlich Effect of Motion Misperception as a Result of Top-Down
Attentional Modulation in the Visual System
Elena Carbone (elena.carbone@uni-bielefeld.de)
Department of Psychology, Bielefeld University
Universitätsstraße 25, 33615 Bielefeld, Germany

Marc Pomplun (marc@cs.umb.edu)
Department of Computer Science, University of Massachusetts at Boston
100 Morrissey Boulevard, Boston, MA 02125-3393, USA
visual areas back to V1, and that these reentrant processes
are essential for the conscious percept. This is supported by
studies that have shown feedback to V1 to be indeed
essential for a conscious perception of certain stimulus
features (Martinez et al., 1999; Pascual-Leone & Walsh,
2001). The Fröhlich effect results because the feedback loop
is initially triggered by the actual onset position but meets
later stimulus representations during the feedback process.
We restricted the model to horizontal motion because
one-dimensional motion is sufficient for simulating the
Fröhlich effect. Additionally, this keeps the model simple
and makes its visualization easy. Just like the visual system,
the model is hierarchical. It consists of five layers, the first
of which explicitly represents the input (more precisely, it
corresponds to one row of pixels on a computer screen). The
second layer represents the primary visual cortex (V1), and
the layers 3, 4, and 5 correspond to higher visual areas
accordingly. Each neuron inside the model receives input
from its receptive field (RF), which is a spatially contiguous
set of neurons in the layer immediately below.
Obviously, the connections between the first and second
layers do not represent direct links between neurons, but the
mapping of the visual input - via optical projection and the
early visual pathway - onto neurons in V1. The connectivity
pattern between these two layers therefore differs from the
other layers in order to reflect an important property of V1 the cortical magnification factor. The size of receptive fields
of V1 neurons increases drastically with increasing retinal
eccentricity of its input. For determining the connections
between the input layer and the second layer we took this
magnification into consideration. The RF sizes were
determined by using the formula provided by Rosa,
Casagrande, Preuss, and Kaas (1997):

Abstract
The term “Fröhlich effect” refers to the phenomenon that the
initial position of a fast moving stimulus appears to be shifted
in the motion direction. Based on the Asynchronous Updating
Model (e.g., Müsseler & Neumann, 1992; Scharlau &
Neumann, 2003) we simulated this perceptual illusion via a
neural model. The model was capable of simulating the same
main effects as those that were found in empirical data.

Introduction
More than 80 years ago, the German physiologist Friedrich
Fröhlich discovered a localization error that occurs with fast
moving stimuli: The stimulus did not seem to appear at its
actual starting location but at a later position on the motion
trajectory (Fröhlich, 1921, 1929). Most researchers explain
the Fröhlich effect in terms of visuospatial attention (e.g.,
Müsseler & Aschersleben, 1998; Müsseler & Neumann,
1992; Müsseler, Stork, & Kerzel, 2002; Neumann &
Müsseler, 1990). Neumann's Asynchronous Updating
Model is based on only a few plain assumptions. It states
that the stimulus onset triggers an attention shift towards its
location. During the shift the stimulus moves, and because
the stimulus can only be consciously perceived when the
shift is completed, a later position is erroneously perceived
as the first position.
In this paper we present a neural model that is aimed at
simulating the Fröhlich effect by adopting the idea of a
time-consuming attentional mechanism necessary for a
conscious percept. We will then compare simulation results
to basic empirical results on the Fröhlich effect for the
stimulus parameters velocity, motion direction, and stimulus
eccentricity

Description of the Artificial Neural Network

RFsize (degrees) = 0.57 ⋅ eccentricity

The model is based on only a few core assumptions: We
started from the now well-known fact that feedforward as
well as feedback connections exist in visual processing, and
that feedback connections seem to be involved in higher
cognitive processes like attention, consciousness, and cross
modal integration of stimulus features (e.g., Di Lollo, Enns,
& Rensink, 2000; Driver & Spence, 2000; Lamme &
Roelfsema, 2000; Luck, 1998). We also assumed that the
attention shift corresponds to a feedback loop from higher

0.69

The number of neurons in layer 2 and their RF sizes were
computed by applying the formula for a central fixation
point and a subject-screen distance of 40 cm (both were
standard parameters in our Fröhlich experiments). For all
RFs, including those in layer 1, the overlap with their
neighbors was set to 40 percent. The number of neurons in
higher layers was computed by approximately dividing the
390

number of neurons in the lower layer in half and by keeping
the RF overlap of 40 percent. These constraints led to a
network configuration of 1478 pixels in the first layer, 111
neurons in the second layer, 55 neurons in the third layer, 27
neurons in the fourth layer, and 13 neurons in the fifth layer.
The model simulates time, i.e., the time for the stimulus’
movement and for transmitting information from one layer
to the next. The motion is simulated by setting pixels in the
input layer to 1 while setting the remaining pixels to 0 for
specific time intervals. The standard stimulus used in most
of our experiments (Carbone, 2001) and in the simulations
was 14 pixels wide (0.67°) and was shifted by its entire
width with every retrace of the screen (16.67 ms; 60 Hz).
The feedforward transmission delays were set on the
basis of a meta-analysis on visual response latencies in the
macaque cerebral cortex done by Lamme and Roelfsema
(2000). According to the authors the “fast feedforward
sweep of activity is completed within approximately 100
ms” (Lamme & Roelfsema, 2000, p. 575). They additionally
established a mean response latency of 72 ms for V1. To
yield a total transmission delay of 100 ms, we set the first
delay (from the input layer to V1) to 72 ms and the other
three delays to 9.33 ms. After each delay, the net input to
neurons in the next-higher layer is computed by adding up
the weighted outputs from that neuron’s RF in the lower
layer and dividing the sum by the number of these outputs:

net i (t ) =

This is where the feedback loop starts. For establishing
the delays for the feedback delays we again consulted the
meta-analysis done by Lamme and Roelfsema (2000). They
found a latency of at least 200 ms for response enhancement
in V1 for a curve-tracing task and attributed this long delay
to recurrent processing. Since this complete delay
comprised the feedforward as well as the feedback loop and
the feedforward loop inside the model takes 100ms, we set
the complete feedback delay to 100 ms and the delays for
each of the three feedback steps to 33.33 ms (there are only
three feedback steps in our model because the feedback
terminates in V1). After the first feedback-delay of 33.33
ms, the winner neurons belonging to the receptive fields of
the feedback neurons in the next higher layer are identified
(α = 0.5). This constitutes the end of the first step of the
feedback loop. After the next delay the net searches for the
most highly activated neurons inside the receptive fields of
these neurons, and so on, until the feedback finally reaches
the second layer.
As the final step, the model determines the perceived
stimulus position that corresponds to the activation in V1.
To achieve this, the activity pattern – more specifically its
center of gravity – inside the highly activated neurons at the
second level is compared to reference activity patterns. For
a layer with neurons 1, ..., N, and oimin being the minimal
output of neuron i, the center of gravity of its activation is
located at position c(t) as computed by the following
equation:

1
⋅ ∑ wij o j (t ) ,
| RF (i ) | j∈RF (i )

N

where neti(t) is the net input to neuron i at time t, RF(i) is
the set of neurons in the RF of neuron i, wij is the synaptic
weight for input from neuron j to neuron i, and oj(t) is the
output of neuron j at time t. Then the output of the higher
layer is computed by applying a sigmoid activation
function:

oi (t ) =

1
1+ e

− ( net i ( t ) + o i ( t −1) / 2 ) −θ ) / τ

c(t ) =

∑ i ⋅ (o (t ) − o

min
i

i

i =1
N

∑ (o (t ) − o
i =1

i

min
i

)

)

These reference center of gravity values were computed
offline before the simulation. We “presented” the stimulus
to the net at each starting position, computed the center of
gravity and thereby mapped stimulus positions to locations
in V1. The current center of gravity is compared to these
reference values and the most similar one is taken as the
network’s “perceived” starting location.
These processes generate the Fröhlich effect because the
activity pattern inside the net changes during the
feedforward-feedback loop due to the fast stimulus motion.
More precisely, the activation that corresponds to the actual
starting location is transferred from the lowest up to the
highest layer. Thus the first stimulus location actually
triggers the feedback loop. But already during this
feedforward processing, the activation patterns in the lower
layers have changed in response to the shifting stimulus
location. This updating continues during the feedback loop,
and when the net determines the most highly activated
neurons inside the current RFs, the center of gravity has
shifted into the direction of the motion. This leads to a
distortion of the feedback loop at each feedback step. The
final distortion at the V1 level determines the amount of the

,

After the next transmission delay, the input of the next
layer is computed by multiplying the output by the weights,
and so on, until the information reaches the top layer TL.
When the input has finally reached TL, a competitive
process within TL determines a set of neurons WTL(t), which
are the “winner” neurons with the highest output:



1
WTL (t ) = i ∈ TL | oi (t ) ≥ α ⋅
⋅ ∑ o j (t ) ,
| TL | j∈TL


where α is a constant that determines the proportion of
winners. In the present model, for all such competitions we
set α = 0.5.

391

Fröhlich effect – the difference between the actual and the
perceived starting location.
The network's architecture and the feedforward and
feedback processes can be visualized during the simulation.
The amount of activity inside the net is visualized by inking

the neurons and connections with red color and feedback is
visualized by inking them with blue color. Figure 1 shows
the final net state when the feedforward and the feedback
processing has been completed. Since the net is too large for
a complete depiction, only the central area is shown.

Figure 1. The network state inside the central area of the neural model after the feedback loop has been completed and the
“perceived” starting location has been determined (blue squares). Activity is represented by red color and feedback by blue
color. To simplify a comparison between the perceived and actual starting locations, the pixels of the actual starting location
are filled with diagonal stripes.
the attention shift by the stimulus. The ongoing motion
changes the activity pattern inside the net and thus the
feedback loop meets activity patterns belonging to later
stimulus locations. This leads to a distortion of the
feedback activation pattern in the direction of motion.
In the following part of the paper, we will compare
empirical to simulation results for the stimulus parameters
– velocity, motion direction, and eccentricity. We were
mainly interested in whether the model would reproduce
the main effects found in the empirical data. However,
because the model in its current state does not produce

Comparing Empirical and Simulation Data
To sum up, we tried to model the emergence of the
Fröhlich effect based on the Asynchronous Updating
Model through feedforward and feedback processes inside
a neural model. Neumann's Asynchronous Updating
Model states that the Fröhlich effect emerges because the
stimulus onset triggers an attention shift towards its
location and that the stimulus moves during the shift and
can only be consciously perceived at the end of the
attention shift. In the neural model, the stimulus onset
triggering the feedback loop represents the triggering of
392

The explanation of the attentional model for the effect
of motion direction is based on the assumption that
attention is centered at the fixation point at the beginning
of each trial. When the stimulus appears, attention is
shifted towards the onset location. On its way attention
may either have to “catch up” with the stimulus or the
stimulus moves toward the focus of attention. Thus, a
stimulus that moves away from the fixation point “costs”
the attention shift some additional distance whereas
motion towards it can “save” the attention shift some
distance.
Carbone (2001) also discussed another possible
explanation for the effect of motion direction in
accordance with the attentional explanation: Evidence
found by Mateeff and Hohnsbein (1988) and Mateeff et
al. (1991) supports the assumption that the visual system
might be more sensitive to foveofugal than to foveopetal
motion. For the moving square this would lead to an
earlier start of the attention shift for foveopetal motion.
In the model, the different motion directions were
simulated by shifting the active pixels (pixels with an
output of 1) either further outward for the foveofugal
motion or further inward for the foveopetal motion with
each virtual retrace. The stationary stimulus was
simulated by setting the pixels at the corresponding
positions to one for a single retrace (16.7ms) only. The
empirical and the simulated data are shown in Figure 3.

any variance, we could not statistically test for these main
effects or test the empirical against the simulated data.
The effect of stimulus velocity was investigated by
Müsseler and Aschersleben (1998). The authors used
velocities of either 14° or 44° per second and found the
Fröhlich effect to increase with velocity. The attentional
model explains the velocity effect in a straightforward
way: A fast stimulus covers a longer distance during the
attention shift, which prolongs the attention shift and thus
leads to a larger Fröhlich effect.
For the simulation of the velocity effect, we adapted
the virtual retrace rates to Müsseler and Aschersleben's
stimulus velocities: Instead of presenting the stimulus for
16.67 ms at each location, each stimulus position was
shown for either 46.10 ms (low velocity) or 12.17 ms
(high velocity). The corresponding virtual retrace rates
were 21.69 and 82.19 Hz. The virtual retrace rates do not
correspond to those used by Müsseler and Aschersleben
(1998) because the subject-screen distance, the stimulus
size and the way to generate the motion of the stimulus
was different in the simulation and the experiments.
Figure 2 depicts the empirical and the simulation results.

Figure 2. Empirical and simulated data for the stimulus
parameter motion velocity.
As can be seen from this figure, the empirical as well
as the simulated data show an increase in the Fröhlich
effect with growing velocity Thus, the model indeed
reproduced the main effect of velocity, but this increase
seems to be more pronounced for the simulated data.
The effect of the stimulus parameter motion direction
was investigated by Carbone (2001). A black square was
used as the stimulus and either moved away from the
fixation point (foveofugal), towards it (foveopetal), or was
flashed at the “starting location” for one retrace (16.7 ms),
i.e., as long as the moving stimuli were shown at each
stimulus location. The main effect for motion direction
was significant. A post-hoc analysis revealed that the
Fröhlich effect was more pronounced for the foveofugal
than for the foveopetal motion, and that there was no
mislocalization for the stationary stimulus.

Figure 3. Empirical and simulated data for the stimulus
parameter motion direction.
A glance at this figure indicates that the model does
not generate a mislocalization for the stationary stimulus.
This shows that the misperception is indeed produced by
later stimulus positions during the feedforward and
feedback processes inside the neural model. The figure
also indicates a main effect for motion direction: For the
simulated data, just like for the empirical ones, the
Fröhlich effect was stronger for the foveofugal motion
than for the foveopetal motion. However, in the
simulation the difference between the two conditions is
smaller. As for stimulus velocity the simulated data match
the empirical data qualitatively but not numerically.
393

adopted from Lamme and Roelfsema (2000). The
Fröhlich effect – the distortion of the perceived onset
location – emerges because the activity inside the net
changes during the processing of the first stimulus
location. The feedback loop meets these later stimulus
representations and is distorted in the direction of
stimulus motion. When the feedback finally reaches V1,
the amount of this distortion determines the amount of the
Fröhlich effect.
When the original attentional model was developed by
Neumann approximately 25 years ago (Neumann, 1978,
1982), little was known about the physiology of highlevel processes like attention or consciousness and about
feedback processes. Accordingly, Neumann did not
speculate about the physiological mechanisms underlying
the attention shift and the conscious perception.
Nevertheless, the model is not only compatible with
feedback mechanisms, but including feedback processes
may even be physiologically more plausible than a sheer
feedforward model, because it is in accordance with new
physiological evidence (e.g. Di Lollo, Enns, & Rensink,
2000; Lamme & Roelfsema, 2000; Martinez et al., 1999)
and it creates the Fröhlich effect in a quite natural manner.
After describing the model, we tried to simulate basic
properties of the Fröhlich effect. We showed that a
misperception only occurred with moving and not with
stationary stimuli. Additionally, the main effects for
motion direction, stimulus eccentricity and stimulus
velocity could be simulated. Nevertheless, the amount of
the simulated misperception did not correspond to the
empirical Fröhlich effect. In our view, the established
main effects are more important than the numerical
resemblance because the size of the Fröhlich effect may
differ strongly between experiments, probably due to the
particular sample of subjects, but the direction of the main
effects rarely does. Additionally, we could have tuned the
model to resemble the absolute effect sizes more closely
by adjusting various model parameters. But we
considered the model to be more convincing if we only
adapted basic physiological parameters (like the RF sizes
or the transmission delays) from the literature.
Several steps are conceivable in evaluating the model
further. First, other properties of the Fröhlich effect
should be simulated. For example, Müsseler and
Aschersleben (1998) have found that a valid cue – a cue
that is shown at the starting location in advance of the
actual moving stimulus – reduces the Fröhlich effect, but
an invalid cue does not enlarge it. More importantly, our
model should be applied to other phenomena that the
Asynchronous Updating Model is supposed to explain,
such as metacontrast (Neumann, 1982). Additionally, we
could derive hypotheses about the effects of certain
stimulus parameters from model simulations and
investigate them in experiments. And finally, the feedback
model should be tested against different computational
models, especially pure feedforward models.

Moreover, the influence of stimulus eccentricity on the
Fröhlich effect was investigated by Carbone (2001).
Starting from the fixation point, the starting location
varied between 0 and 58.8 mm (0 - 8.36°). The results
showed a linear increase of the Fröhlich effect along with
eccentricity.
The attentional account is capable of explaining this
increase by assuming that the attention shift takes longer
for a larger distance. Another explanation that is also in
accordance with the Asynchronous updating model is that
the start of the attention shift might be delayed because it
is more difficult to program the target of the attention
shift (Carbone, 2001). For the simulation, the same
eccentricities as in the original experiments were used by
setting the corresponding pixels to 1. The empirical and
simulated data are shown in Figure 4.

Figure 4. Empirical and simulated data for stimulus
eccentricity.
The simulated data resemble the empirical ones quite
closely. Like the empirical data, the simulated data
increase with eccentricity.

Discussion
In this paper, we presented a neural model that simulates
the emergence of the Fröhlich effect through feedforward
as well as feedback processes based on Neumann’s
Asynchronous Updating Model. The hierarchical model
comprises five levels, with the first one being the input
level and the other levels being visual processing levels of
increasing complexity. The cortical magnification factor
was considered in modeling the RF sizes between the first
and the second layer. The virtual moving stimulus was
generated by setting the corresponding pixels at the first
level to 1. The transmission delays for the feedforward
processes were adopted from Lamme and Roelfsema
(2000). The attention shift that – according to the
Asynchronous Updating Model – is necessary for the
conscious perception is modeled via a feedback loop from
the highest layer back to V1. As were the feedforward
transmission delays, the feedback delays were also
394

Müsseler, J., Stork, S., & Kerzel, D. (2002). Comparing
mislocalizations with moving stimuli: The Fröhlich
effect, the flash-lag effect and representational
momentum. Visual Cognition, 9, 120-138
Neumann, O. (1978). Visuelle Aufmerksamkeit und der
Mechanismus des Metakontrastes [Visual attention and
the mechanism of metacontrast]. Report No. 6/1978,
Department of Psychology at the Ruhr-University
Bochum, Cognitive Psychology Unit.
Neumann, O. (1982). Experimente zum Fehrer-RaabEffekt und das 'Wetterwart'-Modell der visuellen
Maskierung [Experiments on the Fehrer-Raab effect
and the 'Weather-Station' model of visual masking].
Report No. 24/1982, Department of Psychology at the
Ruhr-University Bochum, Cognitive Psychology Unit.
Neumann, O., & Müsseler. J. (1990). Visuelles
Fokussieren: Das Wetterwart-Modell und einige seiner
Anwendungen [Visual focussing: The Weather-Station
model and some of its applications]. In C. Meinecke &
L. Kehrer (Eds.), Bielefelder Beiträge zur
Kognitionspsychologie (pp. 77-108). Göttingen:
Hogrefe.
Pascual-Leone, A,, & Walsh, V. (2001). Fast
backprojections from the motion to the primary visual
area necessary for visual awareness. Science, 292, 510512.
Rosa, M. G. P., Casagrande, V. A., Preuss, T., & Kaas, J.
H. (1997). Visual field representation in striate and
prestriate cortices of a prosimian Primate (galago
garnetti).Journal of Neurophysiology, 77, 3193-3217.
Scharlau, I., & Neumann, O. (2003). Perceptual latency
priming by masked and unmasked stimuli: Evidence
for an attentional explanation. Psychological Research,
67, 184-197.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a fellowship within the
postdoc program of the German Academic Exchange
Service (DAAD) to Elena Carbone and Grant AN 393/1-1
by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft to Ulrich Ansorge,
Holk Cruse, and Odmar Neumann.

References
Carbone,
E.
(2001).
Die
Rolle
von
Aufmerksamkeitsprozessen bei der Fehlwahrnehmung
dynamischer Reize [The role of attentional processes
in the misperception of dynamic stimuli]. Unpublished
dissertation, Bielefeld University, Germany.
Di Lollo, V., Enns, J. T., & Rensink, R. A. (2000).
Competition for consciousness among visual events:
The psychophysics of reentrant visual processes.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 129,
481-507.
Driver, J., & Spence, C. (2000). Multisensory perception:
Beyond modularity and convergence. Current Biology,
10, 731-735.
Fröhlich, F. W. (1921). Untersuchungen über periodische
Nachbilder [Studies on periodic afterimages].
Zeitschrift für Sinnesphysiologie, 52, 60-88.
Fröhlich, F. W. (1929). Die Empfindungszeit [The
sensation time]. Jena: Fischer.
Lamme, V. A. F., & Roelfsema, P. R. (2000) The distinct
modes of vision offered by feedforward and recurrent
processing. Trends in Neurosciences, 23, 571-579.
Luck, S. J. (1998). Neurophysiology of selective
attention. In H. Pashler (Ed.), Attention (pp. 257-295).
Hove: Psychology Press.
Martinez, A., Anllo-Vento, L., Sereno, M. I., Frank, L. R.,
Buxton, R. B., Dubowitz, D. J., Wong, E. C., Hinrichs,
H., Heinze, H. J., & Hillyard, S. A. (1999).
Involvement of striate and extrastriate visual cortical
areas in spatial attention. Nature Neuroscience, 2, 364369
Mateeff, S., & Hohnsbein, J. (1988). Perceptual latencies
are shorter for motion towards the fovea than for
motion away. Vision Research, 28, 711-719.
Mateeff, S., Yakimoff, N., Hohnsbein, J., Ehrenstein, W.
H., Bohdanecky, Z., & Radil, T. (1991). Selective
directional sensitivity in visual motion perception.
Vision Research, 31, 131-138.
Müsseler, J., & Aschersleben, G. (1998). Localizing the
first position of a moving stimulus: The Fröhlich effect
and an attention-shifting explanation. Perception and
Psychophysics, 60, 683-695.
Müsseler, J., & Neumann, O. (1992). Apparent distance
reduction with moving stimuli (Tandem Effect):
Evidence
for
an
attention-shifting
model.
Psychological Research, 54, 246-266.

395

