UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Spatial Reasoning Skills in Tenejapan Mayans

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7m19q14n

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Arbabanelle, Linda
Li, Peggy
Papafragou, Anna

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Spatial Reasoning Skills in Tenejapan Mayans
Peggy Li (pegs@wjh.harvard.edu)
Department of Psychology, Harvard University
33 Kirkland St.. Cambridge, MA 02138 USA

Linda Abarbanell (abarbali@gse.harvard.edu)
Department of Education, Harvard University
13 Appian Way, Cambridge, MA 02138 USA

Anna Papafragou (papafragou@psych.udel.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Delaware
109 Wolf Hall, Newark, DE 19716 USA
Abstract
This paper examines possible influences of language on
thought in the domain of spatial reasoning. Language
communities differ in their stock of reference frames
(coordinate systems to reference locations and directions).
English typically uses egocentrically-defined axes (“leftright”). Other languages like Tseltal lack such a system but
use geocentrically-defined axes ("north-south"). We ask
whether the lexical resources available in one’s language
determine the availability or salience of certain spatial
concepts. Does a “left-right” lexical gap translate to a
conceptual gap? In three experiments, we compared Tseltal
speakers’ ability to solve spatial problems requiring an
egocentric frame of reference to ones requiring a geocentric
frame of reference. We found that Tseltal speakers were
above chance in solving the egocentric problems,
demonstrating that a lexical gap does not necessarily lead to a
conceptual gap. Furthermore, participants were statistically
better on the egocentric version in two of the three
experiments. These results speak against some current
versions of linguistic relativity.

Introduction
Do speakers of different languages come to perceive and
conceptualize the world differently (Whorf, 1956)? For the
last half of this past century, the linguistic relativity
hypothesis was viewed as untenable by many (e.g., Heider,
1972; Heider & Oliver, 1972). However, more recently, the
hypothesis has returned to the forefront of many cognitive
science debates (e.g., Bowerman & Levinson, 2001;
Gentner & Goldin-Meadow, 2003) and many commentators
now endorse stronger or weaker versions of it.
Fueling the debates is an extensive and influential set of
cross-linguistic investigations demonstrating a striking
correlation between the linguistic habits and spatial
reasoning of members of different linguistic communities
(Brown & Levinson, 1993; Pederson, Danziger, Wilkins,
Levinson, Kita, & Senft, 1998; Levinson, 2003). These
studies start with the observation that there is considerable
cross-linguistic variation in linguistic communities’ choices
of spatial frames of reference. As English speakers, we
typically make use of an egocentric, body-defined
coordinate system to reference locations of objects (“The
cup to the left of the bowl”) or to give directions (“Turn

right”). However, some languages make little or no use of
such a spatial frame of reference. One such language is
Tseltal, a language spoken by a group of Mayans residing in
the Tenejapa area of Chiapas (Mexico).
Tseltal lacks the linguistic conventions for encoding “to
the left” or “to the right.” Even though the language has the
body part words “xin” (left) and “wa’el” (right), these words
are extremely infrequent in speech and restricted in use.
The words only exist to define body parts and never regions
outside the body. Additionally most informants use “left”
and “right” exclusively in nominal compounds with arm and
leg terms and not for any other body parts (Brown &
Levinson, 1992).1
In place of egocentric coordinates, Tenejapans utilize a
system of terms (“alan” and “ajk’ol”) based on the overall
inclination of the terrain (“downhill” and “uphill”) which
they inhabit. These geocentrically-defined terms are
extended and used even when one is on flat terrain to
reference the general directions of uphill and downhill
which roughly correspond to the north-south axis.
Moreover, they are used in descriptions of small scale arrays
such as the arrangement of items on tabletops for which
English speakers prefer “left” and “right.”
The linguistic differences between Tseltal and English in
the domain of spatial relations have led researchers to
consider the possibility that spatial concepts might
correspondingly differ in the speakers of the two languages.
For example, Levinson (1996) writes:
Tenejapans show an interesting tendency to confuse
left-right inversions or mirror-images (i.e., reflections
across the apparent vertical axis), even when visually
presented simultaneously, which seems related to
their absence of ‘left’ and ‘right’ terms, and the

1272

1

Strange as it may seem for Tenejapans to not extend the body
location terms (xin and wa’el) to regions outside their body,
Shusterman, Li and Abarbanell (in prep.) found that 4-year-old
English-speaking children, after being taught novel words for the
left and right sides of their bodies, do not automatically interpret
commands using those terms as describing objects to their own left
and right.

absence of related asymmetries in their material
culture. (p.182)
And more recently he comments (Levinson, 2003):

to inquiries about locations and directions. Thus, these
previous studies by themselves do not necessarily reveal
anything about the unavailability or low salience of the leftright frames of reference in Tenejapan conception.
Notice that the language on language hypothesis
assumes that the effect of language should diminish when
speakers are tested on unambiguous spatial tasks that do not
require the interpretation of the experimenter’s intent (i.e.,
tasks with a single correct solution). To rule out this
hypothesis would therefore necessitate testing speakers on
unambiguous tasks and seeing that linguistic influences on
spatial reasoning persist.
We therefore conducted a series of three experiments
which examined Tenejapans’ ability to solve spatial tasks.
Our tasks were unambiguous (they had correct solutions).
In each experiment there were two matched conditions that
varied in whether the geocentric or the egocentric frame of
reference is required to correctly solve the task. The
egocentric condition alone would inform us of Tenejapans’
ability to reason about left-right. Comparing the matching
conditions would permit the assessment of the relative
difficulty in reasoning egocentrically and geocentrically.
We reasoned that if Tenejapans experienced a systematic
downgrading of left-right asymmetries and processed spatial
information in the manner corresponding to their language
as suggested by Levinson (2003), they should find the
geocentric condition easier than the egocentric one (while
English speakers should presumably find the reverse
easier).3

…[O]ne simply cannot say in Tseltal ‘The boy is to
the left of the tree’, or ‘Take the first turning left’…
We therefore believe that there is a systematic
downgrading of left/right asymmetries in Tenejapan
conception. (p. 149)
To explore this possibility systematically, previous
cross-linguistic studies (e.g., Pederson et al., 1998; Majid et
al., 2004) compared English- and Tseltal-speakers’ spatial
reasoning patterns. In these studies, speakers were shown a
spatial array on a table (e.g., a red dot left/north of a blue
dot). They then turned 180o to face a second table and were
asked to identify or recreate the “same” array. Crucially,
after turning, left and right coordinates rotate along with the
participant, while north and south remain constant.
However, where north and south is situated remains
unchanged. By observing the speaker’s response, one could
determine the speaker’s choice of frame of reference. These
studies show that English speakers preferred the egocentric
and Tseltal speakers the geocentric response. From these
results, Levinson and colleagues concluded that language
shapes one's underlying representation of spatial relations
(in accordance with the linguistic relativity position). In
other words, the lexical gap in Tseltal (the absence of a
left/right coordinate system in language) is taken to create a
conceptual gap (the unavailability/low salience of left/right
spatial concepts in thought).
Nevertheless, these data do not conclusively demonstrate
the unavailability or the low salience of left/right concepts.
First, these cross-linguistic studies test speakers’
preferences in encoding spatial arrays, rather than
comparing their ability to solve spatial tasks which require
different frames of reference. It could still be the case that
Tseltal speakers are quite capable of thinking about left and
right, even though they do not use these distinctions if other
options are available2. Second, the scope and extent of the
preferences displayed in these tasks is in question: is the
selected preference representative of the habitual mode of
spatial reasoning in everyday life? The attested preferences
could alternatively be explained as effects of “language on
language” (Li & Gleitman, 2002) Namely, the pragmatics
of language use could implicitly influence how speakers
come to interpret ambiguous commands such as “make it
the same.” In other words, what appropriately counts as the
“same” spatial array might be influenced by how one’s
linguistic community customarily speaks about or responds

Experiment 1
Method
Participants Twenty-six Tseltal-speaking adults (mean age
= 35, SD = 16.31) were recruited through Casa de Cultura in
Tenejapa.4 The participants were tested individually in a
quiet classroom. Each participant was paid 50 pesos for
his/her time. Care was taken to recruit Tenejapans who
knew little or no Spanish, a language that (like English) uses
an egocentric (left-right) reference system.
3

2

A terminological note: Levinson (1996) elegantly described the
types of reference frames in the world’s languages with a tripartite
set of terms (relative, intrinsic, and absolute). For present purposes,
we adopt the simpler terms “egocentric” vs. “geocentric”.
“Egocentric” seemed appropriate since our nonlinguistic tasks tap
participants’ reasoning in terms of their own left-right. Note
therefore that “egocentric” is not exactly synonymous with either
“relative” or “intrinsic”, nor does it subsume those terms. We
cannot discuss these various terminologies here in any detail (but
see Gallistel, 1999; Gleitman, Gallistel, Abarbanell, Papafragou,
Li, in prep.).
4
Using the director-matcher task described in Li and Gleitman
(2002), we also later verified that this population of Tseltal
speakers’ use of linguistic frames of reference was similar to what
Brown and Levinson (1993) reported. Our 8 pairs of directors and
matchers never used any “left” or “right” type terms in discussing
spatial arrangements.

An analogy can be drawn to the claim that Korean speakers are
more likely than English speakers to categorize spatial
relationships on the basis of tightness-of-fit because tight-fit is
marked in Korean verbs. It would be strange, however, to claim
that English speakers cannot distinguish tightness-of-fit (Hespos &
Spelke, 2004).
1273

Stimuli Two sets of five identical (6 in. x 6 in.) cards (see
Figure 1a) were made, each with two same-design dots. For
one set, the two dots varied in size. For another set, the two
dots varied in color.

respond respectively on the ambiguous version.6 After the
participants selected the “same” card, the cover was lifted
from the covered card to reveal the card underneath. There
were 8 test trials, and orientation of the dots left-right/northsouth or up-down/east-west was fully counterbalanced, as
was the choice of set of cards used (variation in size/color of
dots).

Results and Discussion

(a)

(b)

The memory trials served not only as familiarization, but
also as a check to see if the participants in the Egocentric
and Geocentric condition have comparable memory
capacity. Indeed, the two groups were comparable on those
trials (89.8% correct for Geocentric group vs. 85.9% correct
for the Egocentric group, t(24)=.57, p = .57).
The percent correct for the test trials was submitted to a
2 (Condition: Egocentric, Geocentric) x 2 (Orientation: leftright/north-south, up-down/east-west) x 2 (Card Set: Size,
Color) ANOVA, with Condition as a between-subject
factor. The results yielded no main effects or interactions (p
> .15). Most importantly, the non-significant effect of
Condition (F(1, 24)=1.38,p = .25) indicated that the
Geocentric group (74.0% correct) performed no better than
the Egocentric group (84.6% correct). Both groups were
well above chance.
The success on both conditions demonstrated that Tseltal
speakers could keep track of the relationship between the
card dots not only with respect to the environment, but with
respect to oneself in memory. This finding begins to rule
out the possibility that Tseltal speakers cannot reason using
their left-right. The “chips” task, however, is arguably easy
and might not be pushing the limits of Tseltal speakers’
abilities.7 We went on to test Tseltal speakers with other
tasks (Experiments 2 and 3) to consolidate these findings.

Figure 1. Stimuli set used in Experiment 1.
Procedure This task was adapted from Brown and
Levinson (1993)’s “chips task.” The basic paradigm
involved memorizing the orientation of two dots on a card
(e.g., the green dot is left/south of the yellow dot) and then
selecting the “same” card from four identical cards rotated
0, 90, 180, 270 degrees (see Figure 1b).
Prior to the test there was a familiarization phase to
introduce what is meant by the “same.” The experimenter
asked the participants to select the same card as the one in
their hands from four other identical but distinctly oriented
cards and provided feedback that orientation was crucial for
sameness whenever necessary. The familiarization also
included 4 memory trials for which the participants
memorized the dot orientations. Then the experimenter
covered the card and laid out the other four identical cards
in their distinct orientations for the participant to choose.
The familiarization phase involved only one table, with the
participants always facing in a single direction.5
The test trials involved two identically oriented tables at
two ends of the room. The participants stood between the
two tables, close to and facing the first table, just as in
Brown and Levinson (1993)’s studies. Initially, participants
memorized the two dots on a card while facing the first
table. Then the card was covered and carried by the
participants to the second table, where participants had to
identify the “same” card from four distinctly oriented
identical cards. Participants were randomly assigned to
either an egocentric or a geocentric condition. In the
egocentric condition, they held the covered card as they
rotated so that the covered card also rotated 180°. For the
geocentric condition, the participants also held the covered
card, but did not to rotate the covered card even though they
turned to walk to the second table. The correct solutions for
the egocentric and geocentric condition were thus identical
to how one expected English and Tseltal speakers’ to

6

5

For those familiar with Levinson’s set of terminology, some
reviewers suggested that the intrinsic frame of reference is more
readily available and easier than the relative frame. They wondered
whether Tenejapans were solving the task using the intrinsic frame.
As our tasks are based on Levinson et al’s studies, which
unfortunately could be solved either way, it is true we could not
tease the two apart. That said, Tseltal lacks both intrinsic and
relative left-right. However, in other current studies we address
this issue. Preliminary results, though, lead us to suspect that
perspective choice (my left-right vs. someone else’s left-right)
more strongly determines the availability and computational ease
of spatial frames rather than the intrinsic-relative distinction.
7
One might, for example, argue that Tenejapans in the egocentric
condition were really encoding the relations geocentrically (i.e, the
green dot is south of the yellow dot) and then succeeding by
learning to “flip” their responses (now the green dot is north of the
yellow dot). The converse strategy is one that some English
speakers have reported when tested on the geocentric condition. If
flipping did occur with Tenejapans, we might expect them to make
more errors for the egocentric than the geocentric condition as a
result of the extra “flipping” step. However, we find no evidence
for such difficulty when inspecting the percent correct for the test
trials (Geo: 74% vs. Ego: 85%).

Consequently, familiarization trials did not necessarily train or
reinforce left-right encoding; the participants could have encoded
the relationship between the two dots using geocentric relations
(e.g., the green dot is south of the yellow dot).
1274

Results and Discussion

Experiment 2

Figure 3 shows the average percent correct for the
egocentric and geocentric group by the number of legs in
the paths. A trial was counted as correct if the participant
retraced the entire path correctly. As the figure indicates,
Tseltal speakers’ performance on the Egocentric condition
clearly surpassed the Geocentric condition as the number of
legs in the paths increased. A 3 (Leg Number: 1, 2, 3) x 2
(Condition: Geocentric, Egocentric) ANOVA using percent
correct as the dependent measure revealed a main effect of
Condition (F(1, 24)=24.7, p < .001), reaffirming that the
Egocentric Condition was easier than the Geocentric
Condition. There was an effect of Leg Number (F(1,
24)=64.7, p < .001), with 1-leg being easier than 2-legs (p <
.001) and 2-legs being easier than 3-legs (p < .001). Lastly,
the Leg Number x Condition interaction was also significant
(F(1, 24)=14.7, p < .001), suggesting that, as the number of
legs increased, the difference between Geocentric and
Egocentric conditions increased.

We increased the difficulty level in Experiment 2 to see if
the geocentric group would now out-perform the Egocentric
group. Our task adapted Brown and Levinson (1993)’s maze
task. In the original task, participants memorized a path
traversed by a figurine on a tabletop surface. The
participants then identified the “same” path from among
several choices after turning 180o to face a second table. We
increased the difficulty of the task by asking the participants
to recreate the original path with a small ball at the second
table. Also, unlike the original task, we turned the task into
an unambiguous task with a single correct solution.

Method
Participants The same 26 Tseltal speakers from
Experiment 1 participated in this task. Participants were
assigned to the same condition as in Experiment 1. For
example, the egocentric condition participants in
Experiment 1 were again assigned to the egocentric
condition in Experiment 2.
Stimuli A 10 in. x 10 in. evenly-gridded square maze
(Figure 2a) was constructed and laminated. A small ball
was used during the experiment to demonstrate a path
movement starting from the center of the maze that
consisted of 1 leg, 2 legs, or 3 legs.

% Correct

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Egocentric
Geocentric

1-leg 2-legs 3-legs
Figure 3. Comparing the Geocentric and Egocentric
Conditions for the maze task (Experiment 2).

1-leg

2-legs

These results rule out the strong version of linguistic
relativity by showing once again that Tseltal speakers are
capable of reasoning egocentrically. Even more stunningly,
the results show that geocentric reasoning is harder than
egocentric reasoning for a group of speakers whose
language predominantly references directions and locations
with geocentric terms. In fact, preliminary results from
English-speaking college students show a similar
asymmetry (even though, unsurprisingly, overall
performance is much better regardless of condition). Our
Tenejapan data thus rule out a version of linguistic relativity
which suggests that the geocentric frame of reference is
somehow more readily available than the egocentric frame
in Tseltal speakers. Combined with the preliminary results
from English speakers, the Tenejapan data suggest that
egocentric reasoning is universally easier and that habitual
geocentric language use cannot override this egocentric
advantage.

3-legs

(a)
(b)
Figure 2. a. Picture of maze used in experiment.
b. Sample of paths traversed by the ball.
Procedure For each trial, participants memorized a path
traversed by a ball on the maze (see Figure 2b). They were
then asked to rotate 180o. In the egocentric condition, the
maze was covered before the turn, held by the participants
so that it also rotated 180o and then was uncovered on the
second table. In the geocentric condition, the covered maze
was carried to the second table by the participants who were
careful not to rotate the maze despite their own rotation.
Once the maze was uncovered, the participants were asked
to recreate the path on the maze using the ball. Covering the
maze discouraged visual tracing of the path on the maze
while the maze was being transported. The cover also had a
complex pattern of lines to distract and mask any visual
imagery. Each participant was tested on 10 test trials (2 1leg paths, 4 2-leg paths, and 4 3-leg paths in this order).
The experimenter demonstrated the correct path in case of
errors.

Experiment 3

1275

In this last experiment, we used an entirely different
methodology to compare egocentric reasoning with
geocentric reasoning. Our task involved hiding objects to
the left or right of the participants. The task was designed
such that egocentric left-right encoding could be used to
successfully locate the hidden objects in the egocentric

There was no a priori reason to expect poorer performance
on the Geocentric condition relative to the Egocentric
condition. The Tenejapans could have easily encoded the
correct box in the Geocentric condition (“The one to the
south/The one next to the table”) and as a result performed
correctly. In fact, given an anecdote from Brown and
Levinson (1993b, p. 52) in which a Tenejapan blindfolded
and spun around 20 times in a darkened house was able to
point in the agreed direction while still dizzy and
blindfolded, we expected at-ceiling performance from our
non-blindfolded, non-dizzy participants.
Nonetheless, the unexpected finding accords with the
findings from Experiment 2 showing that egocentric
reasoning is easier than geocentric reasoning regardless of
the language one speaks.

condition. Similarly, geocentric encoding could successfully
retrieve the hidden object in the geocentric condition.
Again, we asked how well Tenejapans would remember the
locations of the hidden objects in both conditions and
whether performance on one would be better than the other.

Method
Participants Twenty-four Tseltal-speaking adults (mean
age = 45.6) who had not participated in the previous
experiments were recruited from the same Tenejapa
population. The participants were tested individually in a
quiet and furnished room with a large window with a view
to the outside.
Egocentric condition

Geocentric condition

General Discussion

Figure 4. Swivel chair set up for Experiment 3.

In this paper we have considered a linguistic difference
in spatial terminology between Tseltal and English (the
encoding of left/right spatial coordinates) and its potential
implications for the relations between language and thought.
Several researchers have recently taken the position that
such asymmetries in linguistic encoding give rise to
asymmetries in spatial cognition:

Stimuli The stimuli consisted of a swivel chair with spokes
to the left and right for attaching two identical boxes in the
egocentric condition. In the geocentric condition, the spokes
and boxes were removed and the boxes were placed on the
floor (See Figure 4).
Procedure Each participant was tested on both the
egocentric and geocentric condition, with 8 trials per
condition. Order for the two conditions was blocked and
counterbalanced. For the task, participants sat on the swivel
chair with two boxes, one to each (left/right) side of the
chair. In the egocentric condition, the boxes rotated with
the chair and participant. In the geocentric condition, the
boxes (on the floor) remained stationary while the subject
was rotated. On each trial, the experimenter indicated in
which box she was going to hide the coin. Then the
participant was blindfolded and spun slowly. When the
spinning stopped, the participant was positioned at 0, 90,
180, or 270 degrees from the initial position. With the
blindfold then removed, the participant was asked to
retrieve the coin on a single try. The final positioning of the
chair was randomized with two trials per position for each
condition.

Consider a language that has no terms for ‘in front’,
‘behind’, ‘left’, ‘right’, and so on … preferring
instead to designate all such relations, no matter how
microscopic in scale, in terms of notions like ‘North’,
‘South’, ‘East’, ‘West’, etc. Now a speaker of such a
language cannot remember arrays of objects in the
same way as you and I, in terms of their relative
location from a particular viewing angle… (Gumperz
& Levinson, 1996, pp. 26–27).

Results and Discussion

The strongest interpretation of this position is equivalent
to the view that one simply cannot entertain spatial concepts
inexpressible in one’s language. Weaker interpretations of
this position state that spatial linguistic distinctions may
affect the availability of spatial distinctions in cognition by
promoting the salience of those conceptual distinctions
which are linguistically encoded. Although the strongest
version seems extreme, ultimately the validity of both
positions should be determined empirically (Carey, 2001;
Gordon 2004).
The current set of studies provided us with a better
understanding of how a population with a culture and a
language so different than ours reason spatially. But our
experimental results lead to entirely different theoretical
conclusions from those in the previous literature (e.g.,
Pederson et al. 1998; Levinson, 2003; Majid et al. 2004). In
particular, our studies show that the strong relativistic
position is untenable, at least in the domain of the spatial
notions under consideration: Tseltal speakers are capable of
reasoning in terms of left/right concepts despite the lack of

The percentage correct (i.e., the retrieval of the coin on
the first try) for the Egocentric Condition (92.3%) was
surprisingly higher than the Geocentric Condition (80.0%;
paired t(23)=2.82,p=.01). As ours was a within-subjects
design, this means the same person typically found the
Egocentric condition easier than the Geocentric condition. 8
8

The better performance on the Egocentric condition is robust.
We replicated the effect with another group of Tenejapans (n=24,
Ego: 94.4% vs. Geo: 76.2%) in which we provided increased
1276

incentive to respond correctly on both types of trials by letting
them keep the coins (actual currency) retrieved on the first try.

corresponding words for spatial coordinate systems in their
language. Our results also cast doubt on some weaker
relativistic views, since the availability of egocentric and
geocentric frames of reference in the reasoning of Tseltal
speakers does not seem to correspond to the patterns of
spatial linguistic encoding (where geocentric frames of
reference are clearly dominant).
From a methodological point of view, our new data
deflate the claim that correlations between linguistic
communities’ choices of spatial frames of reference and the
preferred manner of response on open-ended tasks
necessarily serve as evidence for language restructuring
cognition. Our data thus also raise potential concerns about
the use of open-ended tasks as tests of linguistic relativity.
Even though unexpected on previous theoretical and
empirical relativistic claims in the literature, the conclusion
that Tenejapan Mayans are not entirely different from us in
their spatial reasoning may not be so surprising. After all,
multiple frames of reference are necessary to represent
where things are in everyday life (Gallistel 2002a, 2002b).
In fact, under certain circumstances, locations of things are
most aptly remembered using left-right coordinates. From
this perspective, our egocentric condition in Experiment 3 is
one of many cases where it is better to remember such
relationships (a dollar bill in the left pocket of the hanging
jacket, a healed right knee are further examples). In view of
such examples it seems unlikely that linguistic habits usurp
nonlinguistic needs to reason spatially. These observations,
together with the experimental results reported above, can
best be explained by assuming that the linguistic encoding
of spatial frames of reference does not limit speakers’
performance in nonlinguistic spatial tasks.

Acknowledgments
We wish to thank Lila Gleitman, Randy Gallistel, Susan
Carey, and Anna Shusterman for their input. Special thanks
go to the community of Tenejapa, Chiapas, especially
Alfonso Lopez Santiz and family, CELALI and the Casa de
Cultura, Tenejapa, Chiapas. This research was supported by
the MBB Faculty Initiative Fellowship and a FLAS
Fellowship sponsored by the David Rockefeller Center for
Latin American Studies at Harvard to Linda Abarbanell, and
NRSA Postdoctoral Fellowships from the NIH to Peggy Li
(#F32HD043532) and Anna Papafragou (#F32MH06020).

References
Bowerman, M., & Levinson, S. C. (2001). Language
acquisition and conceptual development. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Brown, P., & Levinson, S. (1992). ‘Left’ and ‘Right’ in
Tenejapa: Investigating a Linguistic Conceptual Gap.
Zeitschrift fur Phonetik, Sprachwissenschaft und
Kommunikationsforschung 45(6), 590-611.
Brown, P., & Levinson, S. C. (1993). Linguistic and
nonlinguistic coding of spatial arrays: Explorations in
Mayan cognition. Cognitive Anthropology Research
Group, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics,
Working paper no. 24.

Brown, P., & Levinson, S. C. (1993b). 'Uphill' and
'downhill' in Tzeltal. Journal of Linguistic Anthropology,
3, 46-74.
Carey, S. (2001). Whorf vs. continuity theorists: Bringing
data to bear on the debate. In M. Bowerman and S.
Levinson (Eds.). Language acquisition and conceptual
development. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gallistel, C. (1999). Coordinate transformations in the
genesis of directed action. In Bly, B. M. & Rumelhart, D.
E. (Eds), Cognitive Science Handbook of Perception and
Cognition (2nd ed), pp 1-42.
Gallistel, C. R. (2002a). Language and spatial frames of
reference in mind and brain. Trends in Cognitive Science.
6(8), 321-322.
Gallistel, C. R. (2002b). Conception, perception and the
control of action. Reply to Majid. Trends in Cognitive
Science, 6(12), 504.
Gentner, D., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (Eds.) (2003). Language
in mind: Advances in the study of language and thought.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gleitman, L., Gallistel, R., Abarbanell, L., Papafragou, A.,
Li, P. (in prep). Turning points: Spatial memory and
language in Tenejapan Mayans.
Gordon, P. (2004). Numerical cognition without words:
Evidence from Amazonia. Science, 306(5695), 496-499.
Gumperz, J. J., & Levinson, S. C. (Eds.) (1996). Rethinking
Linguistic Relativity. Studies in the Social and Cultural
Foundations of Langauge No. 17. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Heider, E. R. (1972). Universals in color naming and
memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 93(1), 1020.
Heider, E. R., & Oliver, D. C. (1972). The structure of the
color space in naming and memory for two languages.
Cognitive Psychology, 3(2), 337-354.
Hespos, S., & Spelke, E. (2004). Conceptual precursors to
language. Nature, 430(6998), 453-456.
Li., P., & Gleitman, L. (2002). Turning the tables: language
and spatial reasoning. Cognition, 83(3), 265-294.
Levinson, S. C. (1996).
Frames of reference and
Molyneux’s question: Cross-linguistic evidence. In P.
Bloom, M. A. Peterson, L. Nadel, & M. F. Garrett (Eds.),
Language and space. Language, speech, and
communication (pp. 385-436). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Levinson, S. C. (2003). Space in Language and Cognition:
Explorations in Cognitive Diversity, Cambridge
University Press, Language, Culture and Cognition 5.
Majid, A., Bowerman, M., Kita, S., Haun, D., Levinson, S.
(2004). Can language restructure cognition? The case for
space. Trends in Cognitive Science 8(3), 108-114.
Pederson, E., Danziger, E., Wilkins, D., Levinson, S., Kita,
S., & Senft G. (1998). Semantic typology and spatial
conceptualization, Language, 74(3), 557-589.
Shusterman, A., Li, P., & Abarbanell, A. (in prep). Frames
of reference in spatial language acquisition.
Whorf, B. L. (1956). Language, thought and reality:
selected writings of Benjamin Lee Whorf. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.

1277

