UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Spatial Variability and Peak Shift: A Challenge for Elemental Associative Learning?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3402b04n

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
Lo, Lap-Yan

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Spatial Variability and Peak Shift:
A Challenge for Elemental Associative Learning?
E. J. Livesey (el253@cam.ac.uk)
L. S. Pearson (lsp25@cam.ac.uk)
I. P. L. McLaren (iplm2@cam.ac.uk)
Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Cambridge
Downing Street, Cambridge CB2 3EB. UK.

Abstract

means replacing some icons
retaining a proportion from
demonstrates one hypothetical
nature (see Table 1 below for
dimensional design).

Recent evidence from animal research suggests that peak shift
effects produced with complex pattern stimuli are influenced
by the level of spatial variability over successive presentations
of the stimuli. Initial attempts to explain this have relied on
postulating a shift between elemental and configural
representations supporting learning. Here we outline an
elemental model based on contemporary associative theory
that can accurately simulate this effect, and furthermore can
do so without any built-in assumptions of dimensionality and
without requiring some strategic shift from elemental to
configural processing. Further evidence in support for the
model is provided from a categorization experiment
examining the effect of spatial variability with human
subjects.

with new ones but still
the original. Figure 1
set of four stimuli of this
further explanation of the

Figure 1. Examples of ‘icon’ stimuli. A possible sequence
of generalization test stimuli used here.

Peak shift with an artificial dimension
Peak shift is a well-documented consequence of stimulus
discrimination and generalization and continues to stimulate
interesting research nearly half a century after its discovery
(for recent reviews see Ghirlanda & Enquist, 2003; Honig &
Urcioli, 1981). Typically, subjects will be trained to
discriminate between two very similar stimuli, usually by
learning to respond to one (S+) and not the other (S-).
Subjects are then presented with a range of stimuli that lie at
successive points along the dimension to test for stimulus
generalization. Peak shift takes place when the peak
response rate (or accuracy of response) occurs not for S+ but
for a similar stimulus that is further away from S-.
By its very nature, peak shift can only be observed over a
series of stimuli that have a systematic relationship with one
another. While very simple stimuli with characteristics that
lie along a physical dimension such as wavelength of light
obviously fit this requirement, some experiments have used
much more complex stimuli including morphed faces
(Spetch, Cheng, and Clifford, 2004) and patterns of small
abstract shapes commonly referred to as ‘icons’ (Wills and
Mackintosh, 1998; Oakeshott, 2002). The latter generally
employ a range of icons organized so that a logical sequence
of patterns is produced, akin to a series of points along a
dimension. The frequency of occurrence of each type of
icon is systematically varied from one stimulus to the next
so that shifting one ‘step’ along the artificial dimension

1302

Peak shift along an artificial dimension has been of
particular interest to proponents of an elemental associative
learning account of generalization and discrimination.
Associative theories such as that proposed by Blough
(1975) have been used to model peak shift effects with
great success using several assumptions about the pattern
of graded activation across hypothetical sensory units
which are stimulated by the presentation of training and
test stimuli. While the details of Blough’s (1975) model
and others like it are beyond the scope of this paper, it is
worth noting that one of the key reasons for studying peak
shift along an artificial dimension was to gain more control
over the similarity between stimuli and the pattern of
activation across units that they might stimulate (Wills and
Mackintosh, 1998). Indeed, peak shift effects with icon
stimuli have now been shown with both human and pigeon
subjects under a variety of experimental conditions (Jones
and McLaren, 1999; Livesey, 2004; Oakeshott, 2002; Wills
and Mackintosh, 1998), and several elemental associative
models are able to predict peak shift and related
generalization effects with impressive accuracy. Generally
speaking, these models rely on assumptions about the
underlying dimensionality of the stimuli in order to
calculate how the patterns of activation of two similar
stimuli might overlap. This seems plausible when
modelling generalization between stimuli that have
measurable, physical similarities, even though the units are

hypothetical and to a large degree untestable. However,
relying on dimensional assumptions when the dimension
itself is artificial may be less tenable. Alternatively, for the
purpose of simulating icon experiments, some models have
assumed that different units are solely activated by a single
type of icon but that the activation of each unit is directly
proportional to the number of copies of each icon. This too
is somewhat problematic. There is no way to gauge whether
two copies of an icon would indeed generate twice the
activation of a single copy, for instance. In any case, a
recent finding by Oakeshott (2002) has highlighted the
inadequacies of both of these approaches.

Table 1. Dimension used by Oakeshott (2002)

The effect of spatial variability
Recent research suggests that the level of spatial variability
across successive presentations of these complex patterns of
icons significantly affects the post-discrimination
generalization gradient. This poses an interesting problem
for elemental associative models which assume that the
relative position of the icons should make little or no
difference to the overall pattern of generalization. Icon
experiments that have produced strong peak shift effects
have typically allowed the positions of each icon within the
pattern to vary randomly from one trial to the next, and
many experiments have also allowed the exact number of
each type of icon to vary stochastically, averaging to a given
frequency over multiple trials. Looking at peak shift with
pigeon subjects, Oakeshott (2002) demonstrated that when
spatial and frequency variation are removed so that the
position and number of each icon for a given stimulus
remains fixed throughout the experiment, the peak shift
effect seems to disappear. Using the design shown in Table
1, Oakeshott trained pigeons to discriminate between S+ and
S- (highlighted), under either fixed or variable spatial
organization. When tested across several stimuli, pigeons in
the variable group showed evidence of a peak shift, with
highest response rates for N+, one step removed from S+,
and declining response rates further along the dimension at
F+. However, pigeons in the fixed group did not show any
evidence of peak shift, with highest response rates at S+,
declining steadily to N+ and F+. Oakeshott (2002) found
that the varied generalization gradient mirrors the
predictions of an elemental model such as Blough (1975)
while the fixed gradient resembles that predicted by a
configural model such as Pearce (1987; 1994). As Oakeshott
(2002) noted, the result taken as a whole appears to be
irreconcilable with either type of model. Hence it poses a
significant problem for the associative models that seek to
explain post-discrimination generalization gradients in
experiments with artificial dimensions. However, as
discussed below, a more sophisticated elemental model can
in fact account for both of these results.

1303

Modeling the fixed vs varied result
While Oakeshott (2002) concluded that these gradients
appeared to support conflicting models of learning and
generalization, there remains a strong case for developing a
model that can accommodate both patterns of responding
in appropriate circumstances. Presented below is just such
a model derived from the elemental associative theory
proposed by McLaren and Mackintosh (2000; 2002), which
has a wide scope of application to animal conditioning,
human learning, perceptual learning, and discrimination
and generalization effects such as peak shift. The model
predicts the differences in post-discrimination
generalization gradient between the fixed and varied
conditions in both the current experiment and by Oakeshott
(2002). Several aspects of this model diverge from past
attempts to simulate peak shift effects. Unlike previous
models of peak shift, there is no attempt to assume or
impose any form of dimensionality in the form of graded
activations or differential generalization based on the
position of the stimulus within the artificial dimension. For
simplicity the stimulus, represented by activation of input
units or nodes, takes on a relatively simple, local coding
whereby each icon in each specific location activates a
single input node.
The mechanism through which learning proceeds is the
delta rule (for instance see Widrow-Hoff, 1960) linking a
large number of representational units to one or more
output units. The complexity that allows the model to
predict different generalization gradients for the fixed and
varied cases lies in the representational coding of the
stimuli themselves. As the spatial location of the icons is
important for the presence of peak shift, each icon in each
different location is given a separate input unit which is
fully activated (Ai = 1) when that location-specific icon is
present and not activated at all (Ai = 0) otherwise.

Since Oakeshott (2002) reported proportional response
rates to each of four test stimuli (F+, N+, S+, S-), for this
model the summed input to the single response output was
also converted to proportional values of ekI for the same
four stimuli, where k is a constant held at a single value for
all subjects and I is the summed input to the response
output unit. The results of these simulations can be seen
below in Figure 3, plotted against the proportional response
rates reported by Oakeshott (2002). It is quite clear that the
model predicts a peak shift for the varied condition but not
for the fixed condition.
0.6

Figure 2. A schematic representation of a model based on
McLaren and Mackintosh (2000; 2002)
Thus to model a single subject, one needs 144 input units
(12 different icons are used and the stimulus has 12 different
locations in which an icon can appear).
These units are then connected to a second layer of units
with connection strengths that vary randomly between -1
and +1 and are fixed throughout the experiment (this system
of representation is assumed to exist prior to the experiment
and does not change as a result of exposure to the stimuli or
the outcomes involved). This second layer can be thought
of as the “elements” described in the McLaren and
Mackintosh model. Importantly, there is no assumption of
dimensionality inherent in this system of representation –
the elements are activated via a series of random weights
with all of the activated inputs such that input i = ∑AiWij
where Ai is the activation of input unit i and Wij is the
random fixed weight between input unit i and second layer
unit j. If this input is negative then unit j has no activation
(Aj = 0), otherwise if i is positive then activation of unit j, Aj
= E.i / (D + E.i) where E and D are constants. In effect, this
means that on presentation of any specific stimulus, roughly
half of the second layer units will have an activation of zero
as their summed input will be negative, while the activation
of the other half will vary between 0 and 1.
For the purposes of modeling Oakeshott’s (2002) animalbased experiment, each of these second layer units is
connected to just a single output unit corresponding to the
key-peck response required for reinforcement. These
weights are initially set to zero and vary according to the
delta-rule. The change in weight between second layer unit
i and output j, Wij = S.∆.Ai where S is a learning rate
parameter, Ai is the activation of unit i and ∆ is the
difference between external input, e, and summed internal
input, i. The summed input i is calculated in much the same
fashion as for the second layer units (i = ∑AiWij) . During
training, the output unit was given an external activation of
1 for reinforced S+ trials and an external activation of 0 for
S- trials.
1304

Proportional Response Rate

Oakeshott (2002)
0.5

Simulation

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
F+

N+

Fixed

S+

S-

F+

Stimulus

N+

S+

S-

Varied

Figure 3. Experimental data from Oakeshott (2002) and
results from simulation.
The rules governing weight change and activation from
summed inputs are deliberately relatively simple and
chosen as a matter of convenience rather than being
favoured for any theoretical reason. The key aspect of the
model that allows it to capture the difference between the
two conditions is the interaction between the pattern of
activation of the second layer units and weight change
based on a summed error term. The system of
representation, with random fixed weights between the
inputs and hidden units allow the expression of both
general frequency of occurrence of icons and also location
specific configurations of icons. In the fixed condition, the
units that are activated by configurations of positionspecific icons present in S+ but not S- gradually accrue the
strongest weights to the response output unit. As soon as
some icons change, as happens when presenting N+, the
configurations change and the activation of the units
governing the discrimination may change considerably. In
contrast, in the varied condition, the hidden units that will
gradually come to govern the discrimination are those that
are generally activated by icons occurring more frequently
in S+ than S-, irrespective of the position of these icons.
This involves a more gradual and variable process of
weight change, which seems to fit with the observation that
varied conditions are typically more difficult and are learnt
more slowly than fixed conditions (Livesey, 2004;

Oakeshott, 2002). In this case, N+ will contain many of the
icons predictive of S+ (and relatively few of those predicting
S-) and will result in a high level of activation of the units
with associative control, leading to peak shift.

The fixed vs varied effect in human
categorization
Peak shift with icon stimuli has been found with human
subjects in a categorization paradigm (Wills and
Mackintosh, 1998) and the current model can quite readily
be applied to human categorization as well as animal
conditioning. The results of the model and supporting data
from a human categorization experiment are discussed
below.
Using the same architecture but with two response output
units rather than one, we simulated a very similar
experiment in which the task was to learn to respond with a
left key press for one training stimulus (SL) and with a right
key press for another training stimulus (SR).
The
modifications to the model were kept to a minimum. The
system of representation expressed through the input units
and random fixed weights to the second-layer units was
identical to the animal model. Each of the second layer
units was connected to both output units, with weights
modified by the same mechanism as before. During training,
on each trial the output unit corresponding to the correct
response was given an external activation of 1 while the
incorrect response output had an external activation of 0.
During the test phase, response probabilities for each test
stimulus were calculated using a log form of the ratio rule.
For instance, the probability of a left response, P(Left
Response) = ekL / (ekL + ekR) where L and R are the summed
inputs to the units corresponding to left response and right
responses respectively, k is a constant held at a single value
for all subjects.
Not surprisingly, this model predicted very similar results to
the animal model, with a peak shift evident for the varied
condition but not for the fixed. An experiment with human
subjects was run as further confirmation of the predictions
of the model and to replicate Oakeshott’s (2002) effect of
spatial variability. Participants in the fixed and varied
conditions were first given discrimination training in which
they were required to respond differentially to intermixed
presentations of two training stimuli, SL (requiring a left key
response) and SR (requiring a right key response). A
transfer test then followed in which both training stimuli and
a further three stimuli from each side of the dimension were
presented in successive trials. In terms of the position of
each of the stimuli along the artificial dimension, the
transfer test was symmetrical with respect to the training
stimuli. Therefore, the two ‘sides’ of the dimension were
collapsed for the purposes of analyses, with results to be
expressed in terms of the distance to the nearest training
1305

stimulus (combined in this way, SL and SR will be referred
to as S). Therefore positions 1 and 8 are 3 steps from S and
are equivalent to F+ in the Oakeshott (2002) experiment,
while positions 3 and 6 are 1 step from S, and are
equivalent to S+. It is worth noting that under this
symmetrical design any observed peak shift cannot
reasonably be attributed to simple range effects as had been
argued for some other peak shift experiments using human
subjects (see for instance Thomas, 1993). We predicted
that the varied group would show a peak shift similar to
that found in past experiments while the fixed group would
most likely exhibit the same generalization gradient as that
found by Oakeshott (2002).
Table 2. Dimension used in the current experiment, based
on Oakeshott (2002).

One concern with using this method with human subjects
was that it is relatively easy for participants to form rules
about a particular icon and how often it appears in each
training stimulus. Similar experiments in the past have
demonstrated that the formation of rules can have a large
impact on post-discrimination generalization gradients
(Jones & McLaren, 1999). For instance, icon F always
appears three times in SR and four times in SL, and one
could formulate a simple rule based solely on icon F which
would still solve the discrimination. A subject responding
according to this rule might well respond with a right key
press to stimuli corresponding to position 3 of the
dimension since these stimuli also have three copies of icon
F. Icon counting rules are applicable to both the fixed and
varied conditions. As such, they could significantly reduce
any peak shift in the varied condition and also render the
lack of peak shift in the fixed condition fairly meaningless
since the generalization gradient may be due more to the
application of a rule than to any other process of
generalization, associative or otherwise. Rules also tend to
break down quickly during the generalization test, given
the variation in the number of each icon at each position
along the dimension, and hence their use produces a
tendency towards chance level responding as soon as the
test stimulus appears even slightly dissimilar to the training
exemplars. Experiments using stimuli of this size with

human subjects have produced a peak shift in the past (e.g.
Wills and Mackintosh, 1998), but have generally used a
procedure whereby the exact number of each icon varies
from trial to trial during training, and have thus overcome
rule-based icon counting in a way that cannot be employed
in this study. The only human study to date that has looked
at the effect of spatial variability on generalization gradients
with icon stimuli used much larger and more complicated
patterns made up of 36 icons, which were less susceptible to
the influence of such rules (Livesey, 2004). To combat this
potential problem, participants’ data were only used in the
analysis if their mean accuracy across all test stimuli was
significantly above chance level. Pilot testing also
suggested that the fixed condition was significantly easier to
solve than the varied condition. To equate the mean test
accuracy of the two groups and to prevent ceiling effects in
the fixed condition, the duration of training in the fixed
condition was reduced relative to the varied group.
Matching the two groups for accuracy was necessary so that
the accuracy criteria did not exclude a greater range of
subjects in one group than the other. For instance, if the
varied group training was of the same duration as the fixed
then all but the fastest learners would fail to show
performance above chance, which may well serve to bias
results from the test phase. There is a possibility that the
difference in training duration may affect more than just
overall accuracy, however it is not clear that the changes in
duration of training used here could produce a qualitative
change in the form of the generalization gradient. In any
case, the differences in training duration were also
incorporated into the training regime used in the model.
Post-experiment questionnaires were used to identify
participants who admitted to solving the discrimination by
counting a specific icon. It was hoped that by employing the
accuracy criteria and this questionnaire, the remaining
subjects would represent a group who were attending to the
whole stimulus and were not basing their response decisions
on an explicit assessment of the number of copies of a
specific icon.

Method
Participants and Apparatus 32 undergraduate students
from the University of Cambridge participated in the
experiment. They were randomly allocated into the two
groups Fixed and Varied. Participants were tested
individually in a dimly lit room. The experiment was
programmed using REALbasic software and run on a Power
Macintosh.
Stimuli All stimuli appeared in a rectangular region in the
centre of the computer screen measuring 2.8cm wide by
3.6cm high, surrounded by a thin white border. Each pattern
consisted of an array of 12 icons, 3 icons wide and 4 icons
high. The icons with which each stimulus was endowed
depended on its position on the dimension, as shown in
1306

Table 2. For each subject, 12 icons were randomly
assigned a position A to L on the dimension. By way of
counterbalancing the icon distributions, each randomly
ordered set of icons was allocated to one subject from each
group.
In the Varied condition, the position of each icon within the
array was randomized from trial to trial. For group Fixed
the position of each icon was randomized on the first trial,
but then remained constant for all subsequent presentations
of that stimulus. For any pair of adjacent stimuli in the
fixed condition (e.g. SL and S R) the icons common to both
stimuli remained in a fixed location for both stimuli.
Presentations of the icon stimuli were interspersed with
filler trials consisting of uniform coloured rectangles that
differed in hue. The colours varied in similar fashion to the
artificial dimension, with two very similar shades of green
presented during training, SL and SR, and a broader range
of colours, from blue-green to yellow-green, presented
during the transfer test. The primary purpose of the colour
trials was to negate any effect of immediate contrast
between patterns that would make the icon discrimination
too easy.
Procedure Participants sat approximately 1m from the
computer screen and were given verbal and written
instructions pertaining to the training and test phases and
the responses they would be required to make. For every
trial, participants were required to make either a left or
right key response by pressing either ‘x’ or ‘.’ on the
keyboard. During training, feedback appeared after every
response in the form of the words “correct” or “wrong”
flashing in the centre of the screen. During the test phase
no feedback was given. If no response was given within 4
seconds of the stimulus appearing then the trial timed out
and the message “no response” appeared on the screen.
As shown in Table 2, the stimuli at positions 4 and 5 were
used as SL and SR respectively during the training phase.
Trial order was randomized within blocks of 12 trials,
containing three presentations each of SL and SR and three
each of the corresponding filler trials, with the condition
that trials alternate between icon stimuli and filler stimuli.
To equate the groups for test accuracy, a total of 48 trials
were presented in the fixed condition and 192 in the varied
condition. During the transfer test a total of 8 stimulus
positions were tested, with an equal number of interleaved
colour filler trials. Trial order was randomized within
blocks of 16 trials, containing one trial of each of the 8
transfer stimuli and 8 filler stimuli. There were 6 blocks,
or 96 trials in total.

Results and Discussion
As discussed above, only subjects who performed above
chance based on an average across all test stimuli were
used in the analysis. A criterion was set at a mean test
accuracy of 61.87% based on the 1-tail .05 level of

significance for a score out of 12 for each of the four
(collapsed) stimulus positions. Only subjects who
performed above this criterion were used in the analysis. In
addition, participants who reported a specific icon counting
strategy were also excluded. Only 8 participants in the
varied group and 11 participants in the fixed group scored
above the chance level criteria and did not report icon
counting. The post-discrimination generalization gradients
for these subjects are shown in Figure 4 below.
Accuracy / P(correct response)

1

0.9

0.8

Simulation

0.7

Experiment
0.6
3

2

1

0 (S)

3

2

Fixed

1
Varied

0 (S)

Distance from Stimulus

Figure 4. Experimental data and simulation results.
The model gives a reasonably good fit to the data. In the
fixed group, post-discrimination generalization decreases
rapidly as the test stimuli become systematically more
dissimilar to the training stimuli. In the varied group, the
generalization gradient resembles a negatively accelerating
curve as accuracy peaks for test stimuli that are one step
removed from S.

General Discussion
The simulation data predicts a very similar difference in
post-discrimination generalization gradients between fixed
and varied groups, under the conditions run in the current
experiment and under conditions more closely resembling
the pigeon experiments reported by Oakeshott (2002).
While past models of icon-based peak shift have been
unable to account for the differences in post-discrimination
generalization gradients produced under fixed and varied
conditions, this adaptation of the McLaren and Mackintosh
model does so without resorting to the assumption that the
stimuli have dimensional properties of any sort. Instead, the
dimension-like qualities of the generalisation gradients and
the peak shift effect emerge as a consequence of the process
of associative learning. There is also no need to posit any
shift from elemental to configural processing of the stimuli
to explain the different post-discrimination gradients

1307

observed in the fixed and varied cases, an explanation
suggested by Oakeshott (2002).

References
Blough, D. S. (1975). Steady state data and a quantitative
model of operant generalization and discrimination.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior
Processes, 1, 3-21.
Ghirlanda, S., & Enquist, M. (2003). A century of
generalization. Animal Behaviour, 66, 15-36.
Honig, W. K., & Urcuioli, P. J. (1981). The legacy of
Guttman and Kalish (1956): 25 years of research on
stimulus generalization. Journal of the Experimental
Analysis of Behavior, 36, 405-445.
Jones, F., & McLaren, I. P. L. (1999). Rules and
associations. In Proceedings of the Twenty-First Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Livesey, E. J. (2004). Representation and Discrimination:
An analysis of the curvature of post-discrimination
generalisation gradients. Unpublished 1st year report,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge.
McLaren, I. P. L., & Mackintosh, N. J. (2000). An
elemental model of associative learning: I. Latent
inhibition and perceptual learning. Animal Learning &
Behavior, 28(3), 211-246.
McLaren, I. P. L., & Mackintosh, N. J. (2002). Associative
learning and elemental representation: II. Generalization
and discrimination. Animal Learning & Behavior, 30(3),
177-200.
Oakeshott, S. M. (2002). Peak shift: An elemental vs a
configural analysis. Unpublished PhD, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge.
Pearce, J. M. (1987). A model of stimulus generalisation
for Pavlovian conditioning. Psychological Review, 94,
61-73.
Pearce, J. M. (1994). Similarity and discrimination: A
selective review and a connectionist model.
Psychological Review, 101, 587-607.
Spetch, M. L., Cheng, K., & Clifford, C. W. G. (2004).
Peak shift but not range effects in recognition of faces.
Learning and Motivation, 35(3), 221-241.
Thomas, D. R. (1993). A model for adaptation-level effects
on stimulus generalization. Psychological Review, 100,
658-673.
Widrow, G., & Hoff, M. E. (1960). Adaptive switching
circuits. In Institute of Radio Engineers: Western
electronic show and convention (Vol. Convention
Record, Pt 4, pp. 96-104).
Wills, S., & Mackintosh, N. J. (1998). Peak shift on an
artificial dimension. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology Section B- Comparative and Physiological
Psychology, 51(1), 1-32.

