UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Taxonomic and Ecological Relations in Open-ended Induction

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4kh7k94k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Baker, Alison
Coley, John D.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Taxonomic and Ecological Relations in Open-ended Induction
Allison Baker (baker@research.neu.edu)
John D. Coley (jcoley@neu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northeastern University
360 Huntington Ave, Boston MA 02115 USA
relationship. Here, we might extend the property to garter
snakes who also eat mice.
Many recent models of category-based induction
emphasize the importance of taxonomic relations (e.g.,
Osherson, Smith, Wilkie, López & Shafir, 1990; Sloman,
1993). But, as is evident in the example above, taxonomic
relations may not be the only available relations for guiding
inductive inferences. A recent proposal by Medin, Coley,
Storms and Hayes (2003) suggests that inductive inferences
are guided in part by salient relationships that exist between
premise categories or between premise and conclusion
categories that are relevant to the context in which the
inference is being made. Specifically, they propose the
principle of relevance, the idea that people are sensitive to
relations between premise categories and they assume that
those relations should inform the process of evaluating
potential conclusion categories. The most distinctive feature
shared by the premise categories provides a basis for
projecting a property shared by the premises to other entities.
Recent research suggests that sensitivity to relevant relations
may emerge as a function of experience in a given domain.
López, Atran, Coley, Medin and Smith (1997) compared
inductive inferences made about local mammal species by the
Itza’ Maya of Guatemala and by North American university
students. Participants were asked to judge the relative strength
of two arguments. For example, the item: “Mice have a
disease. Foxes have another disease. Do you think rats have
the disease of mice or the disease of foxes?” contrasts the
argument Mouse/Rat with the argument Fox/Rat. They found
that American undergraduates, who were relative novices in
the domain of local mammals, tended to base their answers
on the taxonomic similarity among the categories. In terms of
the example above, novices might rate Mouse/Rat to be the
stronger argument because rats are taxonomically closer to
mice than to foxes. Itza’ Maya, on the other hand, who have
considerable knowledge of their local mammals, often used
ecological categories or causal relationships between
categories to guide their inductions. In terms of the example,
experts might find Fox/Rat to be the stronger argument
because foxes and rats have similar feeding habits. These
findings suggest that sensitivity to relevant relationships
among premise categories and inductive selectivity may
change as a function of experience in a given domain.
Specifically, they find that novices tend to rely on taxonomic
relations while experts may seek out other types of relations
(such as ecological relations) that may be relevant to the
context of the inference.
Is taxonomic similarity always the most relevant relation
for novices? The methods used to assess inductive inference

Abstract
Recent research suggests that inductive inference may be based
on salient relations between premise and/or conclusion
categories (Medin, Coley, Storms and Hayes, 2003). The types
of relations deemed relevant may be influenced by experience
(e.g. López, Atran, Coley, Medin and Smith, 1997; Shafto &
Coley, 2003). Novices in a given domain have been shown to
rely primarily on taxonomic relationships to guide their
inductive inferences. In contrast, experts show flexible use of
both taxonomic and non-taxonomic relations. Previous research
has assessed induction using forced choice tasks or ratings of
argument strength, measures that may underestimate the
salience of non-taxonomic relations for novices. The present
study investigated the use of taxonomic and non-taxonomic
relations among novices in the domain of local animal species
using an open-ended task. Participants were given 12 pairs of
taxonomically or ecologically related animals both known to
have a certain property and asked to list other animals that
might also have that property. Results show that relations
among premise pairs had systematic effects on open-ended
inferences. Overall, responses based on ecological relations
were more frequent than taxonomic responses for novices.
These results suggest that given an open-ended task, novices do
demonstrate sensitivity to relevant relations among premise
categories in generating inductive inference.
Keywords: Inductive inference: Reasoning

Introduction
One important role of categorization is to support inductive
inference, that is, using what we know to make guesses about
what we don’t know. If, for example, we know that two
animals, say owls and ducks, have a certain property, we
might reason that other similar animals, perhaps
woodpeckers, may share the property, but not dissimilar
animals, like snakes. In this case, our extension of the
property from the premises (owl and duck) to the conclusion
(woodpecker) is based on overall similarity, specific shared
features, or common membership in the same superordinate
class (i.e. birds). We conclude that woodpeckers may have
the property, but not snakes, because woodpeckers are
taxonomically related to the premises, that is, similar to the
class that includes both owls and ducks, and snakes are not.
If, on the other hand, a property is known to be true of both
owls and mice, we might generalize that property somewhat
differently. In this case, if we notice that mice and owls have
a unique relationship, that is that owls prey on mice, we might
assume that the property in question is more appropriately
extended to other animals that also participate in that

181

in studies such as those reviewed above often ask participants
to choose the stronger of two arguments, or to select the most
likely conclusion category from among a small set of
alternatives. These tasks constrain participants’ responses and
may underestimate the salience of non-taxonomic relations
for novices. A more open-ended task such as one in which
participants are presented with premises and asked to
generate their own conclusions may be more like real-world
reasoning tasks and may reveal flexible use of relevant
relations in novices.
The present study investigated novices’ use of relevant
relations, both taxonomic and non-taxonomic, in the domain
of local animal species using an open-ended task. If novices
are sensitive to relevant relationships among premise
categories in evaluating potential conclusions, manipulating
those relations may lead to systematic differences in the
nature of inductive inferences.
To this end, participants were presented with pairs of local
animals known to have a certain property. These animal pairs
were either taxonomically similar or dissimilar. Varied
orthogonally with taxonomic similarity was ecological
relationship. Each pair either possessed an ecological relation
(predator/prey or similar habitat) or did not. If participants are
sensitive to the relations among premise pairs, taxonomically
similar pairs should yield more taxonomic inferences than
dissimilar pairs. Ecologically related pairs should yield more
ecological inferences than unrelated pairs.

Procedure
Participants were interviewed individually or in small groups
in the laboratory. They were presented with a packet
containing 12 pairs of animal names; each pair was presented
on a separate page. Instructions were as follows.
On each page of this packet you will find a pair of
local animals which have been discovered to have
a certain property. All you know about the
property is that these two kinds of animals have it.
You will be asked to list other animals or kinds of
animals you think might also have that property, as
well as reasons for your answers.
Response sheets contained one area in which participants
listed other animals might share the property known to be true
of the two premises, as well as a separate area to provide
justifications for their answers. Participants were instructed to
treat each pair independently.

Coding
Reponses were coded according to the relationship between
the given premise pair and the conclusion categories
generated by the participants. The basis of an inference was
judged to be taxonomic if participants’ explanations
emphasized that premise and conclusion categories belonged
to the same class or kind, were similar in appearance, or
similar in general. Responses were coded as ecological if
participants’ explanations relied on an interaction between
premise and conclusion categories that highlighted a nontaxonomic relation such as a predator/prey relation, shared
diet or habitat. Four or five coders agreed on over 90% of
codes. Disagreements were resolved by discussion.

Method
Participants
Participants were 30 Northeastern University undergraduates
with no stated expertise in the domain of local animals.
Undergraduates were recruited from introductory psychology
classes and participated for course credit.

Results

Materials and Design

Analyses revealed that across items, ecologically based
responses were more frequent than taxonomically based
responses, t(29) = 4.017, p<.001. Taxonomic and ecologically
based responses were then analyzed separately using a 2
(taxonomic distance, near/far) X 2 (ecological relatedness,
related/unrelated) repeated measures analysis of variance.
For taxonomically based responses, analyses reveal a
significant effect of taxonomic distance, F(1,29)=14.57,
p<.001. Participants were more likely to make taxonomic
projections for taxonomically near than taxonomically far
pairs. This analysis also revealed a main effect of ecological
relatedness, F(1,29)=24.93, p <.001. Participants were more
likely to make taxonomic projections from ecologically
unrelated pairs than related pairs (see Fig.1).

Stimuli consisted of 12 pairs of animal species native to
Massachusetts. Relations between paired animals varied
according to taxonomic distance and ecological relatedness
(see Table 1). Pairs were either drawn from the same
taxonomic order (taxonomically near pairs) or from different
orders (taxonomically far pairs). Ecological relatedness
(related or unrelated) varied orthogonally with taxonomic
distance and involved either a predatory/prey relation or a
shared habitat.
Table 1: Examples of stimulus pairs.
Ecological
relation

Taxonomic relation
Near

Far

Related

Coyote, Bobcat
Heron, Duck

Hawk, Field Mouse
Owl, Garter Snake

Unrelated

River Otter, Deer
Turtle, Tree Frog

Chipmunk, Bullfrog
Muskrat, Woodpecker

182

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Ecologically Related

taxonomic relation, participants made projections to other
similar animals. They were less likely to make taxonomic
projections when the taxonomic relationship was more
distant.
When reasoning about animals that had an ecological
relationship, our participants used that relation to guide their
inferences and projected the property to other ecologically
related animals.
Interestingly, the frequency of taxonomic inferences was
influenced not only by taxonomic distance, but also by
ecological relatedness. Participants were more likely to
generate taxonomic projections for pairs of animals that were
ecologically unrelated than for pairs that possessed an
ecological relationship. Ecological projections, however,
were not influenced by the taxonomic distance of the pair.
Participants were equally likely to generate ecologically
based conclusions regardless of taxonomic relation. These
findings suggest that the relations among the premise pairs
had systematic and specific effects on open-ended inferences.
It was not the case that taxonomic relatedness had a pervasive
effect on novices’ inferences.
In sum, the results of the current study challenge previous
characterizations of novice inductive inference. Our results
suggest that novices may not be limited to similarity or
taxonomically-based reasoning strategies. In this experiment,
novices in the domain of local animals exhibited flexible and
systematic use of relevant ecological and taxonomic relations
to inform their inferences. Further, the use of open-ended
reasoning tasks may capture more ecologically valid
inferences, and thus may prove a fruitful method for
examining reasoning strategies.

Ecologically Unrelated

Near

Far

Taxonomic distance

Figure 1. Relative frequency of taxonomic inferences
For ecologically based responses, analyses reveal a
significant main effect of ecological relatedness,
F(1,28)=29.52, p <.001. Participants were more likely to
make ecological projections for ecologically related than
unrelated pairs. This analysis revealed no effect of taxonomic
distance, F(1,28)=2.14, p=.15 (see Fig. 2).
Ecologically Related

Ecologically Unrelated

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Acknowledgments
Near

Far

This research is supported by NSF Grant # BCS-0236338 to
J.D. Coley. We thank Carissa Kemp, and numerous members
of the Categorization and Reasoning Laboratory for their hard
work and dedication.

Taxonomic distance

Figure 2. Relative frequency of ecological inferences

Discussion

References

These results provide compelling evidence for novices’ use of
relevant relations to guide their inductions. Overall,
participants chose to base their inferences on ecological
relationships more frequently than on taxonomic
relationships. This result diverges from the findings of
previous research. Instead of relying exclusively on
taxonomic relations, for our participants, ecological
relationships seem to have been quite salient. This suggests
that past methods used for assessing inductive inference may
have underestimated novices’ sensitivity to ecological
relations. The open-ended methodology employed in this
experiment placed fewer constraints on responses and
revealed a surprising flexibility in novices’ use of both
taxonomic and ecological relations.
Participants’ use of salient relations to guide their
reasoning is consistent with the principle of relevance. When
reasoning about pairs of animals that possessed a salient

López, A., Atran, S., Coley, J. D., Medin, D. & Smith, E.E.
(1997). The tree of life: Universal and cultural features of
folkbiological taxonomies and inductions. Cognitive
Psychology, 32, 251-295.
Medin, D., Coley, J.D., Storms, G. & Hayes, B. (2003). A
relevance theory of induction. Psychonomic Bulletin and
Review, 10, 517-532.
Osherson, D.N., Smith, E.E., Wilkie, O., Lopez, A. & Shafir,
E. (1990). Category-based induction. Psychological
Review, 97, 185-200.
Shafto, P. & Coley, J.D. (2003). Development of
categorization and reasoning in the natural world: Novices
to experts, naïve similarity to ecological knowledge.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory
& Cognition, 29, 641-649.
Sloman, S.A. (1993). Feature-based induction. Cognitive
Psychology, 25, 231-280.
183

