UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Effects of Reading Speed on Visual Search Task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5m04v1fq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Atsumori, Hirokazu
Kato, Masaharu
Kawaguchi, Hideo
et al.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Effects of Reading Speed on Visual Search Task
Masaharu Kato (pieko@abmes.twmu.ac.jp)
Tokyo Women’s Medical University
8-1, Kawada-cho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo162-8666, JAPAN

Mitsugu Kuriyama (kuri@cs.c.u-tokyo.ac.jp)
Kazuhiro Ueda (ueda@gregorio.c.u-tokyo.ac.jp)
The University of Tokyo
3-8-1, Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8902, JAPAN

Toyofumi Sasaki (sasaki@sokudoku.co.jp)
NBS Japan Society of Speed Reading Education
3-6-2, Shibuya-ku, Tokyo150-0002, JAPAN

Hirokazu Atsumori (h-atsu@rd.hitachi.co.jp)
Hideo Kawaguchi (kawaguti@rd.hitachi.co.jp)
Advanced Research Laboratory, Hitachi, Ltd.
2520 Akanuma, Hatoyama, Saitama 350-0395, JAPAN

Yukuo Konishi (ykonishi@abmes.twmu.ac.jp)
Tokyo Women’s Medical University
8-1, Kawada-cho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo162-8666, JAPAN
Abstract
Speed reading training enhances one’s reading speed.
Typically, those who train using the Park-Sasaki training
method can read all the characters sequentially with the
reading speed of over 10,000 characters per minute (about
over 4,000 words per minute in English sentences). It means
that they take in a huge amount of information during speed
reading. Our study investigated the training effect on visual
perception and attention using a visual search task and
revealed that speed reading changes the performance of a
visual search task. In the conjunction task, compared with
novices, the slope of response times for experts as a function
of set size was shallow, which suggests that experts watch a
wider area than do novices, or that experts conduct a parallel
search, at least in part. The measurements of eye movements
during the experiments support this explanation; experts could
respond with fewer episodes of fixation than could novices.
As we used a simple non-letter-based feature as the stimulus,
the results suggest that training improves general ability to
process visual stimuli, regardless of language. We think that
speed reading training improves attention which plays an
important role in the conjunction task.

Introduction
Speed reading training enhances one’s reading speed.
Typically, those who train using the Park-Sasaki training
method can read all the characters sequentially with the
reading speed of over 10,000 characters per minute (about
over 4,000 words per minute in English sentences). The
trained people assert that they understand the contents of the
books read at such high speed. If true, besides
comprehending sentences, it means that they take in a huge

amount of visual information during speed reading. That is
interesting in terms of training and visual attention. To take
in a huge amount of visual information, they must have a
larger spotlight of attention than normal readers have, and/or
they must move their spotlight of attention more quickly
than normal readers do. As trained people acquire their
speed reading ability by training, not by talent, this
attentional change might be brought by the training.
However, no study has examined the effects of speed
reading training on visual attention [for a review, Carver
(1990)].
The aim of this study is to verify that trained people can
really take in visual information faster than normal readers
can, and to investigate whether they have a larger spotlight
of attention or they move it more quickly than normal
readers, by using visual search task. The visual search task
was introduced by Treisman and Gelade (1980), and has
become a widely used measure in the study of visual
perception and attention. In a speeded visual search task,
subjects can look at objects (called items) on a screen for as
long as they like, and a target that differs from uniform
distractors in only one feature dimension is presented on the
screen. The response time usually does not increase with the
number of distractors. This is usually regarded as a
reflection of spatially parallel processing (Treisman &
Gelade, 1980). Treisman and Gelade (1980) argued that if a
target is similar to a distractor (e.g., conjunction), the
response time is largely dependent on the number of
distractors, which they called serial processing. Although
subsequent research has shown that a conjunction search
can be quite efficient in some cases (e.g., Nakayama and

1102

Silverman, 1986), there are some rules for the allocation of
visual attention (Wolfe, 1998).
The set-size dependency of the response time in a visual
search task changes in proportion to the amount of training
(Sireteanu and Rettenbach, 1995, 2000; Leonards et al.,
2002). However, it is not known whether the training effect
is paradigm specific, as these studies used the same
paradigm for both training and testing. In speed-reading
training, there is no task similar to a visual search task; the
readers are trained with respect to eye movements,
breathing, and posture, in order to concentrate on the
sentences they read. Consequently, if speed-reading training
changes the performance of a visual search task, this should
be owing to an improvement in some cognitive process
(perhaps visual attention) that is not specific to the task.
Here, we show that speed reading changes the
performance of a visual search task, that is, trained people
can find a target much faster than untrained people. As we
used a simple non-character-based feature as the stimulus,
this suggests that the training improves one’s ability,
regardless of both language and the stimulus/paradigm of
the visual search task.

Color task

Orientation task

Conjunction task

Target
item

Figure 1: Stimuli used in color, orientation, and
conjunction tasks. For each task, a target item was shown
in upper panel, and an example of spatial configuration of
a target and distractors was shown in lower panel. Gray
indicates green, and white indicates red in experiment.

Subjects

Methods

Eight paid subjects (four men, four women) between 24 and
37 years of age (standard deviation: 4.8 years) participated
in the experiment as novices. Another eight paid subjects
(seven men, one woman) between 24 and 57 years of age
(standard deviation: 12.5 years) participated in the
experiment as speed-reading experts. The average selfreported reading speed of the experts was about 70,000
characters per minute (cpm) with a standard deviation of
about 40,000 cpm. The average training duration was 39
months, and the standard deviation was 29 months. All had
normal or corrected-to normal vision and normal hearing.
They were naïve as to the purpose of the experiment. They
gave informed consent, following an explanation of the
experimental procedures.

Apparatus and stimuli
The experiment was conducted in a quiet, dimly lit room. A
computer monitor (RDF173H, NEC Mitsubishi Electric
Visual System) with a refresh rate of 85 Hz was positioned
50 cm in front of each subject’s face and a chin-rest was
used to maintain the subject’s head position. In some cases,
an infra-red eye tracker (EMR-NL8, NAC Image
Technology) was placed just below the CRT monitor to
record the subject’s eye movements, at a sampling rate of 60
Hz. The stimuli were many short lines or small solid circles,
called items, with a visual angle of about 0.55°. The
luminance of the red and green solid circles was adjusted to
21.5 cd/m2, the luminance of the short lines was 103 cd/m2,
and the background luminance was 1.93 cd/m2. The items
were presented on the CRT monitor under the control of a
MATLAB (MathWorks) script with Psychophysics Toolbox
extensions (Brainard, 1997; Pelli, 1997) running on a
Macintosh G4 (Apple Computers). An ordinary keyboard
was connected to the computer to record the subjects’ button
presses.
We used three search tasks: a red circle among green
circles (feature ‘color’); a short upward line among short
downward lines (feature ‘orientation’); and a short upward
red line among short downward red lines and short upward
green lines (the conjunction of the features ‘color’ and
‘orientation’) as shown in Figure 1. The items were
presented in one of three set sizes, referred to as S, M, and L,
consisting of 49 (7 × 7), 121 (11 × 11), and 225 (15 × 15)
simultaneously presented items, respectively. The items
were aligned horizontally and vertically in a square grid
with a visual angle of 7, 11, and 16°, respectively. The
distance between items was constant across set sizes.

Procedure

1103

The subjects were asked to press the “L” key on the
keyboard when they found a target on the screen or to press
the “S” key when they found that there was no target on the
screen. They were also asked to make decisions as quickly
as possible without making errors. We measured the
response time (RT) and ratio correct as indices of
performance. The stimuli were presented at the beginning of
each trial and disappeared as soon as the subjects pressed
either key. Following a 1-s interval, the next trial started and
new stimuli were presented. There were nine experimental
conditions [3 tasks × 3 set sizes]. Each block included one
experimental condition and 160 trials so that each subject
experienced 1440 trials in total. In half of the trials, a target
was included somewhere on the screen (the position was
randomized), and in the rest of the trials, no target was
presented. The order of trials was randomized. When the
conjunction task was tested with set sizes S, M, and L, each
block was divided into two or three sub-blocks so that the
time for completion was the same as for the other blocks.
The order of blocks / sub-blocks was also randomized. It
took approximately 5 minutes to complete a block or a subblock. Breaks could be taken at the subjects’ request. Each
subject spent one day in our laboratory to complete all the
experiments. It took about three hours including breaks. Eye
direction was recorded for set size L for the color and

p<.001], and group [F(2,28)=9.81, p=.007]. We also found
interaction effects between target and group [F(1,14)=15.85,

orientation tasks, and this was done with all set sizes for the
conjunction task.

Data analysis

Reaction time
A three-way repeated-measures analysis of variance
(ANOVA) was conducted with the factors target, set size,
and subject group for each task.
Figure 2 shows the RT as a function of set size for
novices and experts for the color task. Almost all the lines
overlap and the slopes are essentially flat on this time scale.
A repeated-measures ANOVA revealed main effects of
target [F(1,14)=15.63, p=.001] and set size [F(2,28)=4.67,
p=.018]. This means that the subjects could respond more
quickly when the target was present, than when the target
was absent. We also found that the RT was dependent on set
size. These effects were relatively small compared to the
other tasks, but were statistically significant. A main effect
of group was marginally significant [F(1,14) = 4.26,
p=.058]. This suggests that the RTs of the novices and
experts might differ for the single-feature task. We did not
find any interaction effect in this condition.
Figure 3 shows the RT as a function of set size tested for
novices and experts in the orientation task. Repeatedmeasures ANOVA revealed main effects of target
[F(1,14)=48.436, p<.001], set size [F(2,28)=31.289,
p<.001], and group [F(2,28)=15.231, p=.002]. The main
effect of group means that the experts responded more
quickly than the novices. We also found an interaction
effect between target and group [F(1,14)=14.829, p=.002],
which means that the RTs of novices were more dependent
on the factor target than the RTs of experts. Moreover, the
interaction effect between set size and group
[F(2,28)=8.031, p=.002] means that the slope of experts’
RTs was significantly shallower than that for novices, i.e.,
experts responded relatively independent of set size. An
interaction effect between target and set size
[F(2,28)=24.783, p<.001] was also found, which means that
the slope was relatively flat in the target-present condition.
Figure 4 shows the RT as a function of set size for
novices and experts for the conjunction task. Repeatedmeasures ANOVA revealed main effects of target
[F(1,14)=47.557, p<.001], set size [F(2,28)=29.582,
1104

Reaction time (ms)

novice (target-present)
expert (target-present)
novice (target-absent)

600

expert (target-absent)

500

400
S

M

L

Set size

Figure 2: The mean response time (RT) as a
function of set size in color task. The RTs for
experts are written in black lines and RTs for
novices are written in gray line. Solid lines are for
the target-present condition, dashed lines are for
the target-absent condition. Error bars are S.E.M.
Orientation task
novice (target-present)

1,600

expert (target-present)

Reaction time (ms)

Results

Color task
700

novice (target-absent)

1,200

expert (target-absent)

800

400
S

M

L

Set size

Figure 3: The mean RT as a function of set
size in orientation task. Error bars are S.E.M.
Conjunction task
8,000

novice (target-present)
expert (target-present)

Reaction time (ms)

The mean RT was calculated for each experimental
condition, but was separated according to whether a target
was present or absent, and was then averaged within subject.
The ratio correct was calculated similarly. We analysed two
indices (frequency of saccades, duration of fixation) from
the eye tracker data. These values were also calculated for
each experimental condition and then averaged within
subject.
As for analyses of eye movements, to reduce the
complexity of the results and the factors that explain our
results, the frequency of fixation was calculated using data
from set size L, and the duration of fixation (i.e., the looking
time between saccades) was calculated using data from the
conjunction task.

6,000

novice (target-absent)
expert (target-absent)

4,000

2,000

0

S

M

L

Set size

Figure 4: The mean RT as a function of set
size in conjunction task. Error bars are S.E.M.

p=.001], between set size and group [F(2,28)=7.584,
p=.002], and between target and set size [F(2,28)=51.844,
p<.001]. All of these effects were also observed in the
orientation task, but the effect was greater in the conjunction
task.

15
expert

Frequency

novice

Ratio Correct
The average ratio correct was .961, i.e., subjects averaged
about six mistakes in 160 trials. For the color task, repeatedmeasures ANOVA revealed a main effect of target
[F(1,14)=27.432, p<.001], which means that the subjects’
responses were less accurate in the target-present condition
(mean = .969) than in the target-absent condition (mean =
.990). There was no significant difference for the other main
effects or interactions.
For the orientation task, we found the same main effect of
target [F(1,14)=21.058, p<.001: average .969 for the targetpresent condition and .992 for the target-absent condition].
There was no significant difference in the other main or
interaction effects.
For the conjunction task, repeated-measures ANOVA
revealed main effects of target [F(1,14)=54.017, p<.001:
average .991 for the target-absent condition and .855 for the
target-present condition] and set size [F(2,28)=23.006,
p<.001: the average was .956, .936, and .876, for set sizes S,
M, and L, respectively]. Multiple-comparison revealed that
the ratio correct for set size L was significantly lower than
in the other conditions. We also found an interaction effect
between set size and target [F(2,28)=23.809, p<.001], which
means that the slope was relatively flat in the target-absent
condition, i.e., there was a tendency for subjects to judge
that a target was absent, even when the target was present.

Eye movements
Eye movements during the experiment were measured for
six experts and four novices. The remaining subjects were
not measured because they wore glasses or contact lenses,
which limits our eye tracker.
The frequency of saccades A two-way repeated-measures
ANOVA was conducted with the factors task and subject
group. As shown in Figure 5, experts made fewer saccades
than novices [F(1,7)=49.321, p<.001], and the frequency of
saccades depended on the task [F(2,14)=24.337, p<.001].
We also found an interaction between group and task
[F(2,14)=4.993, p=.021]. Multiple comparisons revealed
that in the color task, the frequency of saccades was not
different [t(7) = 2.298, n.s.], but in the orientation and
conjunction tasks, the experts made fewer saccades than
novices [t(7)=2.595, p=.032 in the orientation task;
t(7)=2.455, p=.0396 in the conjunction task].
The duration of fixation The duration of fixation was
calculated from the data for the conjunction task. A twoway repeated-measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) was
conducted with the factors set size and subject group. This
revealed that the looking time between each saccade was
dependent on set size [F(2,14)=5.684, p=.014; the averages

10

5

0

color

orientation

conjunction

task

Figure 5: The frequency of saccades as a
function of three tasks for experts (solid line)
and novices (dashed line). Error bars are
S.E.M.
were 476, 386, and 343 ms for set sizes S, M, and L,
respectively]. We did not find a main effect of group
[F(1,7)=1.792, n.s.] or an interaction effect between set size
and group [F(2,14)=1.138, n.s.].

Discussion
In all three tasks, the subjects responded more quickly when
a target was present than when a target was absent. This is
easy to explain, because the subjects could stop searching
when they found the target, but they had to look at all the
items on the screen to be certain that there was no target in
it, which takes more time. Overall, the RT depended on set
size, which suggests that subjects could search a smaller
area more quickly. The dependency was smaller for the
color and orientation tasks than for the conjunction task,
which is consistent with other studies (e.g., Treisman and
Gelade, 1980). We found large differences between the RTs
of experts and novices in the orientation and conjunction
tasks, as shown in Figures 3 and 4, and also found that
experts made fewer saccades than novices in these tasks (see
Figure 5). One can argue that the enhanced RTs of experts
were owing to a speed-accuracy trade-off, i.e., novices and
experts use different strategies: novices put greater weight
on making no errors than on responding quickly, while
experts use the opposite strategy. However, it does not hold
in this case, for there was no main or interaction effect of
group factor on the ratio correct. We also noted that the
subjects followed our instructions well, since they averaged
only six mistakes in a block.
In the color task, the slope of RTs as a function of set size
was almost flat for both experts and novices. In this task,
targets ‘pop out’ among other distractive items and the preattentive process is believed to be involved in this
phenomenon.
In the orientation task, when a target was present, it is
apparent that the increase in RT as a function of set size (or
slope) was smaller (or shallower) than the increase in RT in
the conjunction task. This was independent of group factor,
which also suggests that both experts and novices found the
target pre-attentively.

1105

In terms of group difference, experts could find targets
more quickly than novices in both 'pop out' tasks, especially
in a large set size [although it was not significant in color
task, but marginally significant (p=.058)]. This indicates
that experts could process visual information more quickly
than novices in pre-attentive process. Sireteanu and
Rettenbach (1995, 2000) also showed that those who trained
single-feature visual search task could process visual
information pre-attentively.
In the conjunction task, the group difference was very
clear. Compared with novices, the slope of RTs for experts
as a function of set size was shallow (see Figure 4), which
also suggests that experts could process visual information
more quickly than novices in non pre-attentive processes.
Why could experts respond more quickly than novices? If
the ability to speed-read does not require special talents (our
speed reading school declares that speed reading is for every
one), the reason must reflect the potential of speed-reading
training. Some studies have investigated the training effect
on a visual search task (Sireteanu and Rettenbach, 2000;
Leonards et al., 2002). Sireteanu and Rettenbach (2000)
investigated the effect of training in a visual search task
extensively and showed that the performance of a naïve
subject doing a single-feature task was improved by training
and the effect occurred in both target-present and targetabsent conditions. This result is essentially the same as ours.
In the conjunction task, however, the training effect was
limited in their experiments: the effect occurred in the
target-present condition, but not in the target-absent
condition after training for 11 days. In our experiment, by
contrast, the RTs of experts in the target-absent condition
were shorter than the RTs of novices, as shown in Figure 4,
which implies that the effect of training in speed reading is
not limited to the target-present condition. The important
point in which our experiments differ from theirs is that our
experts had never experienced a visual search task;
nevertheless, their performance was better than that of the
novices. Again, note that in speed-reading training, students
are trained in terms of eye movements, breathing, and
posture, in order to concentrate on the sentences that they
read.
In speed reading training, trainees are required to enlarge
their visual span, which might be related to the
improvement. In fact, our results from conjunction task
suggest that the spotlight of attention becomes wider for
experts than novices, rather than the moving speed of the
spotlight becomes faster. In conjunction task, experts could
respond with fewer episodes of saccade than could novices
(see Figure 5), and experts could respond more quickly than
could
novices too. Additionally, experts could respond more
quickly than novices in orientation task where subjects
could respond with only some episodes of saccade (see
Figure 5). This also suggests that experts could process
visual information in a wider area at a glance. Wolfe et al.
(2000) showed that in a searching task, even if subjects
know in advance where the target will appear, the time
needed to check for its existence is longer than the time
needed to find the target in the case of subjects who do not
know the expected position of the target. Their results

suggest that widening spatial attention is more efficient than
focusing attention on a small area (like a moving
searchlight) for a visual search, which appears consistent
with our results.
Green and Bavelier (2003) demonstrated that attention is
strengthened by video games, in terms of visual attention
capacity, and the spatial and temporal distribution of visual
attention. They also showed that action-game training led to
greater performance improvement than did a control game
(Tetris). Their results are very similar to ours, except that
the action game required the subjects’ attention to search for
objects, which is basically the same as a visual search, while
in reading there is no target or distractor.
Recently it was revealed that neural activation in trained
subjects differed from that in untrained subjects (Fujimaki et
al. 2004; Kato et al. 2005). Their data showed that the
neural activity of trained subjects during speed reading
decreased near Wernicke’ s and Broca’s areas. This suggests
that trained people use fewer phonological processes, such
as phonological transformation and inner speech, than the
untrained when they speed-read. Here, we showed that
speed-reading not only changes neural activity at higher
levels, such as phonological processes, but also changes the
performance of a visual search. As we used a simple nonletter-based feature as the stimulus, the results suggest that
training improves ability, regardless of language.

Acknowledgements
This research is supported by grant (Grants-in-Aid for
Scientific Research (A), No.16200019) from Japan Society
for the Promotion of Science.

References
Brainard, D. H. (1997). The Psychophysics Toolbox. Spatial
Vision, 10, 433-436.
Carver, R. P. (1990). Reading rate: a review of research
and theory. San Diego, California: Academic Press
Draganski, B., Gaser, C., Busch, V., Schuierer, G.,
Bogdahn, U., & May, A. (2004). Changes in grey matter
induced by training. Nature, 427, 311-312.
Fujimaki, F., Hayakawa, T., Munetsuna, S., & Sasaki T.
(2004). Neural activation dependent on reading speed
during covert reading of novels. Neuro Report, 5, 239243.
Green, C. S., & Bavelier D. (2003). Action video game
modifies visual selective attention. Nature, 423, 534-537.
Kato, M., Kuriyama, M., Ueda, K., Sasaki T., Atsumori, H.,
Kawaguchi, H., & Konishi, Y. (2005). The effects of
reading speed on brain activity: a NIRS study. A
supplement of the Journal of Cognitive Neurosciences:
Cognitive Neuroscience 2005 Annual Meeting, 227.
Leonards, U., Rettenbach, R., Nase, G., & Sireteanu, R.
(2002). Perceptual lerning of highly demanding visual
search tasks. Vision Research, 42, 2193-2204.
Nakayama, K., & Silverman G. H. (1986). Serial and
parallel processing of visual feature conjunctions. Nature,
320, 264-265.

1106

Pelli, D. G. (1997). The VideoToolbox software for visual
psychophysics: Transforming numbers into movies.
Spatial Vision, 10, 437-442.
Sireteanu, R., & Rettenback, R. (1995). Perceptual learning
in visual search : fast, enduring, but non-specific. Vision
Research, 35, 2037-2043.
Sireteanu, R., & Rettenback, R. (2000). Perceptual learning
in visual search generalizes over tasks, locations, and
eyes. Vision Research, 40, 2959-2949.

1107

Treisman A., & Gelade, G. (1980). A feature-integration
theory of attention. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 97-136.
Wolfe, J. M. (1998). What can 1 million trials tell us about
visual search? Psychological Science, 9, 33-39.
Wolfe, J. M., Alvarez, G. A., & Horowitz, T. S. (2000).
Attention is fast but volition is slow. Nature, 394, 575577.

