UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Languages of Science: A Corpus-Based Study of Experimental and Historical Science
Articles

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/60k47549

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Argamon, Shlomo
Chase, Paul
Dodick, Jeff

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Languages of Science:
A Corpus-Based Study of Experimental and Historical Science Articles
Shlomo Argamon (argamon@iit.edu)
Paul Chase (chaspau@iit.edu)
Illinois Institute of Technology
Dept. of Computer Science, 10 W 31st Street
Chicago, IL 60616, USA

Jeff Dodick (jdodick@vms.huji.ac.il)
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Department of Science Teaching, Givat Ram
Jerusalem 91904, ISRAEL
Abstract

Because of this, reasoning in historical sciences consists
largely of reconstructive reasoning, as compared to the
predictive reasoning from causes to possible effects characteristic of experimental science (Gould 1986; Diamond
2002).
Our contention is that such methodological differences
should lead to discernable differences in language usage;
analysis of such differences will both provide empirical
support for the “multiple methodologies” position (as
opposed to a monolithic “scientific method”), as well as
possibly enable a more nuanced examination of those
methodological differences.

Studying the communication patterns of scientists can give
us insight into how science works in practice. We have
been studying the language of peer-reviewed journal
articles in several scientific fields, and argue that
methodological differences between different scientific
fields are reflected in differences in how scientists in these
fields rhetorically organize their texts. Techniques of
computational stylistics enable us to compare rhetorical
styles between the historical and the experimental
sciences, and thus relate differences in language use to
methodological differences posited by philosophers of
science. A previous study (Argamon & Dodick 2004)
demonstrated a clear difference between writing style in
paleontology and that in physical chemistry; this paper
extends those results to peer-reviewed articles from twelve
journals in six different fields. Our current results
demonstrate more generally that historical science writing
is readily distinguishable from that of experimental
science. Moreover, the most significant linguistic features
of these distinctive styles are directly related to differences
posited by philosophers of science between the historical
and experimental sciences.

Overview
We have been applying techniques of computational stylistics to this problem. In this paper, we generalize our
earlier results (Argamon & Dodick 2004), analyzing the
linguistic features of scientific writing in experimental
and historical science as exemplified in peer-reviewed
articles in a number of journals in various fields. The
larger corpus also enables a more detailed analysis of the
features that distinguish the two classes of scientific articles. We apply stylistic text categorization methods, as in
our earlier study, to determine if the article classes are
significantly distinctive from each other, and what features distinguish them.
(We only consider topicindependent (or `stylistic') features, since each field will
be easily (and trivially) distinguished by its own jargon,
such as `fossil' in paleontology, or `quantum entanglement' in physics.)
To summarize, we find that differences in language
style between articles in different fields do exist, corresponding in broad outline to differences in methodology
between experimental and historical science. Further, a set
of linguistically well-motivated features for genre classification (based on Systemic Functional Linguistics) enable a nuanced examination of the rhetorical differences,
demonstrating a clear connection between linguistic differences classes of articles and methodological differences between kinds of science, as posited by philosophers of science.
Our work in this vein can be seen as a computational
extension of previous work examining the relationship
between linguistic choice and contextual factors. For ex-

Introduction
It has become clear in recent years that communication
among scientists is critical for scientific success (Latour
& Woolgar 1986; Dunbar 2001; Goodwin 1994). Key to
communication, of course, is effective use of language, so
it is unsurprising that idiosyncratic features of scientific
prose have evolved to be useful in constructing complex
scientific arguments (Halliday & Martin 1993). The way
scientific language is organized, then, should reflect scientific reasoning and methodology.
Recently, philosophers of science have begun to recognize that the classical model of a single “Scientific
Method” is overly simplistic, but rather, different scientific methods may be used in different fields with varying
epistemological needs (Cleland, 2002). Experimental
science (such as physics) attempts to formulate general
predictive laws, and so relies heavily on repeatable series
of controlled experiments that test specific hypotheses
(Diamond 2002). Historical science, on the other hand,
deals with contingent phenomena, studying specific phenomena in the past in an attempt to find unifying explanations for effects caused by those phenomena (Mayr 1976).

157

ample, Plum & Cowling (1987) demonstrate a relation
between speaker social class and choice of verb tense
(past/present) in face-to-face interviews. Similarly, Hasan
(1988) has shown, in mother-child interactions, that the
child's sex and the family’s social class together have a
strong influence on several kinds of semantic choice in
speech.

Table 1. Journals used in the study, with number of articles
and average words per article.

Journal

#Art

J. Geology
J. Metamorphic Geol.
Biol. J. Linnean Society
Human Evolution
Palaeontologia Electronica
Quaternary Research
Physics Letters A
Physical Review Letters
J. Physical Chemistry A
J. Physical Chemistry B
Heterocycles
Tetrahedron

Hypotheses
Based on the above-mentioned work in the philosophy
and history of science we formulate our main hypothesis:
H1: Stylistic features will distinguish more strongly
between articles from different kinds (historical or
experimental) of science than between articles from
different journals in the same kind of science.
We also consider more detailed hypotheses regarding
what sorts of stylistic features we expect to be most significant in distinguishing articles in the different fields,
based on posited methodological differences. First, a key
element of historical reasoning is the need to differentially weight the evidence. Since any given trace of a past
event is typically ambiguous as to its possible causes,
many pieces of evidence must be combined in complex
ways in order to form a confirming or disconfirming argument for a hypothesis (Cleland 2002; Baker 1996).
Since all the effects of any given past cause cannot actually be known (as some are lost in the historical/geological record), evidence must be carefully
weighed to decide between competing hypotheses. Experimental sciences tend, on the other hand, to adhere
more or less to a “predict and test” methodology, in which
manipulative experiments are used to confirm or disconfirm specific predictions formulated as hypotheses (Cleland 2002). We therefore hypothesize:
H2a: Writing in historical science has more features
expressing the weight, validity, likelihood, or typicality of different assertions or pieces of evidence
H2b: Writing in experimental science has more features typical of explicit reasoning about predictions
and expectations.

93
108
191
169
111
113
132
114
121
71
231
151

Avg.
Words
4891
5024
4895
4223
4132
2939
2339
2545
4865
5269
3580
5057

expect in the experimental sciences. Thus we may also
hypothesize:
H3a: Writing in historical science has features indicating a greater variety of information units in the
text, as well as a concern with contextualizing information about varied and unique objects of study; this
reflects the methodology of uncontrolled observations
on unique historical entities.
H3b: Writing in experimental science has features
indicating more focused attention to a single (or
small number of) `storylines', reflecting a more focused approach of controlled manipulation of nature
to test specific hypotheses about uniform objects.
Note that the presence or absence of one or two linguistic features that can be linked to reasoning of a particular type is not by itself evidence of such reasoning.
However, a consistent pattern of many of these features
(as shown below) together aligned with the dichotomy
proposed in H2 strongly argues for such differences,
which future research will attempt to elucidate in
greater detail.
Methodology

Further, historical science primarily studies complex
and unique entities via observation and comparison,
while experimental science studies uniform and interchangeable entities via manipulative experimentation.
The consequent manipulative nature of information
gathering in the experimental sciences will tend towards
highly focused and controlled experimentation (indeed,
this is considered a key quality of good methodology).
Historical scientific methodology differs here, in that
(a) the context of uncontrolled observations may be
critical for proper interpretation, and (b) that the
uniqueness of the objects studied means that comparison among many different observations is critical.
Argumentation in the historical sciences thus may be
expected to require a higher density of separate `information units' than the more focused argumentation we

The Corpus
The study reported here was performed using a corpus of
recent (2003) articles drawn from twelve peer-reviewed
journals in six fields, as given in Table 1. This triples the
number of journals and articles surveyed when compared
with our previous study (Argamon and Dodick, 2004).
Textual Features
First, we used a set of 546 functions words (termed FW)
taken en masse from the stop-word list of the popular research information retrieval system AIRE (Grossman &
Frieder 1998); this procedure ensured task and theory
neutrality. The set of function words used are similar to
those used in many previous studies, such as Mosteller

158

and Wallace’s (1964) seminal stylometric work on the
Federalist Papers1. Each document was thus represented
as a vector of 546 numbers between 0 and 1, each the
relative frequency of one of the function words.
In order to more precisely analyze the rhetorical differences between articles in the two fields a follow-up experiment used as features the relative frequencies of sets
of keywords and phrases derived from consideration of
notions of Systemic Functional Linguistics (SFL) (Halliday 1994). This theory construes language as a set of
interlocking choices for expressing meanings: “either this,
that, or the other”, with more general choices constraining
the possible specific choices. For example: “If clause A is
to be extended by clause B, then clause B may extend A
by adding new information, elaborate on the meaning
already in A, or enhance understanding of A by qualifying circumstances; if B is enhancing, then it may do so
with regards to spatiotemporal circumstances, manner, or
causes/conditions,” and so on. A system is a set of options
for meanings to be expressed, with entry conditions denoting when that choice is possible – for example, if a
message is not about doing, then there is no choice possible between expressing standalone action or action on
something. Options serve as entry conditions for more
specific subsystems.
By viewing language as a complex of choices among
mutually exclusive options, the systemic approach is particularly appropriate to examining variation in language
use. A systemic specification allows us to ask the following type of question: In places where a meaning of general type A is to be expressed in a text (e.g., “one clause
expands on another”), what sorts of more specific meanings (e.g., “extension” or “enhancement”) are most likely
to be expressed in different contexts? Such preferences
can be measured by evaluating the relative probabilities of
different options by tagging their realizations in a corpus
of texts (Halliday 1991).
As features, then, in the absence of a reliable systemic
parser, we use keywords and phrases as proxy indicators
for various systems. For example, an occurrence of the
word “certainly” usually indicates that the author is making a high-probability modal assessment of an assertion.
We use as complete a set of such systemic indicator keywords/phrases as possible for each system we represent,
and also by using only measures of comparative frequency between the aggregated features. The use of large
sets of indicators for each system makes it unlikely that
ambiguity will introduce a systematic bias.
We focus on two large-scale aspects of a text related to
its rhetorical organization which enable it to realize complex conceptual structures; for space reasons we only give

a brief overview here (details in the Appendix; also see
(Argamon and Dodick 2004)).
Cohesion refers to linguistic resources that enable language to connect to its larger context, both textual and
extratextual (Halliday & Hasan 1976). Such resources
include a wide variety of referential modalities (pronominal reference, deictic expressions, ellipsis, and more), as
well as lexical repetition and variation, and different ways
of linking clauses together. How an author uses these
various cohesive resources is an indication of how the
author organizes concepts and relates them to each other.
Within cohesion, our computational work considers just
conjunctions, for feasibility of automated extraction.
In SFL, clausal conjunctions are organized via the system of EXPANSION, which describes features which serve
to link clauses together causally or logically. The first of
the three main types of EXPANSION is Extension, which
links clauses giving different information together, realized by words such as ``and'', ``but'', and ``furthermore''.
The second type is ENHANCEMENT, which qualifies information in one clause by another (e.g., ``similarly...'' or
``therefore...''). Third is ELABORATION, which deepens a
clause by clarification or exemplification (e.g., ``in other
words...'' or ``more precisely'').
Assessment we define as qualification of events or
assertions in the text according to their rhetorical or epistemic properties. One key system for assessment is MODALITY in which the likelihood, typicality, or necessity of
an event are indicated, usually by a modal auxiliary verb
or an adjunct adverbial group. There are two main types
of modality: MODALIZATION, which quantifies levels of
likelihood or frequency (e.g., ``probably'', ``might'', ``usually'', ``seldom''), and MODULATION, which quantifies
ability or necessity of performance (e.g., ``ought to...'',
``should...'', ``allows...'').
A second important system for assessment is COMMENT, which is one of modal assessment, comprising a
variety of types of ``comment'' on a message, assessing
the writer's attitude towards it, or its validity or evidentiality. Comments are generally realized as adjuncts in a
clause (and may appear initially, medially, or finally).
Machine Learning
Each document was represented by two numerical vectors, one for each of the above feature sets. In each vector, the elements were the relative frequency of the lexical
features of the text. We applied the SMO learning algorithm (Platt 1998) as implemented in the Weka system
(Witten & Frank 1999) using a linear kernel, no feature
normalization, and the default parameters. (Other options
did not appear to improve classification accuracy, so we
used the simplest option.) SMO is a support vector machine (SVM) algorithm; SVMs have been previously applied successfully to text categorization problems
(Joachims 1998). Generalization accuracy was measured
using 10-fold cross-validation.

1

Relative frequencies of function words, such as prepositions,
determiners, and auxiliary verbs, have been shown in a number
of studies to be useful for stylistic discrimination, since they act
as easily extracted proxies for the frequencies of different syntactic constructs, and also tend not to covary strongly with
document topic.

159

Figure 1: Learning accuracy for distinguishing articles in
different pairs of journals using FW features. (Full explanation of this figure appears in text).

Figure 2: Learning accuracy for distinguishing articles in
different pairs of journals using SC features. (Full explanation
of this figure appears in text).
ture consistently indicative, if it was indicative at all for
one class of document in at least 25 of the 36 trials.
Table 2 shows the consistently indicative features
found. Most important for understanding these results are
oppositions, in which an option in a particular system is
strongly indicative of one article class (either experimental or historical science) while a different option of that
same system is indicative of the other class. Such an opposition indicates a meaningful linguistic difference between the classes of articles, in that each prefers a distinctive way (its preferred option) of expressing the same
general meaning (the parent system). We now discuss the
most salient and how they relate to our hypotheses.
First, consider the system of EXPANSION. At the top
level, we see an opposition between Extension, which
indicates historical science, and Enhancement, which indicates experimental science. This implies that historical
science articles generally have a higher density of discrete
informational items, whereas experimental science articles tend to have fewer information items, which may
have their meaning deepened or qualified by informationally related clauses. This appears to reflect differing principles of rhetorical organization—experimental scientists
seem to prefer a single coherent `story line' focused on
enhancements of a small number of focal propositions,
whereas historical scientists seem to prefer a multifocal
`landscape' of connected propositions. This supports hypotheses H3a and H3b, respectively, comparing the contextual examination of various and highly unique entities
by historical science with the more universalist, hence
focused, examination of generic entities by experimental
science.
Two other oppositions are visible in the `subsystems' of
Extension and Enhancement as well, which, while not
bearing directly on our hypotheses, seem related. Within
Extension, we see an experimental preference for Additive, compared with a historical preference for Adversa-

Results
Distinctiveness
We first test hypothesis H1 by testing on our corpus
whether experimental and historical journal articles are
stylistically distinctive from each other. For each pair of
two different journals, we used SMO (as above) to learn
classifiers distinguishing articles in one journal from those
in the other; the estimated learning accuracy is a measure
of how distinguishable the journals are from one another
(in terms of the features we have defined). These pairwise classification results are shown for feature sets FW
and SC in Figures 1 and 2, respectively. Note that journal
pairs from a single field are the least distinguishable, followed by those from two different (out of three) historical
fields, then from two different experimental fields, and
finally, most distinctive are those journal pairs where one
journal is historical and the other experimental. While
there is some variance within each group, the difference
between the ``Diff'' pairs and the pool of all ``Similar''
pairs (i.e., the union of ``Same'', ``Exper'' and ``Hist''), for
both feature sets, is quite noticeable and statistically significant (FW: Mann-Whitney U=940.5, p<0.0001; SC:
Mann-Whitney U=915.5, p<0.0001).
Linguistic characterization
We now consider what consistent picture, if any, emerges
of the linguistic differences between the two classes of
scientific articles (historical and experimental) from the
patterns of feature weights in the learned models. To do
this, we ran SMO on the entire corpus (without reserving
test data) for each of the thirty-six pairs of a historical
with an experimental journal, and ranked the features according to their weight for one or the other journal in the
weight vector. The sign of a feature’s weight (positive or
negative) denotes which class of documents it indicates.
To simplify presentation of the results, we will call a fea-

160

System

Expansion

Historical

Experimental

Extension(26)

Enhancement(31)

Elaboration

Apposition(28)

Extension

Adversative(30)

Additive(26)

Enhancement

Matter(29)

Spatiotemporal(26)

Comment

Admissive(30)
Validative(32)

Predictive(36)

Modality Type

Modalization(36) Modulation(35)

Modulation

Obligation(29)

Modality Value
Modality Orientation

unqualified statements of what must (or must not) happen,
and (ii) uses therefore the method of ``multiple working
hypotheses''.
Within Modulation, we see also a more delicate opposition, where experimental science articles prefer Readiness
(possibility), and historical science articles prefer Obligation (necessity). To understand this, note first that either
kind of assessment opens up a clause for value-based consideration; if a statement is to be simply accepted, on the
other hand, modal assessment will typically be avoided
(compare ``John went to the store'' with ``John should
have gone to the store''; the first is either true or false,
whereas the second makes a value judgment that can be
disputed). Thus experimental scientists open Readiness
up for consideration and possible disputation by the
reader, while the default is for events to be necessary (and
so need not be noted explicitly as such). For historical
scientists, on the other hand, necessity cannot be assumed,
rather Obligation is noted openly in the text, allowing
dispute, while the possible and contingent is assumed as
the default (and nuanced levels of probability are expressed by Modalization, as noted above).

Readiness(26)
High(27)

Objective(31)

Subjective(31)

Table 2. Consistent indicator features within each of the systems used in the study. Numbers in parentheses show in how
many paired-classification tests the feature names was an indicator for the given class of documents.

tive. This further supports the notion that historical scientists use a ``multiple working hypotheses'' method, in
which comparison of alternatives is key (H3a). Further,
we see that SpatioTemporal relationships form a core type
of Enhancement for experimental scientists (presumably
describing forms and relationships of experimental subjects and results), while historical scientists do Enhancement more via Matter and so contextualize their statements more (H2a).
Posited methodological distinctions between the kinds
of science are further supported by our results for COMMENT. Here we see preference for Validative and Admissive comments by historical scientists compared to a very
strong consistent preference for Predictive comments by
experimental scientists. The latter result is a straightforward consequence (hypothesis H2b) of the experimental
scientist's focus on predictive consistency. The historical
scientist, on the other hand, evinces a rhetorical need (via
Validation comments) to explicitly delineate the scope of
validity of different assertions (hypothesis H2a), likely
due to synthetic thinking (Baker 1996) about complex and
ambiguous webs of past causation (Cleland 2002). An
Admissive comment marks a clause as the opinion (perhaps strongly held) of the author; this too appears indicative of a more hedged and explicitly comparative argumentation style.
Finally, we consider MODALITY, starting with simple
(non-conjunctive) features. The primary opposition is in
modality Type. The preference of experimental science
writing for Modulation (assessing what `must' or `is able'
to happen) is supportive of hypothesis H2b and consistent
with a focus on prediction and manipulation of nature.
Concurrently, historical science writing shows a preference for Modalization (assessing `likelihood' or `usuality'), support hypothesis H2a and consistent with the outlook of an observer who usually cannot directly manipulate or replicate outcomes, and therefore (i) cannot make

Conclusions
Our study of the languages of science provides two intertwined results. First, application of machine learning
techniques to linguistically motivated textual features
provides empirical evidence for rhetorical differences
between writing in historical and experimental sciences,
thus supporting recent claims of philosophers against a
monolithic “scientific method”. Second, analysis of the
models output by this technique gives insight into which
language features most consistently realize the difference
in functional text type corresponding to different types of
science. Such linguistic preferences are directly linked
with the particular modes of reasoning posited by philosophers for these different kinds of science, pointing
towards a more nuanced analysis of methodological variation among different scientific fields while lending further
weight to the argument for a multiplicity of scientific
methods.
Future work includes validating these results against
a larger corpus of articles including more scientific fields.
Moreover, we intend to study linguistic variation across
different sections of individual texts within and across
fields, as the stylistic and discourse-structural character of
an article varies strongly among its different sections
(e.g., Introduction vs. Methods vs. Results), as analyzed
by Lewin et al. (1986) for social science texts.
This work may also have meaningful applications towards improving science education. By delineating some
of the language skills necessary for effective scientific
communication, it might be possible to develop methods
for teaching such skills to scientific novices.

161

References

Witten, I.H. and Frank E. (1999). Weka 3: Machine Learning
Software in Java: http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/~ml/weka.

Argamon, S., and Dodick, J.T. 2004. Linking rhetoric and methodology in formal scientific writing. In Proc. 26th Annual
Cognitive Science Society meetings, Chicago IL.
Baker, V.R. (1996). The pragmatic routes of American Quaternary geology and geomorphology. Geomorphology 16, pp.
197-215.
Cleland, C.E. (2002). Methodological and epistemic differences between historical science and experimental science.
Philosophy of Science.
Diamond, J. (2002). Guns, Germs, & Steel. (New York: W. W.
Norton and Company).
Dodick, J. T., & N. Orion. (2003). Geology as an Historical
Science: Its Perception within Science and the Education System. Science and Education, 12(2).
Dunbar, K. (2001). What scientific thinking reveals about the
nature of cognition. In Designing for Science (pp. 115–140).
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Goodwin, C. (1994). Professional Vision. American Anthropologist, 96(3), pp. 606-633.
Gould, S. J. (1986). Evolution and the Triumph of Homology,
or, Why History Matters, American Scientist Jan.-Feb.: pp. 6069.
Grossman, D. and O. Frieder (1998). Information Retrieval:
Algorithms and Heuristics , Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Halliday, M.A.K. (1991). Corpus linguistics and probabilistic
grammar. In Karin Aijmer & Bengt Altenberg (ed.), English
Corpus Linguistics: Studies in honour of Jan Svartvik. (London: Longman), pp. 30-44.
Halliday, M.A.K. (1994). An Introduction to Functional Grammar. (London: Edward Arnold).
Halliday, M. A. K., & R. Hasan. (1976). Cohesion in english.
London: Longman.
Halliday, M. A. K., & J.R. Martin. (1993). Writing science:
Literacy and discursive power. London: Falmer
Hasan, R. (1998). Language in the process of socialisation:
Home and school. In J. Oldenburg, Th. v Leeuwen, & L. Gerot
(ed.), Language and socialisation: Home and school. North
Ryde, N.S.W.: Macquarie University.
Joachims, T. (1998). Text categorization with Support Vector
Machines: Learning with many relevant features. In ECML-98,
10th European Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 137-142.
Latour, B. & S. Woolgar, (1986). Laboratory Life: The Construction of Scientific Facts (Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press).
Lewin, B.A., J. Fine & L. Young (1986). Expository discourse:
A genre based approach to social science research texts.
Continuum
Mayr, E. (1976). Evolution and the Diversity of Life. (Cambridge: Harvard University Press).
Mitchell, T. (1997) Machine Learning. (McGraw Hill).
Mosteller, F. and Wallace, D. L. (1964). Inference and Disputed
Authorship: The Federalist Papers, (Reading, MA: Addison
Wesley).
Ochs, E., S. Jacoby, & P. Gonzales, (1994). Interpretive journeys: How physicists talk and travel through graphic space,
Configurations 1:151-171.
Platt, J. (1998), Sequential Minimal Optimization: A Fast Algorithm for Training Support Vector Machines, Microsoft Research Technical Report MSR-TR-98-14.
Plum, G. A. & A. Cowling. (1987). Social constraints on grammatical variables: Tense choice in English. In Ross Steele &
Terry Threadgold (ed.), Language topics. Essays in honour of
Michael Halliday. (Amsterdam: Benjamins).

Appendix: Systems and Features
EXPANSION
On the discourse level, the system of Expansion serves to link a
clause with its textual context, by denoting how the given clause
expands on some aspect of its preceding context. Options within
Expansion are as follows:
Elaboration: Deepening the content of the context
Appositive: Restatement or exemplification
Clarifying: Correcting, summarizing, or refocusing
Extension: Adding new related information
Additive: Adding new content to the context
Adversative: Contrasting new information with old
Verifying: Adjusting content by new information
Enhancement: Qualifying the context
Matter: What are we talking about
Spatiotemporal: Relating context to space/time
Simple: Direct spatiotemporal sequencing
Complex: More complex relations
Manner: How did something occur
Causal/Conditional:
Causal: Relations of cause and effect
Conditional: Logical conditional relations

COMMENT
The system of Comment comprises a variety of types of “comment” on a message, assessing the writer’s attitude towards it, or
its validity or evidentiality. Comments are generally realized as
adjuncts in a clause (and may appear initially, medially, or finally). Matthiessen (1992), following Halliday (1994), lists the
following types of Comment:
Admissive: Message is assessed as an admission
Assertive: Emphasizing the reliability of the message
Presumptive: Dependence on other assumptions
Desiderative: Desirability of some content
Tentative: Assessing the message as tentative
Validative: Assessing scope of validity
Evaluative: Judgment of actors behind the content
Predictive: Coherence with predictions

MODALITY
Modal assessment per Halliday (1994) is realized by a simultaneous choice of options within four systems2:
Type: What kind of modality?
Modalization: How ‘typical’ is it?
Probability: How likely is it?
Usuality: How frequent/common is it?
Modulation: Will someone do it?
Readiness: How ready are they (am I)?
Obligation: Must I (they)?
Value: What degree of the relevant modality scale?
Median: In the middle of the normal range.
High: More than normal
Low: Less than normal
Orientation: Is the modality expressed as an Objective attribute of the clause or as Subjective to the writer?
Manifestation: Is the assessment Implicitly realized by an adjunct or finite verb, or Explicitly by a projective clause?

2

Note that we did not consider the system of POLARITY, since it cannot
be properly addressed without more sophisticated parsing.

162

