UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Morpheme Gender Effect: An Evidence for Decomposition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3g6418pv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Meunier, Fanny
Seigneuric, Alix
Spinelli, Elsa

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Morpheme Gender Effect: An Evidence for Decomposition
Fanny Meunier (fanny.meunier@univ-lyon2.fr)
Laboratoire Dynamique du Langage
Institut des Sciences de l'Homme
14 avenue Berthelot, 69 363 Lyon Cedex 07
FRANCE

Alix Seigneuric (alix.seigneuric@u-bourgogne.fr)
Université de Bourgogne, UFR Sciences Humaines
Pôle AAFE Esplanade Erasme, BP 26513, 21065 Dijon Cedex
FRANCE

Elsa Spinelli (elsa.spinelli@upmf-grenoble.fr)
Université Pierre Mendès France
Laboratoire de Psychologie et NeuroCognition
BP 48, 38040 Grenoble Cedex 9
FRANCE
Abstract
In three experiments we tested the decomposition for
morphologically complex words in French. Subjects were
asked to perform a gender decision task on morphologically
complex words that were either of the same gender as their
stem or not. We found that the gender of morphologically
complex words made from a stem with an opposite gender is
more slowly retrieved compared to a condition where the
gender of the stem matches that of the derived noun. Similar
results are observed for words that are pseudomorphologically complex while no effect is observed for non
morphological embedded words. Such results favour a
decompositional hypothesis postulating that recognition of
words that are morphologically complex or look like it, is
achieved through the activation of the stem.
Keywords: Lexical access; morphology; grammatical gender.

Introduction
The purpose of this study is to provide information about
the lexical representation of morphologically complex
nouns in French by using a gender decision task. In these
experiments,
the
decompositional
hypothesis
of
morphologically complex nouns is tested by exploring the
gender assignment of derivationally suffixed French nouns
whose stems have a gender opposite to that of the noun.
The way morphologically complex words are stored and
accessed has been widely studied. Many models have been
proposed, which make claims about the processing of
complex words and the kind of representation that is
accessed. To a large extent, such models are located
between two extreme positions: the left-to-right processing
associated with a global word representation (Butterworth,
1983; Manelis & Tharp, 1977), and the prelexical
decomposition associated with a morpheme-decomposed
representation (Taft & Forster, 1975). According to the
original formulation of this latter hypothesis, stems are

1507

extracted from derived words before the words are
identified. In this model derived words do not have their
own lexical entry. The lexical access of words belonging to
the same morphological family is made via the stem. In
more recent formulations of the decomposition model (e.g.,
Taft, 1994), morphemes are represented as units within a
hierarchical activation system and are activated whenever
congruent orthographic information is contained within the
letter-string. Activation within the morpheme units is then
passed on to units representing the whole morphological
complex word. In this way, a complex word is not actively
decomposed prior to lexical access, yet that word is always
accessed via activation of its morphemes. There is
obligatory decomposition but passively achieved. Many
researchers have proposed some compromise between these
two extremes views. Some have suggested decomposition
processing and/or representation only for particular complex
words such as frequent words (Bybee, 1985; Schreuder &
Baayen, 1995) or semantically transparent words (MarslenWilson, Tyler, Waksler, & Older, 1994). Others have
proposed two competing routes with a race between them
(Caramazza,
Miceli,
Silveri,
&
Laudanna,
1985; Frauenfelder & Schreuder, 1992).
Most studies investigating the lexical representation of
morphologically complex words used the priming
procedure. In line with the decompositional hypothesis these
researches have shown, for example, that the prior
presentation of a morphological complex word (e.g., undo)
facilitates the subsequent processing of its root component
(e.g., do). This effect is considered as reflecting repeated
accesses to the same lexical representation and therefore has
been attributed to the implementation of a procedure of
decomposition of the derived word into the morphemic
constituents of affix and stem (Marslen-Wilson et al., 1994).
However, the priming effect is still an indirect evidence of
decomposition. It could be argued that to some extent,
morphological decomposition occurs because of the priming

paradigm itself, or that priming effect is only reflecting links
between morphologically related words but not
decomposition per se.
In contrast to the voluminous literature reporting
experiments using the priming paradigm, the literature
reporting simple presentation of items is sparse. An
approach used by Taft and colleagues consists of using
pseudowords and manipulating the status of the units used
to create these pseudowords. For example Taft, Hambly,
and Kinoshita (1986) carried out a lexical decision
experiment using four types of pseudowords. Each type
resulted from the concatenation of a real or false prefix (de
or te) with a real or false stem (joice or jouse). Following
the decomposition hypothesis, response times (RTs) for
pseudowords should be longer for pseudowords made of
real morphemes such as dejoice (real prefix + real stem) as
this type of item should be decomposed and the lexical entry
corresponding to the stem activated. This should not be the
case for pseudowords starting with a false prefix such as
tejoice (false prefix + real stem) or tejouse (false prefix +
false stem) as decomposition would not be engaged and the
status of the second unit of the pseudoword would not
matter in this case. Indeed Taft et al. observed that lexical
decision times were faster for items starting with a false
prefix than for those starting with a real one. Moreover the
status of the second unit of the pseudoword was taken into
account only when decomposition was engaged. However,
as mentioned by Henderson (1985), processes observed with
pseudowords may not reflect those applying to words. It
could be that decomposition processes arise after the failure
of the item identification as a word. Reaction times
observed in lexical decision are indeed much longer for
pseudowords than for real words, suggesting the presence of
post checking stages that are not involved in the processing
of real words. These additional stages could interfere with
critical effects and lead to erroneous conclusions about word
processing and representation.
Another way of testing the decompositional hypothesis is
to examine the role of specific parameters related to the
morphemic components or to the whole word form. Some
researchers used frequency cues. For a complex word two
types of frequency estimates are relevant, surface frequency
and cumulative frequency. The former refers to the word's
frequency of occurrence in language as a free lexical item
(e.g., the word fleuriste 'florist'). The latter refers to the sum
of the frequency of the root plus all its affixed forms
(fleuriste ‘florist’ + fleur 'flower' + fleurir 'to flower' + floral
'floral' + déflorer 'to deflower' + refleurir 'to flower
again'...). Several authors have shown that the recognition
time for polymorphemic words is generally sensitive to both
surface frequency and cumulative frequency (e.g., Colé,
Beauvillain & Segui, 1989; Meunier & Segui, 1999). The
presence of a cumulative frequency for derived suffixed
words has been taken as an evidence of decomposition,
showing that access to their lexical representations takes
place via the representation of the root which is sensitive to
frequency of use. However an unresolved issue about

frequency effects is how and when exactly these effects
occur. In the experiments presented in this paper we used
another property of morpheme: morpheme gender.
French is a language in which nouns are classified into
two genders: each noun is either feminine (such as lune–
‘moon’) or masculine (such as soleil-‘sun’). Gender systems
are language-specific. For example in English it is restrained
to animate nouns as revealed in phenomena such as
anaphoric pronouns. Gender has never been used to look for
morphological decomposition and in fact is not widely
explored. However in languages where a gender
grammatical system exits, such as French, it could provide a
fruitful paradigm to explore morphological decomposition.
Two general questions can be addressed regarding gender
processing: A first issue is how it is lexically represented
and accessed during word recognition. Using gender
decision tasks or grammaticality judgments, several studies
have stressed the role of sublexical cues (based on word
endings) and lexical cues (based on the association between
nouns and articles) to retrieve grammatical gender (Holmes
& Segui, 2004; Taft & Meunier, 1998). Globally the results
show that classification of nouns leads to longer times when
both sublexical and lexical cues are uninformative than
when one or both cues are gender informative. The second
interest of gender in comprehension refers to the syntactic
function of gender and explores the gender processing
involved in gender agreement. In languages that have
grammatical gender, words related to nouns, such as articles
or adjectives are marked depending on the gender of the
noun. Most studies have explored this last point using
primarily priming paradigm to test effects of grammatical
congruency or incongruency (e.g. between a noun and an
adjective or article). For example, Bates, Devescovi,
Hernandez, and Pizzamiglio (1996) in Italian, using wordrepetition, gender-monitoring, and grammaticality judgment
tasks showed that the presence of a gender-marked article
can facilitate the recognition of a noun. Performances in all
three tasks were slower when the target noun was preceded
by a gender-incongruent adjective and faster when preceded
by a gender-congruent adjective (see also Colé and Segui,
1994, for results on French). Overall most studies provide
evidence for an influence of a gender-marked context on the
activation of lexical candidates. They also reveal that
grammatical gender access is automatically triggered by a
grammatical prime marked for gender whereas the task
itself does not require such processing, such as in a primed
lexical decision task (see for example Grosjean,
Dommergues, Cornu, Guillelmon, & Besson, 1994).
In our experiment we tested whether the gender of
morphologically complex words derived from a stem with
an opposite gender is more slowly retrieved compared to a
condition where the gender of the stem matches that of the
derived noun. Such results would favour a decompositional
hypothesis postulating that recognition of the derived word
is achieved through the activation of the stem.
In the first experiment we compared pairs of derived
words matched on suffix, frequency and length. For one

1508

member of the pair the stem had the same gender as the
derived word while for the other, genders were opposite. In
the second experiment we compared pairs of derived words
sharing the same stem but having two different genders. The
third experiment was designed to assess whether the effects
were due to decomposition per se or if orthographic overlap
could explain these effects.

Experiment 1
In the first experiment, we investigated whether
morphologically complex words are decomposed during
identification. In order to assess decomposition in word
access, we used a visual gender decision task. Participants
were presented to nouns and they had to decide whether
they were feminine or masculine. The main factor
manipulated was the congruence between the gender of the
stem from which the complex word was derived and the
gender of the morphologically complex word itself. If
gender decision is affected by the gender of the stemmorpheme this would imply that morphologically complex
words are decomposed.

Method
Participants
Twenty-one students of the University
Pierre Mendes France, Grenoble, participated in the
experiment for course credit. All participants were native
speakers of French and had normal or corrected vision.
Stimuli Thirty pairs of morphological complex suffixed
words were selected such that both members of the pairs
were of the same gender (maisonette feminine ‘small house’camionette feminine ‘small truck’) but one member of the pair
was derived from a masculine word : e.g. camion masculine in
camionette and the other member of the pair was derived
from a feminine word : e.g. maison feminine ‘house’ in
maisonette. There were 16 feminine word pairs (e.g.
maisonette feminine -camionette feminine), and 14 masculine
word pairs (e.g. poivrier masculine ‘pepper mill’ -cendrier
masculine ‘ash tray’) individually matched in type of suffix,
frequency (1.3 vs 2.5 occurrences per million), number of
syllables (2.5 vs 2.6) and number of letters (8.3 vs 8.2). Half
of the suffixed words were gender congruent with their stem
(gender congruent condition) and the other half were gender
incongruent with their stem (gender incongruent condition).
A lexical decision pre-test conducted with 12 participants
revealed no difference in reaction times between the gender
congruent and the gender incongruent set of stimuli [gender
congruent condition = 627 ms, gender incongruent condition
=634 ms; t1(11)<1, t2(29)<1]. Sixty filler words (28
feminine and 32 masculine words) were also included in the
experimental list. Hence, there were equal numbers of
feminine and masculine words in the experiment.
Procedure Participants were tested individually in a quiet
room. Stimuli were displayed at the centre of a computer
screen and participants were required to perform a gender
decision task on the visual targets by pressing as accurately

and as quickly as possible one of two response buttons. Half
of the subjects were required to press the « feminine »
button with their left forefinger and the « masculine » button
with their right forefinger. It was the reverse for the other
half of the subjects. The experiment was controlled by Eprime Software (E-prime Psychology Software Tools Inc.;
Pittsburgh, USA). The computer clock was triggered by the
presentation of the target on the screen and stopped by the
subjects’ response. Response latencies and errors were
collected. The session began by 10 practice trials and lasted
approximately ten minutes.

Results & Discussion
Incorrect responses (3 % of responses), and RTs longer than
1500 ms (0.4 %) were removed. T tests were performed by
subjects (t1) and by items (t2). RTs data showed faster
response times in the gender congruent condition (655 ms)
than the gender incongruent condition (692 ms) significant
both by subjects and by items (t1(20)=4.81, p>.001, t2
(29)=4.04; p<.001). Analyses conducted on errors showed
an effect of gender congruency significant by subjects
(t1(20)=2.35, p>.05) and marginally significant by items (t2
(29)=1.98; p<.057) with fewer errors in the gender
congruent condition (2.2 %) than in the gender incongruent
condition (3.8 %).
This result suggests that morphologically complex words
are decomposed in their constituent morphemes during
identification. However as mentioned in the introduction for
morphologically complex words two types of frequency
estimates are relevant, surface frequency and cumulative
frequency. In our experiment words in each pair were
matched on surface frequency but cumulative frequency was
not controlled. In order to control for a potential effect due
to this confound factor we ran another experiment using
pairs of words sharing the same stem, where one is
masculine and the other feminine, e.g. chemisier ‘longsleeved shirt’/chemisette ‘short-sleeved shirt’.

Experiment 2
Method
Participants Twenty-three students of the University Pierre
Mendes France, Grenoble, participated in the experiment for
course credit. All participants were native speakers of
French and had normal or corrected vision. None of them
had participated in experiment one.
Stimuli Nineteen pairs of morphological complex suffixed
words were selected such that both members of the pairs
were derived from the same base stem (e.g. chemisette feminine
-chemisier masculine both derived from chemise feminine ‘shirt’)
but one member of the pair was masculine and the other
member was feminine. There were 10 word pairs derived
from a feminine base stem (e.g. (chemisette feminine chemisier masculine), and 9 word pairs derived from a
masculine base stem (e.g. citronnade feminine ‘lemonade’-

1509

citronnier masculine ‘lemon tree’ both derived from citron
masculine ‘lemon’). The pairs were individually matched in
stem, frequency (3.4 vs 1.7 occurrences per million),
number of letters (7.9 vs 8.5) and number of syllables (2.3
vs 2.4). As in experiment 1, half of the suffixed words were
gender congruent with their stem (gender congruent
condition) and the other half were gender incongruent with
their stem (gender incongruent condition). Thirty eight filler
words (19 feminine and 19 masculine words) were also
included in the experimental list. Hence, there were equal
numbers of feminine and masculine words in the
experiment.
Procedure The procedure was the same than the one used
in experiment 1. However as words in each pair shared the
same stem, in order to avoid short lag priming between the
two members of the pairs, the stimuli were divided into two
blocks so that the two members of one pair did not appear in
the same block. Participants were presented to both blocks
and the order of block presentation was counterbalanced.

Results & Discussion
Incorrect responses (4.8 % of responses), and RTs longer
than 1500 ms (0.6 %) were removed. T tests were performed
by subjects (t1) and by items (t2). RTs data showed
descriptively faster response times in the gender congruent
condition (684ms) than the gender incongruent condition
(692 ms) but this difference was not significant (both ts<1).
In a subsequent analysis, subjects were divided into two
groups according to their mean RTs. We performed T tests
on the two subgroups of subjects (11 rapid subjects and 12
slow subjects). The analyses yielded a significant effect of
gender congruency [t(10)=2.63, p<.05] with faster responses
in the gender congruent condition (618ms) than the gender
incongruent condition (649 ms) for the subgroups of rapid
subjects and no effect of congruency for the subgroups of
slow subjects [gender congruent condition, 745 ms vs
gender incongruent condition, 732 ms; t(11)=1.22, ns].
Analyses conducted on errors data showed a significant
effect of gender congruency [t1(22)=3.64, p<.005;
t2(18)=2.16, p<.05] with less errors in the gender congruent
condition (2.3 %) than in the gender incongruent condition
(7.3 %).
This result corroborates those found in experiment 1 and
suggests that morphologically complex words are
decomposed into their constituent morphemes during
identification. The gender morpheme effect is only observed
for fast subjects suggesting that it is short living effect.
When morphemes are extracted and activated, their gender
must also be activated and compete with the full-form word
gender, however as soon as the word is recognized this
competition must fade out. It remains to be seen whether the
gender effect observed is indeed morphemic and not only
orthographic, i.e. due to the presence of a noun embedded
within another noun irrespective of the morphemic status of
the units in the target noun. The third experiment was

designed to test the morphemic nature of the effect observed
in the two previous experiments.

Experiment 3
The goal of the third experiment was to assess whether the
effect obtained with morphologically complex words was
due to orthographic overlap between two words, rather than
to morphological decomposition per se. In this experiment,
we used non-morphological words that included an initial
segment that look like a stem plus a non-morphemic ending
of French. For example, we compared the effect of gender
congruency for non-morphological words like seringue
‘syringe’. The ending -gue is not a suffix in French, but
appears at the end of existing words like bague ‘ring’,
dingue ‘fool’, etc. If the effect previously observed is not
morphological but orthographic, then we should obtain a
gender effect for these words as well (as serin ‘serin’ is
masculine and seringue feminine in French). If the effects
obtained in experiments 1 and 2 are morphological in nature
and are due to decomposition then we should not obtain any
effect with these non-morphological words.
We also tested another type of words: pseudo-derived
words like baguette ‘French bread, chopsticks’, which can
be parsed into the base morpheme bague ‘ring’ and the
suffix –ette, but is neither etymologically nor semantically
related to bague. This type of word have the same
morphological surface structure (a noun and the suffix –ette)
as truly morphologically complex words such as the ones
used in experiments 1 and 2 but are not morphologically
complex nouns. We used this type of words in order to see if
decomposition
occurs
when
words
look
like
morphologically complex but are not, i.e. do not have any
semantic or historical links with their pseudo-stem.

Method
Participants
Twenty-one students of the Institut des
Sciences Politiques and of the Lumière-Lyon2 University,
Lyon, were paid to participate in the experiment. All
participants were native speakers of French and had normal
or corrected vision. None had participated in any of the
previous experiments.
Stimuli Twenty pairs of pseudo-morphological complex
suffixed words were selected such that both members of the
pairs were of the same gender (vignette feminine ‘label’chouette feminine ‘owl’) but one member of the pair contained
as a pseudo-stem a masculine word, e.g. chou masculine ‘colly’
in chouette and the other member of the pair contained as
pseudo-stem a feminine word, e.g. vigne feminine ‘vine’ in
vignette. There were 8 feminine word pairs (e.g. vignette
feminine-chouette feminine), and 12 masculine word pairs (e.g.
peuplier masculine ‘poplar’-sanglier masculine ‘wild boar’)
individually matched in type of suffix, frequency (4.7 vs
16.6 occurrences per million), number of syllables (7 vs 6.9)
and number of letters (2.1 vs 2.1). Half of the
pseudosuffixed words were gender congruent with their
pseudo-stem (gender congruent condition) and the other half

1510

were gender incongruent with their stem (gender
incongruent condition). Twenty pairs of orthographically
related words were also selected such as both members of
the pairs were of the same gender (seringue feminine -auberge
feminine ‘inn’) but one member of the pair contained an
embedded masculine word : e.g. serin masculine in seringue
and the other member of the pair contained an embedded
feminine word : e.g. aube feminine ‘paddle’ in auberge. There
were 9 feminine word pairs (e.g. seringue feminine-auberge
feminine), and 11 masculine word pairs (e.g. amiral masculine
‘admiral’ -bulletin masculine ‘bulletin’) individually matched in
frequency (22.9 vs 18.4 occurrences per million), number of
syllables (6.5 vs 6.1) and number of letters (2.1 vs 1.8). Half
of the orthographic words were gender congruent with their
embedded word (gender congruent condition) and the other
half were gender incongruent with their embedded word
(gender incongruent condition). Twelve feminine filler
words were also included in the experimental list. Hence,
there were equal numbers of feminine and masculine words
in the experiment.
Procedure The procedure was the same than the one used
in experiment 1. The only difference was that the third
experiment was controlled by DMDX software (J. Forster).

Results & Discussion
Incorrect responses (4.1% of responses) and RTs longer
than 1500ms and lower than 300ms (2.6%) were removed.
Anova analyses were performed by subjects (F1) and by
items (F2).
Overall we observed a significant effect of word type by
subjects and items (F1(1,20)=12.77, p<.002; F2(1,38)=4.58,
p<.05). The congruence factor is significant by subjects
(F1(1,20)=4.40, p<.05; F2(1,38)=1.56, n.s.), as is the
interaction between this two factors (F1(1,20)=4.51, p<.05;
F2<1). For pseudo-morphological complex suffixed words,
planned comparisons showed faster response times in the
gender congruent condition (677 ms) than the gender
incongruent condition (706 ms) significant by subjects
(F1(1,20)=12.77, p<.002, F2(1,19)=1.77, n.s.). For the
orthographic controls no significant difference was observed
(716 ms for congruent condition vs 721 for incongruent one;
Fs<1).
The effect of word type is the only effect significant in the
analyses conducted on errors (F1(1,20)=15.55, p<.001;
F2(1,38)=6.77, p<.02) with fewer errors in the pseudomorphological word condition (1.8%) than in the
orthographic condition (6.3%).
Overall RTs of this experiment showed an effect of
gender congruency only for pseudo-derived words like
baguette. No effect was observed for non-morphological
carrier words.

General Discussion
We ran three experiments to test decomposition of
morphological complex words by testing whether gender
categorisation of morphologically complex noun is affected

1511

by the gender of the morphemes included in them. By
varying the gender congruency and incongruency of short
words included in longer words, we observed a gender
congruency effect for morphologically complex words and
for pseudo-morphological words. Gender decision was
faster when the stem or the pseudo-stem had the same
gender as the derived or pseudo-derived noun. By contrast
no gender congruency effect was observed when the target
nouns were not made of morpheme-like parts. For words
were orthographic overlap is partial, i.e. a short word is
included in the longer word but the rest of the longer word
is not a morpheme, no effect was observed. For true or
pseudo morphologically complex words, an incongruency
between the gender of the stem or pseudo-stem and the
gender of the target noun delayed gender access. Altogether
these results are compatible with a decompositional
hypothesis of the morphologically complex nouns.
The result suggesting that morphological decomposition
occurs even when the target noun is pseudomorphologically complex is very interesting. Recent masked
priming studies have suggested the existence of an early
blind decomposition process that starts as soon as the target
looks morphologically complex, irrespective of whether its
morphological structure is real or only superficial. They also
reported a lack of priming effects for orthographically
related words such as abricot ‘apricot’ which contains abri
‘shelter’ but where –cot is not a morpheme suggesting that
this decomposition is not a left to right process but rather a
parallel mapping of the input to the available morphemic
units, both stems and affixes (Feldman & Soltano, 1999;
Longtin, Halle & Segui, 2003; Rastle, Davis, MarslenWilson and Tyler, 2000). Unmasked priming experiments
showed that the realness of morphological structures is
taken into account later on during word identification.
Indeed, when an auditory or unmasked visual prime is used,
a priming effect is observed only for real morphologically
related words: Word like clochette ‘small bell’ primes
cloche ‘bell’, but word like vignette does not prime vigne
(Feldman & Soltano, 1999; Longtin et al., 2003; MarslenWilson et al., 1994; Rastle et al., 2000). The morpheme
gender effect we observed in our experiments could reflect
this very early on decomposition process. Moreover this
interpretation is compatible with our result showing that the
effect is mainly observed on fast subjects. However the
gender categorization task that we used is usually not
considered as tapping on very early stages of word
processing.
Another domain could be relevant to understand our
morphological gender effect: studies showing the role of
sublexical gender information carried by noun ending in
gender access. In French there are morpho-phonological
regularities that occur on noun-endings. For example the
ending –ette like in fourchette ‘fork’ or cigarette ‘cigarette’
is predominantly feminine at 98%. Corpus analyses done by
Tucker, Lambert and Rigault (1977) showed that using
ending predictability would ensure correct gender
categorization at 85%. Empirical evidence have been

reported by these same authors but also by others (Taft and
Meunier, 1998): Experimental studies show that nouns with
predictive gender endings are categorized faster than nouns
with unpredictive gender endings. What has to be noticed is
that in fact predictive gender endings often correspond to
suffix morpheme like –ette. Indeed when a suffix is add to a
stem, its effect is always the same: for example adding –ette
to a noun will modify the meaning of that noun by the idea
of smallness and the resulting derived noun will always be
feminine whatever the gender of the base noun. Exception
nouns, i.e. nouns that end with –ette but which are
masculine as squelette, are words where the ending –ette is
not the suffix-morpheme and where in our example squel- is
not a stem. In our experiments it could be that the gender
morpheme effect does reflect the conflict between the
activation of the stem-morpheme gender and the effect of
gender predictive noun endings. This explanation would
also explain the lack of effect observed for orthographical
(non morphological) pairs. Indeed in this case, endings are
not predictive suffixes. So it may that these items are not
decomposed as 1) there are not morphologically complex
even superficially and 2) endings are not gender informative
so do not produce a gender ending effect.

Conclusion
Results observed in the experiments presented in this paper
indicate clearly that morphologically and pseudomorphologically complex words are decomposed and that
the gender of the stem-unit is activated. Also our
experiments suggest that the noun ending predictability
effect observed in previous experiments could in fact reflect
morphological decomposition.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by EMERGENCE grant
from the Région Rhône-Alpes and an ACI from the French
Research Ministry.

References
Bates, E., Devescovi, A., Hernandez, A. & Pizzamiglio, L.
(1996). Gender priming in Italian. Perception &
Psychophysics, 58, 992-1004.
Buttherworth, B. (1983). Lexical representation. In B.
Butterworth (Ed.), Language production. London:
Academic Press.
Bybee, J. L. (1985). Morphology: A study of the relation
between meaning and form. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Caramazza, A., Miceli, G., Silvieri, M.C., & Laudanna, A.
(1985). Reading mechanisms and the organization of the
lexicon: Evidence from acquired dyslexia. Cognitive
Neuropsychology, 2, 81-114.
Colé, P., Beauvillain, C., & Segui, J. (1989). On the
representation and processing of prefixed and suffixed
derived words: A differential frequency effect. Journal of
Memory and Language, 28, 1-13.

Colé, P. & Segui J. (1994). Grammatical incongruency and
vocabulary types. Memory & Cognition, 22, 387-394.
Feldman, L.B., & Soltano, E.G. (1999). Morphological
priming: The role of prime duration, semantic
transparency, and affix position. Brain and Language, 68,
33-39.
Frauenfelder, U. H., & Schreuder, R. (1992). Constraining
psycholinguistics models of morphological processing
and representation: the role of productivity. In G. Booij &
J. van Marle (Eds.), Yearbook of morphology 1991.
Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Grosjean, F., Dommergues, J-Y., Cornu, E., Guillelmon D.
& Besson, C. (1994). The gendermarking effect in spoken
word recogntion. Perception & Psychophysics, 56, 590598.
Henderson, L. (1985). Toward a psychology of morphemes.
In A.W. Wallis (Ed.), Progress in the Psychology of
Language, Vol. 1. London: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates
Limited.
Holmes, V. & Segui, J. (2004). sublexical and lexical
influences on gender assignment in French. Journal of
Psycholinguistic Reasearch, 33, 425-457.
Longtin, C.-M., Segui, J., & Hallé, P.A. (2003).
Morphological
priming
without
morphological
relationship. Language and Cognitive Processes, 18, 313334.
Manelis, L., & Tharp, D. (1977). The processing of affixed
words. Memory & Cognition, 5, 690-695.
Marslen-Wilson, W.D., Tyler, L. K., Waksler, R., & Older,
L. (1994). Morphology and meaning in the English
mental lexicon. Psychological Review, 101, 3-33.
Meunier, F., & Segui, J. (1999). Morphological priming
effect: The role of surface frequency. Brain and
Language, 68, 54-60.
Rastle, K., Davis, M.H., Marslen-Wilson, W.D., & Tyler,
L.K. (2000). Morphological and semantic effects in visual
word recognition: A time-course study. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 15, 507-537.
Schreuder, R., & Baayen, R.H. (1995). Modeling
morphological processing. In L.B. Feldman (Ed.),
Morphological aspects of language processing. Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Taft, M. (1994). Interactive-activation as a framework for
understanding morphological processing. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 9, 271-294.
Taft, M., & Forster, K.I. (1975). Lexical storage and
retrieval of prefixed words. Journal of Verbal Learning
and Verbal Behavior, 15, 638-647.
Taft, M., Hambly, G., & Kinoshita, S. (1986). Visual and
auditory recognition of prefixed words. Quarterly Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 38A, 351-366.
Taft & Meunier, (1998). Lexical representation of gender :
A quasiregular domain. Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research, 27, 23-45.

1512

