UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Effects of Prior Use on Preference

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8095z6nc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Bartels, Daniel
Day, Samuel B.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Effects of Prior Use on Preference
Samuel B. Day (s-day2@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 N. Sheridan Drive Evanston, IL 60208-2710 USA

Daniel Bartels (d-bartels@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 N. Sheridan Drive Evanston, IL 60208-2710 USA

Holyoak, 1983; Loewenstein, Thompson & Gentner, 1999).
This suggests that the act of comparison may serve to
highlight meaningful structural commonalities between the
examples, making those structures more available for
application to new situations. Similar results have been
found in developmental research, where comparison has
been shown to facilitate the acquisition and application of
difficult abstract concepts (e.g., Gentner & Medina, 1998).
These findings can be interpreted within the framework of
structure mapping theory (Gentner, 1983), which proposes
that comparisons involve the alignment of representational
structures (e.g., Markman & Gentner, 1993).
These
structural alignments lead to a special role for “alignable
differences,” or differences that are related to structural
commonalities. For instance, the fact that cars have four
wheels while motorcycles have two is an alignable
difference, since it involves different values on the shared
dimension of “number of wheels.” On the other hand, the
fact that motorcycles have a kickstand is a unique feature
for which a car has no corresponding attribute, making it a
“nonalignable difference.” Prior research has repeatedly
shown a privileged role for alignable differences, in areas
such as perceived similarity (Markman & Gentner, 1996),
recall (Markman & Gentner, 1997), and preference (e.g.,
Roehm & Sternthal, 2001). With respect to the current
studies, these findings suggest that comparison of
alternatives that vary along particular dimensions should
serve to highlight those dimensions. Our primary question
is whether this sort of differential emphasis could lead to
generally increased salience, causing increased dimension
weighting on subsequent choices.
Some work exists examining the relationship between
structural alignment and decision processes. In the domain
of consumer research, Zhang and Markman (1998) showed
that after initially learning facts about a particular brand of
product, future alternative products were evaluated largely
in terms of their alignable differences with this “first
entrant.” Values on dimensions that were shared with this
initial product were better remembered, and played a larger
role in preference judgments. In another set of studies,
Markman and Medin (1995) found that justifications for
preferences were more likely to include alignable than
nonalignable differences. (For a review of interesting
parallels between similarity and choice processes, see
Medin, Goldstone & Markman, 1995).
Another way in which comparison and decisions seem to
be linked is in the shared influence of the context created by

Abstract
There is little research examining the effects of decision
processes on the individual, and the work that does exist has
emphasized very high-level processes, associated with
complex decisions made over extended periods of time, with
substantial levels of engagement. We present two studies
demonstrating very basic effects, in which use of a dimension
in a decision leads to its increased salience, and subsequent
greater weighting in later decisions. Effects were based on
both recency of use and total amount of prior use.

Introduction
A large body of research has focused on the factors that
influence people’s decisions. (For a recent review, see
Markman & Medin, 2002). However, relatively little
attention has been given to the effects that the act of making
a decision may have upon the individual. Of course, there
are the obvious tangible effects of the actions people
undertake as a result of their choices. However, it is also
reasonable to suggest that there could be an impact on the
mental representations that are used in decision processes.
In the present studies, we are investigating very specific,
low-level effects, determining whether the particular
dimensions that are used in making a decision will become
generally more salient, and thus play a larger role in
subsequent choices.
We presented participants with
alternative models of portable video players, in which
certain dimensions (such as hard drive capacity or battery
life) were diagnostic and thus useful for determining relative
preference. We then examined the extent to which
dimensions that were used in a decision would become
more important on later choices between different models.

Comparison and Choice
One reason to expect choice processes to affect mental
representations is the fact that decisions generally require
comparison between alternatives, and there is evidence that
comparison itself may lead to representational change.
Some of the most compelling evidence in this regard comes
from demonstrations that comparison may facilitate
knowledge transfer. For example, people were found to be
more successful at solving difficult problems or applying
optimal strategies after having previously made
comparisons between analogous examples, and this
advantage was far superior to that of situations in which the
prior analogues were simply encoded separately (Gick &
553

form of comparisons to alternative options, comparisons to
mental representations, or both. There are at least two ways
in which prior decisions might alter these mental
representations that serve as references. First, through
repeated exposure and attention to relevant dimensions and
features, an individual may gradually gain knowledge about
distributions of values. Hence, one could accrue long-term
knowledge that would allow formerly non-evaluable
information to become evaluable, such as learning the per
unit price for ice cream. (Some evidence for this kind of
knowledge change is given by Moore, 1999). Additionally,
human representation is known to be remarkably flexible,
and the actual reference knowledge that is used in any
situation will depend a great deal on what particular
information is active at that moment. We could therefore
also expect prior decisions to exert a more local effect on
representations by differentially activating certain features
and dimensions through use. These local effects might
themselves eventually lead to long-term representational
change.
Our interest in the current studies is in these (initially)
more local effects. In the absence of specific long-term
knowledge about the relative importance of different
dimensions, individuals should be more likely to rely on
representations that are based on current activation and
salience. Recent use of a particular dimension should lead
to a local increase in its accessibility, which in turn should
give it a more important role in the mental representations
that serve as reference points.

the other alternatives under consideration. It has long been
known that choice is influenced by relational properties of
the alternatives, such as their similarity (e.g., Tversky &
Russo, 1969), or their relationship with reference points
(e.g., Coombs, 1958). One prominent line of research has
demonstrated robust contextual effects in trinary choice
(e.g., Huber, Payne, & Puto, 1983). For example, the
introduction of a third alternative to a binary choice set may
lead to “compromise effects,” wherein one of the initial
alternatives becomes more attractive as result of its new
position as an “intermediate” option between the other two
(Simonson, 1989). Similarity judgments have likewise been
shown to vary with the other items in a set (Golstone,
Medin, & Halberstadt, 1997). Dhar and Glazer (1996)
presented evidence that these two kinds of context effects
are, at least sometimes, the result of shared underlying
cognitive processes, showing that measures of contextual
effects on similarity could be quite predictive of subsequent
effects on choice. Dhar, Nowlis and Sherman (1999)
explicitly examined the effects of comparison on later
choice. In their studies, both the kind of comparison
(similarity vs. dissimilarity ratings) and the direction of
comparison (which alternative served as the referent) were
manipulated. They found that these factors interacted to
influence later preferences between the alternatives, in a
manner consistent with differential feature weightings
predicted by a feature-matching model of similarity.
In all of these cases, comparison processes are exerting an
influence on choice, consistent with the focus of our studies.
In each of the findings described thus far, however, the
effects have been limited to the objects of comparison
themselves, not to more general representations. That is,
comparisons between Items A and B are clearly affecting
decisions that involve those specific items, but there is no
evidence suggesting that this comparison would have any
influence on subsequent choices between new alternatives.

Coherence and decision making
Some researchers have examined representational change in
decision processes in terms of the need to maintain a
coherent set of beliefs (e.g., Phillips, 2002). For example,
Simon and his colleagues have examined the influence of
constraint satisfaction processes in coherence and belief
change, and have specifically looked at these processes in
the domain of complex decisions. In one study (Simon,
Krawczyk & Holyoak, 2004), participants were asked to
decide between two alternative job offers. These jobs were
described on four dimensions (such as salary), with each
being superior on two of the dimensions and inferior on the
other two. An additional factor—“good location” vs. “bad
location”—was varied in order to experimentally
manipulate overall preference between the two options.
Simon proposed that in order to maintain an internally
consistent set of beliefs, individuals would alter their
evaluations of the relevant dimensions, inflating the
importance of the dimensions that favored the alternative
that would eventually be chosen, while deflating those that
favored its competitor. This was indeed the pattern that was
found; participants changed their ratings of each
dimension’s importance and desirability to make them more
consistent with the decisions that they ultimately made.
These results provide compelling evidence for the larger
issue of examining the impact of decision processes on
mental representations. The goals of previous studies were
considerably different from those of the current
experiments, however. While Simon and his colleagues
have explored intriguing issues regarding how systems of

Evaluability
Evaluability refers to the ease with which a value or
attribute can be evaluated independently. For example,
Hsee (1998) asked participants how much they would be
willing to pay for two different products: 7 ounces of ice
cream in a 5 ounce cup, or 8 ounces of ice cream in a 10
ounce cup. When the alternatives were presented together,
individuals were (not surprisingly) willing to pay more for
the second option, which provided more of the actual
product of interest. However, when participants saw only
one of the alternatives independently (between-subjects),
they were willing to pay considerably more for the 7 ounce
product that overfilled its container ($2.26) than for the 8
ounce product whose container was under-filled ($1.66).
Hsee took this as evidence of people’s reliance on highly
evaluable information (over- v. under-filling), to the
detriment of information that could not easily be evaluated
independently (cost/ounce of ice cream). Similar effects
have been shown in a variety of domains (e.g., Hsee, 1996),
and with varying levels of evaluability (Hsee, et al, 1999).
The construct of evaluability highlights the importance of
reference information for evaluation and choice.
Evaluations are made with respect to reference points, in the
554

Descriptions of models were presented to participants two
at a time on a computer screen, on the left and right sides,
under the column headings “Model A” and “Model B”.
Values of particular dimensions were always aligned
horizontally (i.e., one model’s battery life was always
adjacent to the other model’s battery life), but the order of
these features and dimensions was randomly assigned for
each participant, in order to facilitate comparison. A
horizontal bar was displayed beneath the descriptions, with
its endpoints labeled “Strong preference for Model A” and
“Strong preference for Model B”, and its midpoint labeled
“No preference”. Participants were asked to click anywhere
on this scale to indicate their strength of preference. This
continuous scale gave us a more sensitive measure of
participants’ preferences and representations than a binary
forced-choice response would provide.
Decisions were organized into short “test series”. These
consisted of a set of alternative pairs that each differed on
only one variable dimension (“1-dimension” pairs),
followed by a final pair which varied on two dimensions
(“2-dimension” pairs). For all of these 2-dimension pairs,
each of the two alternatives was favored by one of the
varying dimensions and disfavored by the other; for
example, one model might be superior on battery life, while
the other was superior on hard drive capacity. Preferences
on these trials should largely be determined by the relative
weight that participants give to the two relevant dimensions.
In all cases where a dimension varied between the two
alternatives, the difference in the two values was one
“step”—either a high vs. a medium value, or a medium vs. a
low value.
The purpose of these organized series was to allow us to
examine the influence of the 1-dimension pairs, whose use
and decision outcome we could effectively control, on the
preferences exhibited on the 2-dimension pairs, which
should be a reflection of the individual’s own
representations—at least at that moment. In this first
experiment, we examined this influence at a very local level
by seeing whether dimensions that had been used in making
more recent decisions would be given greater weight than
those used in earlier choices.
Four different types of series were used in this study. To
understand their general structure, consider the “1 v. 3back” series. The five variable dimensions may be
arbitrarily designated as Dimensions A–E. If the final, 2dimension choice in this series involved alternatives that
varied on Dimensions A and B, then the choice immediately
before this (“1-back”) would be a 1-dimension decision
varying only on Dimension A, and the choice three items
before (“3-back”) would be a 1-dimension decision varying
only on Dimension B. The prediction in this case would be
that the more recently used dimension (A) would on average
be given more weight in the 2-dimension test decision,
leading to higher preferences for the model favored on that
dimension. The choice that was two items prior to the test
decision would be a filler 1-dimension item (varying on
Dimension C, D, or E) which should not be relevant to the
current test decision, since both alternatives shared the same
value on this dimension. Similarly, each series would begin
with a filler 1-dimension item. The assignment of actual

beliefs interact at a fairly high level, we are investigating
much more fundamental, low-level processes—at the level
of activation and salience—which may act on dimensions
independently. Consistent with this difference, the tasks
used in their experiments have generally involved a single,
very deliberate and ostensibly important decision, made
over an extended period of time, requiring difficult tradeoffs
across many attributes, and demanding a high level of
participant involvement. The current studies examine much
more automatic and local kinds of effects springing from
simple dimension use.

Experiments
Experiment 1
The first experiment was designed to examine whether
dimensions that had been used in making recent decisions
would receive more weight in future choices. An obvious
difficulty in looking at the effects of one decision on another
is the lack of experimental control; decisions are inherently
driven by processes and representations that are internal to
the individual, and preferences can not be dictated by the
experimenter. To circumvent this problem, our study
utilized choice pairs in which one alternative was clearly
objectively superior to the other. Many of the decisions that
participants made in this study involved alternatives that
were identical on all but one dimension, making that
dimension the sole criterion for comparison. Since one of
the two alternatives would necessarily be superior on that
dimension, the outcome of those decisions was essentially
predetermined. This meant that on those trials we were able
to control which dimensions participants were using to
make their decisions, giving us an experimentally-controlled
method for examining whether those recently-used
dimensions would be considered more important in
subsequent choices. Of course, it is quite possible that in
circumstances where the outcome of a decision is essentially
out of the individual’s control, the person will discount its
meaningfulness. However, if we do observe subsequent
effects from even these predetermined kinds of choices, it
would provide strong evidence for the claim that prior
decisions can influence later ones at a fundamental level.
We attempted to use a domain that was novel enough that
participants’ preferences would be somewhat malleable, but
understandable enough that they should be able to easily
structure the new information. We decided on portable
digital video players, which we assumed would be readily
construed in terms of existing schemas about portable audio
devices, but without as many preconceptions about what
would constitute a good or bad value on any dimension.
Each device was described in terms of nine
characteristics: four of these were discrete features, which
were described as being either present or absent (e.g., a
built-in voice recorder), and five were variable dimensions,
for which each model had some value (e.g., battery life,
hard drive capacity). There were three possible values (low,
medium, and high) for each of these variable dimensions;
for instance, the battery life for any device could be given as
2, 4, or 6 hours.
555

First, for each critical trial, we calculated the total number
of previous times that each of the two relevant dimensions
had been used up until that point. We created a “repetition
index” by taking the difference between the total repetitions
for the recency-preferred and non-preferred dimensions.
This index was marginally correlated with participant’s
preference ratings, suggesting that total prior use may also
influence later dimension weighting. Additionally, after the
study, we gathered importance ratings from participants on
each of the dimensions used in the task, for stimuli norming
purposes for future research. Post hoc analysis revealed a
positive (though non-significant) correlation between the
total number of times a dimension had been used and a
participant’s later importance rating for that dimension.
These two results encourage further investigation into the
longer-term effects of prior decisions. Experiment 2 was
designed to systematically control the total number of times
each dimension had been previously used at each decision
point, allowing a more controlled examination of these
repetition effects.

dimensions to these five roles was done randomly at the
beginning of each series. Other series were similarly
structured, including the “1 v. 2-back” and “2 v. 3-back”.
Finally, the “1-back” series examined preferences in cases
where one of the varying dimensions had been used on the
previous item, while the other had not been used at all
during that series.
The order of the four series types was randomized for
each participant at the beginning of the study. Dimensions
were randomly assigned to roles at the beginning of each
series, and the side of the screen on which each alternative
was presented was randomized for each item. Boundaries
between series were not indicated to participants; rather, the
items were presented as a continuous series of judgments.
Participants made a series of decisions for four minutes,
beginning after the instructions with the presentation of the
first pair of alternatives. At the end of the four minutes, the
participants completed the trials remaining in the current
series, and the experiment ended. Twenty undergraduate
students participated in the study for partial course credit.
The overall prediction of the first study is that
participants’ preferences on the 2-dimension choices should
be more influenced by the dimension that had most recently
been used in a previous decision. On average, this should
lead to a general preference for the alternative favored on
that dimension.

Experiment 2
The first experiment demonstrated that the recency of a
dimension’s use influenced its weighting in later decisions.
Experiment 2 was designed to examine whether the total
number of times that a dimension has previously been used
could have similar effects, which would suggest more longterm representational change. The design of this study was
very similar to that of Experiment 1, but in order to strictly
control the number of prior uses of each dimension, a single
abstract structure of decisions was used for all participants.
We created a series of 36 preference decisions similar to
those used in the first experiment, including ten 2dimension test pairs. Each of these test pairs could be
described by its “repetition index”, which was simply the
total number of times the recency preferred dimension had
been previously used, minus the total prior uses for the other
dimension (the recency favored dimension was intended as
an arbitrary reference point; the effects are identical if the
order of subtraction is reversed). For example, if the
dimension of “hard drive capacity” had been previously
used eight times, and “battery life” had been used six, then a
comparison that pitted those dimensions against each other
would have repetition index of two (or negative two). The
set of decisions was organized such that the test pairs
included two each of the following repetition indices: 4, 2,
0, -2, and -4.
This structure allowed us to more
systematically examine the prediction that an increase in the
total prior use of a dimension should lead to an increase in
its weighting, and a corresponding increase in the preference
for the alternative favored by that dimension.
Actual assignment of dimensions to the five roles was
done randomly for each participant at the start of the study.
The task and presentation were identical to Experiment 1;
participants responded on a continuous scale, indicating
their relative preference for the two alternatives.
Approximately 10 to 15 minutes after completing the task
(during which time a filler task was performed), participants
gave importance ratings for each dimension used in the
study. They were prompted with “How important is this

Results and Discussion
Participants completed an average of 7.4 series in the course
of the experiment (median and mode = 7). The data of
interest are the preference ratings for the 2-dimension
decisions at the end of each series. Each of these responses
was coded as a continuous value between 0 and 1, with 1
being the end of the scale strongly preferring the alternative
favored by the more recently used dimension, and 0 being
the end strongly preferring the competitor. These values
were then averaged for each participant. Values of .5 would
demonstrate no influence of dimension recency of choice.
The average preference rating was .62 (significantly
greater than chance [t (19) = 4.9, p < .01]), suggesting that
participants were giving greater weight to dimensions that
had more recently been used in another decision. All four
series types led to average preferences that were greater than
.5, and there was no statistical difference between the types.
In some ways, this is a very surprising result. The
outcome of each of the 1-dimension decisions was
predetermined, with one alternative being objectively
superior to the other. In spite of the fact that these decisions
involve little task engagement, and should not require
individuals to examine their “real preferences” at all, they
had a significant impact on which factors were considered
important in the subsequent 2-dimension choices, which did
draw on participants’ perceptions of their beliefs.
The effects observed in this study are admittedly very
local, however. Clearly, both of the dimensions that were
varied on the test items had been used quite recently—one
was just slightly more recent than the other. It would be
useful to demonstrate more long-term, compounding effects
that could accrue over repeated uses. Some post-hoc
analyses were performed that are suggestive of such effects.
556

the prior decisions in question had predetermined outcomes,
consisting simply of selecting the alternative with the
superior value on one varying dimension. This finding
suggests that the act of making a decision—even a very
simple and cognitively non-engaging one—may have
consequences for decisions that are made much later, and
that these influences may accrue over repeated use.
The predictions concerning importance ratings were not
borne out, however. In that analysis, each participant’s
importance ratings were transformed into deviation scores
(participant’s rating minus average rating, for each
dimension), in order to control for the natural variation in
perceived importance between different dimensions.
Within-participant correlations were then calculated
between these deviation scores and the total number of
times that each dimension had been used in the preference
task. This set of correlations (after Fisher’s Z transform)
did not significantly differ from zero.
One possible reason for this null result is the independent
nature of the importance rating task. Unlike the preference
ratings, in which each alternative could serve as a referent
for the other, the importance of a dimension in isolation is
likely to be a fairly non-evaluable judgment. It is therefore
possible that the measure was simply not sensitive enough
to detect any representational change. Of course, it is also
possible that these effects of prior use are relatively shortlived, and though they are able to accrue throughout several
minutes of continuous choices, they do not extend past the
boundaries of the current choice context. Further research
will be needed to distinguish these two possibilities, likely
in the form of more evaluable long-term measures.

feature when selecting a portable video player?”, and
responded by clicking at any point on a horizontal bar with
endpoints labeled “Not at all important” and “Very
important”. These data allowed us to explore the possibility
that prior use in the study was contributing to longer-term
representational change, affecting participants’ explicit
beliefs about a dimension’s importance.
In sum, the main prediction of Experiment 2 is that a
greater number of prior uses of a dimension should lead to
its greater subsequent weighting, both in comparative
decisions and in independent ratings of importance.

Results and discussion
Preference ratings for the 2-dimension test items were coded
as in Experiment 1, as a continuous value between 0 and 1.
A value of 1 once again reflected the end of the scale
referring to the recency-preferred item, but in this case this
was an arbitrary reference point which simply provided a
way to compare preference to prior use (an alternative
method in which one alternative in each pair is randomly
assigned as the reference point leads to similar statistical
results). Correlations were calculated between test ratings
and repetition indices for each participant, providing a
measure of the extent to which an individual’s preferences
were influenced by an advantage in the number of prior uses
of a dimension. In order to use these within-participant
correlations in further analyses, we used Fisher’s Z
transformation (Snedecor & Cochran, 1980), which corrects
for the inherent positive skew in correlation distributions.
There are several ways to deal with within-participant
correlations, but no universally standard approach. A
pooled correlation of all of the test preference ratings with
their corresponding repetition indices is clearly not
appropriate, since the presence of several data points per
participant would allow far too many degrees of freedom.
One simple and statistically conservative technique is
simply to determine whether the set of within-participant
correlations is significantly greater than zero. A one-sample
t-test confirmed that this was the case (mean Fishertransformed correlation = .20, t (31) = 2.98, p < .01). A
more sensitive analysis is to construct a regression model in
which the repetition index, a “dummy” variable for each
participant, and the interaction between these two are
simultaneously used to predict preference ratings. An F-test
of the effects of the repetition index—using the subject ×
repetition interaction as the error term—allows us to take
advantage of all available data while correcting for
dependencies and degrees of freedom. This analysis again
reveals a significant effect of the repetition index, F (1, 31)
= 8.14, p < .01. One way to understand the overall trend
across all participants is to calculate averages for each level
of the repetition index across all participants (averaging all
participants’ ratings for index level 4, all ratings for index
level 2, etc.). The correlation of these five averages with the
repetition index is .79.
Across participants, preference ratings were significantly
correlated with the repetition index, indicating that these
judgments were being influenced by the total number of
times that a dimension had been used in previous decisions.
As in Experiment 1, this pattern held in spite of the fact that

Summary and Conclusions
These studies demonstrate that decision processes can affect
an individual’s representations at a very basic level, and
influence how that information is later used. Use of a
dimension in making simple—in fact, predetermined—
choices led to an increased reliance on that dimension in
future decisions. These effects were shown locally, with
more recently used dimensions showing increased
weighting, as well as over longer periods, with the effects of
use accruing throughout the course of the study. (It should
be noted that in both studies, the range of attribute values
experienced on previous trials may have had some influence
on preference (see Mellers & Cooke, 1994, Parducci, 1965).
However, since participants were exposed to only three
levels of each attribute, we cannot test for this influence in
these data.)
This research takes modest initial steps toward a very
broad goal of understanding the ways in which decision
processes lead to representational change, and how these
changes may in turn impact later judgments. The studies
draw upon and overlap with the wealth of existing decision
making literature in many obvious ways, but there are some
substantive differences to note as well. Perhaps the most
obvious of these is the level at which these effects appear to
operate. Prior studies examining changes over the course of
the decision process have been quite cognitively demanding,
requiring a considerable amount of engagement from
participants and involving a decision process that spans a
557

separate evaluations of alternatives. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 67, 247-257.
Hsee, C. K. (1998). Less is better: When low-value options
are valued more highly than high-value options. Journal
of Behavioral Decision Making, 11, 107-121.
Hsee, C. K, Loewenstein, G. F., Blount, S. & Bazerman, M.
H. (1999). Preference reversals between joint and separate
evaluation of options: A review and theoretical analysis.
Psychological Bulletin, 125, 576-590.
Huber, J., Payne, J. W., & Puto, C. (1982). Adding
asymmetrically dominated alternatives: Violations of
regularity and the similarity hypothesis. Journal of
Consumer Research, 9, 90-98.
Loewenstein, J., Thompson, L., & Gentner, D. (1999).
Analogical encoding facilitates knowledge transfer in
negotiation. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 6, 586-597.
Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (1993c). Structural
alignment during similarity comparisons. Cognitive
Psychology, 25, 431-467.
Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (1996). Commonalities and
differences in similarity comparisons. Memory &
Cognition, 24, 235-249.
Markman, A. B., & Medin, D. L. (2002). Decision Making.
In D. L. Medin & H. Pashler (Eds.), Stevens Handbook of
Experimental Psychology (3rd ed., Vol. 2, pp. 413-466).
New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Markman, A. B., & Medin, D. L. (1995). Similarity and
alignment in choice. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 63, 117-130.
Medin, D. L., Goldstone, R. L., & Markman, A. B. (1995).
Comparison and choice: Relations between similarity
processes and decision processes. Psychonomic Bulletin
and Review, 2, 1-19.
Mellers, B. A., & Cooke, A. D. J. (1994). Tradeoffs depend
on attribute range. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 20, 1055-1067.
Moore, D. A. (1999). Order effects in preference judgments:
Evidence for context dependencies in the generation of
preferences. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 78, 146-165.
Parducci, A. (1965).
Category judgment: A rangefrequency model. Psychological Review, 72, 407-418.
Phillips, F. (2002). The distortion of criteria after decisionmaking. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 88, 769-784.
Roehm, M.L., & Sternthal, B. (2001). The moderating effect
of knowledge and resources on the persuasive impact of
analogies. Journal of Consumer Research, 28, 257-272.
Simon, D., Krawczyk, D.C., & Holyoak, K.L. (2004).
Construction of preferences by constraint satisfaction.
Psychological Science, 15, 331–336.
Simonson, I. (1989). Choice based on reasons: The case of
attraction and compromise effects. Journal of Consumer
Research, 16, 158-173.
Snedecor, G.W., & Cochran, W.G. (1989). Statistical
Methods. Ames, IA: Iowa State University Press.
Tversky, A., & Russo, J. E. (1969). Substitutability and
similarity in binary choices. Journal of Mathematical
Psychology, 6, 1-11.

significant period of time. Our tasks, on the other hand,
required very little involvement from participants, and
involved a series of quick decisions which lent themselves
to “gut level” responses. This is an important dimension of
contrast, given that prior research in this area has repeatedly
found task involvement to be a significant intervening
variable (e.g., Dhar, Nowlis, & Sherman, 2000; Roehm &
Sternthal, 2002; Zhang and Markman, 2001). As a rule, the
magnitude of the relevant effects in these studies has
decreased with lower task involvement. Since our tasks
were inherently low-involvement, they seem to constitute
especially conservative tests of the effects under study.
This difference also suggests something about the
processes involved—the effects reported here are likely the
result of fairly low-level processes, processes that are
perhaps even opaque to participants. This basic level of
operation suggests that these effects are likely to occur
spontaneously, in the course of both mundane and
significant decisions, and to be fairly persistent.
Two important goals for the future, then, are to continue
to explore these fundamental sorts of processes, but also to
try to bridge these investigations with the work
demonstrating the cognitive impact of decisions at a more
explicit and deliberate level. It seems likely that a
“bootstrapping” scenario—in which one basic choice builds
upon another—is not at all uncommon, and that these sorts
of situations may often ultimately lead to more established
and profound sets of preferences. Common wisdom holds
that a person is the sum of his or her prior decisions, and to
the extent that the act of making a choice may alter an
individual’s representations and influence the course of
future choices, this may indeed be the case.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by ONR award N00014-02-10078. Thanks to Dedre Gentner, Jason Jameson, Jennifer
Asmuth, and the Similarity and Analogy group.

References
Coombs, C. H. (1958). On the use of inconsistency of
preferences in psychological measurement. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 55, 1-7.
Dhar, R., & Glazer, R. (1996). Similarity in context:
Cognitive representation and violation preference and
perceptual invariance in consumer choice. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 67, 280-293.
Dhar, R., Nowlis, S. M., & Sherman, S. J. (1999).
Comparison effects on preference construction. Journal of
Consumer Research, 26, 293–306.
Gentner, D., & Medina, J. (1998). Similarity and the
development of rules. Cognition, 65, 263-297.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema induction
and analogical transfer. Cognitive Psychology, 15, 1-38.
Goldstone, R. L., Medin, D. L., & Halberstadt, J. (1997).
Similarity in context. Memory and Cognition, 25, 237-55.
Hsee, C. K. (1996). The evaluability hypothesis: An
explanation for preference reversals between joint and
558

