UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of Attributional and Distributional Information in Semantic Representation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8xj0h1qv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Andrews, Mark
Vigilocco, Gabriella
Vinson, David B.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of Attributional and Distributional Information in Semantic
Representation
Mark Andrews (mark@gatsby.ucl.ac.uk)
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit, University College London
London, WC1N 3AR

Gabriella Vigliocco (g.vigliocco@ucl.ac.uk)
David Vinson (d.vinson@ucl.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University College London
London, WC1E 6BT
that two words appear in similar texts might imply that
these words refer to similar things in the world. It is,
however, reasonable to assume that these sources are
distinct, or that one source is not entirely explained by
or dependent upon the other. For example it can be argued that attributional information is more important
in learning words referring to concrete entities and actions, for which the properties of the thing or event in the
world can be experienced via the senses, whereas distributional information may be more important in learning
abstract words, those that we learn primarily via linguistic context. Thus both types of information can be
exploited in order to learn word meanings. In previous
studies, the contributions of either source alone, independent of the other, have been studied. In particular,
within cognitive psychology, researchers have primarily
focused on the development of models of meaning representation based on attributional information (Collins &
Quillian, 1969; Hinton & Shallice, 1991; McRae, Sa, &
Seidenberg, 1997; McClelland & Rogers, 2003; Minsky,
1975; Smith, Shoben, & Rips, 1974; Vigliocco, Vinson,
Lewis, & Garrett, 2004), whereas recently within computational linguistics, machine learning and related areas in
cognitive science, researchers have primarily focused on
distributional information alone (Burgess & Lund, 1997;
Dagan, Lee, & Pereira, 1997; Griffiths & Steyvers, 2003;
Hofmann, 1999b; Landauer & Dumais, 1997; Schütze,
1992). In this paper, we describe a model that uses both
sources in combination as the basis of semantic representation.

Abstract
In recent studies of semantic representation, two distinct
sources of information from which we can learn word
meanings have been described. We refer to these as attributional and distributional information sources. Attributional information describes the attributes or features associated with referents of words, and is acquired
from our interactions with the world. Distributional information describes the distribution of words across different linguistic contexts, and is acquired through our
use of language. While previous work has concentrated
on the role of one source, to the exclusion of the other,
in this paper we study the role of both sources in combination. We describe a general framework based on probabilistic generative models for modelling both sources of
information, and how they can be integrated to learn semantic representation. We provide examples comparing
the learned structures of each of three models: attributional information alone, distributional information
alone, and both sources combined.

Keywords: Probabilistic Models; Semantic Representation; Information Integration.

Introduction
We can distinguish between two distinct sources that
provide us with information about the meanings of
words. The first is what we will call attributional information. This describes physical, emotional and conceptual (or otherwise nonlinguistic) attributes associated
with the referents of words. These are features or attributes associated with words that are based upon or
built up from our interactions in the environment, and
our knowledge of the objects and relationships in the
world. A second source of information about word meanings is what we will call distributional information. This
describes the distribution of words across different linguistic or textual contexts. This type of information has
been memorably summarized by the phrase “you shall
know a word by the company it keeps”, (Firth, 1957).
In other words, the type of linguistic contexts in which
a word occurs can provide clues as to what that word
might mean.
While these two sources of information are not uncorrelated, neither are they identical, and it is plausible to assume that they are both utilized when learning
the meaning of words. The two sources are correlated
because words that refer to similar things or events in
the world are likely to appear in similar linguistic contexts. The reverse case could also be argued. Knowing

Generative Models of Semantic
Representations
Probabilistic generative models provide a general means
by which to model semantic representation. This approach has already been pursued both within machine
learning (Blei & Ng, 2003; Hofmann, 1999b, 1999a; Teh,
Jordan, Beal, & Blei, 2004) and within cognitive science
(Griffiths & Steyvers, 2003, 2002). Generative models
describe the data of interest in terms of explicit probabilistic relations and variables. The nature of these relationships and variables are inferred or learned from data.
This general class of models can be used to model the
role of both attributional and distributional information.
Indeed, many of the previous models of semantic representation, mentioned above, can be described as implicitly falling within this general class. In this paper, we
127

with the words dog and pet, etc. This two sources of
information could be combined to provide a richer understanding of the semantics of the word cat than could
be learned by either source alone.

will use this approach to model both the independent
and joint role of distributional and attributional information in semantic representations.
Considering the role attributional information alone
plays in semantic representation, a suitable generative
model would describe how concrete terms (or more properly, their referents) are generated. In this case, a simple
generative model might assume that concrete terms are
defined in terms of a distribution over latent attribute
classes, and that these attribute classes are themselves
probability distributions over binary properties or features. Concrete terms are distributions over these features, obtained by repeatedly sampling from the distribution of latent attribute classes and then sampling from
the distributions over binary properties associated with
these classes.
Considering the role distributional information alone
plays in semantic representation, an appropriate generative model would describe how a text is generated.
Henceforth, we will use the term text to refer to any
linguistic or textual utterance. While this could be an
entire article, book, or transcribed conversation, we will
usually use the term to refer to paragraphs, sentences,
or strings of consecutive words in written documents or
transcribed speech. A simple generative model of texts
might assume that texts are multinomial distributions
over latent semantic classes or topics, and that these latent topics are themselves multinomial distributions over
words. A text is generated by repeatedly sampling from
the distribution over latent topics, and then sampling
from their corresponding distributions over words. In
such a model, the semantic representation of a given
word is defined in terms of its posterior probability distribution over the latent classes. In other words, the semantic representation of a given word is the probability
distribution over the latent topics that can be inferred
whenever the word is generated.
Combining the two sources of information is straightforward. The data we observe consists of sets of words,
and associated with each word is a distribution over
binary non-linguistic attributes. As will be clarified,
we can assume that a distribution over latent variables
accounts for both the distribution of words in a text
and the distribution of binary features associated with a
given word. The semantic representation of a word is defined in terms of its posterior distribution over these latent topics. These semantic representations will be constrained to account for both the distributions of words
in texts, and the distributions of binary attributes associated with given words.
The intuitive rationale behind the model is as follows:
On its own, the statistical structure and patterns in a
language can provide information about word meanings.
A subset of the words in the language are associated
with physical objects or events in the world, and this
information can be integrated with statistical patterns
in language. As a contrived example, knowledge that
the word cat refers to those creatures with claws and
whiskers that meow, etc. can be integrated with implicitly acquired statistical knowledge that cat co-occurs

The Model: Formal Specifications
We can make the preceding description more formal as
follows. The observable data that we are modelling consist of both texts and the attributes associated with
words. As mentioned, texts take the form of paragraphs, sentences and strings of consecutive words in
a natural language corpus. If there are J texts in a
corpus, we can label them as {z1 , z2 . . . zj . . . zJ }. The
texts are, in general, of variable length. For example,
text zj is of length Tj and consists of the sequence of
words {w1j , w2j . . . wtjj . . . wTj j }. For each possible j and
t, wtjj will be a word in the vocabulary of word-types
V = {v1 , v2 . . . vk . . . vK }. What defines a word-type for
our purposes is described below, but in general, wordtypes are a set of common dictionary words in English.
A subset of the words in any human language will
concrete words, or words that refer to objects, events,
actions, etc., in the world. Assume that of the K dictionary words in V we have obtained a set Vf of N concrete words, where N ≤ K. For each word in Vf we
have a probability distribution over a set of L binary
features. We can represent this binary feature vector by
y = {y1 , y2 . . . yl . . . yL }, where yl is the lth binary feature of y. Each feature is a property or attribute that
could be associated with the physical referent of the concrete words in Vf .
To model semantic memory according to the description provided above, we provide generative models for
the case where attributional data alone is used, where the
distributional data alone is used, and where both data
sources are used. The graphical models (or Bayesian
Networks) for these three generative models are shown in
Figure 1. A graphical model describes the conditional independence structure of the variables in a model. Taken
together, we have the observable variables wt , yt and
zt that represent, respectively, the words, features and
text occurring at a time t. In addition, we introduce the
latent-variable xt ∈ {ξ1 , ξ2 . . . ξm . . . ξM }. As a latent,
or hidden, variable the value of xt is unobserved. We
see that in the attributional model, the binary attribute
vector yt is conditioned upon xt , while xt is conditioned
upon the word label wt . In the distributional model, we
have the observable words conditioned upon the latentvariable xt , which is then conditioned upon the text zt .
In the combined model, both the words wt and binary attribute vector yt are conditioned upon the latent-variable
xt , with xt conditioned upon the text zt . The parametric forms of these conditional distributions are as follows.
(The parameters in the models are referred to generically
as θ, until further specified).

Attributional Model
In the attributional model, the probability of the observed binary attributes yt , conditioned upon wt can be
128

yt

yt

wt

wt
xt

xt

xt
ztPSfrag replacements

wtPSfrag replacements

PSfrag replacements

zt
1≤t≤T

1≤t≤T

(a) Attributional Model

(b) Distributional Model

1≤t≤T

(c) Combined Model

Figure 1: The generative models that utilize a) attributional, b) distributional and c) combined information sources.
factored as

re-write (3) as


P yt wt , θ =

X





P yt xt , θ P xt wt , θ ,

M
K
Y
 X
I(w =v )
[zt ]
P wt zt , θ =
πm
qmk t k ,

(1)

{xt }

m

where I(a) is an indicator function, taking the value 1 if
its argument a is true, and 0 otherwise. The distributional model is, as such, a mixture of multinomial distributions.

where the latent variable xt is integrated over. The probability that the lth binary variable of yt , i.e ylt , takes the
value 1 given that xt = ξm , is denoted by pml . The probability that xt takes the value ξm given the value of wt ,
[w ]
is denoted by πm t . We can re-write (1) as


P yt wt , θ =

M
X

[wt ]
πm

m=1

L
Y

(1−y t )
pml l (1

(1−ylt )

− pml )

.

(4)

k=1

Combined Model
In the combined model, as shown in Figure 1, both the
word label wt and attribute vector yt are conditioned
upon the latent variable xt , which is conditioned upon
the text zt . Integrating over the values of xt , the conditional likelihood of the observables is

P y t , w t zt , θ
X



(5)
=
P yt xt , θ P wt xt , θ P xt zt , θ

(2)

l=1

As such, the attributional model is a mixture of M multivariate Bernoulli distributions.

Distributional Model

{xt }

In the distributional model, the probability of the observed word wt , conditional upon observing text zt can
be factored as
 X


P wt zt , θ =
P wt xt , θ P xt zt , θ .
(3)

[z ]

and substituting in parameters pml , qmk and πmt as in
(2) and (4)
=

{xt }

M
X
m

The probability of observing that wt = vk given that
xt = ξm is denoted by qmk . The probability that xt = ξm
[z ]
upon observing that zt = j, is denoted by πmt . We can

[zt ]
πm

K
Y
k=1

I(w =vk )

qmk t

L
Y

(1−ylt )

pml

t

(1−pml )(1−yl ) .

(6)

l=1

As such, the combined model is a mixture of both multivariate Bernoulli distributions and multinomial distributions.
129

Model Learning

In a previous study, Vigliocco et al. (2004) compiled
frequencies of a set 1029 binary attributes associated
with a set of 456 common words. The 456 words consisted of 230 nouns, of which 169 referred to objects and
71 to actions, and 216 verbs, all of which referred to
actions. The attribute-types and their frequencies were
collected from speaker-generated lists of attributes associated with the 456 words. This was done in a manner
similar to that used in McRae et al. (1997). Certain
word types referred to distinct verb and noun senses, e.g.
(the) hammer and (to) hammer. For present purposes,
these word-types were regarded as identical and the vectors associated with the words were collapsed. Out of
this set of words, a subset of exactly 300 also occurred
in our reduced (i.e. 7, 393 word-types) text corpora.
In summary, the text corpora consist of 51, 160 texts,
each described by a frequency distribution over 7, 393
word-types. Of these 7, 393 word-types, a subset of 300
are also described by a frequency distribution over 1029
attribute-types. The word-attribute set alone, the text
set alone and the word-attribute and text-set together
were used to train the distributional model, attributional
model and combined models, respectively. In all cases,
this was done using EM to find the maximum likelihood
estimates of the parameters given the observed datasets. In the simulations described here, the attributional
model used a latent-variable of dimensionality 150 with
both the distributional model and the combined model
used latent-variables of dimensionality 300.

Given a set of training data D consisting of both texts
and attributes associated with concrete words, for each

model above we would ideally wish to estimate P θ D ,
or the posterior probability of the parameters given the
data. In any analyses of the models, we would then integrate over this entire distribution. In related work, we
are using Markov-Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) simulations to compute these posteriors, however these studies
will not be described here. For present purposes, we will
approximate P θ D by its modal point θmp , which assuming a prior distribution over the parameters, is given
by its maximum likelihood estimate θmle .
The standard procedure for maximum-likelihood (or
maximum posteriori) estimation in latent-variable models is Expectation-Maximization (EM). This consists of
iteratively computing
a lower-bound on the likelihood

of the data P D θ , and maximizing this bound with respect to the parameters. This leads to a set of parameter
update rules that can be guaranteed to monotonically increase the likelihood and converge to an (at least local)
maximum. For example, in the case of the combined
[z ]
model above, the update rules for pml , qmk and πmt are
pml ∝

Tj
J X
X


P xt = ξm , wt , yt , zt = j, θ ylt ,

(7)

j=1 tj =1

qmk
∝

Tj
J X
X


P xt = ξm , wt , yt , zt = j, θ I(wt = vk ),

(8)

Analysis of Trained Models
As described above, the latent variables in each model
can be seen as distributions over words, attributes or
both. In Figure 2, we illustrate some of these latent
variables. For each case, we draw samples of the words
and/or attributes with which they are associated. The
distributional model learns latent variables that correspond to multinomial distributions over words. These
distributions can be intuitively viewed as topics that
have been learned by the model. In the three example latent variables shown for the distributional model
(i.e. the three leftmost columns of Figure 2), we see
topics that could be labelled government, business and
religion. In the attributional model, latent variables
correspond to distributions over binary attributes and
can intuitively be viewed as attribute classes. Examples
of attribute-classes, and the samples over attributes to
which they correspond, are shown in the middle three
columns of Figure 2). These classes could be labelled
human-body, fruit-vegetable and clothing. In the case of
the combined model, latent variables correspond to distributions over both words and attributes. In this sense,
they are merges or combinations of both attributional
and distributional classes. We provide some examples in
the rightmost three columns of Figure 2). The classes
learned could be labelled transport, medical and war,
each defined both by clusters of words and clusters of
attributes. The words are given in uppercase, while the
attributes are in lowercase.
In each model, we can measure how much any given

j=1 tj =1
Tj
[zt ]
πm
∝

X


P xt = ξm , wt , yt , zt = j, θ .

(9)

tj =1

The update rules for the attributional model and distributional model are special cases of the above rules, with
the appropriate changes having been made.

Simulations
The text corpora used consisted of fiction and non-fiction
books publicly available at the Oxford Text Archive
(≈ 6.5 · 106 words) and Project Gutenberg (≈ 11.6 · 106
words), Reuters Newswire texts (≈ 2.5 · 106 words), and
a set of Usenet articles (≈ 5.25 · 106 words). We folded
British into American spellings (e.g. centre to center,
favour to favor, realised to realized, etc.), folded affixvariations of words into their word-stems (e.g. swims,
swam, swum, swimming changed to swim, etc.), eradicated non-words (using a standard American-English
dictionary), and eradicated stop-words (using a standard
list of ≈ 550 stop-words). This reduced the corpora to a
total size of ≈ 7.7 · 106 words, with 16, 956 word-types.
By further eradicating all word-types that appear with
a frequency of greater than 104 or less than 102 , we can
reduce the total size to ≈ 6.1·106 words, and 7, 393 wordtypes. This corpus was divided into a set of 51, 160 texts,
each of which were ≈ 150 words long.
130

NATION
AUTHORITY
PRINCIPLE
CENTURY
UNITE
GOVERNMENT
SOCIETY
RELIGION
CONSTITUTION
POLITICAL

MONEY
HUNDRED
COURT
LAND
PAY
THOUSAND
TAX
CITY
SCIENCE
OFFICE

ALLAH
BIBLE
BELIEF
APOSTLE
CHURCH
DISBELIEVE
CHRIST
JESUS
MARRY
SPIRIT

human
face
hair
eye
shoulder
leg
hand
body
foot
mouth

fruit
green
grow
red
round
sweet
juice
tree
eat
food

leg
clothing
wear
body
protect
cover
body
warm
long
humans

CAR
HORSE
RIDE
DRIVE
DRIVER
transport
vehicle
4-legs
wheel
car

PATIENT
MEDICAL
DOCTOR
HEALTH
MEDICINE
nose
body
human
eye
head

WAR
GUN
KILL
ATTACK
KNIGHT
kill
weapon
anger
fear
yell

Figure 2: Examples of latent classes learned by (from left to right) the distributional, attributional and combined
models. For each example latent class, we have drawn samples of the words and/or the attributes they correspond
to. Capitals refer to words, while lower case refer to attributes.
word predicts any other. The extent to which word vj
predicts vi is given by

P w = vi w = vj , θ
X


(10)
P w = vi x, θ P x w = vj , θ .
=

Combined : threat knife murder stab bomb threaten kick
snap knock argue
Ride
Distributional : motorcycle bicycle horse chase pant slide
thumb truck clatter ankle
Attributional : carry drive travel train move pull approach walk push truck
Combined : motorcycle bicycle horse travel pull slide
truck chase carry push

{x}

In both the distributional
model and the combined

model, P w = vi x, θ is the likelihood term of the
model, while P x w = vj , θ is given by Bayes rule,

Discussion

Gun

The attributes associated with a word, and its distribution across texts both provide information about its
the meaning. Either source alone can provide information not provided by the other: Attributes provide information about the physical (or nonlinguistic) relationships in the world between the referents of the word,
while distributional information provide a rich patterns
of linguistic (or non-physical) contexts where the word is
found. While attributional information is undoubtedly
used to learn concrete words, distributional information
provides valuable information about the behavior of abstract words. While in previous studies, the role in semantic representations of each source, independent of
the other, has been investigated, in this paper we describe how both sources can be used in combination.
In using both sources of information, patterns in one
source can interact with those of another. As a trivial
example, if words va and vb are related with respect to
attributional information, while word vb and vc are related with respect to distributional information, that we
might infer that va and vc are related. Inferences may
be made given the ensemble of correlations between and
within the two data sources. Such inferences are suggested by the latent variables that are learned and shown
in Figure 2. For example, in the case of the combined
model’s latent classes shown in Figure 2, we can see that
attributional information leads to knowledge of patterns
of body-parts, while distributional information leads to
knowledge of patterns relating to medicine. Together
both can lead to an inference that the realm of medicine
and medical things are coupled with realm of body-parts
and functions.

Distributional : threat stab knife bomb kick kill argue
snap knock murder
Attributional : murder sword dagger bomb threat knife
shield threaten stab scream

Models that can integrate attributional and distributional information may inform us about how knowledge



P x w = vj , θ ∝

X


P w = vj x P(x, z) .

(11)

{z}

On the other
 hand, for the attributional model
P x w = vj , θ is directly available, while P w = vi x, θ
is obtained by Bayes rules, i.e.



P w = vi x, θ ∝ P x w = vi , θ P w = vi θ
(12)
How predictive any word is, given an observation of another word, can be taken as a measure of semantic relatedness. This measure may, perhaps, be more theoretically motivated than other measures that are based upon
a distance metric. This argument is already presented in
detail in Griffiths and Steyvers (2003). What a prediction of a word vi by a word vj means can be interpreted
as given that we are observing vj in this text, how probable is word vi . Below, we show words predicted by some
example words in each of the three models. For comparison purposes between the models, here we provide only
prediction of words that were in both the text-based and
attribute-based data-sets.
Dog
Distributional : growl bark chase lick whine cat tail paw
wolf snap
Attributional : cat rabbit goat tail pig fox sheep horse
bear fur
Combined : cat growl tail bark paw whine chase sheep
lick wolf

Conclusions and Further Work

131

Firth, J. R. (1957). A synopsis of linguistic theory 19301955. In Studies in Linguistic Analysis (special volume of the Philological Society, Oxford) (p. 1-32).
Oxford: Blackwell.
Griffiths, T., & Steyvers, M. (2002). A probabilistic
approach to semantic representation. In Proceedings of the 24th annual conference of the cognitive
science society.
Griffiths, T., & Steyvers, M. (2003). Prediction and semantic association. In S. T. S. Becker & K. Obermayer (Eds.), Advances in neural information processing systems 15 (pp. 11–18). Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Hinton, G., & Shallice, T. (1991). Lesioning an attractor network: Investigations of acquired dyslexia.
Psychological Review, 98, 74-95.
Hofmann, T. (1999a). Probabilistic latent semantic analysis. In Proceedings of the fifteenth conference on
uncertainty in artificial intelligence.
Hofmann, T. (1999b). Probabilistic latent semantic indexing. In Proceedings of the twenty-second annual
international sicir conference on research and development in information retrieval.
Landauer, T., & Dumais, S. (1997). A solutions to
Plato’s problem: The Latent Semantic Analyis
theory of acquistion, induction and representation
of knowledge. Psychological Review, 104, 211-240.
McClelland, J., & Rogers, T. (2003). The parallel distributed processing approach to semantic cognition. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 4 (4), 310-322.
McRae, K., Sa, V. de, & Seidenberg, M. (1997). On
the nature and scope of featural representation of
word meaning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 126, 99-130.
Minsky, M. (1975). A framework for representing knowledge. In P. Winston (Ed.), The psychology of computer vision (p. 211-277). McGraw-Hill.
Schütze, H. (1992). Dimensions of meaning. Proceedings
of Supercomputing.
Smith, E., Shoben, E., & Rips, L. (1974). Structure and
process in semantic memory: Featural model for
semantic decisions. Psyhological Review, 81, 214241.
Teh, Y., Jordan, M., Beal, M., & Blei, D. (2004). Hierarchical dirichlet processes. In Advances in neural
information processing systems (Vol. 17).
Vigliocco, G., Vinson, D. P., Lewis, W., & Garrett, M. F.
(2004). Representing the meanings of object and
action words: The featural and unitary semantic
space hypothesis. Cognitive Psychology, 48, 422488.

derived from experience in the world and knowledge derived from language may be integrated to lead to human
semantic representations. This is the starting point and
motivation behind this present work. Models based on
attributional information develop semantic representations from the nonlinguistic attributes associated with
the referents of words. This is an intuitively appealing
idea about how word meanings are acquired. From a
developmental perspective, these models provide an account of how word meanings can be linked to conceptual
knowledge that develops independent of language. However, attributional information does not represent the
only source of information about word meaning. From
early stages in their development, children are exposed to
language and it is reasonable to assume that they implicitly use the distributional information inherent in their
linguistic input in order to learn new words, as well as to
enrich the semantic representation for words referring to
concrete referents. Using probabilistic models we have
shown how these two different sources of information can
be integrated to form semantic representations.
Two projects are to be carried out to further the ideas
presented here. The first regards the models that are
used. The EM algorithm is prone to local minima, as
well as data over-fitting. This can limit the usefulness of
the models that we have presented here. Bayesian learning methods based on MCMC sampling can be used to
sample from the posterior probability of the parameters,
and integrate over this for both learning and inference.
These methods have already been pursued in related
probabilistic models used for learning semantic representations (Blei & Ng, 2003; Griffiths & Steyvers, 2003,
2002; Teh et al., 2004). The second project concerns
comparison with human behavioral data. We speculate
that semantic relationships formed when both attributional and distributional information are used in combination will be more accurate in describing human performance than models based on either source alone.

References
Blei, D., & Ng, M., A. andand Jordan. (2003). Latent
dirichlet allocation. Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 3 (993-1022).
Burgess, C., & Lund, K. (1997). Modeling parsing constraints with high-dimensional context-space. Language and Cognitive Processes, 12, 177-210.
Collins, A., & Quillian, M. (1969). Retrieval time from
semantic memory. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 12, 240-247.
Dagan, I., Lee, L., & Pereira, F. (1997). Similaritybased methods for word sense disambiguation. In
35th annual meeting of the acl (p. 56-63).

132

