UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Acquisition and Asymmetric Transfer of Interactive Routines

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0kp0c32z

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Gray, Wayne D.
Veksler, V. Daniel

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Acquisition and Asymmetric Transfer of Interactive Routines
Wayne D. Gray & V. Daniel Veksler
Cognitive Science Department
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
[grayw; vekslv] @rpi.edu

Abstract

does not, however, postulate that behavior reflects an
optimal adaptation (Fu & Gray, 2004).
The expected utility of an interactive routine changes as
experience with its cost and success accumulates in the
current task environment. The central controller makes no
functional distinction between knowledge in-the-head
versus in-the-world or the means of acquiring that
information (such as eye movement, mouse movement and
click, or retrieval from memory, see, e.g., Clark, in press;
Gray & Fu, 2004).
Stable sequences of interactive routines often develop for
accomplishing subtasks during interactive behavior. Such
stable sequences give the appearance of deliberately adopted
strategies, however, the timescales involved would seem to
preclude extended deliberation. Without taking sides on the
deliberate versus non-deliberate debate, in our prior work
(Gray & Boehm-Davis, 2000) we have referred to these
stable sequences as microstrategies.
Despite the ubiquity of interactive routines, few studies
have examined how one set of interactive routines versus
another comes to be deployed in a given task environment
(Gray, 2000; Gray & Fu, 2004; Gray, Sims, Fu, &
Schoelles, submitted for publication). Fewer still have
carefully examined both the development of interactive
routines and their transfer to different interfaces. Indeed, the
only detailed study of transfer of which we are aware is one
of our own (Fu & Gray, 2004). That study focused on
stable, suboptimal performance - the persistent use of one
set of interactive routines when another set is demonstrably
more efficient.
The Fu and Gray study examined the sets of suboptimal
interactive routines that were used after 20 and 40 hrs of
practice with one interactive system, and after 2-yrs of
experience with a second system. It did not provide a
detailed examination of how the set of interactive routines
was acquired or of the factors that influenced their transfer
to a new task environment.
Current work begins the systematic study of the
acquisition and transfer of sets of interactive routines across
variations in interface design. We carefully collected and
tabulated data on trials-to-criterion, performance time, and
information acquisition during training on one interface and
transfer to a new interface. The two interfaces are largely
identical; the variations between them are small. Indeed, it
was not obvious to us a priori whether the soft constraints
inherent to the two variations would be sufficient to result in
stable differences in the interactive routines favored during
training.

We investigate the ways in which small changes in the cost of
using an interface influence interactive behavior. During the
Training Phase of the study, subjects in two interface
conditions acquired two different sets of interactive routines
for programming the shows. During the Transfer Phase we
observed asymmetric transfer. In one case, Subjects
immediately abandoned the interactive routines they had used
during training and adopted the other set of routines. In the
other case, Subjects held steadfast to their original set. We
discuss both acquisition and asymmetric transfer in terms of
cost-benefit tradeoffs in interacting with the two task
environments.
Keywords: Cognitive Science, complex systems, human
factors and human-computer interaction, interactive behavior,
human experimentation

Interactive Routines
Interactive routines are a complex mixture of elementary
cognitive, perceptual, and action operations (Gray & Fu,
2004; Gray, Schoelles, & Myers, 2005). They represent
basic patterns of interactive behavior and are analogous to
Ullman’s visual routines (Hayhoe, 2000; Ullman, 1984).
For any given task environment, the set of possible
interactive routines is defined by the available set of
interactive objects and interactive devices (Gray & BoehmDavis, 2000). Interactive objects include text fields, textbased drop-down or pop-up menus, scroll-bars, 2-D and 3-D
icons, static graphics with and without text, 2-D and 3-D
animations, sound, and so on. Interactive devices include the
standard fare of modern computer interfaces; that is, the
mouse, keyboard, and human eye. At the same time, new
technologies have expanded the range of interactive devices
to include ancient devices such as handwriting and gestures
as well as newer devices such as the force joystick, data
glove, or point of gaze as a selection tool.
The set of interactive routines that are used in a given task
environment is a subset of those that are possible. One
interactive routine is selected over another based on soft
constraints.
The Soft Constraints approach builds on the notions of
bounded rationality (Simon, 1956, 1992) and rational
analysis (Anderson, 1990, 1991) to apply the rational,
expected utility framework to selecting the basic activities
that occur at the 1/3 to 3 sec level of analysis. It embraces
methodological adaptationism (Godfrey-Smith, 2001) in
that it assumes that behavior, even behavior at less than
1000 msec, reflects an adaptation to the task environment. It
809

The Experiment

The Column-Button condition is somewhat problematic.
This condition pits two principles of cognitive engineering
against each other; that is, least-effort in mapping prior
knowledge to device knowledge is pitted against least-effort
in operating the device (Gray, 2000). The perceptual-motor
effort entailed in moving the cursor to and clicking on a
column button seems minor. However, the principle of
least-effort in operating the device suggests that this
additional effort may lead subjects to reduce button clicks
by at least sometimes adopting the by-column interactive
routine of programming the two setting in a given column as
pairs (e.g., start-hr and end-hr, or start-10min and end10min). In this situation, programming start time would be
interleaved with programming end time on a “by column”
basis.
Whatever the magnitude of the effect the predictions
during training are clear. We expected the subjects in the
noColumn-Button condition to adopt predominately by-row
rather than by-column interactive routines for programming
time. Contrariwise, compared to the noColumn-Button
condition, we expected subjects in the Column-Button
condition to use by-row interactive routines less and bycolumn ones more.
After the subjects programmed four shows, for each
condition we transferred half of them to the other interface
(Column-Button to noColumn-Button, or noColumn-Button
to Column-Button). Predictions for the interactive routines
used for the Transfer Phase are less clear than for the
Training Phase. However, if we take interactive routine use
during the training trials as optimal (i.e., the differing
mixtures of by-row or by-column interactive routines shown
in the Column-Button or noColumn-Button interface
conditions) than any deviation from this mix is data that
needs to be explained.

Subjects programmed one of two versions of the simulated
DVD Recorder shown as Figure 1. For purposes of this
report, the important interface features are the organization
of the 12 labeled radio buttons (laid out in 4 columns by 3
rows) and the presence or absence of push-in buttons above
each of the four columns of radio buttons.
A peculiar feature of the DVD Recorder’s interface is that
programming the start time or end time for a to-be-recorded
show required separately programming the start-hour, start10min, start-min as well as the end-hour, end-10min, and
end-min. The radio buttons for these functions were always
organized by-row. As shown in Figure 1, the radio buttons
for start time were always in row 2 and those for end time
were always in row 3. Similarly, the radio buttons for starthour and end-hour were always in column 1, those for start10min and end-10 min in column 2, and those for start-min
and end-min in column 3.
In the version of the interface that had push-in buttons
above each column of radio buttons (the Column-Button
condition), programming a given radio button entry (e.g.,
start-10min) required that the column button for that entry
be “pushed” in. (A column button had to be “released”
before any other column button could be “pushed” in. If
subjects attempted to click a radio button before its column
button was pushed-in, an annoying beep occurred and the
radio button remained unselected.) Without column buttons
(the noColumn-Button condition) subjects were free to
program any setting at any time without any preconditions.

Methodology
Subjects Thirty-two Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
undergraduates participated for course credit. There were
eight subjects per condition. Subjects were assigned to
conditions randomly. The experiment took approximately
one hour. Subjects were individually run.
Design. A 4 x (2 x 4) design was used with four betweengroup Conditions (colB-colB, colB-noColB, noColB-colB,
and noColB-noColB), two within group Phases (training
versus transfer), and four Shows per phase (1-4 and 5-8).
The between-group Conditions were defined by the
presence or absence of the column button during the
Training and the Transfer Phases of the study. For the colBnoColB condition, subjects programmed shows 1-4 in the
Column-Button mode, and shows 5-8 in the noColumnButton mode. For noColB-colB, the noColumn-Button mode
was used in the first four show, and the Column-Button
mode in the last four. ColB-colB required the ColumnButton mode for all eights shows. Finally, noColB-noColB
required the noColumn-Button mode for all eight shows.
There were eight different shows to be programmed.
Eight different sequences of the eight shows were used. For

Figure 1: DVD Recorder interface with push-in column
buttons.
By the cognitive engineering principle of least-effort in
mapping prior knowledge to device knowledge (see, Gray,
2000) in the noColumn-Button condition we expected that
people would program all of start time or all of end time
without interleaving one with the other (and without
interleaving the programming of day-of-week or channel).
We characterize the programming of two successive
elements of time (e.g., start-hr and start-10min, or end10min and end-min) as using a by-row interactive routine.

810

each between-Subject condition, one of the eight Subjects
received each sequence.
For each show, show information regarding start time,
end time, day-of-week, and channel was presented in a
Show Information Window that was immediately below the
DVD Recorder.
Procedures After instructions, the study began with a
practice show (show 0) with the Experimenter watching as
the Subject programmed show 0 to criterion. At that point,
the Experimenter left the room while the Subject
programmed shows 1 through 8. (As show 0 was an
instruction and practice show, it is excluded from the
analyses reported below.)
Each Subject programmed shows 1-8 to the criterion of
two successive correct trials. Each trial began with the
Subject pressing a START TRIAL button and ended with
the Subject pressing STOP TRIAL. At the end of each trial,
the Subject was given feedback as to how long the trial took
and as to whether the show had been programmed correctly.
If the show was not programmed correctly, the Subject was
provided feedback on the first error that the software found.
The order in which errors were checked was: clock time,
start time, end time, day of week, channel, and program
record.
For all conditions and both experiments, each trial began
with the DVD Recorder and the Show Information Window
covered by black boxes. Starting a trial required moving the
cursor to and clicking on the black box covering the Show
Information Window and then moving to and clicking on
the START TRIAL button. (In addition to starting the trial,
clicking this button changed its label from START TRIAL
to STOP TRIAL.)
During a trial, at most only one window was visible at a
time; either the DVD Recorder window or the Show
Information Window. Moving the cursor out of a window
resulted in it being immediately covered by its black box.
Opening a window required that the cursor be moved to and
clicked on that window’s black box.
The Show Information Window contained fields with the
show’s name, start time, end time, day-of-week, and
channel. When the Show Information Window was open,
the field labels were visible but the field values were
covered by gray boxes. To see the value of a field the
Subject had to move the cursor to and click on the gray box
covering that field. The value remained visible as long as
the cursor remained in the field.
In designing the Show Information Window, we
considered two alternatives for presenting time information
to the Subjects. The alternative chosen is congruent with the
way in which time is normally presented, for example,
“10:15 pm” or “7:30 am” presented in the start time or end
time field. The second alternative would have been
maximally congruent with the way in which the DVD
Recorder interface required subjects to program time. This
alternative would have had separate fields for each of starthr, start-10min, start-min, end-hr, end-10min, and end-min.
In making the choice of the former rather than the latter, we

chose the alternative that was maximally compatible with
prior knowledge and which we expected to support the
mapping of prior knowledge to device knowledge.
The radio buttons for the DVD Recorder’s settings were
aligned horizontally by rows and vertically by columns. For
the Column-Button mode subjects had to select a column
button prior to being able to click on any of these settings.
In order to click a radio button in any other column, the
current column button first had to be deselected. In the
noColumn-Button mode, no column buttons were present.

Results
Strategy Use
Of keen interest to this study is the nature of the interactive
routines, by-row or by-column, used to program start time
and end time. Each of the four transitions from start-hr to
start-10min, start-10min to start-min, end-hr to end-10min,
and end-10min to end-min was counted as one by-row
interactive routine. Hence, the highest possible score per
trial was 4.
A similar measure was derived for by-column. For this
measure, we calculated the number of transitions from one
radio-button to another within the same column. As there
were four columns (three concerned with time and one with
day-of-week and channel) the highest possible score per
trial was 4.

Figure 2: Mean number of by-column interactive
routines used during Training and Transfer Phases.
The combined scores for the two sets of interactive
routines did not sum to 4 as it was possible to get, for
example, a perfect score on by-column, 4, and a score of 2
on by-row. This outcome would be produced by
programming the DVD Recorder in the following sequence:
start-hr, end-hr, end-10min, start-10min, start-min, end-min,
and finally day-of-week and channel (in either order).
However, in practice the two scores were largely
complementary as both showed a main effect of Condition
and Phase, as well as an interaction of Phase by Condition
with no other significant effects. As this is the case, we
811

present the ANOVA for the set of by-column interactive
routines and plot those data as Figure 2.
As suggested by this figure, the use of by-column
interactive routines varied by Condition [F (3, 28) = 46.976,
p < .0001] and by Phase (training versus transfer) [F (1, 28)
= 13.511, p = 0.001]. Of most interest, the interaction of
Condition by Phase was also significant [F (3, 28) = 20.989,
p < .0001].
Figure 2 illustrates the influence of column buttons on
interactive routines. During the Training Phase the two
groups that had column buttons (colB-colB and colBnoColB) adopted predominately by-column interactive
routines. The two groups that did not have column buttons
did not adopt these interactive routines. (Indeed, these
groups adopted by-row interactive routines with a mean byrow score of 3.02 out of a possible 4.)
As expected, during the Transfer Phase the two groups
that did not switch button mode (colB-colB and noColBnoColB) continued using the same set of interactive routines
they used in the button phase. Likewise, the group that
switched from noColumn-Button to Column-Button
(noColB-colB) immediately switched interactive routines to
become statistically indistinguishable from the colB-colB
condition. However, a stranger pattern is shown by the
group that trained with column buttons but transferred to the
noColumn-Button mode (colB-noColB). This group does
not budge. Rather than adopting the by-row interactive
routines used by the noColB-noColB group, this group is as
constant in their use of by-column interactive routines
during transfer as they were during training.

same is true of the two noColumn-Button conditions
(noColB-colB and noColB-noColB).
During the Transfer Phase, the two control conditions
(colB-colB and noColB-noColB) showed a uniformed
speedup compared with the Training Phase. Interestingly,
despite the use of a different set of interactive routines colBnoColB, noColB-noColB, and colB-colB are statistically
equal in the Transfer Phase. The only group that differs in
terms of criterion trial time is the noColB-colB group. This
group switches from by-row interactive routines in the
Training Phase to adopt by-column interactive routines in
the Transfer Phase. In doing so its performance times on the
two criterion trials matches the times of the two groups that
had column buttons in the Training Phase.

Searching for Differences

Figure 3: Time (in sec) for the two criterion trials

The asymmetric transfer found in the use of by-row or bycolumn interactive routines is both intriguing and
suggestive. However, before we speculate on why it occurs,
it is prudent to examine the data on other performance
measures to determine if these measures provide clues
helpful to our interpretation of this interesting interaction.
Trials-to-Criterion. Criterion was two successive correct
trials. The measure of trials to criterion yielded a main effect
of Phase. In the Training Phase criterion was reached in 2.6
trials versus 2.3 trials during the Transfer Phase. [F (1, 28) =
5.589, p = 0.0252]. There were no other significant main
effects or interactions.
Time to Program the two Criterion Trials. We also
looked at time, in sec, to program the two criterion trials.
This measure yielded a main effect of Phase [F (1, 28) =
10.905, p = 0.0026] showing a general speeding up with
practice. The main effect of Shows was significant [F (3,
84) = 4.063. p = 0.0095] showing that performance sped up
slightly over each set of four shows. Of most interest for this
measure was the significant interaction of Phase by
Condition [F (1, 28) = 10.777, p < .0001].
As shown in Figure 3, in the Training Phase the criterion
trial time for the two Column-Button conditions (colBnoColB and colB-colB) was indistinguishable. Likewise, the

Other Measures Examined In addition to the above
measures, in the spirit of exploratory data analysis we
examined several others. For total number of errors per
show, we found no differences between conditions in the
Transfer Phase. Likewise, we examined the total time that
the fields in the Show Information Window were opened
during the criterion trials. This analysis showed a main
effect of Show, but no effect of Phase and no interaction of
Phase by Condition. We wondered whether time studying
show information on the first trial of each show might be a
more sensitive measure than time on the criterion trials.
However, that analysis revealed no significant differences
on any of our factors.

Summary and Discussion
In this study we varied a minor interface feature of a
simulated DVD Recorder to determine whether a small
increase in perceptual-motor costs would affect the nature of
the interactive routines used to program the DVD Recorder.
During the first Phase of the study we found strong and
consistent differences. Subjects who were required to select
a column button prior to programming a DVD Recorder
setting consistently adopted a set of by-column interactive
routines. Subjects with no column buttons consistently
adopted a set of by-row interactive routines.
812

The noColumn-Button conditions supported the cognitive
engineering principle of least-effort in mapping prior
knowledge to device knowledge. When the perceptualmotor costs of programming the DVD Recorder were equal
for any set of interactive routines (by-row, by-column, or
some random combination) people adopted the set of
interactive routines that were consistent with the common
procedural frame (Stevenson & Carlson, 2003) for setting
time.
In contrast, the Column-Button conditions pitted this
principle against that of least-effort in operating the device.
As shown in Figure 3, for the Training Phase the slight
difference in perceptual-motor cost for the Column-Button
conditions added about 25 sec to the time required to
program the two criterion shows or 12.5 sec per show. This
additional effort sufficed to cause Subjects to adopt a
different way of interacting with the DVD Recorder.
The Transfer Phase yielded the unexpected finding of
asymmetric transfer. Subjects encountering the ColumnButton mode after programming four shows in the
noColumn-Button mode (noColB-colB) switched almost
immediately from by-row interactive routines to by-column
ones. [By-column scores went from 2.9 on the first show of
transfer to 3.8 on the 4th show. In contrast, by-row scores go
from 1.1 to 0.2.] After four shows of successful experience
with by-row interactive routines Subjects readily abandon
these routines to adopt a new set.
However, immediate switching is not always the case.
The group that started with column buttons in the Training
Phase and had no column buttons in the Transfer Phase
adopted the by-column interactive routines during training
and continued using them during transfer.
Of the dependent variables that we examined to obtain
insight into the nature of this asymmetric transfer, the only
one that showed a significant interaction of Phase by
Condition was time to program the two criterion trials. This
interaction contains three effects that seem relevant to an
explanation of asymmetric transfer.
The first effect is the rapid decrease in time for the colBcolB condition. Indeed, for the Transfer Phase statistical
analyses yielded no difference between colB-colB and
noColB-noColB. Apparently, four shows of experience with
the by-column interactive routines sufficed to make their
use almost as fast as the by-row routines. This speedup
occurs even though the additional perceptual-motor cost
remains.
Second, a comparison of our time measure for the
noColB-noColB condition that uses by-row interactive
routines with the colB-noColB condition that continues
using by-column interactive routines suggest that the mental
load imposed on subjects by the non-standard representation
of time is quickly overcome with a bit of practice. With
practice, when there are no column buttons to be pushed the
by-column interactive routines are every bit as fast as the
by-row ones.
Third, despite practice with other aspects of the DVD,
encountering column buttons for the first time during the

Transfer Phase costs time. Indeed, subjects in the noColBcolB condition spent as much time programming the DVD
during the Transfer Phase as the colB-colB and colBnoColB groups did in the Training Phase. Apparently
acquiring or initially using the by-column interactive
routines adds a time constant over and above that of
learning to program the DVD Recorder.
When we consider the time measure in light of soft
constraints theory we obtain the following explanation for
the finding of asymmetric transfer. The Training Phase data
suggests that column buttons impose an initial cost to
programming the DVD Recorder. To minimize this cost
subjects adopt the set of by-column interactive routines. On
the other hand, once the by-column routines are mastered
the DVD Recorder is almost as fast to program with column
buttons as without. Hence, from the perspective of the colBnoColB condition, a set of interactive routines that worked
well in the Training Phase are now easier and simpler to
apply in the Transfer Phase.

Conclusions
Adapting to the physical task environment changes the
nature of the functional task environment. By adopting
interactive routines that minimized the perceptual-motor
costs of an interface feature, people in the Column-Button
condition became facile with a non-standard way of
programming time. When that interface feature was
removed, Subjects were as fast programming the DVD
Recorder using the non-standard representation of time as
the comparison group (noColB-noColB) was with the
standard representation. The continued success of this
method combined with its low cost, sufficed to maintain its
use even when the original motivation for adopting the
method had vanished.

Acknowledgments
Support for the writing and the research for this paper was
provided in part by a grant to Wayne Gray from the Office
of Naval Research ONR #N000140310046.

References
Anderson, J. R. (1990). The adaptive character of thought.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Anderson, J. R. (1991). Is human cognition adaptive?
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 14(3), 471–517.
Clark, A. (in press). Re-inventing ourselves: The plasticity
of embodiment, sensing, and mind. Journal of Philosophy
and Medicine.
Fu, W.-T., & Gray, W. D. (2004). Resolving the paradox of
the active user: Stable suboptimal performance in
interactive tasks. Cognitive Science, 28(6), 901-935.
Godfrey-Smith, P. (2001). Three kinds of adaptationism. In
S. H. Orzack & E. Sober (Eds.), Adaptationism and
optimality (pp. 335-357). New York: Cambridge
University Press.

813

Gray, W. D. (2000). The nature and processing of errors in
interactive behavior. Cognitive Science, 24(2), 205–248.
Gray, W. D., & Boehm-Davis, D. A. (2000). Milliseconds
Matter: An introduction to microstrategies and to their use
in describing and predicting interactive behavior. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 6(4), 322–335.
Gray, W. D., & Fu, W.-T. (2004). Soft constraints in
interactive behavior: The case of ignoring perfect
knowledge in-the-world for imperfect knowledge in-thehead. Cognitive Science, 28(3), 359-382.
Gray, W. D., Schoelles, M. J., & Myers, C. W. (2005).
Profile before optimizing: A cognitive metrics approach
to workload analysis. In ACM CHI 2005 Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems. New York: ACM
Press.
Gray, W. D., Sims, C. R., Fu, W.-T., & Schoelles, M. J.
(submitted for publication). Near-optimal tradeoffs

between interaction-intensive and memory-intensive
strategies: Towards a theory of soft constraints in
interactive behavior.
Hayhoe, M. (2000). Vision using routines: A functional
account of vision. Visual Cognition, 7(1-3), 43–64.
Simon, H. A. (1956). Rational choice and the structure of
the environment. Psychological Review, 63, 129–138.
Simon, H. A. (1992). What is an “explanation” of behavior?
Psychological Science, 3(3), 150–161.
Stevenson, L. M., & Carlson, R. A. (2003). Information
acquisition strategies and the cognitive structure of
arithmetic. Memory & Cognition, 31(8), 1249-1259.
Ullman, S. (1984). Visual Routines. Cognition, 18(1-3), 97159.

814

