UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The In-Supporting Content of the Extended Mind

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2th4633k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Livesey, E.J.
McLaren, I.P.L.
Pearson, L.S.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The In-Supporting Content of the Extended Mind
Hsi-wen Daniel Liu (hwliu@pu.edu.tw)
Division of Humanities, Providence University
Shalu, Taichung County 433, TAIWAN

below. Dennett’
s (1996, 1998, 2000) raises the notion of
mind-tools, which regards the mind as fundamentally
consisting of skills (i.e. knowing-how) that manipulate tools.
Here, the term “
tools”broadly refers to physical tools,
language, and even cultural “
products”such as rules of
reasoning. Human mind is constituted of such skills, which
are seen as internalized tools—named to be “
mind-tools”
.
Clark (2003) introduces the idea that humans are basically
natural-born cyborgs, by considering the mind to be an
evolutionary product of manipulating technologies for
scaffolding and empowering our thought and action; the
brain has been shaped in the course of evolution as a device
for manipulating technologies.
Clark’
s term of
“
technologies”and Dennett’
s term of “
tools”have roughly
the same coverage. Dennett (1996, 1998, 2000) boldly
claims that except for mind-tools there is nothing left in the
mind. Despite granting a bundle of know-how to manage
tools, he considers all mind-tools as userless. In addition,
Clark considers that in the smooth use of technologies the
position of self or internal mind is very thin; in fact, he
regards the internal mind as non-privileged compared to
external resources. The present paper, in order to challenge
them but respect the general idea of extended mind, raises
an caveat: even in smooth use of technologies there is
indeed a compelling role of internal mentality preserved in
the unfolding of the extended mind—a role that is not
simply the presence of tools or skills—as manifested in the
maintenance of in-supporting content.
Discussions of the extended mind have touched the issue
of content, as seen in the notions of control-based contents
and action-oriented contents alike (Clark 1995, 1999ab,
2001ab), but such discussions as yet are mostly limited to
the faculty of motor control. Beyond that, however, an
account of content is still required. This is because the use
of cultural devices, such as physical tools, technologies,
calculating methods and reasoning rules, indeed needs
training and mental control to various degree. Proficient
users can have conscious states to handle such devices
smoothly and flexibly. This makes it convincing to see
those users’controlling states as bearing content, in the
sense of management concerning ways of performance.
Hinted by such a novel sense of content, certain questions
concerning content of the extended mind would naturally
arise: in what sense can the states of extended mind hold
content, and ultimately what are those states? It is intuitive
to think that humans have mental states, but it would not be
equally intuitive to consider them so in the context of the
extended mind. When considering internal mental states, it
is straightforward to talk about their content, but it seems

Abstract
The thesis of the extended mind has been upheld for a decade
and defended seriously (Clark 1995, 1997ab, 1999ab, 2001ab,
2001ab, 2002, 2003; Clark and Chalmers 1998; Dennett 1996,
1998, 2000; Millikan 1995). However, there seems to have
been little attention addressed to the sense in which the
extended mind can have content, and the role of internal
mentality standing in the unfolding of the extended mind
seems to have been underestimated. Dennett regards the mind
as consisting of internalized tools. Clark claims that the
(internal) mind is non-privileged compared to the external
resources of the extended mind. The present paper provides a
different perspective: the extended mind indeed has an inner
core that has a distinctive role in the extended mind’
s course
of unfolding, to wit, to maintain a novel sense of content–the
in-supporting content—as smoothly and flexibly as possible.
Such content is conceived of as ways of organizing activities:
when the extended mind unfolds, it remains holding an inner
core that constantly serves to organize internal mental
resources (including internalized resources) in support of the
agent’
s problem-solving performance in the environment
and/or cultural settings. The existence of that distinctive role,
this paper argues, certifies that the extended mind has an inner
core that is reasonably privileged compared to external
resources.
Keywords: user; content; extended mind; skill; tool.

Introduction
A‘
tenet’in the study of embodied mind is that cognition is
not a central unit for processing information in the abstract;
conversely, cognition is conceived of as intrinsically
connecting to body, environment and culture (Clark 1997ab,
2001a, 2002, 2003; Dennett 1996, 1998, 2000), thus
forming the extended mind (Clark 2003; Clark and
Chalmers 1998). The thesis of extended mind—proposing
that mind is extended—is grounded on the following three
points together: 1. the completion of cognitive tasks is
usually aided by manipulation of instruments, such as pen
and notepad, books, an abacus, nautical slide rule (Hutchins
1995), language and diagrams; 2. manipulation of
instruments brings substantive aid to mental processes that
makes the completion of cognitive tasks easier; 3.
concerning the nature of that manipulation, were it done in
the brain it would be recognized outright as a part of
cognitive process (Clark and Chalmers 1998). The abovementioned instruments serve to provide new storage of
representations or new forms of representation. The point 3
indicates that the mind is internal in the first place. The
above can be called weak thesis of extended mind,
compared to the strong thesis of extended mind stated
1290

not straightforward at all to think of the content held by the
extended mind.
This is true especially because the
philosophy of mind traditionally conceives of the content of
mental states as serving to describe states of the external
world; by contrast, the extended mind, is alternatively
considered as mainly working for problem-solving.
A difficulty in holding a sense of content for the extended
mind is that the extended mind is basically distributed,
across the boundary of human skin-bags, into the
environment and culture. A dilemma arises, then. The
mental states of an agent, because of the extended mind, go
far beyond the boundary of an animate agent; consequently,
the mental states as a whole are extending, hence not
internal. From another point of view, it is hard to think of
an agent’
s mental states as going beyond the skin-and-skull,
as the mind seems to have been taken as something
intrinsically internal. The agent indeed has mental states
that are entirely internal, although they can manage
information coming in from the external. Thus, the mental
states of a human agent are both internal to himself/herself
and going beyond the boundary of the skin-bag. Whether
the extended part of the mind is something mental becomes
uncertain. The term “
extended mind”
, hence, seems to
include an inner conflict.
To make discussion clear, the present paper analyses, on
the one hand, that the mind has an internal side in the sense
that in contrast to external resources it takes place internally,
and on the other hand, that mind is extended in
consideration of its intrinsic interactions with external
resources. External resources can be internalized as parts of
mental resources, while some other mental resources—such
as attention and memory for maintaining learning—are
intrinsically internal. It is because cognition consists of
making use of external resources that the mind is bound to
extend beyond the skin-and-skull boundary. Although they
are used and accordingly are internalized as certain mindtools, the external resources being used remain objects of
organizing activity. Although the mind is extended, the
external resources would not consequently become parts of
the organizing subject.
This is a subject in a
phenomenological sense; there is neither metaphysic ground
nor supernatural being conferred at this point.
On the basis of the above understandings, the role of
organizing activity in the use of mental resources, this paper
argues, warrants the existence of an inner core in the
extended mind. As a reason, it should be noted that the
maintenance of such a role is not tantamount to mere
presence of mind-tools or skills for managing external
resources.
The activity of organizing mental resources
requires achieving mental unity; the extended mind must
have an inner core in which mind-tools and skills are to be
fine-tuned in order to gain a sense of coherence, apart from
their being present internally. As understood above, the
inner core of the extended mind is not the internal mind in
the traditional sense. The present argues that the extended
mind should have a compelling inner core. It is an

organizing role for using internalized mind-tools in the light
of gaining a mental unity, rather than an internal database.
The present paper raises a novel account of content—the
in-supporting content—in which content is conceived of as
ways of organizing activities: when the extended mind
unfolds, it remains holding an inner core that constantly
serves to organize (internal) mental resources—including
mind-tools—mediated by her brain and body, in support of
the agent’
s problem-solving (including bodily control)
performance in the environment and/or cultural settings.
The mind, the present paper aims to show, indeed has an
inner core manifested in the unfolding of the extended mind.
It is, to wit, the role of maintaining the in-supporting content
as smoothly and flexibly as possible. The existence of that
role certifies the somewhat privileged status of an inner core
existing in the unfolding of the extended mind.

Userless Mind-Tools

1291

Dennett (1996, 1998, 2000) presents a skill-based vision of
mind with four points. Firstly, he considers the mind as
made of mind-tools—tools for thinking—such as notations,
slide-rules, abacuses, education, norms and laws. They are
tools because they serve to make life easier. Tools are
external resources, but they can be internalized for use, as
aforementioned, thus transformed into mind-tools. Less
sophisticatedly, even a can-opener or a rake is a mind-tool,
as when using a can-opener an agent has in her mind a way
of opening a can and a rake should be seen as a
“
mechanized sorting algorithm” (Dennett’
s phrase, in
Clapin 2002: 95). Secondly, all explicit representations
have content in virtue of the agents’ skills, or tacit
knowledge, of managing tools. Content, hence, is basically
skill-based. Because all mind-tools are managed with the
know-how of skills, content consists of mind-tools. Thirdly,
although a tool has its user, Dennett thinks quite startlingly
that the cognitive agents need not. The mind-tools are
deemed as userless. Beyond equipment there is nothing left
in the mind. Lastly, Dennett claims that what makes
humans distinctive is the making of florid representating,
where the higher-level representations serve as metarepresentation and re-organization of lower level ones, with
the result of providing witting representations, such as
language and the rules of reasoning.
Clark (2002) appreciates Dennett’
s above notion of
cognitive agent and explains in favor of him by adopting
Preston’
s (1998) notion of a tool. Preston (1998) follows
Heidegger’
s notion of equipment, a notion without imposing
an internal-external distinction on the user-tool relation.
That notion appears to be highly applicable to everything
being used because bodily parts (e.g. hands) and even
biological cognitive elements (including mental states) can
be conceived of as equipment (of cognitive faculty) such as
rakes and shopping lists. Thus, the handling of equipment
turns up even in internal devices. Beyond equipment there
is nothing left in cognitive faculty. As a consequence, the
need to have a user as an equipment-controller disappears in
a well-weaved collection of equipment.

Despite Dennett’
s claim of userless mind-tools, it is worth
noting that the well-weaved collection of equipment seems
to constitute something that is both mental and internal.
This appears to be the underlying machinery of tool-use in
the guise of weaved connections, and consequently seems to
be a vestige of user left in the extended mind. Hence, the
role of an inner core in the extended mind, as manifested in
the role of the disguised user, does not vanish.

The Human-Environment-Culture Merger

extended mind unfolds, an inner core serves to organize
(internal) mental resources—surely, including mind-tools—
in support of the agent’
s problem-solving performance in
the environment and/or cultural settings. The activity of
organizing those mental resources is maintained with the
aim of making the brain working smoothly and efficiently to
exploit external resources for the need of the required
problem-solving performance. The organization of those
mental resources constitutes a sense of content, called insupporting content. It bears content not in the sense of
standing-for something in the world but in a sense in an
orthogonal dimension: exploiting the external resources
needed for maintaining the envisaged problem-solving
performance. The in-supporting content generally serves to
exploit external resources with a view to gradually forming
guidance of the required problem-solving performance. The
in-supporting content, to see from a different angle, is
contentful in an intuitive sense: it consists of the ways to
exploit an agent’
s external resources in support of the
required performance.
Four categories are immanent in the notion of insupporting content: performance, support, need, and
guidance. Firstly, the role of in-supporting content, quite
unlikely that of the traditionally-understood content (to wit,
the standing-for-based content), is not to present meaning
but to support human performance in problem-solving.
Presenting meaning, yet, may be a component in the way to
support human performance in facing a certain task. For
example, understanding the meaning of natural number 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, and 6 may serve as a means to support maintaining
the operation of addition 132+465=597.
Note that
generation of meaning is not compulsory in all kinds of
performance. The performance of hand-writing only needs
visuo-motor coordination; therein, there is no need to seek
the mediation of word meaning. In addition, using a
screwdriver would not require generating meaning, although
our understanding of the behavior of using-a-screw-driver is
meaningful. Secondly, while the standing-for-based content
has an essential role of representing the world (even the
“
inner world”of humans), the essential role of the insupporting content is to support an organism’
s performance.
The aim of building in-supporting content is not to present
meanings, but to support performance, as evident in the
activity of handling the pen in hand-writing. It only serves
to maintain the envisaged performance—clear and beautiful
writing of characters. Thirdly, when it unfolds, the
extended mind has an inner core that serves to organize
(internal) mental resources with a specific goal, to meet
human need in the maintenance of the envisaged
performance. Problem-solving activities, by nature, have
the immanent need of solving the target problem. The
maneuver of internal or external resources subserves this
need. If it is not constrained by such a need, the activities of
resource-maneuver for building in-supporting content are
very likely to go astray. Doing something unnecessary or
lacking anything needed would jeopardize the performance
for problem-solving. It is at least wasting time, which may

Clark’
s idea of the extended mind is clear and simple:
through their evolutionary and cultural history, humans have
learnt to merge seamlessly with cultural devices such as
technologies, and the merging results have been carved in
the brain by courtesy of the significant degree of cortical
plasticity. The brain, body and external resources (such as
pencil, papers, previous marginalia made on papers or books,
electric files, cell phone, computer, internet) together, set up
a biotechnological matrix that constitutes a problem-solving
machine. On account of such biotechnological matrixes
humans can be regarded as (natural-born) cyborgs, and
consequently humans can be identified as such problemsolving machines. A talent of the human brain is to learn to
join as a player of problem-solving team.
Clark’
s thesis of brain-technologies merger, as it seems,
does not reserve a position for an inner core of the mind.
One may attempt to argue for the existence of the “
real me”
which excludes all nonconscious neural activities interacting
with external resources. However, Clark thinks, “
the vision
of the mind and self”in this “
cognitive amputation”“
is thin
indeed!”(Clark 2003, p. 30).
An argument supporting the claim that the inner core is
non-privileged in extended mind is that technologies have
become integral to human life. The deprival of them would
make people (their users) disoriented or even seemingly
handicapped. However, such an argument, the present
paper contends, simply certifies the human need of
technologies and tools. It does not automatically lead to the
claim that among the components of the extended mind
nothing is privileged in its internal side.
In modern life, the mind surely is not dominant in the
sense of commanding and holding exclusive instructing
guidance. Yet, it need not be privileged in such a strong
sense, but can alternatively be more humble, namely,
privileged in the sense of flexible control and learning. For
the extended mind, its internal side unbeatably holds the
main position of control and learning, and nothing external
(to the brain, hence including the body) can take its place.
Hence, the internal side of the extended mind remains
privileged even in the bio-environmental-cultural matrix,
that is, privileged in the matrix consisting of the body,
environmental factors, and cultural ideas and devices.

In-Supporting Content
This section presents the account of in-supporting content,
in order to explain the role of an inner core standing in the
unfolding of the extended mind, as shown below. When the
1292

sometimes be dangerous or even fatal in certain critical
tasks of problem-solving, such as handling the steering
wheel or pushing on the brake pedal in order to avoid a
traffic collision. Lastly, among the various needs to support
the problem-solving performance, guidance is usually the
primary one that the internal side of the extended mind is
requested to provide. In order to survive in the merciless
environment, organisms need sufficient guidance in the light
of effective and efficient ways of body control. Handling
tools must be subject to correct guidance, although those
tools may be so simple that no manuals need to be provided.
Responding to the above four categories of in-supporting
content, a question arises. Why should we regard the
aforementioned in-supporting content as content, given that
it differs intrinsically from the content we traditionally
understand?
To avoid the confusion resulting from
ambiguity, after all, it seems wise to adopt a different term,
even preserving the part “
in-supporting”
. Replacing the
term “
content”by “
control”or “
constraint”
—consequently
forming “
in-supporting control” or “
in-supporting
constraint”
—at first glance, looks sufficient to convey the
same idea. However, it seems not so, for four reasons.
Firstly, It seems sure that the control of motor activities is
neither empty nor blind, nor random, but is subject to
certain forms of mental arrangement, even subject to certain
forms of conscious planning. Motor control is by no means
simply a matter of neural firing. The job of conscious
planning, in particular, cannot be accomplished by external
resources or mind-tools alone without involving a core of
internally organizing activities. Conscious planning needs
an active core standing in cognition, a core that is hard to be
seen as a mind-tool.
Secondly, the activity of organizing (internal) mental
resources indeed forms a mental unity. It is the unity of
supporting teamwork, subserving the envisaged problemsolving performance. Getting a ball in the baseball sport,
for example, needs a variety of supports—energy, muscle
torque, visual tracking of the flying ball, appropriate motor
guidance, and visual-motor coordination. The maneuver of
these supports is not to show-off human psychological and
physical resources, but instead aims to form the unity of
supporting teamwork, supporting the task. Given that such
a unity is maintained in mental states, however dynamical
they are, those states constitute a mental unity of supporting
teamwork, a unity that may even connect to conscious effort
with a certain scenario of supporting combinations. Such a
mental unity constitutes a certain organization of standingins. Because the maintenance of that unity would be
complex, the in-supporting content cannot be scanty and
consequently the internal side of the extended mind would
not be thin.
Thirdly, given the above, motor control can be seen as in
a sense “
about”the world, because all the relating mental
activities carry information that aims to support external
performance. In an agent’
s activities of motor coordination,
between ways of internal control and those of motor
performance there exist certain systematic connection, with

certain ways of conformity, which can be deemed as
constituting a certain non-standing-for sense of mapping.
The aimed external performance can be organized on the
distal side, through the above systematic connection, by
manipulating the standing-ins of the (internal) mental
resources on the approximate side. Though it is complex,
that systematic connection can be managed in firm and
fixed ways, which is hopefully to achieve after sufficient
practice, that the (internal) motor control seems as if it acts
directly on the (external) motor performance.
The last reason is to balance the notion of representation.
In the literature of the extended mind, there have been
various notions of representation serving to explain human
interaction with environmental or cultural resources, such as
the notions of pushmi-pullyu representations (Millikan
1995), action-oriented representations (Clark 1997), and
florid representing (Dennett 2000). Because the notion of
in-supporting content apparently also involves agent’
s
interaction with those external resources, and because
representations are usually understood as vehicles of content,
it seems reasonable to claim that what is previously
regarded as in-supporting content is indeed a form of
content.
The in-supporting content, as above conceived, can be
seen as “
extended” in the senses that the organizing
activities make an agent to act as if she controls external
resources directly, and that the controlling activities unfold
in accordance with the need of the task to be performed.

Five Types of Human-Environment Merger
The following discussion exemplifies the notion of insupporting content with five types of human-environmentculture merger.

1. Biotechnological Matrix for Retrieving
Information via Accessing Devices

1293

Most examples of technology Clark (2003) discusses—e.g.
cell phone, clock, paper and board—serve to check
information that is readily made available by being stored in
the technologies under discussion. Our knowledge of the
current time, when the wristwatch is readily available,
presents in the form of using the wristwatch. What users
need in order to get knowledge, in turn, is to access the
technologies. Agents can know the current time, hence,
should their wristwatch be easily accessible. This is similar
to the fact that we know how to open a can by knowing how
to use a can-opener. Knowledge is carved in the form of
knowing how to use tools that are appropriate to the
required tasks. Although knowledge has been stored in the
technologies to be used, agents would not get it until they
are able to, and actually, manage to use the technologies in
question.
In order to answer the requested question, the agent must
organize relevant (internal) mental resources, through which
she can know what technological device is relevant to the
request, say, what time it is at the moment. Without such
knowledge she would be unable to decide what is the

appropriate technological device that she can access in the
light of reporting the current time. Furthermore, the agent
would also be unable to retrieve the requested information
until she organizes her know-how information of accessing
the device and reading the positions of the wristwatch’
s
long and short arms. The agent’
s activities of information
retrieval are organized into appropriate steps in the light of
achieving the requested information. The activity of
organizing (internal) mental resources—gathering all forms
of knowledge relevant to the request—serves to exploit the
needed external resources, namely, raising the arm wearing
a wristwatch and operating visual system, in order to read
specific information needed for the request. Thus, the
activity of organizing (internal) mental resources constitutes
the in-supporting content.

3. Biotechnological Matrix for Managing Tools

2. Perception-Body-Environment Integration

Tools, in general, are technological products, however
simple they are. Humans manage tools, according to Clark
(2003), with their biotechnological matrixes, which are
results of human-technology merger. The operation of a
biotechnological matrix that supports the handling of tools,
this paper argues, relies on the construction of in-supporting
content. This is evident primarily in the feeling that after
training to use tools they seemingly become a part of the
body. Consider hand-writing, with a pen on a paper.
Although the pen is physically not a part of the body,
proficiency makes the agent able to manage the pen as if it
is a bodily part like a digit. Proficiency is a result of
learning, consequently a psychological result. It even
allows conscious involvement in the tool-handling activity
in order to pursue excellence of writing quality. Proficiency
is also a result of organizing psychological resources, by
fine-tuning the motor system with subtle order of forces and
timing control. Visual experience seems to play a role, as
closing the eyes will make the performance more difficult.
Whatever the psychological resources being taken into
operation, however, the pen-user’
s attention rests less on the
ways in which her writing-hand or fingers move than on the
ways in which the pen performs. Proficiency in handwriting makes the pen-user to seemingly forget how her
physical body operates but focus attention on how the pen,
as her virtual bodily part, performs in pursuit of excellence.
The (internal) mental resources, including the conscious
efforts paid for the excellent performance, are organized in
support of writing beauty. Different forms of hand-writing
need different ways of hand-cum-pen control, and, to see
from a different angle, the (internal) mental resources
relevant to the hand-writing are organized in different ways.
Those different ways manifest different forms of insupporting content.

The extended mind does not always deal with the tasks of
information retrieval via accessing devices.
Using
technologies is not always as simple as reading the current
time from the wristwatch. The motor control of tools, for
example, is obviously not. An expert’
s activities usually do
not result from reflexive response of neural circuits. Just
doing it (by initiating certain pre-programmed routines) is
one thing, while doing it well is another. For example, in
order to gather good senses of bat-control (over hands and
the whole body), a baseball batter must keep intensive
practice before a competition. In that practice, the batter
must pay full attention of where and how the pitcher’
s ball
is arriving, with sufficiently sharp discrimination. The batcontrol is by no means a matter of “
reflexive response”
, as it
must respond to the unexpected trajectory of the pitcher’
s
ball with sufficient flexibility. Although it indeed requires
the immediate control for nearly-reflexive responses (to
initiate motor routines), flexibility in response to changeable
environmental factors cannot be managed without attention
and a good sense of bat-control. The internal side of the
extended mind, hence, indeed plays a significant role for a
good performance.
In order to hit the ball with the expectation that it grounds
on a good position in the baseball field, the batter requires a
variety of (internal) mental resources. He provides visual
experiences of activities in the sport field, especially the
arriving ball; he also makes available his motor intentions of
hitting the ball—hitting the ball to a position without tight
guard—and deals with motor planning of doing so. Such
mental resources are needed for a good performance. In
addition, when the pitcher just threw the ball, the batter
must provide visual guidance in support of his on-line motor
control. In the light of a good hit, there must be close and
dynamical interconnections between visual guidance and
motor control. All these are needed for the envisaged good
hit. Such mental resources are organized with subtle
interconnections and precise timing, thus forming certain insupporting content held in the batter’
s (dynamical)
controlling states.

4. Brain-Body-Environment Coupling

1294

Hands are regarded by Dennett (2000) as tools like rakes.
Feet, in the same vein, will be seen as tools, although hands
and feet have different functionality. It seems, as we may
infer, that organisms’management of their limbs will have
been fully understood in previous discussions concerning
the biotechnological matrix for managing tools. However, it
is not so. There is some new message concerning insupporting content immanent in the coupling between
bodily parts and the environment. A dolphin’
s tail well
merges with the vortex around it; a bird’
s feathers well
integrate with their surrounding airflow. The principles of
environmental factors and how organisms of a specific
species can smoothly manage those factors have been
“
taken account of”(in embodied forms) in the intricate ways
of those organisms’ bodily control. Phylogenesis or
epigenesis transforms organisms’capacity of bodily control
in a way that they can better cope with their surrounding
environmental factors. For such organisms, those principles
of environmental factors and how organisms cope with
those factors are embodied (internal) mental resources that

organisms specifically “
tailor”in support of their bodily
control. Through the course of phylogenesis or epigenesis
organisms accumulate and modify their (internal) mental
resources in support of their bodily control, in the light of
better performance (e.g. swimming or fly). Thus, organisms
have evolved or developed in-supporting content for their
flexible use.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported by National Science Council,
Taiwan, under grant NSC 93-2411-H-126-003.

References

5. Bio-(Non-Technological)Culture Merge

Clapin, H. (2002). (ed.) Philosophy of Mental
Representation. Oxford University Press.
Clark. A. (1995) Moving Minds, in Tomberlin (ed.).
Clark, A. (1997a). Being There. MIT Press.
Clark, A. (1997b) The Dynamical Challenge. Cognitive
Science, 21: 461-81.
Clark. A., (1999a), Visual Awareness and Visuomotor
Action, Journal of Consciousness Studies, 6(11-12):1-18.
Clark. A., (1999b), An Embodied Cognitive Science?,
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 3(9): 345-351.
Clark. A. (2001a), Mindware. Oxford University Press.
Clark. A. (2001b), Visual experience and motor action: Are
the bonds too tight? Philosophical Review, 110: 495-519.
Clark. A. (2002). Minds, Brains, and Tools, in Clapin
(2002). (ed.).
Clark. A. (2003). Natural-Born Cyborgs. Oxford U. Press.
Clark, A., and Chalmers, D. (1998). Analysis, 58:10-23.
Dennett, D. C. (1996). Kinds of Minds. Basic Books.
Dennett, D. C. (1998). Things about Things, Lisbon
conference on Cognitive Science.
Dennett, D. C. (2000). Making Tools for Thinking, in D.
Sperber (ed.), Metarepresentations. Oxford U. Press.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the Wild. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Millikan, R. G. (1995) Pushmi-pullyu representations, in
Tomberlin (ed.).
Preston, B. (1998) Cognition and Tool Use. Mind and
Language, 13:513-47.
Tomberlin, J. E. (1995) (ed.) Philosophical Perspectives: 9:
A.I., Connectionism And Philosophical Psychology,
Ridgeview Publishing Company.

A variety of cultural innovations have been tightly merged
with humans. This is done by learning, which makes
humans develop the in-supporting content to manipulate
such innovations. Its way of development is sophisticated
but quite straightforward: learning the conceptions
involving in culture, treating them as internalized cultural
resources, and when needed applying them directly or under
the constraint of appropriate rules. Although such resources
can be fully internalized (in conceptions), they remain
somewhat peripheral compared to the above-discussed inner
core of the extended mind. Standing in that core is the
organizing role of learning, and thereby cultural conceptions
can be learned. Humans learn various mathematical
conceptions, such as numbers and operations (for example,
addition, subtraction, product and division), and the largest
common divisor accompanied with the algorithm to achieve
it.
Humans manipulate mathematical operations, when
there is a need in living affairs, e.g. giving change. They
also learn rules of reasoning, such as natural deduction, by
applying them to judgments. Normative notions such as
justice, good, and moral maxims, help humans to develop
their sensibility of morality, and ultimately help to maintain
moral behavior in human society. Thus, a variety of insupporting contents serve to apply appropriate cultural
conceptions in the circumstances humans encounter.

Concluding Remarks
The present paper preserves a role for an inner core of the
extended mind. Two most outstanding ways in which the
extended mind unfolds are the human handling of tools and
the complex-and-tight coupling between an organism and
her immediate environment. It is a core that manages the
ways in which the in-supporting content works. It works by
organizing various (internal) mental resources to exploit
external resources in the light of supporting what is needed
in the agent’
s problem-solving (including body control)
performance. That role is salient in the human abilities of
maintaining flexible performance. Because it forms the insupporting content, that inner core of the extended mind is
privileged compared to the external resources of the
extended mind. The import of the extended mind’
s internal
side is consequently legitimized in embodiment but in a
rather discursive sense, in which the autonomy of
constituting cognition does not rest on the internal mind per
se but yields to the ways in which it supports its
performance.

1295

