UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of Affordances at the Semantics/Pragmatics Boundary

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8pw697m6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
Attardo, Salvatore

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of Affordances at the Semantics/Pragmatics Boundary
Salvatore Attardo (sattardo@cc.ysu.edu)
English Department, Youngstown State University
Youngstown, OH 44555 USA

Abstract

proposition. What this paper seeks to demonstrate is that,
while it is true that, in principle, any utterance can produce
an infinite number of implicatures, in practice the implicatures are severely constrained by the affordances of the lexical
items activated by the utterance and by encyclopedic knowledge (frames).
The paper will begin by considering the definition of “affordance” and by briefly reviewing the (scant) literature on
the subject in linguistics. It will then develop a linguistic
theory of affordances which has direct repercussions on the
explicature/impliciture debate and on current research based
on the “embodied meaning” approach (cognitive linguistics).

The paper introduces the concept of affordance within frame
semantics as a significant factor in the semantics/pragmatics
boundary issue. Specifically, it is argued that expansions of
literal meanings, which have been argued to be required for
the complete interpretation of sentences, are constrained and
guided by affordances, in contrast to the generally assumed
complete freedom of the pragmatic mechanisms used to generate the expansions. A first hint at some general properties of
affordances are presented, as well as some indications of the
significance of affordances.
Keywords: affordances; implicature; explicature; impliciture;
expansions; semantics; pragmatics.

The definition of affordances

This paper addresses the role of linguistic affordances in
the expansion of lexical meaning during sentence processing. It shows that affordances, which are a part of the framesemantic meaning of the lexical items, constrain and guide
the expansion process. Therefore the image of a passive semantic “said” that gets molded by pragmatic inferences needs
to be re-envisioned as a two-way street in which expansions
are guided and constrained by semantic data.

Developed in the field of vision by perceptual psychologists
(Gibson 1977, 1979), affordances are what the environment
of an “animal” offers as possibilities to the animal itself. Affordances are not limited to the visual aspect of reality. For
example,
if a terrestrial surface is nearly horizontal (instead of
slanted), nearly flat (instead of convex or concave), and
sufficiently extended (relative to the size of the animal)
and if its substance is rigid (relative to the weight of the
animal), the the surface affords support (Gibson 1979:
127)

The Semantics/Pragmatics Interface
Extensive debate on the semantics/pragmatics interface has
taken place recently, resulting in a significant shift from the
traditional view that semantics is equal to meaning minus
pragmatics and instead advocating an increasingly strong role
for pragmatics in determining what would be defined pretheoretically as the “literal meaning” of the sentence (cf.
the work by Recanati, Bach, Carston, and others on the issues of explicatures/implicitures; e.g., Recanati 1989, 1993,
1994, 1998, 2001, 2004a/b; Bach 1994a/b, 1999, 2001, 2004;
Carston 1988, 1997, 1999, 2000, 2002, 2004).
While the above reassessment was well needed and redressed an unacknowledged aspect of semantic/pragmatics
processing, a parallel influence of lexical/encyclopedic information on pragmatic inferencing has been neglected. In this
paper I will examine two aspects of this influence: the directing of pragmatic inferencing by lexical affordances and
the (partial) determination of implicatures by frame-based
knowledge. In short, I will show that not only does pragmatics affect the semantics of a sentence, but that the semantics
of a sentence constrains pragmatic inferencing.
This is a significant fact, because beyond the obvious sense
that the semantics of a sentence is the starting point of pragmatic inferencing, the inferencing can take virtually any path
and, given the proper context, any utterance can imply any

Gibson’s approach is one of the foundations of ecological
psychology. This is not the place to consider the psychology of perception debate around affordances. We will instead
consider linguistic treatments of affordances.
There has been little discussion of the relationship between
affordances and semantics. However, recent work has established some significant points for a linguistic theory of affordances. Contrary to the original definition of affordance,
they are not exclusively a feature of the referent, as would
follow from Gibson’s definition. 1 It has been established that
words activate affordances, including motor-perceptive ones,
see (Glover et al., 2004). In fact, a social-constructivist view
of affordances is possible: on the social nature of (some, perhaps many, but not all) affordances, see Noble (1991), Costall
(1995). I think an intensional definition of affordance, in
terms of beliefs and belief systems, is entirely possible and
actually necessary (for example, how could a referential theory of affordance explain the fact that swimming after eating
1
The reluctance to acknowledge the significance of language in
relation to affordances has been noted even among ecological psychologists, cf. Costall and Leuder (1998: 169).

169

affords potential death in Italian culture and nothing of the
sort in (some parts of) American culture?). Moreover, syntactic parsing is affected by affordances (Chambers et al. 2004).
In short, the main objection to a linguistic theory of affordances, i.e., that affordances are simply non-linguistic can be
rejected.
The most significant point, however, about a linguistic theory of affordances, is not so much that it is possible, but
rather that it is inscribed within frame-semantics (FS), a longstanding theory of semantic representation which originated
in psychology and was adopted in artificial intelligence and
from there into linguistics. There exists no comprehensive
treatment of FS that surveys the entirety of the literature. Useful surveys are Andor (1985), Raskin (1985a ch. 3), Attardo
(2001 ch. 3). Collections of papers were edited by Raskin
(1985b, 1986) and Lehrer and Kittay (1992). On Fillmore’s
FS see Petruck 1996). Besides artificial intelligence and psychology, FS is particularly popular in reading theory and has
recently been co-opted by cognitive linguistics. In an interesting turn, frame semantics has turned toward computational linguistics, see Fillmore et al. (2001) and Nirenburg
and Raskin (2004). 2
This is not the place to produce a summary of FS, so we
will be satisfied with a brief definition. A frame (a.k.a.,
script, MOP, schema, daemon, etc.) is an organized set of
labeled links among concepts which, taken together, describe
the meaning of a lexical item (though not all frames are necessarily tied to a lexeme). Thus the frame HAMMER includes in
its definition a link labeled “ISA” which connects it to TOOL,
and a link for “parts” which would connect it to HANDLE and
HEAD , etc. It should be noted that the meaning of a lexical
item in a frame goes far beyond a dictionary definition and
includes “encyclopedic” information.
Affordances can be defined as a sub-graph of each frame,
with particular emphasis on the object-of, instrument, and
agent slots (i.e., affordances typically are concerned with
what an object is used for, or what can be done to/with it, or
what it does). Artifacts are a particularly significant group of
lexical items because they come with a pre-specified “core”
affordance, i.e., the goal or purpose for which they were manufactured (hence a rake has a core affordance of raking, a
hammer of pounding, etc.) Of course, a hammer can be used
as a weight (it being an object with mass allows it to afford
weighting), etc. This explains why those psychological experiments that require lateral thinking (such as using a pair
of pliers as a weight) are typically difficult to visualize for
subjects, because they use non-core affordances of the object.
In other words, affordances, like frames come with “weights”
(i.e., saliency values).
Saliency is the term used, in frame-based semantics, to describe the fact that the components of a frame are not organized flatly, but that some are more “important” (i.e., salient)
than others. For example, in the frame for DOCTOR the feature HUMAN is less salient than CURES DISEASES. Affordances differ from saliency in that saliency is lexicalized (i.e.,
words come with a default setting), whereas affordances are

relative to the perceiver and/or situation. Needless to say,
saliency may change due to contextual pressure, but that does
not affect the point just made.

Application of Affordances to the
Semantics/Pragmatics boundary issue
One of the central points of contention in the recent debate
about the semantics/pragmatics boundary has been the issue
of expansions. In a nutshell, expansions are significant for
the boundary issue, because they show very clearly that the
“literal meaning” of a sentence cannot be determined without the use of implicatures, a pragmatic tool, and hence that
pragmatics encroaches on the turf of semantics.3
In what follows, I will argue that, while indeed expansions
are pragmatic phenomena, they are constrained and directed
by the lexical semantics of the sentence, and specifically by
the affordances of the lexical items.
Consider the following example, also quoted in Récanati
(2004b),
(1) He ran to the edge of the cliff and jumped. (Carston 1988:
165)
which Carston analyzes as follows:
The interpretation of (1) in most contexts of utterance
will include the understanding that he jumped over
the cliff although there’s no linguistic expression there
telling us this or requiring us to filli in a prepositional
phrase. The verb jump is not subcategorized for an
obligatory following PP. (. . . ) this is simply the most
natural interpretation to give. (Ibid.)
Carston does not explain why this is the most natural interpretation of jumped. This is peculiar, since of course jump
may occur without the understanding that one is jumping over
or off something, cf.
(2) The kids jumped on the trampoline all afternoon.
The answer of course lies not in the semantics of jump but
in the semantics of cliff. Coincidentally, we do have a description of the affordances of cliff by Gibson himself: “The
brink of a cliff affords falling off” (1977: 80).
Let us now turn to Récanati’s (2001: 85) claim of semantic indeterminacy for such constructions such as the possessive. Récanati claims that “John’s car (. . . ) means something
like the car that bears relation R to John, where R is a free
variable” (Récanati 2001: 85) is most likely in error, in the
sense that R is not a free variable, but is constrained by the
affordances of the frames involved. Consider the following
examples:
(3) John’s horse [= the horse owned by John; the horse ridden
by John; the horse bet upon by John]
(4) John’s comet [= the comet observed/discovered/studied
by John]

2

(note how ownership is excluded). Contrast now

Obviously the various approaches to FS differ in their implementation. These differences are irrelevant in this context.
The argument developed in the text hold in whatever formalism/representation of knowledge one cares to select.

3
Needless to say, this is not an uncontroversial claim. For example, Bach 2004 claims that the “said” need not include expansions.

170

(5) John’s hat [the hat owned/worn by John]

such examples as those mentioned by Carston, Récanati and
Bach. In other words, how common are those phenomena?
I would contend that they are in fact pervasive of linguistic
use, in fact much more so than one would think from the relevant literature. Consider the following example: the speaker
is a customer ordering a the made-to-order sandwich, at a local Italian deli, in December 2001. He is addressing a store
employee. The customer has made it clear that he is ordering the sandwich for himself (and a colleague, who is a silent
participant in the conversation)

with
(6) John’s chair [the chair owned/sat upon by John]
note how if John had clumsily sat on a hat (not his own, for
the sake of the argument), we could not describe it as John’s
hat.
A contrasting view to the one presented above is discussed
in (Sperber and Wilson 1998) who claim that

(8) You don’t have to wrap ‘em too good, cuz we’re gonna
eat them.

a word like ’open’ can be used to convey indefinitely
many concepts. It is impossible for all of these to be
listed in the lexicon. Nor can they be generated at a
purely linguistic level by taking the linguistic context,
and in particular the direct object, into account. It seems
reasonable to conclude that a word like ’open’ is often
used to convey a concept that is encoded neither by the
word itself nor by the verb phrase ’open X’ (Sperber and
Wilson 1998)

Ignoring the dialectal markers, we will focus exclusively on
the completely implicit expansion “right away” which specifies that the time of the action is the immediate future.6
Note that there is absolutely no trace of the expansion in
the utterance’s form, that the expansion is compulsory (otherwise the causal connection between the two sentences is
unjustified), and that a Gricean implicatural path can be provided: since the purpose of prototypical sandwiches is to be
eaten, specifying that one will eat a sandwich is redundant
and therefore violates (the maxim of) relevance. Therefore
we can trigger the search for an implicature, which would be
found in the claim that the eating of the sandwich will take
place in the near future (note how this takes care abductively
of the causal relation predicated by the utterance between the
two clauses).
An interesting note, is that the expansion seems to work
only in the immediate future sense, cf. the following (where
the impossible candidate for expansion is in square brackets)

while it is by and large true that many, perhaps most, concepts are not lexicalized (for example, things that irritate me),
and that often, perhaps most of the time, we mean things that
are not precisely determined, 4 as Sperber and Wilson argue,
nonetheless their claim is clearly an overstating of their position. Words come with a semantic baggage that restricts seriously the latitude of their applicability to concepts (cf. Travis
1997: 100 “Given words may have any of many semantics,
compatibly with what they mean.” My emphasis). It would be
hard to convey the concept of “cat” by using the word open,
barring prior stipulation. If Sperber and Wilson meant more
reasonably that open may convey indefinitely many nuances
of “opening,” the claim is either trivial (language always underdetermines reality) or wrong: there are numerous concepts
of “open” that simply cannot be conveyed by the word open
under normal circumstances. For example, the command to

(9) * You have to wrap ‘em good, cuz we’re gonna eat them
[later].
In this case, the FS explanation of the expansion seems to
falter, since one can both eat immediately or later (hence the
frame would consider both inferences acceptable). Consider
the following examples:

(7) Open the gate
cannot be taken to have been performed adequately if the gap
between the two sides of the gate is of one micron (since
the scale of gates and their manufacturing tolerance is such
that a gap of one micron is well within the parameters of a
closed gate). Thus open (under normal circumstances) may
mean only indefinitely many concepts that include the specification that whatever the kind of entity that prototypically
passes through the opening that is (to be) opened can do so
without excessive difficulty.5 This is far from the inferential
free for all that Sperber and Wilson seem to advocate.

(10) Customer to sales clerk in clothing store: “You don’t
have to wrap it, I am going to wear it. [right away]
6
Cf. also the following exchange, recorded on January 7th, 2002,
between myself and my daughter Gaia (then aged seven): me “Will
you give me a kiss?” Gaia “Yes, when I am ninety-nine.” It is
clear that developmentally these expansions are no problem even
for young children. An interesting issue is the possible hypothesis that all requests, unless explicitly postponed, are to be assumed
to have immediate value. However, as discussed in Attardo 1997,
this hypothesis is not tenable: all requests are slotted for the time
best compatible with the achievement of the ultimate perlocutionary
goal for which the request is being made. A request for a kiss is
made to receive a kiss, hence no ulterior goal is present and the time
of the request can be assumed to be “immediately.” Consider now
a request to marry someone. It would be unduly demanding to request that the marriage take place immediately. This is because the
goal of a request in marriage is for the marriage to take place, but
marriages are very complex businesses to organize, and hence can
be reasonably deferred for planning purposes.
Finally consider a request to deposit a check at the bank, uttered
at 12:29 pm, when the bank closes for lunch at 12:30. an agent
who would attempt fruitlessly to deposit the check at 12:30 would
be acting irrationally (assuming the agent is aware of the closing
times). A rational agent will postpone the depositing until the bank
is open.

Scope of expansions
We are now in the position of drawing a few conclusions from
the present discussion. But before we do so, we can address
an important issue, namely the degree of representativeness of
4
After all we communicate for practical purposes and therefore
when the degree of understanding we achieve is sufficient to accomplish what we set out to do we no longer bother to achieve further
precision, or to put it differently, we communicate for a purpose, not
to provide examples to truth-theoretic semanticists.
5
The details of the analysis of open may be debatable (and it is
not a complete analysis). The point remains.

171

How are Affordances Determined?

(11) * Customer to sales clerk in book store: “You don’t have
to wrap it, I am going to read it. [right away]

The first observation, is that there seems to be no “silver bullet” to determine the affordance of a frame. What I mean
is that there is no general heuristic rule that given an arbitrary frame would algorithmically determine what are the affordances thereof. For example, we saw that artifacts are a
special case, because they come generally with a built-in purpose (i.e., humans build artifacts teleologically) which is then
the affordance of the object (cf. knife
cut, hammer
pound, etc.) However, once we move outside of artifacts,
for example to natural objects, it is much harder to predict
the affordances of a non-manufactured object. For example,
“branch” affords floating, covering, burning, etc.
The second observation is that the theory of affordances
that I am proposing is dynamic, insofar as the affordance
weights are redistributed by context: in a shipwreck situation a wooden door affords floating, whereas in a “normal”
situation it affords “going through,” “closing, or “slamming,”
etc.
In fact, we can be more specific: both contextual pressure
from within the sentence (what is commonly referred to as cotext) and contextual pressure from the goals of the speakers
in uttering the sentence can affect the affordances of a lexical
item. So, “horse,” in the context of hunting, will afford “ride”,
while in the context of a butchery will afford “eat.” Consider
again example (1): the meaning of “jump” is constrained by
the affordances of CLIFF, which is an object from which you
jump off. Therefore, affordances depend on the contextual
pressure of the rest of the sentence in which they occur. To put
it differently, affordances are not fixed, they are determined in
part by context. Thus, a first conclusion is that the enrichment
of the semantics of sentences is constrained by the semantics
of the rest of the sentence.
Let us now move on to a slightly different example: suppose that an agent is cold and he/she picks up a branch, it will
afford burning. But if the agent is hot and the day is sunny,
the branch will afford cover. These cases are different from
the previous ones, insofar as they are independent of any linguistic presentation. In fact, they can be summed up as the
observation that affordances vary according to the goals and
plans of the agents. Once more, we reach the conclusion that
affordances are dynamic, albeit for different reasons than before.
The general mechanism governing affordance thematization seems to be that contextual pressure selects a sub-graph
of the frame according to the needs of the inferential engine.

(Although, (11) suddenly becomes fine if the antecedent is a
newspaper. Which shows that it is the frame that is affecting
the availability of the inference. Newspapers are readable “on
the spot,” books are not.)
However, further examples show that indeed the explanation suggested above is correct:
(12) I am going to pay my balance in full. [later, when it is
due]
(13) The proceedings will be closed by the business meeting.
[later, at the end of the conference.]
As examples (12) and (13) show it is possible to have the
implicature later or not immediately if the frame for the verb
includes a set time for the action to take place and we assume
that the time of speaking is not immediately adjecent to it.
The second example, was collected at a local bread/coffee
shop which sells specialty bagels, such as “blueberry,”
“sesame seeds,” and “onions.” One of their bagels is called
“everything.” It consists a bagel covered with every7 topping/flavoring used on the bagels. The scope of everything
is clearly limited. Consider that if the everything label were
taken literally, these bagels would be very strange indeed,
since they should include every object in the universe, including those very bagels as well, ad infinitum. Here the affordance of BAGEL delimits the universal quantifier to things
that people put on bagels and that go well together.
The mechanism whereby the delimitation is achieved is
of some interest. BAGEL affords being cooked (first boiled
and then baked), being eaten, and being covered/baked with
spices/condiments. These affordances interact interestingly,
because since the bagels are made to be eaten, only tasteful
combinations of flavors can be accepted (a blueberry/onion
bagel would not be very appetizing to the average American) and a fortiori no inedible toppings may be used, or objects that would not fit in an oven (which rules out “galaxy”
bagels—a seriously “everything” bagel would need to include
our galaxy, at the very least).
It is precisely the unremarkable nature of the exchanges
which attests that speakers are capable of processing these
inferences without any trouble or visible effort. We have seen
that these enrichment phenomena are much more widespread
than the literature, which tends to treat them as exceptions,
would lead us to believe. They are in fact very common and
I believe that affordances underlie most semantic amalgamation.

Do we need affordances?
Affordances are merely part of a full semantic treatment of
the meaning of a sentence, where semantics is understood
a frame semantics and not as mere truth-functional semantics. If that is the case, one may object that it is unnecessary or impractical to distinguish the affordances of a frame
from the full-blown frame, since any computational advantage that might derive from not having to process the entire
frame would be offset by having to extract the affordances
from them in the first place.8

Prolegomena to a Theory of Linguistic
Affordances
We have shown that affordances of lexical items constrain
and determine implicatures and related processes of expansion. We can now turn to the characterization of the linguistic
theory of affordances (which is distinct from the theory of
perceptual affordances). Given the extreme novelty of this
approach, anything that follows should be taken as tentative
and subject to revision.
7

8
Two referees make this argument. Affordances are a subgraph
of a frame, so in this sense, affordances are distinct from, say, a

Actually, not even that, it is mostly non-sweet flavors.

172

body with an orientation, provided by the placemen tof the
visual organs on the top). However, affordances have very
direct neuronal correlates: it has been shown that words activate affordances, including motor-perceptive ones (Glover et
al. 2004). In other words, mention of a word like “glass” activates the body’s motor system that will be needed to grasp
(an affordance) the glass with one’s hand.

The answer to this question is double: if our semantic theory is to be psychologically real, it will need affordances because humans (and animals) have them. It will need linguistic
affordances because natural languages have them. Moreover,
on a purely computational level, affordances allow a solution
(or maybe the glimpse of a solution) to the old frame problem.
In a nutshell, the problem is concerned with the fact that
if a robot is told to paint an object green, the color of the
object is changed, but not its position, whereas if the object
is moved (and not painted) its location changes, but not its
color. This knowledge is very easy for a human to assume
(and is in fact faintly ridiculous when stated explicitly) but
extremely difficult for a computer program to figure out. Solutions to the frame problems essentially assume that things
don’t change unless acted upon. This solves the computationally sticky issue of having to calculate the potentially infinite
set of things that don’t change. The frame problem is tied to a
much broader and more significant epistemological problem,
which can be very roughly summed up as “when is it OK
to stop computing the consequences of an action?” (this has
been amusingly called the Hamlet problem; Fodor 1987; on
affordances and the frame problem, see also Steedman 2002).
My suggestion here is that affordances tell us where to look
for change, in a broad sense, in the frame problem. Or, in
other words, they can tell us where to stop thinking: painting
affords coloring, hence this is the domain where change is
likely and about which one needs to be concerned. Painting
does not afford changes in shape or mass, and hence one need
not concern oneself with these issues.
It should be emphasized that I am not here trying to contribute to the literature on the frame problem, but rather arguing for the significance and relevance of an affordance-based
semantics, by showing that it may quite possibly have interesting broad theoretical consequences.
Finally, I want to briefly mention that affordances, when
properly conceptualized as partially socially constructed and
conventional, are completely compatible with the cognitive
program and this despite Lakoff (1987: 215-217) rejection of affordances from the domain of cognitive linguistics.
Lakoff’s argument only addresses the external referentialist
definition of affordances (which, it should be stressed, is the
original Gibsonian one). Within that definition, Lakoff’s argument are quite effective. But the redefinition presented
here (and implicit in most of the linguistic literature on affordances) sidesteps them entirely.
More significantly, however, a positive argument can be
made for the incorporation of affordances, and namely that
they end up being a very strong argument in favor of the embodied view of meaning. Cognitive linguistics has long argued that meaning is embodied, in the metaphorical sense
that it makes reference to the bodies of the speakers of the
language (e.g., the concepts of up and down depend on a

Acknowledgments
I would like to thank Victor Raskin and the four anonymous
reviewers who provided generous insight and suggestions.

References
Andor, Joszef. (1985). On the psychological relevance of
frames. Quaderni di Semantica. 6:2. 212-221.
Attardo, Salvatore. (1997). Locutionary and Perlocutionary Cooperation: The Perlocutionary Cooperative Principle. Journal of Pragmatics, 27: 753-779.
—. (2001). Humorous Texts. Berlin: Mouton De Gruyter.
Bach, Kent. (1994a). Semantic Slack. What is said and more.
In Savas L. Tsohatzidis (ed.) Foundations of Speech Act
Theory. London/New York: Routledge. 267-291.
-. (1994b). Conversational impliciture. Mind and Language,
9:2. 124-162.
-. (1999). The Semantics-Pragmatics Distinction: What It Is
and Why It Matters. In Ken Turner (ed.) The SemanticsPragmatics Interface from Different Points of View. Oxford: Elsevier. 65-84.
-. (2001). You don’t say? Synthese, 128. 15-44.
-. (2004). Minding the gap. In Bianchi (2004: 27-43).
Bianchi, Claudia, (ed.). (2004). The Semantics/Pragmatics
Distinction. Stanford, CA: CSLI.
Carston, Robyn. (1988). Implicature, Explicature, and truththeoretic semantics. In. Ruth M. Kempson (ed.) Mental
Representation: The interface between language and reality. Cambridge: Cambridge UP. 155-181.
-. (1997). Enrichment and loosening: complementary processes in deriving the proposition expressed? Linguistische
Berichte, 8, 103-127.
-. (1999). The semantics/pragmatics distinction: A view
from relevance theory. In: K. Turner (ed.) The Semantics/Pragmatics Interface from Different Points of View.
Amsterdam: Elsevier, 85-125.
-. (2000). Explicature and semantics. UCL Working Papers
in Linguistics. 12: 1-44. To appear in S. Davis and B.
Gillon (eds) Semantics: A Reader. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
-. (2002). Thoughts and Utterances: The Pragmatics of Explicit Communication. Oxford, Blackwell.
-. (2004). Truth-Conditional Content and Conversational Implicature. In Bianchi (2004: 65-100).
Chambers, Craig G. Michael K. Tanenhaus and James S.
Magnuson. (2004). Action and affordances in syntactic
ambiguity resolution. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 30:3. 687-696.

verb’s more general argument structure, which is also implicitly activated (see Mauner et al. 2002). This is an important issue, which
should be stressed, as it may lead to misunderstandings: affordances
are not separate and distinct from the contents of semantic frames;
they are part of, specifically, a sub-graph of, the frames. So it makes
no sense to oppose affordances and frames: all affordances are part
of a frame. The issue is that affordances are privileged parts of
frames, that seem to be salient or somehow more active than the
rest of the frame.

173

Costall, Alan (1995). Socializing affordances. Theory and
Psychology, 5:4. 467-481.
Costall, Alan and Ivan Leudar. (1998). On How we can Act.
Theory and Psychology, 8:2 165-171.
Fillmore, Charles J. and Collin F. Baker. (2001). Frame Semantics for Text Understanding. In Proceedings of WordNet and Other Lexical Resources Workshop, NAACL,
Pittsburgh, June, 2001.

Petruck, Miriam. (1996). Frame Semantics. In Jef Verschueren, Jan-Ola stman, Jan Blommaert, and Chris Bulcaen (eds.). Handbook of Pragmatics. Philadelphia: John
Benjamins.

Fodor, Jerry. (1987). Modules, Frames, Fridgeons, Sleeping
Dogs, and the Music of the Spheres. In Pylyshyn, Z.W.
(ed.) (1987), The Robot’s Dilemma: The Frame Problem
in Artificial Intelligence, Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Gibson, James J. (1977). The theory of affordances. In
Rovert Shaw and John Bransford (Eds.), Perceiving, Acting, and Knowing. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
-. (1979). The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Glover, Scott, David A. Rosenbaum, Jeremy Graham and Peter Dixon. (2004). Grasping the meaning of words. Experimental Brain Research. 154. 103-108.

—. (1986). Round Table Discussion on Frame/Script Semantics, Part 2. Quaderni di Semantica. 7:2.

Grice, Herbert Paul (1989). Studies in the Way of Words.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

-. (1998). Contextual domains. In Xabier Arrazola, Kepa
Korta, and Francis Jeffry Pelletier (eds.), Discourse, Interaction, and Communication. Dordrecht/Boston/London:
Kluwer. 25-36.
-. (2001). What is said. Synthese, 128. 75-91.
-. (2004a). Literal Meaning. Cambridge: Cambridge UP.
-. (2004b). ‘What is said’ and the Semantics/Pragmatics Distinction. In Bianchi (2004: 45-64).
Sperber, Dan and Deirdre Wilson. (1998). The mapping between the mental and the public lexicon. In P. Carruthers
and J. Boucher (eds) Thought and language. CUP, Cambridge. 184-200.

Raskin, Victor. (1985a). Semantic Mechanisms of Humor.
Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
—. (1985b). Round Table Discussion on Frame/Script Semantics, Part 1 Quaderni di Semantica. 6:2.

Récanati, François. (1989). The pragmatics of what is said.
Mind and Language, 4. 295-329. Rpt. in Steven Davis
(ed.) Pragmatics: A reader. New York, NY/Oxford: Oxford University Press. 1991. 97-120. [quotations are from
the reprinted version]
-. (1993). Direct Reference: From Language to Thought.
Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
-. (1994). Contextualism and anti-contextualism in the philosophy of language. In Savas L. Tsohatzidis (ed.) Foundations of Speech Act Theory. London/New York: Routledge.
156-166.

Lakoff, George. (1987). Women, Fire, and Dangerous
Things. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Lehrer, Adrienne and Eva Feder Kittay. (1992). Frames,
Fields, and Contrasts: New Essays in Semantic and Lexical Organization. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Mauner, Gail, Alissa Melinger, Jean-Pierre Koenig and Breton Bienvenue. (2002). When is schematic participant information encoded? Evidence from eye monitoring. Journal of Memory and Language. 47. 386-406.
Nirenburg, Sergei and Victor Raskin. (2004). Ontological
Semantics. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Noble, W. G. (1991). Ecological realism and the fallacy of
“objectification”. In Arthur Still and Alan Costall (eds.)
Against cognitivism : alternative foundations for cognitive
psychology. New York, NY: Harvester Wheatsheaf.

Steedman, Mark. (2002). Plans, affordances and combinatorial grammar. Linguistics and Philosophy. 25. 723-753.
Travis, Charles. (1997). Pragmatics. In B. Hale and C.
Wright (eds.) A Companion to the Philosophy of Language. 87-107.

174

