UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Meaning of Cause and Prevent: The Role of Causal Mechanism

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4307978r

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Smith, Andra M.
Sohrabi, Ahmad
West, Robert L.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Meaning of Cause and Prevent: The Role of Causal Mechanism
Clare R. Walsh (clare.walsh@plymouth.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of Plymouth
Plymouth, PL4 8AA, U.K.

Steven A. Sloman (Steven_Sloman@brown.edu)
Department of Cognitive & Linguistic Sciences, Brown University
Box 1978, RI 02912 USA

A second theory is based on the idea that a cause involves a
process of transmission or exchanges along a causal
pathway from cause to effect. This idea can be found in
generative theories of causation in philosophy (e.g., Dowe,
2000; Salmon, 1984) and psychology (e.g., Shultz, 1982).

Abstract
What is a cause? Some theories propose that A causes B if
A’s occurrence makes a difference to B’s occurrence in one
way or another. Other theories propose that A causes B if
some quantity or symbol gets passed in some way from A to
B. The aim of our studies is to compare these theories’ ability
to explain judgments of causation and prevention. We
compare judgments for causal paths that involve a
mechanism, i.e., a continuous process of transmission or
exchange from cause to effect, against paths that involve no
mechanism but nevertheless a change in the cause brings
about a change in the effect. We describe three experiments
which show that people are more likely to make attributions
of causation when there is a mechanism but attributions of
prevention when the mechanism is interrupted.

“Make a Difference” Theories of Causation

Causal Attribution

A number of theories of causation incorporate the notion
that a cause is something that makes a difference to the
effect, without regard to how the effect is brought about.
According to Hume, people infer causation from the regular
co-occurrence of distinct events (Hume, 1739/1960) even
though this practice cannot ultimately be justified. The
great problem of induction according to Hume is that past
experience cannot be used to justify prediction without
incoherence or circularity. Nevertheless, past experience is
all we have and is, therefore, what we use.
More recent proposals about how we know that causes
make a difference to their effects include counterfactual and
manipulability theories. They also assume that causation
can be judged without appealing to the mode of operation of
a specific causal mechanism. Counterfactual theories of
causation propose that causation can be defined in terms of
a counterfactual conditional. In other words, it is the case
that “event c caused event e” provided that “if c hadn’t
occurred then e wouldn’t have occurred” in the closest
possible world to our own (e.g., Lewis, 1973). Using a
related idea, manipulability theories propose that “event c
causes event e” provided that if I manipulate or intervene in
a particular way that involves changing c, then this should
change e also (e.g., Halpern & Pearl, 2001; Pearl, 2000).
Rather than relying on the notion of a closest possible
world, Pearl (2000) proposes that an intervention to change
“c” leads to a counterfactual in which the consequences of
“c” are changed but its causes are left unchanged.
These approaches capture many of our intuitions, for
example, it seems to make sense to say that the alarm not
going off caused me to be late, provided that if the alarm
had gone off I wouldn’t have been late. Despite this, several
major difficulties have emerged for counterfactual theories
over the years. One important difficulty is that they can lead
to the wrong prediction in cases where the outcome is overdetermined, that is, where more than one cause occurred and
each alone would have been sufficient to produce the
outcome. One of these situations occurs in cases of “preemption.” For example, imagine both Billy and Suzy throw

Causal attributions are central to our ability to make sense
of the world and to explain events as well as to plan for the
future. Events tend to be preceded by many influences and,
in one sense of the word, each is a “cause”; however, in
making a judgment, people are selective in choosing only
some events as causal. For example, if I slip on the
pavement, I may attribute cause to the fact that there was
ice-cream on the pavement or to the person that dropped it
there. I am unlikely to attribute cause to other events in the
causal sequence, to the fact that I bought ice cream or to my
decision to follow that particular route.
Our aim is to examine how people decide whether an
event caused or prevented a particular outcome. The answer
for “cause” and “prevent” may or may not be the same. The
statement “c prevented e” may be equivalent in meaning to
“c caused not e” as Goldvarg & Johnson-Laird (2001)
argue. However, the statements may differ in both their
semantics and their pragmatic implications. For instance,
people may consider different possibilities in making
judgments regarding each (Mandel & Lehman, 1996).
Attributions of causation and prevention may also be
distinct in the type of linkage they require between events.
One theory of cause is based on the idea that a cause is
something which makes a difference to the effect. This idea
is found in regularity theories (Hume, 1739/1960) as well as
probabilistic (Reichenbach, 1938; Suppes, 1970),
counterfactual (e.g., Lewis, 1986) and manipulability
theories of causation (e.g., Pearl, 2000; Woodward, 2003).
2331

rocks at a bottle and both their throws are right on target.
Billy throws first, and his rock hits the bottle and it breaks.
In this case, the counterfactual “if Billy hadn’t thrown the
rock, then the bottle wouldn’t have broken” is false even
though we might say that Billy caused the bottle to break.
Lewis has recently reformulated his theory to deal with
problems such as this one (Lewis, 2000). He argues that c
causes e if an alteration to c would have led to an alteration
of e. If Billy’s rock had been lighter then the shattering of
the bottle would have been different, whereas if Suzy’s rock
had been lighter, there would be no change to the shattering.
Another recent proposal is that people may evaluate cause
using counterfactuals that hold certain events constant
(Halpern & Pearl, 2001; Hitchcock, 2001; Woodward,
2003). One such counterfactual concerns whether the effect
would occur if other causes are assumed to not have
occurred. For example, if we maintain that Suzy’s rock
didn’t hit the bottle, then if Billy hadn’t thrown, the bottle
wouldn’t have broken. It turns out that this is a necessary
but not sufficient counterfactual for assessing cause (cf.
Woodward, 2003).

Generative Theories of Causation
In contrast to the theories described above, generative
theories pay greater attention to the process by which the
effect occurs. In this sense, the cause is believed to generate
the effect. Causation involves a transmission along a causal
pathway (Salmon, 1984; Shultz, 1982) and may involve the
exchange of some conserved physical quantity (Dowe,
2000). For example, the reason that we believe that Billy’s
rock caused the bottle to break may be that “objecthood” is
conserved along the trajectory of Billy’s rock which then
transmits a force that breaks the bottle. Suzy’s rock is not
the cause of the bottle breaking because no such force is
transmitted along the path from Suzy’s throw to the bottle
breaking.
Prevention is problematic for generative theories because
if A prevents B, then B does not occur and hence there is no
continuous process connecting the cause and effect. A
possible fix is to assume that prevention is qualitatively
different from causation. Dowe (2000) proposed that A
prevented B if there was a causal interaction between A and
another process x and if A hadn’t occurred then x would
have caused B.

Judgments of Causation and Prevention
Despite extensive study, there is no consensus about
whether regularity theories or generative theories best
describe how people make causal attributions (Baillargeon,
Kotovsky & Needham, 1995; Cheng, 1997; Lewis, 2000;
Schultz, 1982). Shultz (1982) provided evidence that even
young children demand an understanding of a generative
transmission process to attribute cause. He showed that
children make causal attributions based on inferences about
a causal mechanism more readily than based on temporal or
spatial contiguity. On the other hand, psychological studies
have shown that generating a counterfactual conditional
about a possible cause increases attribution to that event
(Wells & Gavanski, 1989). Research also suggests that

judgments of causation and prevention may rely on different
information. For example, judgments of causation may
depend on the co-variation of cause and effect, whereas
judgments of prevention may depend more on the
generation of a counterfactual conditional (Mandel &
Lehman, 1996).
Our main aim is to address the question of how people
make judgments of both causation and prevention by
examining cases that involve a causal mechanism (i.e., a
clear process of generative transmission) and ones without a
causal mechanism. If people do attribute cause without
appealing to a mechanism, then a second aim of our studies
was to examine the kinds of counterfactual possibilities that
they will consider. For this reason, we used scenarios
involving pre-emptive causation.

Experiment 1
We generated two scenarios based on classic examples of
late pre-emption in the philosophical literature (cf. Halpern
& Pearl, 2001). Each had a similar structure and included a
pre-emptive cause. The ‘causation scenario’ included an
actual mechanism going from cause to effect, that is, a stone
is thrown, it hits a bottle and the bottle breaks:
There is a bottle on the wall. Billy and Suzy are
standing close by with stones and each one throws a
stone at the bottle. Their throws are perfectly on target.
Billy happens to throw first and his reaches the bottle
before Suzy’s. The bottle breaks.
The scenario was followed by two questions:
Did Billy cause the bottle to break?
Did Suzy cause the bottle to break?
The ‘prevention scenario’ involved a similar causal structure
to the first except that the links were preventive and hence
did not involve a mechanism or transfer from cause to
effect, that is, a ball is caught and as a result the bottle
doesn’t break:
There is a bottle on the wall. Frank and Jane are
standing close by. While they are there someone else
aims to throw a ball at the bottle. The aim is perfectly
on target. Frank and Jane both step in front of the
bottle. Frank happens to step in front of Jane and
catches the ball. The bottle doesn't break.
Again, the scenario was followed by two questions, this
time based on prevention:
Did Frank prevent the bottle from breaking?
Did Jane prevent the bottle from breaking?
Recent formulations of counterfactual theories developed by
Lewis (2000) and Halpern and Pearl (2001) were designed
to ascribe causation to Billy and not Suzy. On the
assumption that “A prevents B” means the same as “A
causes not B”, the theories make the parallel prediction for
prevention, ascribing prevention to Frank and not Jane.
According to generative mechanism theories, people should
also ascribe causation to Billy but not Suzy. In this case,
there is a clear mechanism linking the action (Billy’s throw)
to the outcome (the bottle breaking). On Dowe’s (2000)
account, people should also ascribe prevention to Frank but
not Jane, although the reason is different. In this case, the

2332

action (Frank’s catch) interacts with the marble and it is
natural to infer that if Frank had not caught the marble, the
bottle would have broken. Our aim in this study was to
examine whether people’s attributions are consistent with
the predictions of these recent theories.
One hundred participants were recruited mainly through a
campus-based electronic newspaper and they completed the
study on-line. They received both scenarios and responded
to the questions by answering “yes” or “no”.
As Table 1 shows, the results for the causation scenario
strongly corroborate the predictions of the mechanism and
counterfactual views. A large majority (90%) attributed
causation to Billy but not Suzy.
For the prevention scenario, the majority of participants
also attributed prevention to the first actor only, i.e., Frank
but not Jane (60%). The result is consistent with the
predictions of recent counterfactual theories and also with
Dowe’s account that prevention may involve an interaction
with a potential cause.
Table 1: The percentage of “yes” responses to the four
questions in experiment 1
Causation
Scenario

Prevention
Scenario

First actor only
(Billy / Frank)

90

60

Second actor only
(Suzy / Jane)

1

6

Both actors

5

23

Neither

4

11

However, the percentage of participants who made an
attribution to the first actor only was significantly lower in
the prevention scenario than in the causation scenario
(McNemar Test, p < .001). For the prevention scenario, a
large minority (23%) ascribed prevention to both actors.
This result is not predicted by Dowe’s mechanism theory or
by recent counterfactual theories which would predict that
only the first actor prevented the outcome. One explanation
for this result is that some people may understand
prevention not just as an actual interruption to a causal
mechanism (Frank actually caught the ball) but rather as a
potential interruption to that mechanism (Jane would have
caught the ball). The ball would have transmitted a force
breaking the bottle, if Frank and Jane had not intervened to
block that process. People often talk about prevention in the
sense of having the potential to block some event even if
that event does not occur (e.g., the lock is preventing the
bike from being stolen).

In our second experiment, we further examine how people
understand causation and prevention by asking questions
about both in a scenario that involves a causal mechanism
and one involving an interruption to a causal mechanism.

Experiment 2
We constructed two scenarios based on the ones in the
previous experiment. However, in this case, we asked the
question about cause and prevention in each case. As before
the first scenario contained an actual causal mechanism
going from the action to the outcome:
There is a coin standing on its edge at the end of the
table. It is unstable and it is about to fall over and land
on tails. Billy and Suzy are standing close by with
marbles. Each one rolls their marble down the table
towards the coin. Their rolls are perfectly on target and
each one will hit the coin at exactly the same spot,
knock it the other way, and the coin will land on heads.
Billy happens to roll first and his marble reaches the
coin before Suzy’s. The coin falls over and lands on
heads.
After reading the scenario, participants answered the
following four questions. Half of them answered the cause
questions first and half answered the prevention questions
first.
Did Billy cause the coin to land on heads?
Did Suzy cause the coin to land on heads?
Did Billy prevent the coin from landing on tails?
Did Suzy prevent the coin from landing on tails?
The second scenario was similar but it contained no actual
causal mechanism going from the action to the effect:
There is a coin standing on its edge at the end of the
table. It is unstable and it is about to fall over and land
on heads. Frank and Jane are standing close by with
marbles. While they are there someone else rolls a
marble toward the coin. The roll is perfectly on target
and it will hit the coin, knock it over and the coin will
land on tails. Frank and Jane both reach out and put
their hands in front of the coin. Frank happens to put
his hand in front of Jane’s and he catches the marble.
The coin falls over and lands on heads.
After reading the scenario, participants answered the same
four questions as after the ‘mechanism’ scenario. Again,
half of them answered the cause questions first and half
answered the prevention questions first.
Did Frank cause the coin to land on heads?
Did Jane cause the coin to land on heads?
Did Frank prevent the coin from landing on tails?
Did Jane prevent the coin from landing on tails?
Recent counterfactual theories make the same prediction for
both scenarios. They predict that people should attribute
causation and prevention to the first actor only. According
to Dowe’s mechanism theory people should attribute
causation when there is a mechanism producing the
outcome but not when the mechanism is blocked. In
contrast, they should attribute prevention when the
mechanism is blocked but not when it produces the outcome

2333

Hence, people should make attributions of causation but not
prevention to Billy in the mechanism scenario and
attributions of prevention but not causation to Frank in the
mechanism-blocked scenario.
Fifty seven participants were again recruited through a
campus-based electronic newspaper and completed the
study on-line. They read both scenarios and in each case,
they responded to each of the four questions by answering
“yes” or “no”. The order of presentation of the scenarios and
the order of cause and prevention questions were
randomized.
As Table 2 shows, the majority of participants attributed
causation to the first actor only in the mechanism scenario
where there was a transmission along the pathway from
cause (Billy throws a marble) to effect (the coin lands on
heads; 74%). However, in the mechanism-blocked scenario
when there was no continuous process from cause (Frank
catches the marble) to effect (the coin lands on heads), the
majority of participants attributed causation to neither
(77%). The percentage of participants who made an
attribution to the first actor only was significantly lower in
the mechanism scenario than in the mechanism-blocked
scenario (McNemar Test, p < .001). The results support the
predictions of mechanism theories that causal judgments
depend on the presence of a causal mechanism.
In contrast, the pattern of prevention attributions was
similar for the mechanism and mechanism-blocked
scenarios. Approximately half of the participants attributed
prevention to the first actor only (54% and 52% for the
mechanism and no-mechanism scenarios respectively, and
these did not differ significantly, p > .9). These judgments
conform to the predictions of recent counterfactual theorists.
Table 2: The percentage of “yes” responses to the eight
questions in experiment 2
Mech.

Mech.

Cause
question

Prevent
question

Mech
blocked
Cause
question

Mech
blocked
Prevent
question

74

54

18

52

0

4

0

0

Both actors

10

12

5

14

Neither

16

30

77

34

First actor
only
Billy/Frank
Second
actor only
Suzy/Jane

In contrast to the previous experiment, where the largest
minority attributed prevention to both actors, in this case
approximately one third of participants attributed prevention
to neither actor regardless of whether a mechanism was

present (30%) or not (34%). The main difference between
the two studies is that in the previous study the prevention
scenario ended with no change of state, the bottle remained
unbroken, whereas in this experiment, the scenarios end
with an outcome different from the original state, i.e., the
coin was spinning but in the end lands on heads. In this
case, the outcome may be attributed to a different
mechanism, namely the spinning of the coin, and hence the
actors may be perceived to have played a lesser role and are
thus less likely to be assigned any kind of causal role.
One alternative explanation for the results is that
attributions of causation depend not on the presence of a
mechanism but rather on a change to the default outcome.1
In the mechanism scenario, the marble hitting the coin
changes the outcome from tails to heads. In contrast in the
mechanism-blocked scenario, the marble doesn’t hit the
coin and as a result, there is no change to the direction of the
coin’s fall. We carried out our third experiment to test this
explanation.

Experiment 3
In our third experiment, we aimed to test whether causation
depends on a causal mechanism or merely a change to the
outcome. For this reason, we constructed a scenario without
a causal mechanism linking the action to the outcome but
one which did involve a change to the final outcome. The
scenario is similar to the mechanism-blocked scenario used
in Experiment 2 but rather than blocking the marble, the
action involved lifting a book which was blocking the path
to the coin:
There is a coin wobbling on edge at the end of the
table. It is about to fall over and land on tails. There is
a book directly in front of the coin. Max and Anne are
standing close by. While they are there someone else
rolls a marble toward the coin. The roll is perfectly on
target and in the absence of the book it will hit the coin,
knock it over and the coin will land on heads. Max and
Anne both reach out to lift the book. Max happens to
reach in front of Anne and he lifts the book. The marble
hits the coin, and the coin falls over and lands on
heads.
After reading the scenario, participants answered the
following four questions. Half of them answered the cause
questions first and half answered the prevention questions
first.
Did Max cause the coin to land on heads?
Did Anne cause the coin to land on heads?
Did Max prevent the coin from landing on tails?
Did Anne prevent the coin from landing on tails?
If attribution of cause depends on a change in the outcome
and not on a causal mechanism, then we expect people to
attribute cause to the first actor (Max) in this scenario. In
contrast, if a mechanism from cause to effect is important in
attributing cause, then we expect that people will again tend
not to attribute cause to Max.

2334

1

We thank Jim Woodward for suggesting this explanation.

Sixty-eight participants (recruited as in the previous
experiments) read the scenario and responded to each of the
four questions by answering “yes” or “no”.

Table 3: The percentage of “yes” responses to
the eight questions in experiment 3
Mechanism
unblocked
Change in the
Outcome

Mechanism
unblocked
Change in the
Outcome

Cause question

Prevent question

First actor only
(Max)

34

47

Second actor only
(Anne)

0

6

Both actors

4

6

Neither

62

41

As Table 3 shows, the majority of participants did not
attribute causation to either actor (62%). The result supports
the predictions made by mechanism theories. Even when
there is a change to the default outcome, in the absence of a
mechanism, people are less likely to make a causal
inference.
In real life, most cases of prevention do not involve a
change to the outcome. It is perhaps unsurprising then that
the pattern of results for the prevention question was quite
close to that found in Experiment 2. Approximately half of
the participants judged the first actor only to have prevented
the outcome (47%) and more participants judged the first
actor to have prevented than to have caused the outcome
(McNemar, Test, p < .04). Again as in Experiment 2, a large
minority believed that neither participant prevented the
outcome (41%). The results suggest that a change in the
outcome is not important for prevention judgments.

General Discussion
The results of our experiments suggest that cause and
prevent may not have symmetric meanings. Judgments of
whether A caused B tend to depend on the presence of a
causal mechanism. In contrast, for the majority of people,
judgments of prevention conform to the predictions of
recent counterfactual theories (Halpern & Pearl, 2001;
Lewis, 2000). But in certain cases, prevention may be
attributed by virtue of a potential interruption to a causal
mechanism.

In our first experiment, we compared judgments on two
scenarios involving pre-emption; in one an action produced
an outcome and in the other an action prevented an
outcome. The results showed that people made different
attributions in each case. When the action produced the
outcome, there was a clear causal mechanism connecting the
cause (the stone is thrown) to the outcome (the bottle is hit
and breaks) and people view the actor as causal in this case.
Also, when the action interrupted the mechanism, the
majority attributed prevention to the first actor but not the
actor who was pre-empted. The results corroborate both
Dowe’s mechanism and recent counterfactual theories.
However, a large minority viewed both actors as preventors,
suggesting that they understand prevention to mean a
potential interruption to a causal mechanism.
The results of our second experiment suggested that both
mechanisms and counterfactuals are important. We
constructed two scenarios, one with a causal mechanism
connecting the cause to the effect and one in which a causal
mechanism is blocked, and we asked causation and
prevention questions about each. The results showed that
causation questions were strongly sensitive to the presence
of a causal mechanism corroborating the predictions of
mechanism theories but not counterfactual theories.
Participants attributed a cause to the actor only when the
scenario involved a causal mechanism. In contrast, many
participants attributed prevention without regard for whether
a mechanism was present or was blocked. In the second
experiment, fewer attributions were made to both actors,
perhaps because an actual outcome was produced by
another mechanism in this case.
In our third experiment, we ruled out an alternative
explanation for our results, namely that attributions of
causation depend not on a causal mechanism but rather on a
change to the outcome. We constructed a scenario in which
no mechanism linked the action to the outcome but the
action facilitated a mechanism that did change the outcome.
The majority of participants judged that the action did not
cause the outcome supporting the view that it is a
mechanism rather than a change to the outcome that is
necessary for attributions of causation. Overall, the results
suggest that an understanding of causal mechanisms as well
as how people generate counterfactuals is necessary for a
complete theory of the meaning of causation and prevention.
The results suggest further questions for psychological
research. First, we need a greater understanding of how
people reason with different types of causal mechanism. The
examples used in our experiments all involved physical
relations. But many causal relations are not of this nature.
For example, causation can involve social influence or
people may have reasons which lead them to carry out a
particular action. Furthermore, physical mechanisms can
involve a transmission process involving obvious physical
contact between cause and effect as in our examples of the
marble hitting the coin, or the transmission process may be
invisible if wind from a fan caused the coin to fall (Shultz,
1982). In some cases the mechanism may be unknown.

2335

Indeed, the very notion of mechanism requires further
elaboration. Schaffer (2000) offers multiple examples of
causes that disconnect a cause from its effect. For instance,
pulling a trigger causes a gun to shoot through
disconnection: It moves a part (the sear) that otherwise
would inhibit a spring from uncoiling, and the action of the
spring causes an explosion that propels the bullet. For a
mechanism theory to be viable, it must define people’s
understanding of mechanism to include such cases.
Our results suggest that judgments of causation may be
highly sensitive to the kinds of questions that people are
asked (Hilton, 1990). People may make different judgments
depending on whether they are to decide if something
caused or enabled an outcome (Goldvarg & Johnson-Laird,
2001) or when they are asked to make social judgments of
blame or responsibility. The results may also vary
depending on the framing of the question. For example, we
may respond differently when asked if something is “the
cause” or “a cause”.
The task we posed to participants was essentially
linguistic, asking them whether the verb “cause” or
“prevent” was an appropriate characterization of a scene.
We, like everyone else, assume that such linguistic
judgments derive from a conception of the scene. If we are
right that the notion of causal mechanism is necessary to
explain how people attribute cause, then that suggests that
people have access to a notion of mechanism that could be
critical in a variety of other conceptual tasks as well, like
explanation, induction, and decision making (cf. Sloman,
2005).
Causal judgments are ubiquitous in our everyday thinking
as well as in domains ranging from science to the law. We
suggest some steps toward the development of an
understanding of this process.

Acknowledgments
We thank Denis Hilton, Joe Halpern, Rui da Silva Neves
and Jim Woodward for discussions on this topic. This
research was supported by NASA grant NCC2-1217 to
Steven Sloman.

References
Baillargeon, R, Kotovsky, L. & Needham, A. (1995). The
acquisition of physical knowledge in infancy. In D.
Premack & D. Sperber (Eds), Causal cognition: A
multidisciplinary debate. (pp.79-116). New York, NY,
US: Clarendon Press/Oxford University Press.
Cheng, P.W. (1997). From covariation to causation: a causal
power theory. Psychological Review, 104, 367-405.

Dowe, P. (2000). Physical Causation. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Goldvarg, Y. & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2001) Naive
causality: a mental model theory of causal meaning and
reasoning. Cognitive Science, 25, 565-610.
Halpern, J.Y. & Pearl J. (2001). Causes and Explanations: A
Structural-Model Approach – Part I: Causes. In
Proceedings of the Seventeenth Conference on
Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (pp. 194-202). San
Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Hilton, D. J. (1990). Conversational processes and causal
explanation. Psychological Bulletin, 107, 65–81.
Hitchcock, C. (2001). The intransitivity of causation
revealed in equations and graphs. Journal of Philosophy,
98, 273-299.
Hume, D. (1960). A treatise of human nature. Oxford:
Clarendon. (Originally published in 1739).
Lewis, D. (1973). Counterfactuals. Oxford: Blackwell.
Lewis, D. (1986). Philosophical Papers: Volume II. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Lewis, D. (2000). Causation as influence. In J. Collins, N.
Hall, and L.A. Paul (Eds.), Causation and
Counterfactuals. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Mackie, J.L. (1974). The cement of the universe: a study of
causation. Oxford: Clarendon.
Mandel, D. R. & Lehman, D. R. (1996). Counterfactual
thinking and ascriptions of cause and preventability.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70, 450463.
Michotte, A.E. (1963). The perception of causality. New
York: Basic.
Pearl, J. (2000). Causality: Models, Reasoning and
Inference. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Reichenbach, H. (1938). Experience and prediction.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Salmon, W. (1984). Scientific Explanation and the Causal
Structure of the World. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Schaffer, J. (2000).
Causation by disconnection.
Philosophy of Science, 67, 285-300.
Shultz, T.R. (1982). Rules of causal attribution.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development, 47, 1-51.
Sloman, S. A. (2005). Causal models: How people think
about the world and its alternatives. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Suppes, P. (1970) A probabilistic theory of causality. Acta
Philosophica Fennica, 24. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Woodward, J. (2003). Making Things Happen: A Theory of
Causal Explanation. New York: Oxford University Press.

2336

