UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of Interface Style in Planning during Problem Solving

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5b59r9z7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Tabachneck-Schijf, Hermina
van Nimwegen, Christof
van oostendorp, Herre

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of Interface Style in Planning during Problem Solving
Christof van Nimwegen (christof@cs.uu.nl)
Herre van Oostendorp (herre@cs.uu.nl)
Hermina Tabachneck-Schijf (h.schijf@cs.uu.nl)
Center for Content and Knowledge Engineering, Utrecht University
Padualaan 14, De Uithof, 3584CH, Utrecht, The Netherlands
Abstract
It is argued that support from an interface during problem solving can make interaction easier. Interfaces often display relevant information, making recall unnecessary and relieving
working memory, called externalization. However, externalizing information might not necessarily instigate planning, understanding and knowledge acquisition from the user. In previous
studies, the effects of externalizing information in an interface
not always converged. We describe an experiment investigating
the influences of (1) inducement to plan and (2) externalizing
information on problem solving. Contrary to others’ findings,
no advantages of externalization were found. Instead, NOT externalizing (requiring internalization) yielded advantages and
facilitated planning from the user.
Keywords: Interface; knowledge acquisition; screen representation; planning; problem solving; externalization

Introduction
Many cognitive tasks are computer-based nowadays. We
explore multimedia environments, and use computers in education, entertainment, office tasks and many other domains.
Computer interfaces are often complex, and applications can
have hundreds of functions. Designing the right computer
interface for the right task can be tricky and this gave rise to a
whole domain of human computer interaction research. “Usability” became a buzzword. One notion that came from usability studies is the importance of “minimizing user memory
load“, and a common recommendation is that users should
interact on basis of recognition rather than recall. In practice
this means that information, e.g., text, objects, actions and
options should be made available only when a user could
need them for a task, while hiding non-relevant information:
externalization of information. By externalization we mean
providing relevant information on the interface, making recall
of certain knowledge unnecessary, thus relieving working
memory. On the contrary, when information is not externalized, certain task information is less directly available and
needs to be internalized, i.e. inferred and stored in memory
before it can be used. If this occurs, an already constructed
plan is available for subsequent use. There are many different
types of information that can be externalized. As examples,
think of interfaces that “take the user by the hand” by limiting
choices and providing feedback (e.g. Van Oostendorp & De
Mul, 1999), such as greying-out menu items that cannot be
used in a particular context, thus offering a context-sensitive
interface with just “possible” actions. This type of externalization prevents errors and limits search. For example in

Word, one cannot select “paste” from the “edit”-menu, when
nothing is copied or cut first. “Paste” is shown in grey, indicating that the command exists, but you cannot now use it.
Wizards externalize the solution path. Help-options externalize the fact that extra information on a topic is available. That
externalization is considered helpful is reflected in various
GUI-guidelines, e.g., “visibility status”, “feedback”, “grey out
inapplicable items”, “provide help-functions”.
But is externalization always helpful? When looking more
specifically at certain problem solving tasks, planning and
learning are thought to be essential factors. One could argue
that during computer-based problem solving, externalizing all
information can lead to “experiential cognition” (Norman,
1993): users are not triggered to look for underlying rules,
form plans, or learn. In contrast, externalizing less information may trigger a user to engage in “reflective cognition”, i.e.
to plan and learn more actively.
This paper focuses mainly on the users’ behavior that two
interface styles (externalization and internalization) provoke,
and specifically on the amount of planning and reasoning
from the user’s side.
In literature, traditionally the role of external representations has been underestimated. The pioneering work of Gibson (1979) has stimulated better analysis of the interaction
between internal and external representations. Norman (1988)
proposed the idea that knowledge might be as much in the
world as it is in the head. He pointed out that the information
embedded in technological artifacts (such as interfaces) was
as important to task achievement as the knowledge residing in
the mind of the individual who used that artifact. Norman
argued that well-designed artifacts that externalized information as to their functions could reduce users’ memory load,
while badly designed artifacts increased the knowledge demands made on the user. The message stemming from this
distinction drew attention to the implications that design decisions could have. Larkin (1989), for instance, considered the
role played by differences in external displays in cognitive
problem-solving, finding that externalizing information, enabling ‘display based problem solving’, helped people recover
from interruptions in work. Note that Larkin’s most revealing
display externalized all the pieces of the solution path that had
been accomplished, enabling a quick pick-up after a withintrial interruption. Tabachneck-Schijf, Leonardo and Simon
(1997) created a model in which small individual pieces from
different representations were linked on a sequential and temporary basis to form a reasoning and inferencing chain, using
visually encoded information recalled to the Mind's Eye from

2271

ternalization yielded better knowledge of the rules afterwards. Internalization subjects also showed more planful behavior by avoiding dead-end problem-states far better. Furthermore, this better knowledge was still evidenced eight
months later in a re-run of the experiment. In other words, not
at any moment did externalization yield advantages, only
internalization did. This in itself might be not so strange,
since there is ample evidence that discovering something
yourself can facilitate learning (Carroll, 1990). Requiring
information to be internalized rather than externalizing it imposes a cost on the user, aligning these results with those of
Payne and colleagues. Our results indicated that when not all
information is externalized, the solver is triggered to start
figuring out the problem on a more metacognitive level, planning more, and remembering more about move sequences and
rules.
The indication that requiring internalization encourages
planning and learning, led us to conduct another experiment
to investigate the interaction of planning and externalization.
What will be subjects’ behavior if they are not just confronted
with one of the two interface styles, but also explicitly asked
to plan moves carefully, vs. to shallowly solve the tasks? We
hypothesized that in with externalization, explicit instruction
to plan might not make a significant difference, because the
interface would preclude planning. In the internalization condition however, where we saw subjects planning more, we
expect users’ planning to be facilitated when instructed to
plan carefully. On the other hand, with internalization, when
subjects are instructed to solve shallowly, it might inhibit
planning and learning.

long-term memory and cues recognized on an external display. They stressed that much reasoning could not take place
without external information being present – exactly what
was found in a study by Mayes, Draper, McGregor and Oatley (1988). More recently, there has been more research on
internalization and externalization in problem solving, most
requiring planning. Assuming that by externalizing certain
information, working memory is relieved, Zhang and Norman
(1994), Zhang (1997), like Larkin (1989), showed that externalizing information can be useful for cognitive tasks: the
more is externalized, the easier it is to solve a problem. Zhang
externalized the rules of the problem, which prevents errors
and relieves working memory but does not alter the problem
space. Re-distributing information from the internal memory
to an external display helps. O’Hara and Payne (1999) and
Trudel and Payne (1996), on the other hand, stated that too
strong a reliance on external information leads to negative
effects regarding planning and transfer of skills. They drew a
distinction between plan-based and display-based problem
solving. In plan-based problem solving one uses detailed
problem strategies from long-term memory, leading to shorter
solutions. Display-based makes little use of learned knowledge but relies on interface information, usually involving
more steps because of more searching. O’Hara and Payne
also found that making an interface harder to use by imposing
delays on operators (thus making them more costly), makes
subjects plan more. Also, the higher the cost of error recovery, the more planning subjects displayed. A similar observation was made by Svendsen (1991). Using the Towers of Hanoi problem, a high-cost interface yielded improved understanding of problems.
Externally available information, thus, is not always beneficial. Payne, Howes and Reader (2001), for instance, regard
the principle that artifacts and representations should be designed to maximize the potential for cognitive offloading as a
mistaken over-generalization.
Research by Van Nimwegen, Van Oostendorp and Tabachneck-Schijf (2004) surprisingly showed no performance
advantage for externalization over internalization. Subjects
were presented with two versions (internalization or externalization) of an isomorph of the well-known “Missionaries
& Cannibals” puzzle, which we called Balls & Boxes (B&B).
The puzzle had a set of underlying rules, certain types of
moves were “illegal”. To reach the solution a certain strategy
is required, always obeying the rules. These rules were enforced by not allowing certain moves to be performed. In the
externalized condition, the interface showed which moves
were allowed. If a move in the puzzle would lead to an illegal
situation (violating a rule), this was externalized by means of
disabling certain controls. Thus subjects could only perform
legal moves. However, it has to be bared in mind that NOT
the solution path itself was externalized. In the internalization
condition, subjects had no clue whatsoever about the legality
of moves. They had to find out everything by themselves.
Subjects solved a series of problems; performance was measured as well as their knowledge of the problem’s rules and
states afterwards. Unexpectedly, the time needed, and correctness were the same in the two conditions. However, in-

Method
Subjects and Design
Thirty-two subjects, aged 19-35 were randomly assigned to
four conditions, eight per condition. They were undergraduate
students from Utrecht University and received a 5 € reward
afterwards. Our 2x2x3 design has two between-subject independent variables: interface style (internalization or externalization) and planning instruction (low or high) and one withinsubject independent variable, puzzle version (6, 8, or 10
balls). Among the dependent variables were:
1. Performance measures (all logged by the computer)
- correctness: the number of correctly solved puzzles
- speed: time needed to solve the puzzles
- extra moves: the deviations from the shortest path
- the number of illegal moves
2. Knowledge test
After the trials we measured how well subjects had learned
the rules and shortest-path solutions of the problem.
3. Attitudes
Likert-scale questions concerning, among others, perceived
amount of planning, feeling lost during interaction.

Material

2272

The experiment was conducted in the usability lab at the Center for Content and Knowledge Engineering, Utrecht Univer-

sity. The java-applet ran on a Pentium 4 PC with a mouse,
keyboard, and a 17” monitor, and logged virtually everything
subjects did: mouse clicks, timestamps, path measures, types
of (attempted) illegal moves made etc.
The puzzle
As in earlier experiments, we used our Balls & Boxes application. It is informationally equivalent to “Missionaries and
Cannibals”. 5 missionaries and 5 cannibals stand on a riverbank, and all have to reach the other bank by boat. The boat
only holds 3 people; the minimum to sail is 1. If cannibals
ever outnumber missionaries at any place, the latter will be
eaten. At one point a contra-means-end-analysis move has to
be made, this bottleneck is passed after a minimum of 7
moves (fig. 1, black square). The B&B problems (fig. 2) use
the same problem space, but are more abstract (Missionaries
and Cannibals-rules contain a lot of common cultural knowledge: cannibals eat people, boats cross rivers). With boxes,
colored balls and a dish instead, we avoided too easily learned
rules. The rules translate to:
1. Balls should be transported using the dish
2. You can transport at most 3 balls at a time
3. To move, the dish must contain at least 1 ball
4. The dish has to reach the boxes in turn
5. No more blue than yellow balls in the dish
6. No more blue than yellow balls left in the boxes
Below is the formal problem space of the puzzle. The
shortest path to solve it is 11 moves, but one can wander
around the problem space. There are several “dead-endstates” (circled in fig.1) that force back-tracking.

1. Externalization: Arrows are only colored (clickable) when
an action is legal and greyed out (unclickable) if illegal. E.g.
moving the dish empty in figure 3 is illegal because it violates
rule 3. In this situation, this rule is externalized by greying out
both pink arrows. Note that this type of externalization, like in
Zhang’s (1997) experiments, errors are prevented and working memory is relieved because rules do not need to be
learned, but the problem space is not altered.
2. Internalization: All arrows are always colored providing no
information about the legality of moves. One can click all
buttons at all times. However, an illegal move is not executed.
For instance, if one wants to move the dish empty and clicks a
pink arrow, nothing happens.

Figure 2: The externalized version of B&B5

Procedure and Instruction

Figure 1: The Balls & Boxes problem space (B&B5)

Subjects received a general instruction on the course of the
experiment, starting with a screenshot and the phrase “All
balls should be transported from one side to the other. However, there are constraints, not everything is allowed. Find
out for yourself how it works.” After this, our independent
variable “planning instruction” was applied:
1. Low planning instruction: “Try to solve the puzzle as fast
as possible, making mistakes is not a problem. Good luck!”
2. High planning instruction: “Try to solve the puzzle as economically as possible. Think hard, plan with care, it pays off.
Good luck!”
Subjects solved 7 trials (3xB&B3, 2xB&B4, 2xB&B5, about
half an hour). After completing them, they were presented
with the knowledge questionnaire (10-15 minutes).

Unlike in earlier experiments, we decided to let the puzzle
change a little over time. The number of balls in the game
gradually increased. The solution basically is the same, but
more balls make it look more difficult. Only one rule (maximum balls in dish) varied. We constructed 3 puzzles:
B&B3: 3 blue /3 yellow balls. Solution 11 dish-moves
B&B4: 4 blue /4 yellow balls. Solution 9 dish-moves
B&B5: 5 blue /5 yellow balls. Solution 11 dish-moves

Results
Solution Times and Correctness

From earlier experience we knew that subjects’ performance did not improve much more after 2-3 trials, so we decided to keep the numbers of puzzles to be solved low. All
subjects had to solve “B&B3” 3 times, and “B&B4” and
“B&B5” both 2 times, 7 puzzles in total. The controls were
simple: to get blue/yellow balls into the dish, blue/yellow uparrows had to be clicked and to move the pink dish horizontally; one had to click a pink arrow (left or right). The independent variable “interface style” (internalization vs. externalization) was operationalized as follows.

On average, as we saw in earlier experimentation, the time
that subjects needed to complete the puzzles was neither influenced by interface style, nor by planning instruction. The
same was true for the correctness (the number of correctly
solved trials out of 7 over the 3 puzzles).

Extra moves

2273

The path measure we call “extra moves” is calculated by subtracting the shortest-path number of moves from the moves
needed. For B&B3, B&B4 and B&B5, the shortest paths
were respectively 11, 9 and 11 moves. To meaningfully compare the extra-moves scores per puzzle version, we standardized the “extra moves” to z-scores.

Furthermore, not regarding the puzzle version, there was a
nearly significant interaction effect between interface style
and planning instruction F(1,27)=3.17, p=0.08. Figure 5
shows that externalization, like in figures 3 and 4 was not
influenced by planning instruction, but internalization was;
this difference was significant t(14)=-1.94, p=0.03.
2.0
1.6
1.2

Number of extra moves needed (Z-values)

-.8

Interface style

-1.2
Internalization

-1.6
-2.0
Low

Externalization
High

Subjects also rated the amount of planning as perceived by
them selves on a 5-point Likert scale. An ANOVA yielded
just a tendency of an interaction of planning with interface
style which did not reach significance, F(3,28)=2.24, p=0.14.
However, the pattern fits earlier mentioned results quite well;
only in the high planning instruction, interface style has an
effect. In the high planning condition, subjects that worked
with internalization (M = 3.38, SD = 0.92) felt that they
planned more than subjects in the externalization condition
(M = 2.38, SD = 1.06), t(14)=2.02, p=0.03.

1.2
.8
.4
.0
-.4

Attempted illegal moves

-.8

Interface style

Results so far point out that externalization subjects are not
influenced by planning instruction, but internalization subjects are. Some variables were only measurable in the internalized interface, e.g. “attempted illegal moves”. In the externalized version one could only make legal moves, while in
the internalized version it was also allowed to attempt illegal
ones, since the control arrows were always clickable. Within
internalization we compared the number of times that this
occurred, in relation to planning instruction.

-1.2

Internalization

-1.6

Externalization

-2.0

B&B4

B&B5

Figure 3: Extra moves per puzzle version in low planning
2.0
1.6
1.2

.6

.8

Number of attempted illegal moves (Z-values)

Number of extra moves needed (Z-values)

.0
-.4

Perceived amount of planning

1.6

.4
.0
-.4
-.8

Interface style

-1.2

Internalization

-1.6

Externalization

-2.0

B&B3

.4

Figure 5: Average extra moves needed per interface style and
planning instruction

2.0

B&B3

.8

Z-values mean extra moves needed

The within-subjects variable “puzzle version” showed no
significant main effect. There was no significant 3-way interaction effect between puzzle version, interface style and planning instruction (F(2,54)=1.98, p=0.15). Also the interaction
between puzzle version and planning instruction was not significant (although a bit stronger, F(2,54)=2.28, p=0.12).
The interaction between puzzle version and interface style
on the scores for “extra moves” was significant at
F(2,54)=3.23, p=0.05. Figures 3 and 4 show that in the externalization condition the scores are practically identical during
the 3 puzzles (regardless of the planning instruction). However, the scores in the internalization condition look quite
different.
In the low planning condition (fig. 3), a repeated measures
ANOVA showed neither significant differences in extra
moves for the puzzle versions, nor for interface style. However, this was different for the high planning condition (fig.
4). The patterns between the two interface styles are quite
different, especially for B&B3. Repeated measures showed a
significant interaction effect for puzzle planning instruction
and interface style F(2,13)=6.31, p=0.01. Post hoc Tukey
tests (p < 0.05) showed that in B&B3, internalization subjects
(M = -1.05, SD= 0.39) needed significantly fewer extra
moves than externalization subjects (M = 0.32, SD = 0.91). In
puzzles B&B4 and B&B5 there were no significant differences between interface styles.

B&B4

B&B5

Figure 4: Extra moves per puzzle version in high planning

.4

.2

-.0

-.2

Planning Instruction
-.4

Low
High

-.6

B&B3

B&B4

B&B5

Figure 6: Number of attempted illegal moves by internalization subjects per puzzle-version
2274

A repeated measures ANOVA showed an interaction effect
F(2,28)=4.27, p=0.03 (fig. 6). In the internalization condition,
in the first puzzle (B&B3) the high planning instruction (M =
81.50, SD = 43.94) resulted in much fewer illegal moves than
low planning instruction (M = 163.75, SD = 96.05),
t(14)=2.20, p=0.02. After B&B3 the effect was gone.

Knowledge
There were 3 questions concerning the crucial rules of the
puzzle, the answer could be correct or incorrect (score range
0-3). An ANOVA showed, as in earlier experimentation that
the knowledge of the rules afterwards was influenced by interface style, F(1,28)=11.01, p=0.03. Planning instruction had
no influence. As before, the average knowledge acquired by
internalization subjects (M = 1.95, SD = 0.77) was better than
for externalization (M = 1.0, SD = 0.82).

Discussion and Conclusion
We analyzed the influences that interface style, (externalization or internalization) has on performance and knowledge
acquisition in a problem solving task. According to Zhang
(1997) and others, the more information is externalized, the
easier a task becomes. We do not feel this to be true in all
cases, e.g. when learning is required, when executing the task
faster is the aim or when the task is prone to interruptions.
The latter, we think depends on the timing of the interruption
(between-trials or within-trial) and the amount of information
remaining on the interface at the time of the interruption.
Larkin’s (1989) interruptions were within-trial, and in the
externalized version all needed information remained visible.
Our interruptions were between-trials and no information
remained visible.
We hypothesize that removing error-making from the interface by externalizing the rules has a cost, namely a lessening
of metacognitive activity such as planning, and consequently,
less learning. In this paper, we therefore varied the planning
instruction (low or high) subjects received. Subjects were
either encouraged to do the task fast, errors did not matter
(low planning) or to plan carefully and work as efficiently as
possible (high planning).
O’Hara and Payne (1999) showed that making the interface
slower makes subjects incur a cost for errors and extra moves,
and induces planfulness, which in turn causes subjects to
learn more. Does this hold also when we require subjects to
internalize information as opposed to externalizing it? We
hypothesized this to be the case, as requiring internalization is
also costly.
Surprisingly, performance measures such as time needed to
solve the puzzles and number of correctly solved puzzles
were not influenced by the interface style. As in the previous
study by Van Nimwegen et al. (2004), Zhang’s (1997) prediction was not confirmed: externalization of the rules held no
advantages. Also, the new condition planning instruction had
no influence on the performance measures correctness or
solving time. The latter was not exactly as we expected but
we understood it better when we had analyzed the “extra
moves”.

“Extra moves” is a path measure we used as an indicator of
planning by subjects. This measure focuses on how subjects
solve the problem, not on if or how fast. It reflects the directness, the efficiency of the path that subjects chose. A small
amount, or even better, no “wandering back and forth” at all
around the problem space, is taken as indicator of planning
and contemplation by subjects. The opposite would be just
trying to solve the problem by trial and error, making many
unnecessary extra moves. Concerning extra moves, internalization subjects were positively influenced by planning instruction and externalization subjects not at all. This effect
was the largest in the first puzzle. Here, high-planning internalization subjects outperformed the three other groups by
needing far fewer extra moves, thus displaying smarter, more
thoughtful behavior. Their planful behavior was confirmed by
the fact that there were no differences in solving time. Subjects acted more carefully and considered their moves more.
It seems that being confronted with our type of externalized
interface makes a subject ignore, or even forget the planning
instruction all together. As externalization subjects were not
confronted with actual mistakes (one could not make illegal
moves, only inefficient legal moves were allowed), they simply kept on solving without applying meta-cognition (Tabachneck-Schijf, 1996). This idea of attention taken by an
interface fits with Carroll and Rosson’s (1987) paradox of the
active user – users of computer systems are so consumed with
immediate productivity that they are not motivated to take
time to learn better ways of accomplishing their task.
These findings are confirmed by subjects’ own judgments
of their planning. Results pointed in the same direction; only
subjects in the internalized interface with a high planning
instruction reported having done a considerable amount of
planning. The fact that subjects’ own judgment of planning
coincided with our extra-moves findings, indicates that “extra
moves” is an adequate measure for planning.
Only the interface where subjects had to internalize the
needed information, allowed attempts of illegal moves (besides the mentioned legal extra moves), since all controls
were always clickable. The interface gave little information
away about the rules of the puzzle, so of course subjects in
the internalization condition attempted illegal moves at some
point. Subjects with low planning instruction attempted twice
as many illegal moves as the ones with high planning instruction. This reconfirms that in internalization, planning instruction has an influence, high-planning instruction facilitating
and low-planning instruction inhibiting planning as compared
to the externalization subjects.
After the tasks, the knowledge of subjects was tested, and
proved to be influenced only by the interface style, as in earlier experiments. Although planning instruction in one condition resulted in fewer extra moves and higher perceived planning, it had no influence on how well the knowledge was
remembered. We expected that high planning instruction and
having to internalize information would re-enforce each
other, resulting in even better knowledge, but this proved not
to be the case. Interface style alone still was the main convincing factor of influence. Perhaps the nature of the puzzle
was such that all internalization subjects acquired the knowl-

2275

edge as good as it can be already, and that planning instruction (and consequently their behavior) therefore could not
make a difference anymore.
Our results indicate that in the externalized condition, subjects were “deaf” to the planning instruction. It was the combination of interface style and planning instruction that was
deciding in subject’s behavior. Externalization seems to encourage trial and error problem solving, which stands opposite to planning. Relying on interface information in this
manner, making little use of learned knowledge corresponds
with display-based problem solving behavior as defined by
O’Hara and Payne (1999).
Remarkable is again, that no advantages of externalization
were found in either this or the previous experiment. It was
internalization that yielded advantages. Firstly, internalization
resulted in more solid knowledge, as found earlier. Secondly,
in the internalization condition, the given instruction was actually obeyed (in externalization it was not). If in a given
situation it is crucial or important that an instruction is followed, one might consider not using too much externalization.
When high planning instruction was given in internalization circumstances, it showed to have a positive influence:
subjects displayed more planning and smarter behavior. As in
O’Hara and Payne’s (1999) article, an interface that is in
some way “harder to use”, allows more plan-based behavior.
Planning instruction has a maximum effect if no help is supplied by the interface.
This research aims to contribute to theory on how knowledge organization, learning and memory relate to modern
insights in computing and learnability, and to visualization of
human-computer interaction. In future research we will investigate what happens if the planning instruction is being repeated, look at different levels of externalization and feedback, and perhaps adaptively derive how well subjects are
doing, and re-provide subjects with planning instruction on
the basis of that. The factors we also intend to research are
interruption, differences in internal motivation, and changes
in the interface environment, time pressure and rewards.
In addition, our puzzle task is not very realistic and results
cannot be expected to generalize to realistic tasks. However,
the advantage of our task is its tractability and the amount of
control one can exercise over it. We plan to further investigate effects of externalization and planning in more realistic
tasks, e.g. spreadsheet or drawing applications, where actions
are less repetitive, more life-like, and more complex, and are
currently designing such an environment). In sum, if learning
or performing metacognitive activities is the objective (as in
the educational software domain) then planning and engagement from a user are essential, and requiring the user to incur
a cost may be necessary to achieve this.

References
Carroll, J. M. (1990). The Nurnberg Funnel: Designing
Minimalist Instruction for Practical Computer Skill. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Carroll, J. M., & Rosson, M. B. (1987). The paradox of the
active user. In Carroll, J.M. (Ed.), Interfacing Thought:
Cognitive Aspects of Human-Computer Interaction.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual perception. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Larkin, J.H. (1989). Display Based Problem Solving. In D.
Klahr & K. Kotovsky (Eds.), Complex Information Processing: The Impact of Herbert A. Simon. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Mayes, J. T., Draper, S.W., McGregor, A.M., & Oatley, K.
(1988). Information flow in a user interface: the effect of
experience and context on the recall of MacWrite screens.
In Jones, D.M & Winder, J.R. (Eds.), People and Computers IV. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Norman, D. A. (1988). The psychology of everyday things.
New York, NY: Basic Books.
Norman, D. A. (1993). Things that make us smart: Defending
human attributes in the age of the machine. Reading, MA:
Addison Wesley.
O'Hara, K. P., & Payne, S.J. (1999). Planning the user Interface: the effects of lockout time and error recovery cost. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 50, 4159.
Payne, S. J., Howes, A., & Reader, W. R. (2001). Adaptively
distributing cognition: A decision-making perspective on
human-computer interaction. Behavior & Information
Technology, 20(5), 339-346.
Svendsen, G. (1991). The influence of interface style on problem solving. International Journal Man-machine studies,
35, 379-397.
Tabachneck-Schijf, H. J. M., Leonardo, A.M., & Simon, H.A.
(1997). CaMeRa: A computational model of multiple representations. Cognitive Science, 21(2), 305-350.
Tabachneck-Schijf, H. J. M. (1992). Computational differences in mental representations: effects of mode of data
presentation on reasoning and understanding. Unpublished
dissertation, Carnegie-Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA.
Trudel, C. I., & Payne, S.J. (1996). Self-monitoring during
exploration of an interactive device. International Journal
of Human-Computer Studies, 45, 723-747.
Van Nimwegen, C., Van Oostendorp, H., & TabachneckSchijf, H. J. M. (2004). Does context sensitivity in the interface help? Proceedings of the 12th European Conference
on Cognitive Ergonomics (pp. 29-33). Le Chesnay, France:
European Association of Cognitive Ergonomics.
Van Oostendorp, H., & De Mul, S. (1999). Learning by exploration: Thinking aloud while exploring an information
system. Instructional Science, 27, 269-284.
Zhang, J., & Norman, D. (1994). Representations in Distributed Cognitive Tasks. Cognitive Science, 18, 87-122.
Zhang, J. (1997). The Nature of External Representations in
Problem Solving. Cognitive Science, 21(2), 179-217.

2276

