UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Cognitive Representation of Computer-Supported Instructional Tools

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/930614ks

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Antonietti, Alessandro
Colombo, Barbara

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Cognitive Representation of Computer-Supported Instructional Tools
Alessandro Antonietti (alessandro.antonietti@unicatt.it)
Department of Psychology and Cognitive Psychology Laboratory, Largo Gemelli 1
Milano, 20123 Italy

Barbara Colombo (barbara.colombo@unicatt.it)
Department of Psychology, Largo Gemelli 1
Milano, 20123 Italy

employed, assuming that the higher is its quality, the better
are the learning results. In this perspectives the way of
employing a tool derives directly from the affordances of the
tool: What was "put" into the tool (provided that it was
phenomenologically salient), that will be used properly by
students, if adequately instructed and assisted (Selwood, Fung
& O'Mahoney, 2003). We can label this perspective as
"objective" since it relies on the intrinsic properties of the
tool. It is a tool-driven perspective based on the assumption
that, given a relevant instructional setting, learners’ behavior
is modeled above all by the features of the technological
instruments that they are requested to use. In such a
perspective learner tends to be conceived as an executor, that
is, as an individual who has to use the educational tool
according to its own properties. Finally, this perspective takes
into account only a dimension of the learner’s mind, namely,
the level of the cognitive processing: Learner is seen as a
person who is asked to activate his/her thinking skills in order
to manage the contents provided by the educational tool.
However, the question initially mentioned seems to involve a
more complex process. Most CSIT can be used in a variety of
manners, since flexibility is a features that such tools try to
incorporate. Thus, the desired effects depend on the specific
manner in which a tool is used. But what does determine the
way of using the tool? It is what the user has in mind about
the features of that tool and the aims to be pursued that
orientates his/her behavior while employing the tool. We can
call this perspective as "subjective" since it stresses the role
that the personal definition of the tool and of its implications
has in modulating the relationships between the tool and the
effects that it produces. The “subjective” perspective is
student-driven since it assumes that learner has control over
the process in which the tool is employed. Learner is seen not
only as an executor, but as a self-regulating person who can
monitor and control the use of the tool according to his/her
own aims. In this perspective learners’ mind is conceived as a
two-dimensional entity, namely, not only as a cognitive
processor, but also as a metacognitive processor which can
reflect upon itself by shifting the focus of attention from the
contents provided by the tools to the way of using the tool
and which can represent the relationships that occur by itself
and the tool. This gives reasons of why researchers were
interesting in studying—beside what can result, in terms of
performance effects, from the use of certain tools in given

Abstract
Two studies are reported whose aim was to assess whether
undergraduates' cognitive representations of the psychological
correlates of computer-supported instructional tools (CSIT) vary
according to the features of tools themselves. A questionnaire
investigating participants' conceptions about motivational and
emotional aspects of learning through CSIT, behavior during the
learning process, required capacities, mental operations,
metacognition, preferred style of thinking, cognitive benefits and
learning outcomes was employed in both studies. In Study 1
undergraduates were requested to judge to what extent such issues
are involved in different kinds (virtual simulations, Web forums, and
so on) of CSIT, whereas in Study 2 the same issues were considered
by making reference to different dimensions (hypertext, multimedia,
and so forth) of CSIT. Results showed that students have a welldefined and deep-rooted conception about what CSIT can introduce
into a learning process, by attributing different psychological
correlates to different kinds of tools. However, undergraduates failed
to recognize that distinct dimensions of CSIT involve different
psychological correlates. Implications of these findings for education
and tool designing are discussed.

Keywords: Representation - Education - ICT

From Goals to Effects: "Objective" and
"Subjective" Perspectives
Computer-supported instructional tools (CSIT) are often
presented as instruments that teachers, trainers, and tutors
might adopt in order to try to solve problems that they
encounter in their job, particularly to lead trainees to
overcome the difficulties that they experience in learning. The
main question that educators ask when someone proposes to
them to employ technological devices is: «Do this tool
actually produce the expected outcomes?» (Giles, 2003).
A way to conceptualize this question is the following. There
is a need that requires to be satisfied (for example, rising the
level of trainees' motivation) or a goal to be reached (for
instance, improving students' understanding of a hard
concept). Instructors look for, or devise by themselves, a tool
which should help students in satisfying that need or in
achieving that goal. Then they induce learners to use that tool.
The outcomes produced by the tool are detected in order to
test the alleged efficacy of the tool. Such an approach stresses
the importance of the characteristics of the tool to be

151

phenomenon in itself (that is, as a cognitive representation
which accompanies computer use) and as a factor which can
influences e-learning.

settings (Bryant & Zillman, 2002; DiSessa, 2000)—also what
learners think of the CSIT that they are proposed to use.

The Cognitive Representation

An Instrument to Assess the Cognitive
Representation

Various levels of the subjective reactions in which we are
interested have to be distinguished. We can identify a first
level which includes affective responses (pleasure, anxiety,
frustration), feelings (self-confidence, interest) and
perceptions (sense of competence, self-efficacy) (Gordon,
Killey, Shevlin, McIlroy & Tierney, 2003). Dispositions
(curiosity, refusal, acceptance) toward the CSIT (Yaghi,
1997) can be placed at a second level. A third level consists
of opinions or naive conceptions about the tools (their
importance, skills required, strategies to be employed). The
first level concerns the direct, often unreflecting, response to
the tool. The second level goes beyond the affective reactions
and includes a motivational orientation, an (at least partially)
controlled, even though not always completely explicit,
tendency to do (or not to do) something with the tool. The
third level embraces the beliefs that an individual develops
about the tool, so constituting the personal cognitive
representation of the tool (Wilson & Whitelock, 1998).
As far as the third, above mentioned level is concerned, it is
proved that students can catch and report differences between
traditional and technology-based testing (Richardson et al.,
2002) and training (Antonietti, Rasi, Imperio & Sacco, 2000)
tools. University students are convinced that computers are
necessary in school life, that they can enhance academic
performance and that the Web helps to find information,
makes communication easier, and has potential as a learning
tool (Liaw, 2002). Undergraduates are aware of what
motivates them in a Web-based course (Gao & Lehman,
2003), have precise ideas about the strengths and weaknesses
of e-learning, and can conceptualize the benefits which are
likely to be expected (Wilson & Whitelock, 1998). In general
undergraduates can assess the nature, the reliability, and the
strategies to access information in the Web (Dinet, Marquet
& Nissen, 2003) and can relate learning outcomes to the level
of interactivity experienced during the course (Jiang & Ting,
2000). Undergraduates engaged in instructional activities
carried out within a virtual learning environment conceived
that such a kind of environment was very flexible in terms of
place and time and of setting pace of work and appreciated
the responsibility for their learning (Richardson, 2001).
The studies mentioned above showed that heterogeneous
issues have been considered, so making difficult to draw a
systematic view of students' cognitive representations. Thus,
we decided to restrict our attention only onto a type of content
of the students' naive conceptions, namely, the psychological
correlates of CSIT. A correlate was considered as
psychological if it matched two criteria: (i) it referred to a
mental state, process, strategy, function, or skill; (ii) it
referred to individual, but not social, abilities, preferences, or
effects. Such a topic, as yet scarcely considered, concerns
what computers introduce specifically, in terms of what
happens in the learner’s mind, into the learning process and
thus it seemed to us worthy to be investigated both as a

A questionnaire was devised to investigate people's
conceptions about the psychological correlates of CSIT. Item
of the questionnaire concerned these issues: motivational and
emotional aspects of learning (e.g., attraction, involvement,
reactivity, boredom, tiredness), behavior during the learning
process (active participation, effort), required capacities
(attention, language, logical reasoning, creativity, quick
reflexes, manual ability), mental processes (comparing,
simultaneous consideration, schematizing, reflection, reelaborating, assuming other people's point of view),
metacognition (planning, awareness of personal limits),
preferred style of thinking (intuition, visualisation, reflection),
cognitive benefits and learning outcomes (better
understanding,
immediate
feedback,
memorisation,
application, overall view, confusion).
Previous studies showed similar structures of the
questionnaire. In Antonietti and Giorgetti’s (2004) Study 2
the questionnaire was filled out by 170 undergraduates.
Factor analysis led to extract the following components.
Factor 1 included items concerning the cognitive reelaboration of the contents to be learned: The highest loads in
this factor suggested that it refers to the idea that CSIT help
students to schematize the contents, to re-arrange them in
order to have an overall picture, and to make links among
them. Factor 2 was labelled as facilitating effects: CSIT allow
students to learn fast and without effort and facilitate the
application of the concepts, their memorisation and
understanding. Factor 3 was loaded by items concerning
analytical thinking: CSIT are suitable for persons who like
reasoning in logical and schematic ways and ask for
concentration and for the overall consideration of the given
elements. Factor 4 included the negative aspects of CSIT:
mental confusion, excessive involvement, tiredness,
imprecision. Items related to creativity—which appeared to
be associated with non-linguistic skills—loaded Factor 5.
Finally, Factor 6 was labelled as curiosity since items
concerning the attractive, not-boring properties of CSIT—
which are appreciated by persons with a visual cognitive
style—had the highest load on this factor.
The investigation was replicated with 493 undergraduates
(Giorgetti & Antonietti, in press). In this study Factor 1
corresponded to creativity skills (intuition, fantasy,
simultaneous consideration, quick reflexes, prevision,
perceptual performance, risk taking). Factor 2 was linked to
the optimising and facilitating effects of CSIT (implicit and
visual learning, memorisation, convincing effects, boredom
contrasting). Factor 3 was loaded by items stressing the
involvement of analytical thinking (logic, schematising,
planning, connecting, global view). Factor 4 included
statements about the negative effects of CSIT.

152

forums, in which he/she is constantly requested to react to the
threads proposed by other people participating in the
discussion and to elaborate by himself/herself the responses
or the questions to introduce in the debate (Selinger &
Pearson, 1999). Hypertexts and Web forums are based
exclusively, or prevalently, on the verbal code since they ask
students to read words and to write sentences. By contrast,
different codes are massively involved in other computersupported educational devices. Multimedia presentations
integrate verbal language with iconic symbols (pictures,
movies, and so on), sometimes supported also by sounds and
music (Rouet, Levonen & Biardeau, 2001). Iconic
representations, providing the illusion of threedimensionality, are on the basis also of virtual simulations,
which immerse the learner in a artificial environment where
he/she can move objects, generate phenomena, modify the
variables of a given system, and so on (Stanny, 2002).
Multimedia presentations tend to be associated with a passive
fruition by the student, who watches (or listens to) what the
tool is providing to him/her, whereas virtual simulations tend
to assign an active role to the learner since he/she can act in
the artificial situation yielded by the computer.
These four kinds of instructional tools (hypertexts, Web
forums, multimedia presentations, and virtual simulations)
seem to represent a series of prototypal computer-supported
devices, each of them subsuming a set of specific features,
which can be meant as instances useful to assess whether
students are able to differentiate their beliefs about the
psychological aspects of the technological instruments that
they are proposed to use in education.
The questionnaire was administered to 99 undergraduates
attending the Faculty of Engineering at the Voronezh
Division of Russian State Open Technical University of
Railway Transportation. Eighty-six students were enrolled in
specialization courses in the field of construction of railways
and the remaining 13 in specialization courses in the field of
civil engineering. They were 72 men and 27 women ranging
in age between 18 and 50 (mean age = 28.79 yrs., SD = 7.23).
Men (mean age = 29.90 yrs., SD = 6.45) were older than
women (mean age = 25.81 yrs., SD = 8.42; t(97) = 2.58, p <
.05). Participants were given a booklet. In the first sheet of the
booklet, which reported also the description of the aim of the
questionnaire and the instructions to fill it out, respondents
were requested to express their opinions about the
psychological correlates of online courses. In each of the
other four sheets they were asked to endorse the same list of
items by making reference to hypertexts, Web forums,
multimedia presentations, and virtual simulations employed
for instructional aims. The order of these four kinds of tools
was randomly varied in each booklet. A short description of
each kind of educational tools was reported at the top of the
corresponding sheet.
Inspections of the distributions of responses in each item of
the questionnaire revealed that, for each statement and for
each kind of tools, the full range of possible responses was
endorsed, so suggesting that the statements included in the
questionnaire were discriminative for all kinds of CSIT. It

The same questionnaire was administered also to 272 teachers
(Antonietti & Giorgetti, in press). The relative degrees of
importance attributed to the various psychological aspects of
CSIT by teachers were rather similar to those attributed by
students in the previous studies. Factor analysis induced us to
label the resulting factors as follows. Factor 1 concerned
analytical processes: CSIT were related to logical, schematic,
holistic, associative, strategic reasoning. Factor 2 was loaded
by items about creativity and about activation and attraction.
Factors 3 made reference to facilitating effects: CSIT were
perceived to make application, memorisation, and
comprehension easier, thanks also to the reduction of time
and of effort, to simultaneous thoughts, and to the reduction
of verbal load. Factor 4 concerned the impact effects of CSIT,
that is, visual and global understanding and arousing and
convincing presentation of the contents. Factor 5 included the
negative effects of CSIT: confusion, excessive involvement,
tiredness, and imprecision.
The overall consideration of these factor analyses suggested
that recurrent patterns of beliefs lie under people's
representation of the psychological correlates of educational
information technologies. Negative effects, facilitating
effects, analytical thinking, and creativity emerged as
distinctive factors in all the studies.
In these studies only a kind of tool at a time was considered.
However, we realize that nowadays undergraduates have
access to a variety of CSIT. Therefore we can assume that
conceiving differences among tools is important both to select
the most relevant tool in consideration of the goal to be
reached and to use the chosen tool in the proper way. Thus,
we were interested in assessing whether university students
can differentiate their cognitive representations, as measured
by the questionnaire described earlier, according to specific
type of CSIT.

Study 1
The aim of the study was to assess whether students can
realize that psychological correlates of CSIT differ according
to the kind of tools at hand. Five categories of tools were
identified. Online courses can be conceived to be the general
kind of tools in which we were interested. Online courses
constitute a form of e-learning which is largely spread out
around the world and are “containers” which can include a
wide set of more specific tools (Rudestam & SchoenholtzRead, 2002). So, online courses served as a sort of pivotal
point of reference to which more specific kinds of tools can
be compared. Four main kinds have been considered here.
Hypertexts are often proposed as tools which allow learner to
access knowledge according to his/her preferences since they
present contents organised within an associative framework
which permits to overwhelm the sequential constraints of the
usual linear structures shared by several traditional
instruments (Bromme & Stahl, 2002). The fruition of
hypertexts is usually passive, in the sense that students
receive information provided by someone else, having only
the possibility to choose what piece of information they like
to acquire. An active role is assigned to the learner by Web
153

The questionnaire was filled out by 87 undergraduates
attending different faculties (architecture, economics,
education, science) in universities in the city of Milano
(Italy). Also in this participants were given a booklet
consisting of three sheets; In each sheet respondents were
requested to express their opinions about the psychological
correlates of, respectively, hypertext, multimedia, and
interactive CSIT. The order of these three dimensions was
randomly varied in each booklet.
According to students’ opinions, multimedia tools are helpful
above all to facilitate understanding, memorization and
schematization; Hypertexts were appreciated since they allow
learners, besides to better memorize, to make comparisons
and to have a global view; Interactive tools were appreciated
since they, beside facilitate concept schematization, force
learners to be active and to apply what they were taught. So, it
appears that undergraduates can perceive a few specific
advantages provided by different features of CSIT, even
though overlappings among some of the most and less
appreciated features occurred. Possible significant differences
among the three dimensions (hypertextuality, multimediality,
and interactivity) were assessed through a one-way, repeated
measure model of Analysis of Variance. Only in 7 out of 37
cases statistical significant differences among scores
emerged. Thus, we are induced to maintain that students-even
though they ranked psychological correlates of CSIT in a
relative different order according to the fact that such
correlates concern multimedia, hypertext, or interactive toolsfailed to attribute different absolute values to such correlates.
This finding was supported by the computation of the
correlations between scores of each pair of kinds of tool: In
most cases significant correlations occurred. Thus, it resulted
that undergraduates were not able to differentiate their
judgments according to the specific dimension of CSIT.

was possible to identify the psychological correlates of each
kind of tools that were shared by undergraduates in the largest
and lowest extent and to compare the five kinds of tools in
order to assess whether the statements which were endorsed
in the highest and lowest extent were or were not the same for
all the kinds of tools. Data showed that—even though some
features were, respectively, highly (e.g., involvement, manual
abilities) or scarcely (activation, precision, boredom)
attributed to more than one kind of tool—online courses,
hypertexts, Web forums, multimedia presentations, and
virtual simulations were characterized, in students’ cognitive
representation, by distinctive features. Online courses were
appreciated above all for their motivating and challenging
power. Hypertexts were conceived as tools useful to a
“serious” and deep learning, with no contribution from
imagination. Multimedia presentations shared some features
with hypertexts (notion re-elaboration, global view), even if
incidental learning and facilitation in retention were attributed
to the latter but not to the former ones. Specific aspects of
social interaction were identified in Web forums. Finally, a
visual, not-linguistic, and creative way of thought was
attributed to virtual simulations. As far as each statement was
concerned, possible significant differences among the five
kinds of tools were assessed through a one-way, repeated
measure model of Analysis of Variance: Significant
differences among the kinds of CSIT emerged in 32 out of 37
cases (F values computed for each item of the questionnaire
ranged from 3.21 to 32.06). Such a finding was supported by
the computation, of the correlations between scores of each
pair of kinds of tools. Even though in most cases significant
positive correlations occurred, it is worth noticing that only in
few cases coefficients were high.

Study 2
A different, more sophisticated criterion to differentiate CSIT
was used in this study. In Study 1 students were requested to
consider different types of tools, defined on the basis of
concrete, physical, perceptual and/or operational properties.
In the present study they were requested to consider different
dimensions—that is, properties defined at an abstract or
functional level—of CSIT by making references, separately,
to the following three dimensions: hypertextuality,
multimediality, and interactivity. In other words, students
were requested to judge to what extent each psychological
correlate considered in the questionnaire depended on,
respectively, the fact that CSIT (i) allow learners to
personalise access to knowledge since contents are organised
in a reticular manner so to permit people to choose the parts
which meet their interests or needs and to move from a part to
another without being compelled to follow a fixed, sequential
order of presentation (hypertextuality), (ii) provide notions
through two sensory channels (visual and auditory) and/or by
means of a variety of codes or languages (multimediality),
(iii) engage students into a continuous interchange of requestresponse-feedback, for instance by asking them to answer
questions, to solve problems, to find hidden objects, to
combine shapes, and so forth (interactivity).

Conclusions
The overall picture that emerged from the two studies carried
out was that students have a well-defined and deep-rooted
conception about what CSIT can introduce into a learning
process, by attributing different psychological correlates to
different kinds of tools. However, undergraduates failed to
recognize that distinct features of CSIT involve different
psychological correlates (or involve them to a different
extent); In fact, participants tended to attribute similar effects
to hypertextuality, multimediality, and interactivity.
Differences between the two studies, where the same
questionnaire was employed, might be due to differences in
the samples of participants: Engineering undergraduates,
thanks to their course of study and/or to the higher exposure
to technological devices, may be more sensitive to the
differences existing among various kinds of tools.
Alternatively, it is possible that differences depended on the
issues that students were asked to evaluate. In Study 2
undergraduates were requested to answer by considering
different dimensions rather than kinds of tools. Presumably
differentiating “things” such as forums, three-dimensional

154

the participation in a Web-forum. The lack of awareness
about these aspects might lead students to approach new
instructional devices by assuming the same, a-specific
attitudes and, consequently, either to neglect possible causes
of failure or to ignore interesting potentialities offered by the
technology. The results of the study induce to wonder
whether well-focused interventions are needed to lead
students to reject inadequate conceptions and to realize
properties of the tools whose they are not aware.
Educators are in charge to check, when they work in team, if
they have the same opinions about the psychological aspects
of the CSIT that they plan to employ in order to be sure that a
coherent view is shared by them. Trainers are also asked to
pay attention to what students think about the computersupported devices. Such an attention is important in order to
verify whether what is relevant in the educators’ opinion is
also relevant in the learners' opinion.
Finally, software developers should know what potential
users think of the kind of instructional tools that they are
construing, so to reflect about possible lack of
correspondences between the functions with which they equip
the tools and learners’ expectations. It is not unlikely that
software designers include into a tool opportunities —such as
the possibility to shift from a representational format to
another, to draw automatically a schematic overview of the
structure of the contents to be learned, to follow an approach
based on autonomous discoveries, and so on—which will be
not recognized by users since they do not perceive that tool as
relevant to provide those opportunities.

simulations, and so on is easier than differentiating concepts
such as interactivity, and so forth.
Several perspectives stress the role that cognitive
representations of the learning process and of the tools which
are involved in it play in modulating learning itself. For
instance, literature about metacognition showed that personal
ideas concerning how the mind works (the so-called
metacognitive knowledge) influence learning outcomes
(Schraw & Moshman, 1995). Studies about the naïve theories
of learning highlighted that students’ opinions about the
personal purposes and the mental strategies to be adopted
when they have to learn are associated to achievement
(Lonka, Joram & Bryson, 1996). Also epistemological
beliefs—that is, individual convictions about how knowledge
is constructed and acquired—resulted to be linked to learning
results (Hofer & Pintrich, 2002). Finally, according to various
models of self-regulated learning, students’ conceptions of
the emotional, motivational, and cognitive aspects of learning
can influence learning itself (Boekaerts, Pintrich & Zeidner,
2000). These perspectives support the importance of
investigating the opinions about the psychological correlates
of CSIT.
The two studies reported here helped us to better describe
students' representations of CSIT by allowing us to
understand to what extent such representations can be
sensitive to the specific features of the tools. If we assume
that—beside the chain of causal influences that link
educational goals, features of the instrument to be employed
to reach such goals, presumed way to use the instrument and
learning outcomes (the “objective” perspective) —a parallel
chain links the actual use of the tool to what learners think of
the tool itself, especially of the mental activities underpinning
the tool (the “subjective” perspective), we can argue that the
"objective" and "subjective" perspectives are two perspectives
each of them integrating the other one. The needs or goals set
by the educators—and the corresponding desired outcomes—
interact with the learners’ perception of their own needs and
goals; The identification of the relevant tool carried out by
instructors matches or mismatches students’ opinions about
the tool (why it should be useful, what advantages should
derive from its use, and so forth); The planned use of the tool
is modulated by what learners think is the best way of
employing it.
Implications of the findings of the present study are threefold,
since they have something to say to learners, trainers, and
software developers. Nowadays students are faced to a variety
of technological educational devices. In some cases they have
the opportunity to choose among them. In these
circumstances, in order to select the tool which is more
adequate, they must be aware of what a certain kind of
instruments involves in terms of mental work activated. But
also when only a kind of tools is available, this awareness is
important if tools should be used in a way consistent with the
features of the tools themselves, the learner’s personal
characteristics, and the task demands and the goals to be
achieved. The amount and type of effort required by
hypertext navigation is usually different from that needed by

References
Antonietti, A., & Giorgetti, M. (2004). Students’ conceptions
about learning from multimedia. In H. Niegemann, R.
Brünken, & D. Leutner (Eds.), Instructional design for
multimedia learning (pp. 249-265). Münster-New York:
Waxmann.
Antonietti, A., & Giorgetti, M. (in press) Teachers’ beliefs about
psychological aspects of learning through multimedia.
Computers in Human Behavior.

Antonietti, A., Rasi, C., Imperio, E., Sacco, M. (2000). The
representation of virtual reality in education. Education
and Information Technologies, 5, 317-327.
Boekaerts, M., Pintrich, P. R., & Zeidner, M. (Eds.) (2000).
Handbook of self-regulation. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Bromme, R., & Stahl, E. (Eds.) (2002). Writing hypertext and
learning. Conceptual and empirical approaches. Amsterdam:
Elsevier.

Bryant, J., & Zillman, D. (Eds.) (2002). Media effects.
Advances in theory and research. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Dinet, J., Marquet, P., & Nissen, E. (2003). An exploratory study of
adolescent's perceptions of the Web. Journal of Computer
Assisted Learning, 19, 538-545.
DiSessa, A. A. (2000). Changing minds: Computers, learning, and
literacy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

155

Richardson, M., Baird, J.-A., Ridgway, J., Ripley, M.,
Shorrocks-Taylor, D., & Swan, M. (2002). Challenging
minds? Students’ perceptions of computer-based World
Class Tests of problem solving. Computers in Human
Behavior, 18, 633-649.
Rouet, J. F., Levonen, J. J., & Biardeau, A. (Eds.) (2001).
Multimedia learning: Cognitive and instructional issues.
Amsterdam: Pergamon.
Rudestam, K., & Schoenholtz-Read, J. (Eds.) (2002).
Handbook of online learning. London: Sage.
Schraw, G., & Moshman, D. (1995). Metacognitive theories.
Educational Psychology Review, 7, 351-371.
Selinger, M., & Pearson, J. (Eds.) (1999). Telematics in
education: Trends and issues. Amsterdam: Pergamon.
Selwood, I. D., Fung, A. C. W., & O'Mahoney, C. D. (Eds.)
(2003). Management of education in the information age.
The role of ICT. New York: Kluwer.
Stanny, K. M. (Ed.) (2002). Handbook of virtual
environment: Design, implementation, and applications.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Wilson, T., & Whitelock, D. (1998). What are the perceived
benefits of participating in a computer-mediated
communication (CMC) environment for distance learning
computer science students? Computers and Education,
30, 259-269.
Yaghi, H. M. (1997). Pre-university students’ attitudes toward
computers: An international perspective. Journal of
Educational Computing Research, 16, 237-249.

Gao, T. & Lehman, J. D. (2003). The effects of different levels of
interaction on the achievement and motivational perceptions of
college students in a Web-based learning environment. Journal
of Interactive Learning Research, 14, 367-386.

Giles, D. (2003). Media psychology. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Giorgetti, M. & Antonietti, A. (in press). Come gli studenti si
rappresentano il ruolo della multimedialità nella formazione
[How students conceive the role of multimedia in education],
Rassegna di Psicologia.
Gordon, M., Killey, M., Shevlin, M., McIlroy, D., & Tierney K.
(2003). The factor structure of the Computer Anxiety Rating
Scale and the Computer Thoughts Survey. Computers in Human
Behavior, 19, 291-298.

Hofer, B., & Pintrich, P. R. (2002). Personal epistemology.
The psychology of beliefs about knowledge and knowing.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Jiang, M., & Ting, E. (2000). A study of factors influencing students'
perceived learning in a Web-based course environment.
International Journal of Educational Telecommunications, 6,
317-338.
Liaw, S.-S. (2002). An Internet survey for perceptions of computers
and the World Wide Web: Relationship, prediction, and
difference. Computers in Human Behavior, 18, 17-35.
Lonka, K., Joram, E., & Bryson, M. (1996). Conceptions of learning
and knowledge: Does training make a difference? Contemporary
Educational Psychology, 21, 240-260.

Richardson, J. (2001). An evaluation of Virtual Learning
Environments and their learners: Do individual
differences affect perception of virtual learning
environments? Interactive Educational Multimedia, 3, 3852.

156

