UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Effects of Naming Practices on Children's Understanding of Living Things

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1927r08m

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Anggoro, Florencia K.
Medin, Douglas L.
Waxman, Sandra R.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Effects of Naming Practices on Children’s Understanding of Living Things
Florencia K. Anggoro (f-anggoro@northwestern.edu)
Sandra R. Waxman (s-waxman@northwestern.edu)
Douglas L. Medin (medin@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 Sheridan Rd., Evanston, IL 60208 USA

more inclusive concept LIVING THING, one that includes
members of both the plant and animal kingdoms, is a rather
late and laborious developmental achievement. For example,
Piaget (1954) argued that children have an inchoate notion, as
witnessed by their tendency to mistakenly attribute animacy
to inanimate objects (e.g., clouds, bicycles) that appear to
move on their own or exhibit goal-directed behavior). This
observation of ‘childhood animism’ led Piaget to assert that
children have a very different understanding of fundamental
folkbiologic concepts such as ANIMAL and LIVING
THING, and have not yet worked out the scope and relations
among them. Other examples of this difficulty come from
Hatano et al. (1993) who documented that the majority of
kindergarteners, second-graders, and fourth-graders from the
U.S., Israel, and Japan had difficulty judging that plants as
well animals are alive (Hatano et al., 1993).
In sum, developmental evidence suggests that several
folkbiologic concepts, including LIVING THING, are
difficult to acquire, and that this reflects, at least in part,
children’s difficulty establishing the scope of each of these
concepts and the relations among them. For example, young
children have a tendency to attribute animacy to too broad a
set of entities (to inanimate objects) and at the same time, a
tendency to attribute life to too restricted a set of entities
(judging animals, but not plants, to be alive). In this paper we
ask why this is the case. To foreshadow, we will suggest that
by roughly 6 or 7 years of age, children do appreciate an
inclusive concept LIVING THING that includes both plants
and animals, and that they reveal this in certain tasks.
However, we also argue that they have particular and pointed
difficulty working out the scope of the terms for these
concepts (e.g., alive, living thing, and animal) and the
relations among them. We document in English-speaking
children a rather clear difficulty interpreting the term alive
and working out its relation to the term animal. We further
document that Indonesian-speaking children reveal no such
difficulty. More provocatively, we propose that the
developmental trajectory for fundamental folkbiologic
concepts is rooted in the naming practices and conceptual
structure of the communities in which children are raised.

Abstract
We investigated the development of an understanding of the
concept LIVING THING in 4- to 10-year-old monolingual
children acquiring either English or Indonesian. In English,
LIVING THING is comprised of two major constituent
categories, ANIMAL and PLANT. However, the word animal
has (at least) two senses, and these overlap in their scope. One
sense of animal includes both humans and non-human animals;
the other sense excludes humans and includes only non-human
animals. In Indonesian, the constituents are organized
differently: neither this overlapping category structure nor the
polysemous use of animal exists. We consider the consequence
of this cross-linguistic difference on acquisition, asking whether
underlying category structure, coupled with the polysemy of the
word animal, interferes with the acquisition of the concept
ALIVE or LIVING THING. Using a Sorting Task, we
compared English- and Indonesian-speaking children’s ability
to form a category that includes all and only LIVING THINGS.
All children successfully formed this inclusive category when
they were instructed to sort on the basis of terms like die or
grow. Importantly, and as predicted, we found cross-linguistic
differences when children were asked to sort the very same
objects on the basis of the term alive. English-speaking children
performed less well when sorting on the basis of alive than on
the basis of the other terms, and indeed tended to include
animals, but not plants. In contrast, Indonesian-speaking
children showed no such decrement. We suggest that this crosslinguistic developmental difference likely stems from the
naming practices and underlying conceptual structure in each
respective language community.

Introduction
Acquisition of Folkbiologic Knowledge
A considerable amount of research has been focused on our
concepts and reasoning about entities of the biological world.
Of particular interest is ‘folkbiologic’ knowledge, or people’s
everyday, intuitive knowledge about the biological world.
Within the domain of folkbiology, the focus is on identifying
people’s mental models of the natural world, examining how
experience and goals influence their mental models, and
exploring how these models influence reasoning and action
(Medin & Atran, 1999; Wellman & Gelman, 1992). Another
key focus has been to discover how folkbiologic concepts
develop.
There is broad consensus across different measures,
different lab groups, and different decades of research, that a

Living Thing
Consider the concept LIVING THING which encompasses
all biological entities, both animals and plants.

139

On the face of it, this nested hierarchical structure should
pose no difficulty in acquisition. After all, children readily
acquire such nested structures (e.g., SPINACH and BROCCOLI
are members of the category VEGETABLE, which in turn is
a member of the category FOOD). But in the case of the
folkbiologic hierarchy, there is an added obstacle: the very
same name, animal, designates two different categories with
different scopes.
This type of polysemy, in which a single word refers to two
different nested categories, is unusual, and it could have
adverse consequences on acquisition. We know that nouns
support the formation of object categories and lend these
categories inductive force. But if the same name animal
points to two different nested categories, this should make it
difficult for learners to identify the scope of this word.
Children may attempt to resolve this difficulty by avoiding
the polysemy, attempting to map a unique term to each
animal sense. We suspect that children readily map animal to
ANIMAL2, that they will accept a different term to cover
ANIMAL1, and that as a result, they tend to (mis)appropriate the
term alive as a name for the broader animal sense (ANIMAL1).
In this way, English-speaking children can circumvent the
problematic polysemy of the term animal. But there is
another, less advantageous consequence: if children do
(mis)appropriate the term alive for the otherwise covert
ANIMAL1, this would account, at least in part, for their
tendency to include animals (that is ANIMAL1), but to exclude
plants, when asked to identify living things (see Stavy &
Wax, 1989, for a similar analysis of Hebrew).
If this is the case, then the developmental trajectory for
these folkbiologic categories should look different in a
language community that exhibited no such polysemy or
nested categories. Indonesian provides this test case. In
Indonesian, LIVING THING consists of three mutually
exclusive categories: PEOPLE (manusia), ANIMAL
(hewan), and PLANT (tumbuhan) (see Figure 3).

LIVING THING

ANIMAL

PLANT

Figure 1: A schematic depiction of the concept LIVING
THING.
Among these constituents, ANIMAL appears to emerge
first in development, and there appear to be perceptual,
conceptual and linguistic factors supporting its early
acquisition. For example, infants are especially interested
animate objects and readily acquire a distinction between
animate and inanimate objects (Gelman, 1990; Bertenthal,
1993; Woodward, 1999; Woodward et al., 2001). Moreover,
there are linguistic factors that favor the acquisition of the
concept ANIMAL. In particular, across languages, this
concept tends to be named with a dedicated noun, whereas
the concepts PLANT and LIVING THING are often
unnamed (Berlin, 1992; Waxman, in press). In such cases,
these concepts are described with phrases (e.g., living thing)
rather than with a dedicated noun.
This is important because there is a powerful relation
between naming and object categorization from infancy (see
Waxman (1999) or Waxman & Lidz (in press) for a review).
For infants as young as 9 months of age, naming serves as an
invitation to form categories. Although they may have
difficulty forming an object category (e.g., animal) when a set
of exemplars is presented alone (e.g. a dog, a horse, a duck, a
fish), their categorization improves dramatically if these
exemplars are introduced with the same (novel) noun. By 9
months, this facilitative effect of names on object
categorization is specific to words (and not tones), and by 14
months, it is specific to nouns (and not adjectives or verbs)
(Balaban & Waxman, 1997; Waxman & Markow, 1995;
Waxman & Booth, 2001; Echols & Marti, 2004). In short,
naming has powerful consequences on categorization, and
named categories support inductive inference (Gelman, 2003;
Gelman & Markman, 1987; Graham et al, 2004; Waxman &
Booth, 2001, Waxman et al., 1997).
Let us return to consider the consequences of these
observations for the acquisition of the fundamental concepts
of folkbiology. A careful consideration reveals that the mental
model depicted in Figure 1 requires further elaboration. In
English, the concept ANIMAL actually consists of two
constituents: PEOPLE and NON-HUMAN ANIMAL. See
Figure 2.

LIVING THING

PEOPLE

PEOPLE

PLANT

Figure 3: A depiction of LIVING THING as schematized in
Indonesian.
There appears to be no “intervening conceptual node”
between these constituents and the overarching concept
LIVING THING, and hence no covert category for this
node and no polysemy within the folkbiologic hierarchy. If
conceptual structure and naming practices influence the
acquisition of these key constituent categories, then
Indonesian-speaking children should not exhibit the same
obstacles to working out the scope of animal and alive as
has been documented in English, Hebrew, and Japanese
(Hatano et al., 1993).

LIVING THING

ANIMAL1

ANIMAL

PLANT

ANIMAL2

Figure 2: A depiction of LIVING THING as schematized in
English.

140

where the term animal is polysemous, there is slippage in the
meaning that children assign. In the next experiment, we went
on to examine the consequences of this difference in naming
practices on children’s categorization of entities in the
folkbiologic world.

Experiment 1
As a first step, we checked this intuition directly. We
showed English- and Indonesian-speaking children a picture
of a person, and asked if a person could be described with the
term animal. If humans and animals are mutually exclusive
categories, as we suggest is the case in Indonesian, then
children should respond in the negative. If humans and
animals can both be considered animals, as we have
suggested is the case for ANIMAL1 in English, then they
should respond in the affirmative.

Experiment 2
The goal of the second experiment was to examine
children’s appreciation of the content of core folkbiologic
concepts and the relations among them. We developed a
sorting task with a set of 17 cards, each depicting an entity,
living or non-living. Children sorted these cards four different
times, on the basis of four different probes. Specifically, they
were asked to sort these cards on the basis of whether they a)
were alive, b) could die, c) need food, and d) could grow.
Because each of these probes taps into a property of all living
things (i.e., biological entities), we reasoned that children’s
sorts would provide an index of their intuitions of content of
the concept LIVING THING. An examination of their sorts
should therefore shed light on which entities they include and
which they exclude from this concept. If children appreciate
an inclusive biological concept, they should distinguish the
living things from the non-living things. Crucially, if alive is
especially difficult for English-speaking children, children’s
performance with this probe should be attenuated relative to
performance with the remaining probes. Moreover, if their
difficulty is related to underlying conceptual structure and
polysemy (as in Figure 2), then this relative decrement for
alive should be evident in children acquiring English, but not
in those acquiring Indonesian.

Method
Participants In Jakarta, Indonesia, we interviewed 36 6- to 7year-olds and 34 9- to 10-year-olds; in Illinois we interviewed
4 5-year-olds, 15 6- to 7-year-olds, and 8 9- to 10-year-olds.
Children in both communities were of middle class families
and were living in urban environments.
Materials and Procedure Children were interviewed
individually. The experimenter showed each child a picture of
a person and asked a single probe, “Could you call this an
animal?”

Results
English- and Indonesian-speaking children’s judgments
differed markedly, although they were all being raised in
urban environments. Across all ages, only 4% of the
Indonesian-speaking children agreed that a person could be
called an animal. In sharp contrast, 55% of the Englishspeaking children answered this question affirmatively. See
Figure 4.

% Yes

1.00
0.90
0.80

"Could you call [a person]
an animal?"

Method

English
Indonesian

Participants English-speaking participants were recruited
from public schools and private preschools in Evanston and
Chicago, Illinois. They included 51 4- to 5-year-olds, 68 6- to
7-year-olds, and 53 9- to 10-year-olds. Our Indonesianspeaking participants were recruited from private pre- and
elementary schools in Jakarta, and included 28 4- to 5-yearolds, 30 6- to 7-year-olds, and 32 9- to 10-year-olds.

0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00

age 5

age 6-7

age 9-10

Materials We constructed a set of seventeen cards, each of
which depicted an image of a single entity, either living or
non-living. See Figure 5.

Figure 4: Children’s “yes” responses to the question of
whether a person could be called an animal.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

This finding provides support for the proposal that children
acquiring Indonesian and English do indeed have different
naming practices for objects in the biological world.
Specifically, when they are questioned directly, Indonesianspeaking children clearly denied that the term animal can be
applied to a person. Yet roughly half of the English-speaking
children accepted this broader scope of the term, judging that
it can indeed be applied to people. Importantly, Englishspeaking children’s acceptance of this more inclusive
ANIMAL1 sense was not uniform; presumably, the other half of
the children interpreted the term animal more narrowly
(ANIMAL2). This is consistent with the idea that in English,

person
bear
squirrel/rabbit*
blue jay/perkutut*
trout/gourami*
bee
worm
maple tree/palm tree*
cranberry bush

10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17

dandelions
sun
clouds
water
rock
bicycle
scissors
pencil

Figure 5: Complete list of materials for the sorting task.
Asterisks indicate adjustments to accommodate differences in
familiarity across communities.

141

Procedure We asked children to sort the cards four different
times, each time on the basis of a different term. First, the
experimenter randomized the cards, and asked children to sort
them based on the term alive. After completing the first sort,
the experimenter re-shuffled the cards and asked children to
sort these same cards based on the terms die, need food, and
grow. These terms were presented in random order, and cards
were re-shuffled before each sort. Instructions for each sort
were identical, except for the term involved. Instructions
(using the term alive) were as follows:

Main effects of Community and Term were mediated by a
Community x Term interaction, F (3, 768) = 7.00,
p < .001. As predicted, English-speaking children were less
successful on the alive probe than on the remaining three
probes (all p’s < .001), whereas Indonesian-speaking children
revealed no differences among the four probes (all p’s > .1).
We pursued this phenomenon by conducting a subsequent
analysis to consider more carefully the scope of the term
alive. Our goal was to ascertain the range of entities that
English- and Indonesian-speaking children included when
sorting on the basis of this term. As predicted, children of all
ages and from both language communities identified humans
and non-human animals as alive. However, there were
developmental and community differences in their judgments
regarding the inclusion of plants and non-living natural kinds.
(See Figure 7.) Children from the youngest two age groups
included plants at a rate of roughly 50-70%, with Indonesianspeaking children surpassing English-speaking children
modestly. However, by 9 to 10 years of age, this modest
Indonesian advantage became quite striking, with Indonesianspeaking children including plants at a rate of 100%, as
compared to the roughly 70% inclusion rate of their Englishspeaking age-mates. Children’s performance with non-living
natural kind items is also suggestive. English-speaking
children included these items at a rate of roughly 30% across
all age groups. In contrast, Indonesian-speaking children’s
tendency to include these items dropped significantly, and
was barely evident at 9 and 10 years of age. This pattern is
consistent with the prediction that children acquiring English
experience some difficulty in grasping the scope, and
boundaries, of LIVING THING.

“I have a game we can play. Let’s make piles, OK? Let’s put one
pile here (indicate left) and another one here (indicate right). OK,
now, let’s get started. Hmmm…I wonder which ones are alive.
Let’s put the ones that are alive here, and the ones that are NOT
alive here. [Show first picture.] OK, what’s this? That’s right,
it’s a (X). Where does it go? Are (X)’s alive (over here) or NOT
alive (over here)?”

After completing the first sort, children sorted on the basis of
the remaining terms.
Scoring For each of the child’s four sorts, we tabulated the %
of cards that were sorted correctly. A perfectly correct sort
was one that included all of the living things (cards 1-10) and
none of the non-living things (cards 11-17).

Results
The results are consistent with the proposal that children do
appreciate the overarching concept LIVING THING, as
witnessed by their successful sorting on the basis of the three
probes: die, need food, and grow. The results also suggest that
the term alive poses a unique challenge for children acquiring
English, but no such challenge for those acquiring
Indonesian. See Figure 6.

English
Indonesian

Alive
1.00
0.90
0.80

English
Indonesian

1.00

0.70
0.60

0.90

% Correct Sorting

0.80

*

0.50
0.40

0.70

0.30
0.60

0.20

0.50

0.10

0.40

0.00

P

0.30

A2

age 4-5

0.20

0.00

Die

Food

NK

P

A2

Pl

age 6-7

NK

P

A2

Pl

NK

age 9-10

Figure 7: English- and Indonesian-speaking children’s rates
of success on sorting People (P), Non-human Animals (A2),
Plants (Pl), and Natural Kinds (NK) based on alive.

0.10

Alive

Pl

Grow

Figure 6: English- and Indonesian-speaking children’s
success rates on sorting based on alive, die, need food, and
grow. Asterisk indicates significance in pair-wise
comparisons among probes within a language community.

This analysis suggests that the ‘slippage’ between the terms
alive and animal is more pronounced and longer-lived in
English than in Indonesian.
This interpretation is intriguing. But because analyses
based on group means cannot tell us how individual children
interpreted the term alive in the sorting task, we went on, in
the next analysis, to characterize each individual child’s
pattern of response. We identified four possible patterns of
response: ANIMAL1, All Living Things, All Living and
Natural Things, and No Pattern. For example, a child would
be credited with an ANIMAL1 pattern if she included cards 1

These observations were supported by an ANOVA, with
Community (2: Illinois, Jakarta) and Age (3: 4-5, 6-7, 9-10
years old) as between-subjects factors, and Term (4: alive,
die, need food, and grow) as a within-subjects factor. A main
effect of Age, F (2, 256) = 66.06, p < .001, revealed that
sorting improved with age (M4-5= .78, M6-7= .87, M9-10= .95).
142

to 7 (see Figure 5) but excluded the remaining cards. In
assigning children’s patterns of response, we permitted one
error of omission and one error of commission.
Perhaps not surprisingly, younger children were most likely
to respond with No Pattern. However, an examination of the
distribution of the remaining three patterns reveals some very
intriguing trends. See Figure 8.
Consider first the English-speaking children. For 4- to 5year-olds, the predominant response is the ANIMAL1 pattern.
Moreover, the proportion of children exhibiting this pattern
remains comparable across all three ages, with roughly 30–
40% of all English-speaking children at all ages interpret
alive as referring to ANIMAL1, including humans and nonhuman animals, but not plants. In addition, the tendency in
this population to exhibit an All Living Things pattern
increases gradually, but not dramatically, over this same
developmental period. Yet by 9 to 10 years of age, roughly
50% of all children interpret alive as referring to the inclusive
category of LIVING THING.
A very different developmental trajectory is evident for the
Indonesian-speaking children. Like their English-speaking
counterparts, roughly 40% of the youngest children interpret
alive as referring to ANIMAL1. However, in this population,
this interpretation recedes quite dramatically, and is absent
entirely in 9- and 10-year-olds. At the same time, there is a
marked increase in the proportion of children interpreting
alive as referring to the more inclusive category LIVING
THING. By 6 to 7 years of age, this interpretation
outshadows the ANIMAL1 pattern, and by 9 to 10 years of
age, it has been adopted by fully 97% of all children. 1

100
90
80
70

% ANIMAL1
% All Living Things

We interpret this pattern of results as evidence for the
hypothesis that underlying conceptual structures and naming
practices influence the acquisition of the core folkbiologic
concepts such as ALIVE, ANIMAL, their names, and the
relation among them. Children in both communities begin
with some uncertainty about the meaning of alive. A sizeable
proportion appear to interpret is as referring to ANIMAL1,
and thus extend it to animals, but exclude plants. For Englishspeakers, this pattern persists, probably as a default
assumption, because it permits children to circumvent the
problematic polysemy of the term animal. It does so by
appropriating the term (alive) to cover one sense of the term
animal (ANIMAL1), and interpreting the tern animal
primarily to cover the other sense of the term (ANIMAL2).
We suggest that it is for this reason that children as old as 10
years of age continue to mistakenly map alive to ANIMAL1
(rather than mapping it to LIVING THING) in the sorting
task. In contrast, in Indonesian, where there is no such
problematic polysemy, and no intervening node or covert
category corresponding to ANIMAL1, the tendency to map
alive to ANIMAL1 recedes, making way for the correct
mapping for alive to all and only living things (including
plants).

General Discussion
The results of these experiments converge on two
important points. First, the concept LIVING THING may
indeed be available quite early in development. By 6 to 7
years of age, children in both English- and Indonesianspeaking communities made a clear distinction between
living and non-living things, as witnessed by their nearceiling performance when sorting on the basis of terms die,
need food, and grow.
Second, we have documented an intriguing difference in
the developmental trajectory of the term alive. Our results
reveal that Indonesian-speaking children’s tendency to
interpret alive as referring to inclusive LIVING THING
increases markedly over the school-aged years, and reaches
near ceiling success by 9 to 10 years of age. In sharp contrast,
the proportion of English-speaking children exhibiting this
pattern shows only a modest increase, and by 9 to 10 years of
age, only about 50% of the children demonstrated this pattern.
Our explanation for this difference is located at the
intersection of naming and conceptual organization. In
English, the word animal has (at least) two meanings with
overlapping scope: one that includes people and one that
excludes them. Stavy and Wax (1989) have brought up a
similar pattern of polysemy in Hebrew. We suggest that
English- and Hebrew-speaking children’s persistent difficulty
with alive reflects the naming patterns and conceptual
structure in which they are immersed.
In future work, it will be important to examine alternative
explanations for these effects. Because our English and
Indonesian participants all live in urban areas and have
roughly the same amount of experience with the natural
world, we have argued that differences reported here are
related to the naming practices of the two communities. There
are, however, other potential differences between the
communities (e.g., socio-economic status; formal education
system; religious beliefs) and these warrant further

Alive (English)

% Living and Natural
% No Pattern

60
50
40
30
20
10
0
age 4-5

100
90
80
70

age 6-7

% ANIMAL1
% All Living Things

age 9-10

Alive (Indonesian)

% Living and Natural
% No Pattern

60
50
40
30
20
10
0
age 4-5

age 6-7

age 9-10

Figure 8: Patterns of individual children’s sorting on alive.
1

Consistent with our previous analysis, the proportion of
English-speaking children showing the All Living and
Natural Things pattern increased with age, a tendency that
was not found in Indonesian-speaking children.
143

investigation. In particular, it would be fascinating to examine
English-speaking children who are taught that people are not
animals (e.g., children being raised in Christian
fundamentalist communities). These children might perform
more like the Indonesian than the US samples described here.
It will also be important to examine the language input to
children in each community, and to document the frequency
with which the terms animal and alive are used, the scope of
these terms, and the contexts in which they occur (e.g., school
vs. home).
In conclusion, we propose that the concept LIVING
THING is available to young children, and that the
development of folkbiologic knowledge is influenced by the
conceptual structure and naming practices of the language
under acquisition.

Gelman, S. A., & Markman, E. M. (1987). Young children’s
inductions from natural kinds: The role of categories and
appearances. Child Development, 58, 1532-1541.
Graham, S.A., Kilbreath, C.S., & Welder, A.N. (2004). 13month-olds rely on shared labels and shape similarity for
inductive inferences. Child Development, 75, 409-427.
Hatano, G., & Inagaki, K. (1994). Young children’s naïve
theory of biology. Cognition, 50, 171-188.
Hatano, G., Siegler, R. S., Richards, D. D., Inagaki, K., Stavy,
R., & Wax, N. (1993). The development of biological
knowledge: A multi-national study. Cognitive development,
8, 47-62.
Medin, D. L., & Atran, S. (Eds.). (1999). Folkbiology.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Piaget, J. (1954). The Construction of Reality in the Child
(Margaret Cook, Trans.). New York: Basic Books.
Stavy, R., & Wax, N. (1989) Children's conceptions of plants
as living things. Human Development, 32, 88-94.
Waxman, S. R. (1999). The dubbing ceremony revisited:
Object naming and categorization in infancy and early
childhood. In D. L. Medin & S. Atran (Eds.), Folkbiology.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Waxman, S. R. (in press). The gift of curiosity. In W. Ahn,
R.L. Goldstone, B.C. Love, A.B. Markman, & P. Wolff
(Eds.), Categorization Inside and Outside the Laboratory:
Essays in Honor of Douglas L. Medin. Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.
Waxman, S. R., & Booth, A. E. (2001). Seeing pink
elephants: Fourteen-month-olds’ interpretations of novel
nouns and adjectives. Cognitive Psychology, 43, 217-242.
Waxman, S. R., Lynch, E. B., Casey, K. L., & Baer, L.
(1997). Setters and samoyeds: The emergence of
subordinate level categories as a basis for inductive
inference. Developmental Psychology, 33, 1074-1090
Waxman, S. R., & Markow, D. B. (1995). Words as
invitations to form categories: Evidence from 12- to 13month-old infants. Cognitive Psychology, 29, 257-302.
Wellman, H. M., & Gelman, S. A. (1992). Cognitive
development: Foundational theories of core domains.
Annual Review of Psychology, 43, 337-375.
Woodward, A. L. (1999). Infants' ability to distinguish
between purposeful and non-purposeful behaviors. Infant
Behavior & Development, 22, 145-160.
Woodward, A. L., Sommerville, J. A., & Guajardo, J. J.
(2001). How infants make sense of intentional action. In B.
F. Malle & L. J. Moses (Eds.), Intentions and
intentionality: Foundations in social cognition. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by NIH R01 HD 41653
(Waxman and Medin) and NSF BCS-0132469 (Medin and
Waxman). We thank Jeanne Arijanti and Vini Putri for their
assistance with recruitment and data collection. We are
indebted to our cross-cultural team: Jennie Woodring, Tracy
Lavin, Sara Unsworth, and Nathan Winkler-Rhoades for their
insights and collaboration, and to the children, parents, and
teachers at Walker and Disney schools in Evanston and
Chicago, Illinois, and Regina Pacis school in Jakarta,
Indonesia for their participation.

References
Balaban, M. T. & Waxman, S. R. (1997). Do words facilitate
object categorization in 9-month-old infants? Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 64, 3-26.
Berlin, B. (1992). Ethnobiological Classification. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Bertenthal, B. I. (1993). Infants' perception of biomechanical
motions: Intrinsic image and knowledge-based constraints.
In C. Granrud (Ed.), Visual perception and cognition in
infancy. Carnegie Mellon symposia on cognition. Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Carey, S. (1985). Conceptual change in childhood.
Cambridge, MA: Bradford Books.
Echols, C. H., & Marti, C. N. (2004). The Identification of
Words and Their Meanings: From Perceptual Biases to
Language-Specific Cues. In D.G. Hall & S.R. Waxman
(Eds.), Weaving a Lexicon. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gelman, R. (1990). First principles organize attention to and
learning about relevant data: Number and the animateinanimate distinction as examples. Cognitive Science, 14,
79-106
Gelman, S. A. (2003). The Essential Child: Origins of
Essentialism in Everyday Thought. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

144

