UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Repetition-Shift Plot Structure: A Cognitive Influence on Selection in the Marketplace of
Ideas

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/96p2r8qs

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Heath, Chip
Loewenstein, Jeffrey

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Repetition-Shift Plot Structure:
A Cognitive Influence on Selection in the Marketplace of Ideas
Jeffrey Loewenstein (jeffrey.loewenstein@mccombs.utexas.edu)
McCombs School of Business, 1 University Station B6300
Austin, TX 78712 USA

Chip Heath (chip.heath@stanford.edu)
Stanford Graduate School of Business, 518 Memorial Drive
Stanford, CA 94305 USA

Abstract

violated, and therefore make a non-event (e.g., the nondestruction of a house) interesting.
Jokes also provide ready examples of the Repetition-Shift
plot structure (cf. Sacks, 1992, in the essay “The dirty joke
as a technical object; Temporal and sequential
organization”). A common joke form has three people
entering a bar, standing at the gates of heaven, sitting in a
duck blind, and so forth. For example, there is an old joke
about two cabdrivers and a priest who are standing at the
gates of heaven. The first cabdriver enters and is richly
rewarded, the second cabdriver enters and is also richly
rewarded, then the priest enters and receives little. The
events and their ordering pose a puzzle for the punch line to
resolve: why are cabdrivers favored and priests not? “In
your sermons, people slept; in their cabs, people prayed.”
There are two key commonalities in the examples just
given from children’s stories and jokes. First, they use a
sequence of similar events to set up an expectation. Second,
they have a final, contrasting event used as a payoff. We
term this the Repetition-Shift plot structure. It is a general
way of structuring information to generate a specific,
potentially unusual expectation that can then be violated,
making the information memorable.

Cognitive Science research on how to sequence examples to
facilitate learning and memory has implications for how to
structure information to facilitate its social distribution.
Specifically, repetition among obviously similar items
capitalizes on comparison to establish a pattern, enabling a
final contrasting item to break the pattern and be interesting.
We term this the Repetition-Shift plot structure. It is
widespread: it is present in roughly a quarter of current fullpage magazine advertisements, and about a third of story
jokes and folktales. Results from an experiment show when
and for whom jokes with this structure should be more
interesting than those without the initial repetition. Thus we
document evidence for a cognitive factor for how information
is selected in the marketplace of ideas.
Keywords: Sequence learning; marketplace of ideas; plot
structure; folktales; advertisements; jokes.

Introduction
Why do we know and tell some stories but not others?
Surely there are many and diverse factors influencing
selection in the marketplace of ideas, such as that they
provide information (Allport & Postman, 1947). People also
seem to prefer stories that robustly invoke emotions (Heath,
Bell & Sternberg, 2001). To this list we would like to add
another factor: how the information is structured.
Specifically, we will argue that cognitive science data on
sequence learning, both from category learning and schema
learning research, implies that some ways of ordering
information should focus attention and lead to learning.
Stories for young children provide natural examples of the
Repetition-Shift plot structure. In The Three Little Pigs,
three events follow in close succession. One pig builds a
straw house, which a wolf blows down. Another pig builds a
stick house, which the wolf also destroys. The third pig
builds a brick house, which the wolf cannot topple. The
climactic third event is interesting because of what does not
happen, and it is the initial events that enable children to
understand this. The first two events are highly similar,
inviting children to compare them. Comparing them enables
children to find their commonalities, and to generate a
precise expectation about the third event (that the wolf will
destroy the third house). This expectation can then be

Experimental and Theoretical Support
Presenting multiple highly similar events might seem
wasteful. Yet people are drawn to compare highly similar
items that are juxtaposed. And comparing even highly
similar items can enable people to notice subtle and
interesting structures they have in common, as shown by
both the category learning and schema learning literatures.
Category learning research has long argued that people
compare examples to generate an understanding of the
category of which they are members (classification learning
tasks; Nosofsky, Palmeri & Mckinley, 1994). Particularly if
learning is unsupervised, the order in which people
encounter examples matters, and blocking together members
of the same category helps (Clapper & Bower, 1994). There
is further evidence that some choices among available
category members matter, and that it helps to receive several
central members first (Avrahami et al, 1997). This line of
research suggests that plot structures presenting multiple
similar events in succession should encourage people to
1319

infer a common structure and generate expectations that
further examples have the same structure.
Research on schema learning also suggests benefits of
comparing similar examples (Elio & Anderson, 1984).
Specifically, these studies show that comparing examples
leads people to focus on commonalities (Gick & Holyoak,
1983), particularly common relational structure (Gentner,
1983). Although comparing examples that share relational
structure is beneficial, most people do not spontaneously
compare analogous examples (i.e., examples that share
relational structure but not obvious surface commonalities;
Loewenstein, Thompson & Gentner, 1999). Most schema
abstraction studies examine comparisons between analogies,
but nonetheless there are theoretical arguments and data to
suggest that comparing highly similar items initially is
beneficial.
Gentner and colleagues’ research on progressive
alignment most clearly makes the argument that comparing
similar items can generate understandings of structure
(Kuehne et al, 2000; Namy & Gentner, 2002). Gentner and
Kotovsky (1996) introduced the term progressive alignment
to capture a generalization of their finding that children
comparing examples of a pattern in one dimension (biglittle-big) subsequently noticed analogies to the same pattern
expressed in a different dimension (dark-light-dark).
Loewenstein and Gentner (2001) showed a similar transfer
effect with spatial configurations. Children who saw dog
bones hidden in two highly similar dollhouses were better
able to find a bone hidden in a third, dissimilar dollhouse
than children who only saw one initial dollhouse. The
implication from these studies is that comparing highly
similar items is a springboard to seeing analogies, rather
than a dead end of reinforcing initial understandings.
There is also research supporting the importance of a
contrasting event that provides a payoff. Schank (1982)
argued that people should attend to expectation violations,
and a meta-analysis of experimental research showed that
violations of expectations are better remembered than
expectation-consistent information (Rojahn and Pettigrew,
1992). Further, the more prominent the expectation, the
more likely people are to remember the violation of it
(Sakamoto & Love, 2004).
In short, cognitive science research provides support for
both aspects of the Repetition-Shift plot structure: an initial
series of similar events leads people to attend to their
commonalities and generate an expectation about additional
similar examples, and deviations from that expectation
should bring additional attention and be memorable.

Overview of the Studies
We had two goals in this research. The first was to
document the prevalence of the Repetition-Shift plot
structure. If the research on learning from sequences of
examples holds in natural settings, and these effects
influence what information people are interested in,
remember, and choose to communicate to others, then the
Repetition-Shift plot structure should be common.

Accordingly, we present analyses of corpuses of folktales,
advertisements and jokes documenting the use of the
Repetition-Shift plot structure. These three different kinds
of content are all subject to severe selection pressures—each
item is at risk of being collectively forgotten. Accordingly,
if the Repetition-Shift plot structure is commonly used, this
would provide strongly suggestive evidence for its utility. A
second goal was to generate experimental evidence as to
when and for whom the plot structure should be useful.

Plot Structures in Folktales
Children’s stories, such as The Three Little Pigs and The
Three Billy Goats Gruff often seem to use the RepetitionShift plot structure. Gentner first called attention to this
connection by calling the Loewenstein and Gentner (2001)
spatial mapping experiment “the Billy Goats Gruff study.”
Folktales provide an opportunity to examine a broad base of
such stories, and allow us to emphasize stories recorded
from oral transmission. Oral transmission places stronger
demands on comprehension and memory than literary
transmission and accordingly orally transmitted stories
should be more likely to make use of the Repetition-Shift
plot structure (for a broader examination of the cognitive
psychology of oral tales, see Rubin, 1995). Thus folktale
collections provide an indication of selection pressures over
a long history of oral transmission, and hence potentially
crucial insight into selection in the marketplace of ideas.
The canonical Western source of folktales is the
collection compiled by the Grimm brothers. It includes
classic tales such as Rapunzel, Hansel and Gretel,
Cinderella, Little Red Riding Hood and Snow White. There
are multiple translations available, which allowed us to code
three versions (including one claimed to be a poor
translation) to ensure that plot structure was not altered
across translations. Finally, it is a well-studied collection of
folktales, and we have information as to which stories were
from oral sources and which were from literary sources. We
could even examine some of the folktales that the Grimm
brothers omitted from their final edition for further insights.
We took a sample of Grimm folktales and analyzed them
for the use of the Repetition-Shift plot structure both as the
main plot for the entire story, as well as for just a portion of
the plot. We also coded for sheer repetition without a shift
(i.e., without a contrasting final event) as a control for the
use of repetition alone as a memory aid. In addition, we
coded the number of events in each plot structure. It is
possible that because the number three has important
cultural significance, stories with three events may be
prevalent due to cultural resonance, rather than, or in
addition to, cognitive reasons. Three is the minimal number
of events needed to generate the Repetition-Shift structure.

Methods
Materials We examined 90 Grimm folktales. These fell into
three categories derived from Zipes (1987). According to
Zipes, 160 of the full set of Grimm folktales were taken
from oral traditions, and we randomly selected 43 of these.
A further 51 tales were from literary traditions, and we
1320

randomly selected 24 of these. Zipes also records an
additional 31 tales that were omitted by the Grimm brothers
from their final edition. We randomly selected 23 of these.
Some of these were omitted from the final Grimm collection
because they were too similar to included folktales (n=9),
and the rest were omitted because they were deemed unfit
for the final collection (n=14), due to being too gruesome,
baroque, allegorical, more a legend than a folktale,
insufficiently German, and so forth. Finally, to ensure that
the plot structures were inherent to the folktales, we coded
the 67 folktales included in the Grimm brothers’ final
edition in two additional translations, one of which was
another well regarded translation (Manheim, 1977) and the
other of which was a poorly regarded translation (Barnes &
Noble, 1993). Our codings were identical across the three
collections.
Coding We coded three aspects of each folktale’s plot
structure. First, we coded whether the Repetition-Shift
structure was the dominant plot for the entire folktale.
Second, we coded whether the Repetition-Shift structure
accounted for a minor portion of the plot. Third, we coded
whether repetition occurred as either a major or minor part
of the plot structure. The distinction between the RepetitionShift plot structure and repetition was whether the last item
differed from all the items coming before it substantially
more than the initial items differed from each other.
Because the latter two codes could apply to a minor part of
the plot, the three codes were independent—a given folktale
could have received all three. In addition to the presence or
absence of these plot structures, coders also recorded the
number of events in the plot structure. For example, if a
story described three knights fruitlessly attempting to rescue
a princess prior to her successful rescue by a shepherd boy,
this would have been recorded as an instance of the
Repetition-Shift structure as the main plot, composed of 4
events.
One coder rated every folktale. A second coder rated 46.
Agreement for the main plot structure was 80%, for minor
plot structure was 78%, and for repetition was 72%. Across
the three structures, the coders agreed on the number of
events, given both agreed that the given kind was present,
83% of the time.

origins (38%, 49/129) than literary origins (22%, 16/72)
used these plot structures, χ2 = 5.25, p < .05. And just
examining the Repetition-Shift plot structure, 74% (32/43)
of those with oral origins incorporated the structure, in
contrast to 42% (10/24) of those with literary origins, χ2 =
7.06, p < .01.
The Repetition-Shift plot structure requires at least three
events—two similar events followed by a contrasting one.
Yet the number of initial events can be more than two, and
we found folktales with two to five initial events. The
structure was more likely to have more than two initial
events if it was the main plot structure (43%, 10/23) than a
minor plot element (14%, 4/28), χ2 = 5.40, p < .05.
Repetition also extended across a broad number of events,
from 3 to 12, with many repetitions of more than 3 (43%,
6/14). Thus, although several Grimm folktales state that “all
good things come in threes” and three is a culturally
important number, repetition and the Repetition-Shift
structure are prevalent in more numerous instantiations.
We found additional evidence consistent with an
advantage of the Repetition-Shift plot structure in analyzing
the two kinds of folktales the Grimm brothers omitted. One
set of folktales was omitted for being too similar to included
stories. Of these, 78% (7/9) included the structure in some
form, and 89% (8/9) of the matching stories that were
actually included have the structure. A second set of
folktales was omitted for a variety of negative reasons, and
just 21% (3/14) use the Repetition-Shift structure, which is
reliably less frequently than in the folktales omitted due to
redundancy by a Fisher’s Exact Test, p < .05.
Finally, to generalize beyond the Grimm folktale
collection, a parallel analysis was done on a random
selection from a culturally diverse sample of folktales: Jane
Yolen’s (1986) Folktales from Around the World. Two
results were striking. First, 43% of the sample used the
Repetition-Shift structure as their main plot structure.
Second, these folktales were from cultures spanning the
globe. Taken together, evidence from folktales shows the
Repetition-Shift structure is prevalent, consistent with the
claim that sequence learning findings indicate how to
structure information such that it is more likely to be
interesting, remembered, and communicated.

Results and Discussion

Plot Structures in Advertisements

Examining the oral and literary folktales included in the
final edition, 63% (42/67) used the Repetition-Shift
structure to organize a main or minor plot. In contrast, just
21% (14/67) used repetition as a plot structure, a clear
difference, χ2 = 24.05, p < .001. Surprisingly, given the
prevalence of the Repetition-Shift structure, we contacted
half a dozen folklore experts, including a translator of the
Grimm collection, and all discussed recurring motifs and
repetition, but none had previously abstracted the
Repetition-Shift plot structure as a generalization.
If the Repetition-Shift structure and repetition were useful
aids to limited attention and processing capacity, then one
would expect them to be more common in oral than literary
folktales. This prediction held: more folktales with oral

Folktales were subject to the selection pressures of oral
transmission. We turn to a different but also intense arena
with respect to selection pressure: modern magazine
advertising. An advertisement’s effectiveness depends in
part on whether potentially distracted people readily find
them sufficiently interesting that they spend more than a
moment looking at them. Advertisements are also strongly
visual. Nonetheless, because the predictions from sequence
learning should apply equally well to advertisements as to
folktales, we expected to find evidence for the presence of
the Repetition-Shift plot structure.
Even a casual examination of advertising indicates the
Repetition-Shift structure is used in the domain. For
1321

example, a highly successful advertising campaign from the
past 10 years is Mastercard’s “priceless” campaign, which
uses the Repetition-Shift structure. For example: “18 speed
bike: $1235. Shipping bike to Italy: $281. Map of Tuscany:
4000 lira. Seven days without email: priceless.” Although
the advertising agency that created MasterCard’s campaign
has generated numerous variations of the above example for
multiple media, discussions with members of the firm
suggest that they did not identify the ads plot as a general
structure.
We examined full-page magazine advertisements because
they are common and sufficiently large that they could
contain more information than just a brand name, slogan, or
logo. We randomly sampled from an online archive of fullpage magazine advertisements. We looked for our structure
in main words and images only, not in fine print or
paragraphs. We also coded for rhetorical tricolon as a
control for cultural preference for the number three and for
rhetorical nicety. Tricolon is repetition in threes, such as
“better, faster, stronger.” Tricolon does not require a “shift”
at the end, only applies to words, and only applies to sets of
three items.

number used with text was 11; the higher numbers came
from visual uses.
The examination of advertisements showed that the
structure is in widespread and varied use. Our numbers
imply—and casual testing supports—that on average, one
may expect the typical magazine to have a couple
advertisements using the Repetition-Shift structure.

Plot Structures in Jokes

Materials We examined 80 full-page advertisements
originally published 1990-2003. We randomly selected
advertisements from Adflip.Com’s online database. We
generated one sample of 40 advertisements drawing from
their entire database, and a second sample just from
automobile advertisements to ensure that any results were
not due to either a particular industry or to the nature of the
non-representative Adflip.com sample itself. As results were
similar across both sets, we combine them for our
discussion here.
Coding We coded for the Repetition-Shift plot structure as
well as tricolon. We only coded for these in the primary text
and, for the Repetition-Shift structure, main images in the
advertisement. We ignored any text in paragraphs. Two
coders rated all the advertisements, and agreed on 89%.

A third arena for examining plot structures in information
under selection pressure is jokes. If jokes are not funny, they
do not persist. As humor relies at least in part on novelty
and surprise, a structure that can convey a novel pattern and
direct attention (if only to allow misdirection) should be
valuable. The structure should also facilitate a joke’s being
remembered and retold, thereby aiding its transmission and
diffusion. We hypothesized the Repetition-Shift plot
structure fulfilled these demands.
As with advertisements, there is reason to think jokes use
the Repetition-Shift structure. There are standard joke forms
that use it—such as “three guys walk into a bar…” or “a
priest, a minister and a rabbi are standing at the gates of
heaven…” In these jokes, the first two characters set a
pattern for the third to break. There is a further reason to
think that these may not be isolated examples. Comedians
have a phrase, “the law of threes” that refers to many things,
but at least one of its meanings seems to overlap with the
Repetition-Shift structure. It has been summarized as “setup,
setup, punchline.” Comedians are the one group thus far that
we have surveyed who already seemed to know about the
Repetition-Shift structure.
To examine whether the Repetition-Shift structure is
prevalent, we gathered a sample of jokes from Jokes.Com, a
database run by Comedy Central, and the self-proclaimed
largest joke site on the web. In addition, because the website
allows people to rate the jokes on a scale from 1 to 5, and
lists their average ratings, we can test whether the
proportion of jokes with the structure increases by rating
level.

Results and Discussion

Methods

A quarter (25%, 20/80) of the sample of full-page magazine
advertisements 1990-2003 used the Repetition-Shift plot
structure as their main structure. Tricolon was not as
common: 11% (9/80) of the advertisements used it. This is a
reliably lower proportion than for the Repetition-Shift
structure, χ2 = 5.10, p < .05.
Examining the advertisements with the structure showed
it was instantiated with considerable variation. For some,
the structure was solely in the words, for others it was solely
in the images, and for some, the words and images together
conveyed the structure. The most common form of purely
visual use was to have one contrasting item among a set of
highly similar items, such as a convertible automobile in a
row of deck chairs by a pool or a running shoe among a set
of hiking boots. The number of items in the structure varied
considerably, from the minimum of 3 to 23. The greatest

We downloaded 197 jokes and their mean ratings by
website visitors from Jokes.Com. We constrained our search
to story jokes, as opposed to puns, satires, one-liners, top ten
lists, and so forth. Although jokes were categorized into
standard topics (lawyers, bars, offices, politics, and so
forth), we drew from the miscellaneous category so as not to
be constrained to a particular content area. Finally, we
limited ourselves to clean jokes. We took an initial sample
(n=174) of all available such jokes, then supplemented it
with additional jokes just at the low and high ends of the
rating scale, although even so we had low numbers at both
ends. One rater coded all 197 jokes. Two additional coders
also rated the initial sample of 174 jokes for use of the
Repetition-Shift plot structure, with reasonable agreement
with the initial coder (α = .79).

Methods

1322

but also for whom and under what circumstances. We will
present some data from a larger study, focusing here on
jokes taken from the Jokes.Com sample just discussed.
To set up our predictions, we will draw an analogy to
Bowdle and Gentner’s (2005) career of metaphor
hypothesis. They argued that metaphors are initially
processed as comparisons (a billboard is like a wart), but as
they become conventional, they are processed as category
inclusion statements (encyclopedias are goldmines, where
goldmine has a conventional categorical meaning of “a
source of value”). We suggest that the efficacy of the
Repetition-Shift plot structure should be similar. People
should need to draw comparisons across repeated events to
set up an expectation if they are unfamiliar with the
common structure in the events. However, jokes with
conventional themes (e.g., greedy lawyers, dumb blondes)
should not require initial comparison, as one example
should be sufficient to invoke the expectation. Thus we
have three predictions. First, people unfamiliar with
particular joke types should find jokes with the RepetitionShift structure more interesting, funny, surprising, and so
forth than jokes lacking the initial repetition. Second, people
familiar with the joke types should not show a preference
for jokes with initial repetition. Third, conventionality
should reduce people’s ratings of jokes: people familiar with
the joke types should rate them as less funny and interesting
overall than those unfamiliar with the joke types.

Results and Discussion
We found that 36% (70/197) of the jokes used the
Repetition-Shift structure. As seen in Figure 1, the
proportion of jokes with the structure generally increased
with their mean Jokes.Com rating. These ratings ranged
from 1 (“blows”) to 5 (“hysterical”), and mean ratings were
given in 0.5 increments. Because of low sample size at the
tails, we collapsed the bottom three ratings categories (1,
1.5, 2), and subsequent pairs of categories (2.5 and 3; 3.5
and 4, 4.5 and 5) to generate a statistical test for the
association, which proved reliable, χ2(3) = 9.55, p < .05.
Thus not only was the Repetition-Shift structure used, it was
more likely to be used in funnier jokes (at least according to
the people visiting the Jokes.Com website).
There was another intriguing aspect of the sample. There
were 14 pairs of jokes that were essentially alternative
versions of the same joke, and 9 (64%) of these pairs used
the Repetition-Shift structure. This is consistent with the
claim that the Repetition-Shift structure aids selection in the
marketplace of ideas. It is also reminiscent of the finding of
substantial use of the structure in the folktales the Grimm
brothers omitted due to repetition.
As with the folktales, we conducted a parallel analysis
using an alternative sample. We drew 60 jokes from Milton
Berle’s (1989) collection of over 10,000 jokes. These jokes
can be roughly characterized as one-liners and story jokes
based on length. We simply ignored the one-liners and
randomly drew a sample of longer jokes (i.e., those at least
6 lines long). We found that 30% (18/60) used the
Repetition-Shift structure, confirming the prevalence of the
structure within samples of story jokes.

Methods
Participants A group of 40 university students participated
for a payment. Included in this total are a sub-sample of
non-native language speakers (n=14) who served as a
population that should have been unfamiliar with the joke
themes.
Materials We used a subset of the Jokes.Com jokes from
the previous corpus analysis. We selected jokes from which
we could easily remove the initial repetition in the setup.
The jokes were otherwise unchanged.
Procedure People read 36 jokes, half with and half without
the Repetition-Shift structure. The first two jokes did not
vary, but across subjects the remaining items were presented
with and without initial repetition. The key measure was the
overall rating of jokes with the structure compared to those
without. The ratings were an average of people’s responses
to four questions about each joke (on a scale from 1 “not at
all” to 7 “very”; α = .94): how interesting it was, how likely
they would be to show it to a friend sitting nearby, how
surprising it was, and how funny it was.

Figure 1: The proportion of jokes using the RepetitionShift plot structure by average Jokes.Com rating.

Results and Discussion
As shown in Figure 2, the results confirmed our three
hypotheses. Non-Native English speakers preferred jokes
with the Repetition-Shift structure to those without the
initial repetition, 4.67 versus 4.15, t(13) = 2.23, p < .05.
Native speakers found the jokes far less interesting (3.29
versus the non-natives’ mean rating of 4.41), t(38) = 3.25, p
< .005, and did not show a preference for the Repetition-

Experimental Manipulation of Plot Structures
Given the substantial prevalence of the Repetition-Shift
structure in three different domains, we now turn to an
experimental test of it. We were interested in examining not
just whether alterations to the structure would be harmful,
1323

Shift structure (3.28 versus 3.30). The implications of these
results are that the Repetition-Shift plot structure is useful
primarily to establish expectations for novel patterns.
Familiarity removes the need for the initial repetition.

References

Figure 2: Average joke ratings for jokes using the
Repetition-Shift structure (O3) and those with initial
repetition removed (A2) for Non-Native and Native English
speakers.

Conclusion
Cognitive Science research on learning yields insights not
only into what individuals know, but into what groups and
cultures know. Research on category and schema learning
suggested a plot structure that could be interesting, easily
understood, and well remembered. We found it to be
prevalent in samples of folktales, advertisements and jokes.
Further, initial experimentation was consistent with
extensions of theorizing, as we found that the structure was
particularly helpful to people unfamiliar with the content,
and people who were familiar but distracted. The
implication of this work is that Cognitive Science provides a
basis for explaining how to structure information to increase
the likelihood that people will acquire and transmit it. The
Repetition-Shift plot structure appears to be a cognitive
influence on selection in the marketplace of ideas.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dedre Gentner and Michael Morris for thoughtful
discussion of these issues.

1324

Allport, G. W., & Postman, L. J. (1947). The Psychology of
Rumor. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Avrahami, J., Kareev, Y., Bogot, Y., Caspi, R., Dunaevsky,
S., & Lerner, S. (1997). Teaching by examples:
Implications for the process of category acquisition. The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 50A(3),
586-606.
Barnes & Noble (1993). Grimm’s Complete Fairy Tales.
New York: Barnes & Noble Books.
Berle, M. (1989). Milton Berle’s Private Joke File. New
York: Three Rivers Press.
Clapper, J. P., Bower, G. H. (1994). Category invention in
unsupervised learning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 20(2),
443-460.
Elio, R., & Anderson, J. R. (1984). The effects of
information order and learning mode on schema
abstraction. Memory & Cognition, 12(1), 20-30.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Heath, C., Bell, C., & Sternberg, E. (2001). Emotional
selection in memes: The case of urban legends. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 81(6), 1028-1041.
Kuehne, S. E., Forbus, K. D., Gentner, D., & Quinn, B.
(2000). SEQL - Category learning as progressive
abstraction using structure mapping. Proceedings of the
Twenty-second Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society, 770-775.
Loewenstein, J., Thompson, L., & Gentner, D. (1999).
Analogical encoding facilitates knowledge transfer in
negotiation. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 6(4), 586597.
Manheim, R. (Tr.) (1977). Grimms’ Tales for Young and
Old. New York: Anchor Books.
Namy, L. L,. & Gentner, D. (2002). Making a silk purse out
of two sow's ears: Young children's use of comparison in
category learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 131, 5-15.
Nosofsky, R. M., Palmeri, T. J., & Mckinley, S. C. (1994).
Rule-plus-exception model of classification learning.
Psychological Review, 101, 53–97.
Rojahn, K., & Pettigrew, T. F. (1992). Memory for schemarelevant information: A meta-analytic resolution. British
Journal of Social Psychology,31(2), 81–109.
Rubin, D. (1995). Memory in oral traditions: The cognitive
psychology of epic, ballads, and counting-out rhymes.
Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Sacks, H. (1992). Lectures on conversation. Cambridge,
MA: Blackwell.
Schank, R. C. (1982). Dynamic memory. Cambridge
University Press.
Yolen, J. (Ed.) (1986). Favorite Folktales from Around the
World. New York: Pantheon Books.
Zipes, J. (Tr.) (1987). The Complete Fairy Tales of the
Brothers Grimm. New York: Bantam Books.

