UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Toward Modeling Contextual Information in Web Navigation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0p7528tp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Juvina, Ion
Karbor, Poyan
Pauw, Brian
et al.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Toward Modeling Contextual Information in Web Navigation
Ion Juvina (ion@cs.uu.nl)
Herre van Oostendorp (herre@cs.uu.nl)
Poyan Karbor (poyan@cs.uu.nl)
Brian Pauw (brian@cs.uu.nl)
Center for Content and Knowledge Engineering, Institute of Information and Computing Sciences, Utrecht University
14 Padualaan, 3584CH Utrecht, The Netherlands

validating the model and examining its practical relevance.
Results of this study are commented and further
developments of the model are suggested.

Abstract
Existing cognitive models of web navigation mainly address
the process of assessing relevance (‘information scent’) of
screen objects to user’s goals. Recent research shows that
users decisions are based not only on the assessed relevance
of the currently available screen objects, but also on relevance
of objects that were encountered in earlier steps of the
navigation session. We propose the concept of ‘path
adequacy’, that is the semantic relevance of a navigation path,
to be used in augmenting an existing cognitive model of web
navigation. It is argued, based on theories and models of text
comprehension, that path adequacy models the role of
contextual information in assessing the relevance of incoming
information. Then, we show that the augmented model is able
to simulate some aspects of task execution and generate
navigation support. The generated navigation support had a
positive impact on users’ performance in realistic web
navigation tasks. Finally, some aspects regarding the validity
of the proposed model and its practical relevance are
discussed.

Cognitive Models of Web Navigation

Introduction

There are various approaches in cognitive modeling of web
navigation behavior. Pirolli and Fu (2003) developed SNIFACT (Scent-based Navigation and Information Foraging in
the ACT architecture), a computational cognitive model that
simulates users performing web tasks. Their model predicts
navigational choices, i.e., where to go next and when to stop
(leave the website) based on the concept of information
scent. Information scent is calculated as a mutual relevance
between the user’s goal and link texts based on word
occurrences and co-occurrences in the Internet. Kitajima,
Blackmon, and Polson (2000) introduced CoLiDeS – a
Comprehension-based Linked model of Deliberate Search.
CoLiDeS measures relatedness of a particular screen object
to the user’s goal (information scent) based on three factors:
semantic similarity, frequency and literal matching.
Semantic similarity is calculated based on co-occurrences
between words and documents with the aid of an algorithm
called Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA). Miller and
Remington (2004) model the common situation in which
link labels are not fully descriptive for their targets or users
are not knowledgeable enough to accurately assess the
relevance of link descriptions to their goals. Their model,
called MESA (Method for Evaluating Site Architectures),
does not give an account for how link relevancies are
assessed, but takes them as input. It rather focuses on
effectiveness of various link selection strategies, given
various link relevancies and site structures.

Several attempts to model cognitive processes involved in
web navigation are based on the assessed semantic
relevance of screen objects to users’ goals (‘information
scent’) (Kitajima, Blackmon, & Polson, 2000; Pirolli & Fu,
2003). In a previous study we found out that not only
semantic but also spatial processes are employed in web
navigation tasks (Juvina & van Oostendorp, 2004). Based
on this and also on other findings (Chen, 2000; Howes,
Payne, & Richardson, 2002; Wen, 2003), we assume that
assessing relevance of a particular screen object to user’s
goal depends not only on user’s knowledge about that
particular screen object but also on the contexts of a
navigation session, i.e. what has been done up to that
moment, where the current position is represented in the
information space, how close to the target the user perceives
herself etc. In this study, we argue for considering ‘path
adequacy’, that is the relevance of a navigation path to the
user’s goal, beside ‘information scent’, in modeling web
navigation. This would be a first step in modeling the role of
contextual information in selecting specific navigation
actions.
The next section introduces the model of web navigation
that we propose, its cognitive grounds and practical
relevance. Then a study is described, which attempted at

CoLiDeS+

1078

We have made few amendments to an existing cognitive
model of web navigation, namely CoLiDeS (Kitajima,
Blackmon, & Polson, 2000), and we have conducted a study
to refine the model and check its validity. The altered model
has been labeled CoLiDeS+, to indicate that it is a working
version, shares the main assumptions with the original
CoLiDeS, and is intended to eventually be an augmented
model.
CoLiDeS compares the user’s goal with link texts on web
pages using Latent Semantic Analysis and selects the link
that best matches the user’s goal. The selected link is
clicked on and the process of judging link relevance
(information scent) and selecting a link is repeated until the

user’s goal is attained or the user gives up. CoLiDeS+
brings in the concept of “path adequacy” as a complement
to the concept of “information scent”. Path adequacy is the
semantic similarity between a navigation path and a user’s
goal. A navigation path is a succession of links that have
been selected prior to a particular moment in a navigation
session. A high similarity means that the path is likely to
lead toward the targeted item. Previous research found
significant positive correlations between path adequacy,
spatial ability and task success, respectively (Juvina & van
Oostendorp, 2004). Path adequacy and information scent are
both calculated based on semantic similarity, although they
model different aspects: information scent models the value
of incoming information and path adequacy models the
value of past selections. Users are assumed to base their
selections based not only on goal-relevance of incoming
information but also on whether a candidate selection is
consistent with past selections or not. Therefore, in
CoLiDeS+ selecting a link on a specific web page is a
function of goal description, link description and path
description.
CoLiDeS models mainly the ideal situation of forward
linear navigation; backtracking steps are considered erratic
actions. When no particular object on the current page
sufficiently matches the user’s goal, an impasse is said to
have occurred. Solutions to impasses are only described and
not computationally modeled by Kitajima, Blackmon and
Polson (2000). However, backtracking and impasses seem
to be natural in web navigation and rather frequent
(Cockburn & McKenzie, 2001; Wen, 2003). Therefore they
need to be modeled within the same framework as forward
linear navigation. Miller and Remington (2004) propose
navigation strategies to deal with ambiguity of link labels or
with users’ errors in judging link relevance.
CoLiDeS+ tries to incorporate navigation strategies. First,
it maintains a developing representation of the information
space being navigated and it remembers past selections.
Then it tries to prevent impasses by checking at each step
for latent impasses based on path adequacy. A latent
impasse occurs when path adequacy does not increase after
selecting a link and it is a possible reason to switch the path.
It is called latent because it only signals a possible path
switch and it causes considering concurrent paths. If a
concurrent path with a better adequacy is found, the current
path is switched toward the concurrent one. If impasses still
occur, CoLiDeS+ reacts with a strategy that we called “next
best” and it is to some extent similar with the opportunistic
strategy of Miller and Remington (2004). “Next best” means
that not only the link with the highest similarity to the user’s
goal is considered but also links with lower similarities
provided that they contribute to an increase in path
adequacy. And eventually the options of backtracking one
or more pages or going to index pages are available.
A short description of the algorithm used by CoLiDeS+,
presented below, shows how task execution is simulated and
how the concept of path adequacy is considered in addition
to link relevance (see also figure 1):
• A task description is taken as input and assumed to be
equivalent to the user’s goal.

1079

•
•

•
•

A web page is attended to, parsed in several areas, and
a particular area is focused on (e.g. a menu).
Menu entries are comprehended (based on how
semantically similar to the user’s goal they are) and one
entry (the one that is most relevant to the user’s goal) is
selected and acted on (e.g. clicked on).
A new page is attended to and if the target information
cannot be found, the cycle is reinitialized.
The selected element is retained in a memory structure
that maintains user’s navigation paths.
Task description
Previous
webpage

Start
Current webpage
Target
page ?

Stop

Yes

Increment
path; click

No
Focused-on area
Comprehension (LSA)
Selection (best similarity)

Increasing
similarity?

Yes

No

Buffer: Maintains current path
Calculates path adequacy (PA)
Stores old paths and their adequacies

Increasing
PA?

Yes

No
Next best

Re-focus
Back

Figure 1. A simplified diagram of the algorithm that
implements the CoLiDeS+ model
•

Starting with the second cycle, a navigation path is
available to be taken into consideration when screen
objects are checked for their goal relevance. A metric
called path adequacy is calculated as a semantic

•
•

•

similarity between a path and the user’s goal. Selections
of screen objects to be acted on are made if they
contribute to an increase in path adequacy.
Otherwise an impasse is declared and dealt with by
considering “next best” options, changing the focusedon area and backtracking.
If the focused-on area happens to be a search engine,
keywords are generated by the LSA nearest neighbors
module (terms that are semantically most similar to the
user’s goal), and the engine’s results page is treated as
any other web page.
The algorithm stops when the current page contains the
target information.

Cognitive grounds. CoLiDeS is based on a text
comprehension theory; a similarity in basic principles is
assumed between the process of reading a text and
navigating through an information space. We maintain the
analogy between text comprehension and web navigation
but specify some particular aspects of the latter.
As the reader proceeds through a text, s/he constructs an
episodic memory representation of the incoming
information and uses background knowledge from semantic
memory (van den Broek, Rapp & Kendeou, 2005). Since
human attentional resources are limited, only a small part of
the reader’s memory is active at a given moment, i.e. only a
small amount of knowledge resources can be employed in
current processing. What determines which concepts are
activated? According to the authors of the Landscape model
of reading (van den Broek, Young, Tzeng & Linderholm,
1999) there are several sources of activation: the text
element that is currently being processed, the preceding
recently processed knowledge, the knowledge processed in
earlier phases of a reading session, and the reader’s
background knowledge. Since the web navigation tasks that
we modeled are goal-directed, we consider the user’s goal
as the primary source of activation. Thus, in CoLiDeS+,
information can be actively involved in current processing
because: (1) it is the current goal, (2) it is attended to
(incoming text elements), (3) it has some residual activation
carried over from previous cycles of processing (previously
encountered text elements), (4) it is required for
understanding of current information, and (5) it is strongly
associated with an already active knowledge element.
Existing models of cognition (e.g. ACT-R, Landscape)
assume that concepts can be activated to different degrees.
CoLiDeS+ has not yet a complete implementation of this
assumption. It only gives priority ranks to various sources of
activation and this results in some sources of activation
having a bigger influence than others. For instance, user’s
goal is more important as a source of activation than
information previously encountered. The attended text
element is first assessed in the view of user’s goal. Only
when the result of this assessment is not straight forward
previously attended text elements come into play to
disambiguate the relationship between the current text
element and the user’s goal. This ranking mechanism can
also give a simple account for decay effects. Thus,

background knowledge and previously encountered
information is likely to have less influence than the
currently attended information on the current processing.
Our particular ranking of various sources of activation is
tailored to the type of tasks we are simulating. In a web
based information search task, already encountered
information has been assessed as partly useful or useless.
We only use selected text elements, so they were judged as
having some relevance, but the most relevant elements are
not there yet, and are expected to be found in the incoming
information. This is why incoming information has received
a higher rank as an activation source.
As mentioned in the text comprehension literature,
readers sometimes import concepts that are not mentioned
in the current sentence. Employing background knowledge
from user’s long term memory in the current processing
happens either because there is an explicit need for that
knowledge or the prior knowledge is strongly associated
with the current knowledge (van den Broek, Rapp &
Kendeou, 2005). In web navigation the role of domain
expertise (prior knowledge and experience) has been
empirically established (e.g. Juvina & van Oostendorp,
2004). CoLiDeS uses a LSA semantic space to model user’s
knowledge representation. A particular semantic space
(corresponding to a particular user population) is used to
represent concepts and relationships between them
(semantic similarities). Based on this representation, a text
element can be “comprehended”, i.e. it is possible to specify
the concepts of the semantic space that are most associated
with it.
An LSA semantic space is not a perfect model of user’s
background knowledge but it is useful in building
computational models (Kintsch 1998). LSA allows an
objective estimation of the strength of association between
knowledge elements; this estimation is essential in
calculating the amount of activation that is spread between
various knowledge elements. CoLiDeS+ relies crucially on
a knowledge representation that allows comprehension of
incoming information. An attended text element (e.g. a link
label) is represented in the semantic space and it can be
computed if the current link label is semantically connected
to the current goal. If the connection is not strong enough,
the processor employs contextual information, i.e. text
elements that have been previously attended to and selected
(navigation path). The semantic space allows determining if
the new text element is connected to the previous
information that has been selected. If this is the case the
current text element receives an extra activation from the
path elements and contributes itself to the cohort activation
(van den Broek, Rapp & Kendeou, 2005) of the whole new
path (including the new element). The new path as a whole
can now be stronger related to the goal (path adequacy is
higher) than the old path. If this is the case, the new element
is integrated in the path and (if the goal is not fully attained)
the user proceeds further to attend to new information. If the
added element makes the path less connected to the goal, it
is rejected, and other options are considered. The semantic

1080

space provides a reference frame to represent all of these
connections and to estimate their strength.
Practical relevance. CoLiDeS has been used to identify and
repair web usability problems (Blackmon, Kitajima &
Polson, 2003). With the amendments proposed here and
with future improvements, such a model could be used in
supporting navigating users more actively and in real time.
A cognitive model could be running few steps ahead and
prompt the user with a reduced number of options that are
likely to be relevant for the task at hand. For some
categories of users suggesting relevant actions to users
could be essential for a satisfactory web experience. For
example, blind users access the web by the aid of “screen
readers” – tools that read out loud the web content and
options. Since using the web naturally involves revisits to
certain pages (Cockburn & McKenzie, 2001), blind users
would have to repeatedly listen to large amounts of menu
options and contents. Therefore, tools are needed to assist
users in selecting the relevant information. One of the
solutions proposed by Di Blas, Paolini and Speroni (2004) is
to bring in linguistic models, and we propose cognitive
models to be brought in.

advance that suggestions were generated by a robot, they
were meant to help with task execution, and they were not
mandatory: participants could follow them or not at their
discretion. Suggestions were provided in the auditory
modality. This way of delivering navigation support can be
implemented in combination with screen readers for
improving the web access of visually impaired users.
Solutions to tasks were reported on paper by the
participants and evaluated afterwards for correctness. The
average duration of tasks per participant was calculated by
dividing the total navigation time (45 minutes) to the
number of tasks attempted. An overall estimate of task
performance was calculated by dividing the total correctness
score to the average duration of tasks. The natural logarithm
of this ratio was taken to correct for a skewed distribution.
Participants’ spatial ability was tested with a mental rotation
task (Juvina & van Oostendorp, 2004). Navigation actions
of participants were automatically recorded with a web
logging software (Scone).

Results

Experimental Setup

The first outcome was that CoLiDeS+ was able to generate
successful paths and “dead ends”. However, the way it
navigated the websites was not as straight and forward as
suggested by Kitajima, Blackmon, and Polson (2000). It
made extensive use of ‘next best’ trials, refocusing, and
backtracking. The number of steps to solutions was even
higher than the actual users took. In general, the model took
different decisions than the actual users did, but, due to the
mechanisms of solving impasses, the correct paths and
dead-ends were correctly identified. The main explanation
for the differences between the model and the actual users is
the weakness of the LSA technique. The “general reading”
semantic space available at http://lsa.colorado.edu was used.
Perhaps a more specialized semantic space would have
given better results. These results show that LSA is limited
as a tool to model user’s relevance assessments. However
this limitation exists for users as well. This is why
contextual information and navigation strategies to deal with
impasses are needed.
Providing navigation support made a significant
difference in users’ navigation behavior and task
performance. The number of navigation steps was lower in
the support condition than in the control condition (t=3.86;
p=0.001). It took an average of 30 steps to execute a task in
the control condition and only 19 steps in the support
condition. The average duration of tasks was shorter in the
support condition than in the control condition (t=2.16;
p=0.039). It took an average of 10.26 minutes to complete a
task in the support condition and 12.49 minutes in the
control condition. Task performance was significantly
higher in the support condition (mean=1.16) than in the
control condition (mean=0.68) (t=2.16; p=0.04).
As expected, the correlation between spatial ability and
task performance was significant for the control condition
(r=0.64; p=0.01) and not significant for the support
condition (r=0.15; p=0.60). Participants were divided in two
groups with high and low spatial abilities (the median of test
scores was taken as a cutting point). The difference in task
performance induced by navigation support was checked

An empirical study examining the predictive and ecological
validity of the CoLiDeS+ model was conducted. We
hypothesized that CoLiDeS+ would be able to simulate real
users navigation behavior and the navigation support
generated based on simulations would have a positive
influence on users navigation behavior and task
performance. This positive influence was expected to be
bigger for users with a deficit of spatial ability, since
CoLiDeS+ took over the job of representing a complex
information structure and remembering past selections.
Six realistic web tasks were built based on the collection
of cases gathered by Morrison, Pirolli, and Card (2000) and
indications of Kitajima, Blackmon, and Polson (2000)
related to size and elaboration of task descriptions. Each
task had an associated web site.
The six tasks were simulated with CoLiDeS+ prior to the
actual navigation sessions. The results of simulations were
successful paths, i.e. successions of links leading to the
target pages, and “dead-ends”, i.e. pages that are not linked
with target pages, making it necessary for the user to
backtrack. Based on these results of the simulations, two
types of suggestions were generated: link suggestions –
when a link contained in a successful path was visible on the
screen, the user received the suggestion Click on <link
label>; path switch suggestions – when a ‘dead-end’ page
was downloaded, the user got the suggestion Go back.
Participants (students, sufficient web experience, nondomain and non-internet experts) were randomly assigned to
two conditions: a control condition in which 15 participants
had to perform as many of the six tasks as possible in 45
minutes, and a ‘support’ condition in which 14 participants
did the same while receiving the generated navigation
support (suggestions). These participants were instructed in
1081

separately for low and high spatial ability participants.
Results are depicted in figure 2. One can see that the
difference induced by the navigation support is bigger for
participants with low spatial ability (t=2.27; p=0.044) than
for participants with high spatial ability (t=0.73; p=0.48).
1,4

1,2

1,0

Task performance

,8

,6

Spatial ability
,4
Low
High

,2
control

support

Condition

Figure 2. The effect of providing navigation support on task
performance for users with low and high spatial ability

Conclusions
The technique used by CoLiDeS+ to model user’s
assessments of relevance (LSA) was rather weak, i.e., it
modeled a rather bad assessor. For instance, the similarity
between hotel and sleep (0.24) was lower than the similarity
between hotel and wait (0.34). This is why CoLiDeS+ had
to make extensive use (more than actual users) of its
mechanisms of preventing and dealing with impasses before
finding solutions. These mechanisms were based on path
adequacy – a measure of contextual information involved in
user navigation. This result shows that using contextual
information as a complement of judging semantic relevance
of incoming information is essential for users’ success in
web navigation tasks.
When CoLiDeS+ simulations were offered as navigation
support, users performed the given tasks in fewer steps,
faster and with better results. It seems that the offered
navigation support prevented users to spend time and
cognitive resources with those kinds of navigating actions
that are not directly effective but are usually employed in
order to accurately represent the information structure
(exploring how information nodes are linked and where the
relevant information is placed). As other researchers have
found (Cockburn & McKenzie, 2001; Howes, Payne, &
Richardson, 2002; Wen, 2003), real users do engage in
seemingly useless navigation actions in order to get
acquainted with the context of a particular piece of
information, which is eventually useful in judging the value
of that particular information. By making use of path
adequacy CoLiDeS+ gives an account for this type of
behavior.
The correlation between spatial ability and task
performance was once more replicated in this study. It
indicates that users’ ability to mentally represent and
manipulate information spaces is crucial for web navigation

tasks. However, when provided with the kind of navigation
support that CoLiDeS+ generated, users’ performance did
not depend any more on their spatial abilities. Users with
low spatial abilities had a higher performance increase due
to navigation support than users with high spatial abilities.
Since in a previous study (Juvina & van Oostendorp, 2004)
we found a positive correlation between spatial ability and
path adequacy, we decided to include the navigation path in
the CoLiDeS model, and we expected the new model to
account to some extent for spatial cognition involved in web
navigation. This expectation was confirmed. Users with low
spatial abilities are probably less able to represent the
information space and remember past selections and this is
why they benefit considerably when the cognitive model is
doing this job for them. We consider this result to be an
additional proof that CoLiDeS+ gives an account not only
for the process of assessing relevance of screen objects to
users’ goals but also for the ability of users to represent and
manipulate an information space.
A cognitive model running few steps ahead and providing
users as they navigate with filtered information relevant to
their goals has various possibilities of application. We have
suggested the use of such a model together with screen
readers for improving the web experience of visually
impaired users. In fact such a model can be used whenever
users’ cognitive or perceptive limitations interacts with
information overload. The model takes over part of the
user’s burden in representing and processing information.
Search engines use a different approach: they try to find
target pages and return them to the user. Target pages are
identified by their title, URL, and a short description. In
contrast, the model-based navigation support that we
propose prompts the user with possible ways to reach her
target by following the existing links on the web page that
she is currently inspecting. Information is left in its initial
context and the users natural way to look for information
(Pirolli & Card, 1999) is preserved.

Discussion and further developments

1082

CoLiDeS+ is a process model of web navigation, which
describes the step-by-step process by which information
presented on the screen is attended to and processed in order
to perform various types of web tasks. It is originated in
established theories and models of text comprehension.
The Construction - Integration theory of text
comprehension (Kintsch, 1998) postulates a construction
phase in which a mental representation is constructed from
textual input, reader’s goals and prior knowledge, and an
integration phase which establishes coherence of the
constructed representation. Construction is local (contextfree) whereas integration is global (context-dependent).
Human comprehension is regarded as a top-down and
bottom-up process (Kintsch, 2005). CoLiDeS (the original
source of CoLiDeS+) only implements a top-down feature:
assessing an incoming text element in the view of user’s
goal. By adding contextual information we made the model
more consistent with its theoretical assumptions. Contextual
information is essential in comprehension of particular text
elements especially for text elements with equivocal or

metaphorical meaning. Lack of supportive sentence context
may lead to fast reading but poor comprehension (Budiu
and Anderson, 2004). In web navigation, contextual
information allows users to build a representation of the
information space that is being navigated and this
representation, in turn, supports locating and integrating
relevant pieces of information.
Link labels have various degrees of ambiguity (due to
either bad design or user’s comprehension limits). Users are
generally able to disambiguate an ambiguous term by
integrating it in context (Kintsch, 1998). Budiu and
Anderson (2004) demonstrated that when a word seems
inappropriate, a rich sentence context can help people grasp
the intended meaning of that word.
Using a LSA semantic space instead of a propositional
representation is beneficial since it allows automation.
However, a LSA semantic space is only an approximation
of a user’s background knowledge and it makes the model
less accurate in details. We believe though that the model
remains valid in general principles, since LSA only models
the sub-symbolic part of CoLiDeS+, i.e. the strengths of
associations between concepts. We have shown that the
model is able to give an indirect account for spatial
cognition, user behavior and task performance. The fact that
LSA models a bad assessor does not affect the validity of
the symbolic part of CoLiDeS+ (navigation rules and
strategies). However, a better way to represent user
knowledge should be employed in the next versions.
So far in our simulations we have used the whole path
from the beginning of the task to the current step. This was
justified by the fact that the number of steps to solutions
was rather small. However, there are theoretical and
empirical reasons for limiting the amount of elements that
are active at a particular moment. In text comprehension, it
is estimated that one sentence is carried over to the next
cycle (Kintsch, 1998). Other approaches limit the total
amount of available activation rather than the number of
elements. We will try to identify meaningful segments in a
navigation path which could be based on path switches.
In the current version, all the previously selected text
elements are taken into account with an equal weight.
Differentiation based on recency or frequency were not
considered necessary since paths were rather short and
repetition of a link label in a path is a rather rare event.
However, an appropriate decay mechanism needs to be
implemented if more complex tasks are modeled.
CoLiDeS+ was conceived with the aim of building
model-based navigation support. For this reason, some of
the methodological criteria of cognitive modeling are (at
least at this stage) relaxed. The simulation of user behavior
is not complete. For example, the model does not have a
mechanism to identify target content pages. Such a
mechanism would be extremely difficult to build and it is
not really necessary for our intended use of the model. The
model is meant to work alongside the user and suggest links
that are – according to its “judgment” – relevant to a given
goal. The user is free to take these suggestions or not. If a
target page has been attained the user would presumably
recognize it without any intervention of the model.

References
Blackmon, M. H., Kitajima, M., & Polson, P.G. (2003).
Repairing Usability Problems Identified by the Cognitive
Walkthrough for the Web. Proceedings CHI 2003. ACM
Budiu, R. & Anderson, J.R. (2004) Interpretation-based
processing: A unified theory of semantic sentence
comprehension. Cognitive Science, 28, pp. 1-44.
Chen, C. (2000). Individual Differences in a Spatial-Semantic
Virtual Environment. Journal of The American Society for
Information Science, 51(6), 529-542.
Cockburn, A., & McKenzie, B. (2001). What Do Web Users
Do? An Empirical Analysis of Web Use. International
Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 54(6), 903-922.
Di Blas, N., Paolini, P., & Speroni, M. (2004). “Usable
accessibility” to the Web for blind Users. Proceedings
UI4ALL 04, Vienna, Austria: Springer-Verlag.
Howes, A., Payne, S.J., & Richardson, J. (2002). An instancebased model of the effect of previous choices on the control
of interactive search. Proceedings of the 24th Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
Juvina, I., & van Oostendorp, H. (2004). Individual
differences and behavioral aspects involved in modeling
web navigation. Proceedings UI4ALL 04. Vienna, Austria:
Springer-Verlag.
Kintsch, W. (1998). Comprehension – A Paradigm for
Cognition. Cambridge University Press.
Kintsch, W. (2005). An Overview of Top-Down and BottomUp Effects in Comprehension: The CI Perspective.
Discourse Processes, 39(2&3), 125-129.
Kitajima, M., Blackmon, M.H., & Polson, P.G. (2000). A
Comprehension-based Model of Web Navigation and Its
Application to Web Usability Analysis. People and
Computers XIV, 357-373.
Miller, C. S., & Remington, R.W. (2004). Modeling
Information Navigation: Implications for Information
Architecture. Human-Computer Interaction, 19(3), 225271.
Morrison, J. B., Pirolli, P., & Card, S. K. (2000). A
taxonomic analysis of what World Wide Web activities
significantly impact people's decisions and actions, UIR
Technical report, Xerox PARC.
Pirolli, P., & Card, S.K. (1999). Information foraging.
Psychological Review, 106(4): 643-675.
Pirolli, P., & Fu, W.-T. (2003). SNIF-ACT: A Model of
Information Foraging on the World Wide Web.
Proceedings User Modeling (pp 45-54). LNAI 2702.
Springer-Verlag.
van den Broek, P., Rapp, D.N., & Kendeou, P. (2005).
Integrating Memory-Based and Constructionist Processes
in Accounts of Reading Comprehension. Discourse
Processes, 39(2&3), 299-316.
van den Broek, P., Young, M., Tzeng, Y., & Linderholm, T.
(1999). Modeling causal integration and availability of
information during comprehension of narrative texts. In H.
van Oostendorp & S.R. Goldman (Eds.), The construction
of mental representations during reading (pp. 71-98).
Mahwah: Erlbaum.
Wen, J. (2003). Post-Valued Recall Web Pages: User
Disorientation Hits the Big Time. IT & Society, 1(3), 184194.

1083

