UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Unity or Fractionality of Implicit Learning: A Methodological Aspect

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/54x8n0m8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Aczel, Balazs
Gonci, Daniel

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Unity or Fractionality of Implicit Learning: A Methodological Aspect
Balázs Aczél (balazs.aczel@gmail.com)
ELTE University PPK, Department of Cognitive Psychology,
Izabella utca 46, 1046 Budapest, Hungary

Dániel Gönci (gonci_daniel@yahoo.com)
ELTE University PPK, Department of Cognitive Psychology,
Izabella utca 46, 1046 Budapest, Hungary

Abstract

linked to motor processing. In the case of dynamic systems
experiments she found a third kind of measure, which she
called prediction and control. Identifying these three different
dependent measures, Seger raises the question of whether
these tasks tap related forms of learning with shared
knowledge representations, or whether they tap different
learning
mechanisms
with
separate
knowledge
representations.
Other theorists dispute that learning of probabilistic
sequences may be implicit, whereas learning deterministic
sequences is to some extent explicit (Remillard, 2003). This
way the simultaneous implicit and explicit learning can also
bias the equability of the measurements taken by different
tests.
Stadler and Roediger shed light on an even more confusing
property of these implicit learning measuring methods. They
analyze them according to their nature of encoding and
retrieval. In accord with our present thoughts they describe
artificial grammar learning paradigm as a case of implicit
encoding and explicit (intentional) retrieval, while in the
procedure of serial reaction time task both encoding and
retrieval occur under implicit instructions (Stadler &
Roediger, 1998). This alterity is crucial enough concerning
the supposed dissociation between these two forms of
cognition.
Considering the above-mentioned doubts about the validity
of these frequently used tests, we made a purposeful
examination on the issue. The findings supported these
ominous demands and showed no correlation among the three
most frequently used measuring paradigms of implicit
learning. These inconsistencies led us to propose an
explanation of this behavior of the tests and to outline some
further necessary steps in research for the field of implicit
learning methodology to become clarified.

Although the field of non-conscious learning is full with
debating studies about the dissociation of explicit and implicit
systems, not much emphasis is laid on the understanding of the
applied methods. In the literature we found convertible
application of the tests measuring implicit learning without
much empirical support. In this study we made a crossvalidation examination of the three main tests of implicit
learning. The findings supported the ominous demands and
showed no correlation among the most frequently used
measuring paradigms. These inconsistencies led us to propose
an explanation of this behavior of the tests and to outline some
further steps in research.

Introduction
It is almost four decades now since systematic research has
set in motion about the phenomenon of implicit learning in
cognitive psychology. According to the most common
definition of implicit learning, learning is implicit when we
acquire new information without intending to do so
(Cleeremans, Destrebecqz & Boyer, 1998) and this encoded
knowledge can affect our decisions and behavior. In practice
we use implicit learning equivalently to what we measure by
it’s classical tasks.
The best established means of measuring implicit learning
include serial reaction time (SRT; Nissen & Bullemer, 1987),
artificial grammar learning (Reber, 1969, 1989), covariation
learning (Lewicki, Czyzewska & Hoffman, 1987),
probabilistic classification learning (Knowlton, Squire &
Gluck, 1994) and dynamic systems task (Berry & Broadbent,
1984). So far the literature of implicit learning regarded these
methods almost unanimously as comparable measurements of
the same phenomenon; however, they have been developed to
reveal the dissociation of learning in studies from different
backgrounds and via quite dissimilar dependent measures.
Apart from our present study there have already been a few
ominous demands to direct more attention to the question of
equability (Keane et al, 1991; Seger, 1994; 1997; Stadler &
Roediger, 1998), but these had little impact.
Seger argues that by the serial reaction time tasks we in fact
measure two independent forms of sequential implicit
learning (1997). One is learning that is linked to making
judgments about stimuli, and the other one is learning that is

Paradigms for Implicit Learning
This study works with cross validation procedure on the three
main implicit learning tests. Artificial grammar learning,
serial reaction time task, and probabilistic classification
learning are all computer-assisted procedures.
AGL – Artificial Grammar Learning It was Arthur Reber
(1967) who began the systematic study of the phenomenon

51

with this specifically developed artificial grammar task. In his
test he trained the participants by asking them to memorize
strings of letters generated from a finite-state grammar. One
of the grammars Reber used is shown in Figure 1. This
grammar specifies rules, similar to those that exist in natural
languages, for ordering string elements. Grammatical strings
are generated by entering the diagram at the leftmost node
and moving along legal pathways, as indicated by the arrows,
collecting letters, until an exit point is reached on the righthand side. The letter string TSSSXS is grammatical as it can
be generated from the diagram, whereas XTTTVV is
ungrammatical, as strings must begin with a T or a P. In AGL
studies we use three to eight letter strings.

these criticisms, the AGL task still remains one of the mainly
used tools in implicit learning studies.
The later developed tasks of implicit learning studies share
a feature with artificial grammar learning, that the participant
is unaware, or at least partly unaware of the attained
knowledge of rules, or patterns. The knowledge usually
measured by some performance improvement on the task.
SRT – Serial Reaction Time A widely popular type of the
implicit paradigms is the sequence learning (SL). In typical
SL situations, participants are asked to react to each element
of sequentially structured visual sequences of events in the
context of a choice reaction task. On each trial, subjects see a
stimulus appear at fixed locations on a computer screen and
are asked to press the corresponding key as fast and as
accurately as possible. Unknown to them, the sequence of
successive stimuli follows a repeating pattern, or is governed
by a set of rules that describes permissible transitions among
successive stimuli, such as finite-state grammars. Subjects
exposed to structured material produce shorter reaction times
than subjects exposed to random material, thus suggesting
that they can better prepare their responses as a result of their
knowledge of the pattern. Nevertheless, subjects exposed to
structured material often fail to exhibit knowledge of the
pattern that they can verbalize. In Nissen and Bullemer’s
(1987) computerized test the stimuli is a dot on the screen,
which can appear above one of four permanently visible
unilinear lines, as can be seen in Figure 2.

Figure 1: A finite state grammar used by Reber (1989) in his AGL
experiments. To produce a grammatical string, one has to move from
left to right using the arrows. Each passed arrow adds one letter to
the string.

In the first part of the experiment (training phase) the
participant has to learn strings of letters. After the appearance
of each grammatical string the person has to repeat the correct
string. After 50 correctly repeated string comes the second
part, the grammatical prediction phase. In this phase the
participants are tested about their knowledge of the hidden
rule by informing them of the existence of a set of rules
governing the structure of the training items - although they
were not told what those rules were - and then asking them to
classify novel letter strings as grammatical or ungrammatical.
Half of the novel strings are grammatical, the other half are
ungrammatical. A metaanalysis of several AGL studies
showed, that an average of 60 – 65 % of the participants
answers are correct, which is significantly above chance level
(Dienes, Broadbent & Berry, 1991). Early studies showed,
that while they performed so well on the discrimination task,
they could not report on the knowledge that influenced their
decisions (Reber, 1967). This kind of dissociation led Reber
(1967, 1969) to the conclusion, that people in this kind of
situation acquire their knowledge about the rules implicitly.
Although, the results of the study have been repeated
several times since (e.g. Servan-Schreiber, 1990), the
conclusions were frequently targeted by critics (e.g. Shanks,
Johnstone & Kinder, 2002). The usual misgiving is related to
the hypothesis, that the knowledge is strictly implicit. Despite

Figure 2: Serial Reaction Time (SRT) presented on computer. The
letter string above represents the hidden order of the appearance of
the stimulus. The corresponding keys are Y, C, B, and M.

The participants simply have to push as fast as possible the
button accompanied with the line, above which the dot
appeared. After the successful choice a new dot appears
above a different line, and the participants have to push the
correct button again. The participants are told that the task is a
simple reaction time measuring while unknown to them the
appearance of the stimuli is set to a 12 unit long sequence.
During the task the given reaction time gradually decreases,
yet with the change of the hidden pattern the reaction time
radically increases. Interestingly, according to their verbal

52

procedures, and receive similar implicit learning results.
Therefore first we discuss the implicit learning results on the
three methods. Our main question however can be summoned
as whether the performance on one task can predict the
performance on another. In other words whether the
comparison of the participants’ implicit learning performance
shows correlation among the tasks.

report the participants do not realize the pattern, or even the
existence of it.
PCL – Probabilistic Classification Learning The task
developed by Knowlton, Squire and Gluck (1994) is a newer
form of measuring implicit learning. The test is made up of a
series of predictions. Seeing a set of geometrical symbols, the
participants have to predict if the following type of weather
will be “rain or sunshine” (see Figure 3). After the appearance
of one of the 14 different sets of symbols they have to choose
between rain and sunshine. After the decision the correct
outcome (rain or sunshine) appears on the screen. The whole
experiment consists 50 of these judgments. What the
participants do not know is the fixed probabilistic connection
between the geometrical sets and the weather outcomes. The
probability of the “sunshine” outcome is set to 100%, 86%,
75%, 60%, 50%, 40%, 25%, 14% or 0% identically after each
set of geometrical forms. The 50 separate decisions are
divided into 10 blocks (Knowlton et al. 1994; Reber,
Knowlton & Squire, 1996).
Knowlton et al. studied the question of whether people can
acquire the hidden knowledge of the probabilistic rule in this
kind of situation. They found, that participants could acquire
a significant amount of the knowledge, because there was a
significant increase in correct answers between the first and
the last block of answers. These findings made this method as
a well known tool of implicit learning measurement.

Method
Procedure During the experiment the participants completed
the three implicit learning tasks in a row separated by 5
minutes breaks. The experiment lasted 50 minutes. To rule
out the effect of fatigue, half of the participants completed the
3 tasks in SRT-AGL-PCL sequence, the other half in PCLAGL-SRT sequence. Since there was no significant effect of
the sequence of tasks, we did not examine the question any
further.
The exact versions of the tests were the following:
1. The artificial grammar learning (AGL) procedure used by
Reber, Walkenfeld and Hernstadt (1991) as introduced
before, showed as MS Power Point© presentation, encoded
manually.
2. A computerized version of the revised serial reaction time
task (SRT), which was described first by Reber & Squire
(1998). In practice, this was the SRT module of the ImpLab©
computer program.
3. We also used a computerized version of Reber, Knowlton
and Squire’s (1996) earlier introduced probabilistic
classification learning task (PCL).

Which weather will follow the
set below?

Participants The participants were volunteers from an
introductory psychology course and first year psychology
students at the ELTE University, Budapest, who received
small gifts for their participation. The average age of the 40
participants was 22.7 years (S.D.=4.3). They were tested
individually.

Results
The statistical examination of the data verified the conditional
assumption, namely we found implicit learning (as defined by
the task developers) in all the three tests.

Figure 3: Probabilistic Classification Learning (PCL) presented on
computer

As we define the phenomenon of implicit learning by it’s
classical tasks, we have to be extra curious about the
question: „What do these tasks really measure?” The mutual
citation of studies using different methods should guide us to
the conclusion, that these tasks measure the same hidden
ability of people, an implicit learning capacity. In this study
we conclude, that this postulation seems to be untenable.

Artificial Grammar Learning (AGL) In the rule learning
part the participants could give correct answers in 56.5%
(S.D. = 6.6) of the decisions. This shows that they acquired
some kind of knowledge about the grammar. Though earlier
studies found higher percentage of correct answers, the results
show similar implicit learning.

Experiment

Serial Reaction Time (SRT) The average reaction time of
the 40 participants during the 21 blocks of the experiment can
be seen on Figure 4. The diagram shows the significant
decrease of reaction times [t(39)=7.51, p<0.001] from the first
to the twentieth block, which means some kind of learning.
The reason of the significant increase [t(39]=-10.49, p<.001)]

To examine the methodological question, if the three main
implicit tasks measure the same hidden variable, we used a
cross validation analysis on them. To be able to deduce
general conclusions we needed to replicate the classical
53

in reaction time between the twentieth and twenty-first blocks
is the hidden change of the pattern. These two findings
together can lead us to the conclusion, that we tracked the
effect of implicit learning.

declare that the participants learned the hidden rule similarly
to the preceding studies.
Input Data for the Cross Correlation To test the main
question we had to define the exact implicit learning variable
for each method, which we could then compare. We used the
indicator variables developed by Gönci (2004) in an earlier
study examining methodological problems of the implicit
learning procedures. As the standard indicator of implicit
learning in AGL studies we used the percentage of correct
answers in the grammar prediction phase. The higher the
percentage, the higher the participant’s implicit learning. In
the PCL task the variable for measuring the implicit learning
was the difference between the average of correct answers in
the first three, and the average of correct answers in the last
two blocks. This variable showed the increase of correct
answers during the task, which increase is explained by the
implicit learning of the participant. In the SRT task the
indicator variable was the difference between the average of
reaction time in the 21st and the 20th block. The difference
occurred, because of the change in the hidden pattern. The
higher the difference, the higher the effect of the implicit
learning on the reaction speed of the participant. We used
these variables due to their strong differentiating power.

Reaction time (msec)

550

500

512
467

450

400

426

350

345
300
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21

Blocks

Figure 4: The average of reaction times by blocks in the SRT task

Probabilistic classification learning (PCL) As input
variable for the data analysis of the PCL method, we used the
average of the correct answers within each of the blocks.
Figure 5 shows the average percentage of the participants’
correct answers during the 5 blocks of the task.

Correct predictions

65%

Cross Correlation Results As Table 1 shows, there is no
significant correlation among the three variables. Since the
three methods do not have a common measuring variable, we
also tested the correlation of the order of the performance of
the participants in the three tasks, but we could not find
significant correlation either (see Table 1).

63%

60%

59%

55%

45%

51%

51%

50%

50%

44%

43%

50%

Table 1: Correlation of the performances and of the order numbers
on the three tests

45%

Cross correlations
AGL – SRT
AGL – PCL
SRT – PCL
Correlation of orders
AGL – SRT
AGL – PCL
SRT – PCL

40%
1

2

3

4

5

Blocks

Figure 5: The average percentage of correct answers during the 5
blocks of the PCL task; the continuous line shows the task with
hidden rule, the broken line shows the task without hidden rule

As can be seen on the graph, during the first 3 blocks the
participants stayed at chance level [t(39)=0.77, p>0.1], which
shows that they blindly guessed the outcome. On the other
hand, in the last two blocks they performed significantly
above chance level. To demonstrate the difference in Figure
5, we indicated the percentage of correct answers on a task
without hidden rule, where the outcomes followed the
geometrical sets by chance (Aczél, 2003). There is a
significant difference between the percentage of the correct
answers in the first three and the last two blocks: t(39)=-4.1,
p<0.001. The number of correct answers in the last two
blocks also shows a significant increase from chance level:
t(39)=4.5, p<0.001. On the basis of these results we can

r
0.16
-0.23
-0.03
r
0.02
-0.21
-0.01

p
>0.1
>0.1
>0.1
p
>0.1
>0.1
>0.1

Discussion
In this study we made a purposeful methodological
examination about the three main methods of implicit
learning. We experienced in the relevant literature a
convertible application of these tests for measuring this kind
of learning phenomenon. The question that we wanted to
answer was whether these frequently used paradigms could
be applied to the same phenomenon of memory and learning,
or if the constructional and instructional components of the
tests make different relevance to them. We assumed that, if
these methods measure a certain property of the learning

54

system of a person then these tests should behave more
consistently intrapersonally than interpersonally.
The three implicit learning measuring methods (AGL,
SRT, PCL) were used with 40 healthy persons individually.
The tests were administered within one session in varying
order. The order of the tests did not cause significant
difference in the performance. In all cases we found the
expected implicit learning rates comparable to the previous
studies. In this respect it is grounded to generalize our result
to the previous experiments using the same methods.
The statistical analysis, examining the cross validity of
these tests showed no significant correlation among the
implicit learning indexes. This result suggests that one
person’s performance on one implicit learning test has
nothing to do with his/her performance on another implicit
learning test. The lack of correlation is quite unexpected, if
we intend to think about implicit learning as an undivided
cognitive ability. It is also surprising if we consider that the
studies examining the features of implicit learning based their
conclusions on various methods. Thus we should rather ask,
‘what do these tests have in common?’ As described in the
introduction, the most common definition of implicit learning
is a process, when we acquire new information without
intending to do so, which can have an effect on our decisions
and behavior. All of the methods we tested suited this
criterion. So what is the reason of this oddity? Here we briefly
discuss our possible explanations, approached from two
aspects and we propose some possible ways for further
research.

retrieval; and explicit encoding with explicit retrieval) 1.
Probabilistic learning (PCL) varies so much from the other
two tests (e.g. not deterministic) that we did not try to couple
it with the others.

Unity or fractionality Regarding the results, the question
arises of whether this unitary view about an undivided
implicit learning phenomenon is still supportable, or not. In
the later case, if these methods measure validly non-conscious
learning processes, we should hypothesize that implicit
learning is segmentalized into various partitions. From the
point of view of the question of unity or fractionality, the
outcome of this validation study supports the rejection of the
idea of the classical conception. Further, this supports the
view that all of these tasks can be associated to different
segments of an embracing concept of implicit learning.

Acknowledgements

Table 2: Hypothetical division of implicit and explicit
memory tasks from a process-based regard.

Implicit
Retrieval
Explicit

Encoding
Implicit
Explicit
Implicit
SRT
Memory
Explicit
AGL
Memory

This alterity of the tests could be a reasonable explanation
of our results and thus the methods would still measure the
same phenomenon, but from a different aspect. In the context
of this matrix, a new thinking may begin to explore the
relations of these processes in learning. To test this
hypothesis, other tests, fitting the same box of the matrix are
planned to be examined together.
It is evident that implicit learning may interact with explicit
learning and other cognitive processes in many complex
ways. In this respect this model may seem to oversimplify the
question of the entangled issue of implicit research. However,
we still believe that a thorough examination of this processbased regard is essential for the understanding of these ways
of learning.

We wish to express our thanks for tutoring to Anikó Kónya,
László Mérő, Mihály Racsmány, and Dezső Németh from
Budapest.
Special thanks for the linguistical check of the manuscript to
James Wason from Cambridge.

References
Aczél, B. (2003). A theoretical and empirical review for
implicit learning. Unpublished manuscript
Berry, D. C., & Broadbent, D. E. (1984). On the relationship
on task performance and associated verbalizable
knowledge. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 36A, 209-231.
Bowers, J. S., & Marsolek, C. J. (Eds.) (2003). Rethinking
implicit memory. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Cleeremans, A., Destrebecqz, A., & Boyer, M. (1998).
Implicit learning: News from the front. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 2, 406-416.

Process analysis We found the above projected approach
though rational, but still far from a viable model. The
understanding of the phenomenon seems to be more
expedient through a process analysis. Therefore we took our
thinking further on Stadler and Roediger’s proposition about
nature of encoding and retrieval in the case of learning tasks
(1998). Table 2 shows our hypothetical matrix of memory
processes completing Stadler and Roediger’s description.
It comes from the operational definitions of implicit
learning and implicit memory (Bowers & Marsolek, 2003)
that its components can be combined in various ways
(implicit encoding with implicit retrieval; implicit encoding
with explicit retrieval; explicit encoding with implicit

1

We have to remark at this point that in the case of implicit
learning the nature of encoding and retrieval refers to the nature of
the instruction only, braver surmises would open here intense
debates.

55

Dienes, Z., Broadbent, D., & Berry, D. (1991). Implicit and
explicit knowledge bases in artificial grammar learning.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 17, 875-887.
Gönci, D. (2004). Methodological problems of the implicit
learning procedures. Thesis, Department of Psychology,
ELTE University, Budapest.
Keane, M. M., Gabrieli, J. D. E., Fennema, A. C., Growdon,
J. H., & Corkin, S. (1991). Evidence for a dissociation
between perceptual and conceptual priming in Alzheimer’s
disease. Behavioral Neuroscience, 105, 326-342.
Knowlton, B. J., Squire, L. R., & Gluck, M. (1994).
Probabilistic classification learning in amnesia. Learning
and Memory, 1, 106-120.
Lewicki, P., Czyzewska, M., & Hoffman, H. (1987).
Unconscious acquisition of complex procedural
knowledge. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 13, 523-530.
Nissen, J. M., & Bullemer, P. (1987). Attentional
requirements of learning: Evidence from performance
measures. Cognitive Psychology, 19, 1-32.
Reber, A. S. (1967). Implicit Learning of Artificial
Grammars. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 6, 855-863.
Reber, A. S. (1969). Transfer of syntactic structure in
synthetic languages. Journal of Experimental Psychology,
81, 115-119.
Reber, A. S. (1989). Implicit learning and tacit knowledge.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 118, 219235.

Reber, A. S., Walkenfeld, F. F., & Hernstadt, R. (1991).
Implicit and Explicit Learning: Individual Differences and
IQ. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 17, 888-896.
Reber, P. J., Knowlton, B. J., & Squire, L. R. (1996).
Dissociable Properties of Memory System: Differences is
Flexibility of Declarative and Nondeclarative Knowledge.
Behavioral Neuroscience, 5, 861-871.
Reber, P. J., & Squire, L. R. (1998). Encapsulation of Implicit
and Explicit Memory in Sequence Learning. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 2, 248-263.
Remillard, G. (2003). Pure perceptual-based sequence
learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 29, 581-597.
Seger, C. A. (1994). Implicit learning. Psychological Bulletin,
115, 163-196.
Seger, C., A. (1997). Two forms of sequential implicit
learning. Consciousness and Cognition, 6, 108-131.
Servan-Schreiber, E., & Anderson, J. R. (1990). Learning
artificial grammars with competitive chunking. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 16, 592-608.
Shanks, D. R., Johnstone, T., & Kinder, A. (2002).
Modularity and Artificial Grammar Learning. In: Frensch,
R., & Cleeremans, A. (Eds.), Implicit learning. Hove, East
Sussex: Psychology Press.
Stadler, M. A., & Roediger, H. L. (1998). The question of
awareness in research on implicit learning. In: Stadler, M.
A., & Frensch, P. A. (Eds.), Handbook of Implicit
Learning. London, UK: Sage Publications.

56

