UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Universal Foci and Varying Boundaries in Linguistic Color Categories

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/12d097g6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Cook, Richard S.
Kay, Paul
Regier, Terry

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Universal Foci and Varying Boundaries in Linguistic Color Categories
Terry Regier* (regier@uchicago.edu)
Department of Psychology, 5848 S. University Ave.
Chicago, IL 60637 USA

Paul Kay (kay@cogsci.berkeley.edu)
International Computer Science Institute, 1947 Center Street
Berkeley, CA 94704 USA

Richard S. Cook (rscook@icsi.berkeley.edu)
International Computer Science Institute, 1947 Center Street
Berkeley, CA 94704 USA

Abstract
Recent research has questioned the universal basis of color
categorization and has instead emphasized cross-linguistic
variation in boundaries of color categories. We propose that
these cross-linguistically varying boundaries can be predicted
from near-universal focal colors within the categories. In
support of this proposal, we show that: (1) best example
choices for color terms in 110 unwritten languages cluster
near the prototypes for English white, black, red, green,
yellow, and blue – we take these 6 points in color space to
approximate universal foci; (2) best example choices cluster
more tightly across languages than do category centroids; and
(3) a computational model can predict color term boundaries
from labelings of best examples reasonably well, for several
languages, including one that has been taken to
counterexemplify universal tendencies in color naming.

Overview
It has long been held that there are universal tendencies in
color naming, in that linguistic color categories are
organized around universally-shared focal points, or
prototypes, in color space. Berlin and Kay (1969; B&K for
short) showed that the best examples of color terms across a
sample of 20 languages seemed to cluster in color space.
That study and subsequent work (Kay & McDaniel, 1978;
Kay & Maffi, 1999) showed that the most reliable and
widespread of these clusters correspond to the six Hering
primaries: white, black, red, green, yellow, and blue –
suggesting that these points in color space may constitute a
universal foundation for color naming. These foci in color
space have also appeared to be cognitively privileged, in
non-linguistic tasks with speakers of languages that have
dissimilar color naming systems (Heider, 1972; Heider &
Olivier, 1972).
Recently, however, Roberson, Davies, and Davidoff (2000;
RDD for short; see also Davidoff, Davies, & Roberson,
*

1999) turned this universalist account on its head. RDD
proposed that color categories are not universal, and are
constrained only rather loosely – the most important
constraint being that if two points in color space belong to
the same linguistic color category, points between them
should also belong to that category (p. 395).
By
implication, the actual location in color space of these
categories is not taken to be constrained. RDD suggested
moreover that color categories are not organized around
universal foci, but are instead determined by naming
distinctions made at category boundaries – which vary
across languages. On their view, foci (best examples) are
mere epiphenomena: once categories have been defined by
language-determined boundaries, best examples may be
derived secondarily as the centers of these alreadydetermined categories (p. 395). The empirical basis for their
inversion of the universalist view is: (a) they attempted to
replicate, in Berinmo, a Papua New Guinea language,
Heider’s findings of cognitively privileged status for focal
points – and failed to do so; (b) best example choices for
some Berinmo color terms are rather diffuse, rather than all
falling at or very near the proposed universal foci; (c)
Berinmo and English have different boundaries for color
terms – and these differing boundaries appear to influence
non-linguistic memory for color in speakers of these two
languages.
Are the cross-linguistically varying boundaries of color
categories determined from universal prototypes (foci) – or
are prototypes determined from language-demarcated
boundaries? We wished to discriminate between these two
proposals, to clarify the broader question of color naming
universals. B&K’s original universalist findings were based
largely on written languages of industrialized societies –
thus, the regularities they found could have resulted from
the global spread of industrialization, rather than from
genuinely universal forces. Berinmo, in contrast, is a
language spoken by an otherwise undocumented group that

Corresponding author: regier@uchicago.edu

1827

RDD describe as a “stone age culture”. In the present study,
we relied on a large set of color naming data from unwritten
languages of non-industrialized societies, which we
compared with data from written languages of industrialized
societies, to ensure as best we could that any commonalities
we found were genuine universals (Kay & Regier, 2003).
We reasoned as follows:
Prediction 1: If best examples are reflections of the
proposed universal foci, then best examples of color terms
from unwritten languages should cluster near those
locations in color space corresponding to the best
examples of English white, black, red, green, yellow, and
blue. This would not be predicted if best examples are
instead derived as the centers of cross-linguistically
varying category boundaries.
Prediction 2. If best examples are reflections of universal
foci, then best examples should cluster more tightly
across languages than do the centers of category
extensions – since category extension is known to vary
across languages. However, if best examples are derived
secondarily as the centers of categories that are defined at
their boundaries by language, best examples should not
cluster more tightly than the centers of category
extensions – since on this view, best examples are
category centers.
Prediction 3: If cross-linguistically varying color category
boundaries are projected from privileged foci within those
categories, then a computational model should be able to
predict color category boundaries from best examples of
those categories, for a variety of languages.

Figure 1: The World Color Survey stimulus array.
We pooled data from all speakers in all languages, and
calculated how many WCS best example choices (hits) fell
on each chip of the array. The two chips in the array that
received the most hits were A0 (2048 hits) and J0 (1988
hits). These two chips lie at the extremes of the leftmost
column of achromatic chips. They are the lightest and
darkest chips in the array, and align closely with best
examples of English white and black, respectively. In
B&K’s English color naming data, the best example of
white was B0, which is one chip away from A0. The B&K
stimulus array did not include A0, so it was not available as
a possible selection in that study. The best example of
English black was J0.
The contour plot in Figure 2 shows the number of WCS best
example hits that fell on each chip of the stimulus array
other than the leftmost column of achromatic chips. The
outermost contour represents 100 hits, and each subsequent
inner contour represents an increment of 100 hits. The
black dots indicate the best examples of the English color
terms red, yellow, green, and blue, provided by one U.S.
speaker, as reported by B&K. (This one speaker provided
several best example choices for each of red, green, and
blue.)

We tested these three predictions, in three studies.

B

Yellow

C

Lightness

Study 1: Universals of color term foci
Do best examples of color terms from unwritten languages
cluster near those of English white, black, red, green,
yellow, and blue (and straightforward translations of these
terms in other written languages)?
The World Color Survey1 (WCS; Kay, Berlin, Maffi &
Merrifield, 1997) collected color naming data from 110
unwritten languages of non-industrialized societies
worldwide, from an average of 24 native speakers per
language (mode: 25 speakers). Each speaker named, in his
or her native language, each of the 330 color chips shown in
the stimulus array2 of Figure 1, and also indicated which
chip in the array represented the best example of each color
term in the language.

1

Data at http://www.icsi.berkeley.edu/wcs/data.html
The rows correspond to 10 levels of Munsell Value (lightness);
the columns correspond to 40 equally spaced Munsell Hues, from
R2.5 in column 1 to RP 10 in column 40; the color in each cell
corresponds approximately to the maximum available Munsell
Chroma for that Hue-Value combination.
2

Green

D
E

Blue

F
Red

G
H
I

0

5

10

15

20
Hue

25

30

35

40

Figure 2. Contour plot of WCS best example choices,
compared with best examples of English color terms.
The best examples of named color categories across the 110
unwritten languages of the WCS appear to cluster near or at
the best examples of English white, black, red, green,
yellow, and blue. This finding suggests that commonalities
in color naming are not restricted to written languages of
industrialized societies, and that these 6 regions in color
space may reasonably be considered universal foci. This
finding would not have been predicted if best examples in
these languages are derived from language-defined category
boundaries.
Concretely, we take the universal foci to be the peaks of the
WCS best example distribution: A0 (white: 2048 WCS

1828

hits), J0 (black: 1988 hits), C9 (yellow: 752 hits), G1 (red:
668 hits), F17 (green: 351 hits), and F29 (blue: 253 hits).3
Figure 3 shows the same distribution of WCS best
examples, but this time compared with Berinmo. The size
of the dots in the grid indicates how many Berinmo speakers
located the best example of some color term at that position,
as reported by RDD: a small dot denotes 1-3 best example
choices (“hits”); a medium-sized dot denotes 4-5 hits, and a
large dot denotes 6 or more hits. RDD’s stimulus array did
not include achromatic chips, and included only evennumbered chromatic columns in the array of Figure 1; thus,
none of the universal foci listed above were themselves
available as selections to Berinmo participants. The chips in
rows B and I, which received many hits, were the closest
available approximations to focal white and black
respectively.
B

Lightness

C
D
E

Taken as a whole, this study shows that best examples of
unwritten languages, including Berinmo, cluster near the
proposed universal foci. Further, as would be predicted if
categories are formed around universal foci, Berinmo
category boundaries are also similar to those of some other
languages.

Study 2: Best examples and centroids
Best examples appear to cluster non-randomly (Study 1) –
and it has also been shown that the centroids of named color
categories cluster at rates greater than chance (Kay &
Regier, 2003). But do best examples cluster more tightly
across languages than centroids do? This is not yet known,
and it would be expected if best examples reflect the
universal foci around which color categories are organized –
because category centroids are sensitive to crosslinguistically varying boundaries, while universal foci are
not. In contrast, if best examples are abstracted as the
centers of boundary-delineated categories, best examples
should cluster no more tightly than category centers – since
on this latter view, best examples are category centers..

F
G
H
I

0

5

10

15

20
Hue

25

30

35

40

Figure 3. Best example choices from WCS and Berinmo.
If Berinmo foci are similar to those of other languages, and
boundaries are determined from foci, we would expect some
other languages to also have boundaries similar to those of
Berinmo. Figure 4 compares the named color categories of
Berinmo and Yaminahua (Peru, from the WCS). Different
categories within a language are designated by different
colors. Best examples for these Yaminahua color terms
peak at A0, J0, C12, F1, and F17 – fairly near the Berinmo
peaks. The WCS contains several other languages of
comparable similarity to Berinmo, such as Colorado
(Ecuador), and Iwam (Papua New Guinea).

Since clustering depends on the idea of distance, we needed
a color space with a psychologically meaningful distance
metric. We chose CIEL*a*b* space, a 3-dimensional color
space which has such a metric, and represented each chip of
the WCS array in that space.5 We calculated the centroid of
each color term in each language in the WCS and B&K
datasets, following Kay and Regier (2003): for each speaker
s who used term t, we first found the centroid in CIEL*a*b*
space of the chips that s had named t. We then took the
average of these speaker centroids for t, and coerced it to the
chip most similar to it in the stimulus array – this was our
representation of the overall term centroid for t. We
calculated the focus of each color term in each language by
selecting that chip in the WCS array that received the
maximum number of best example choices for that term. If
more than one chip received the maximum number, we
chose randomly among those chips that had “tied”.6 This
left us with two single-point representations for each color
term: a centroid and a focus.
We compared the distance separating WCS foci from B&K
foci, to the distance separating WCS centroids from B&K
centroids. We restricted attention to those terms for which
we had both a focus and a centroid – occasionally, one or
the other was missing from the data. Then, for each

Figure 4: Color categories in Berinmo (upper panel) and
Yaminahua (lower panel).4
3

MacLaury (1997: 202) displayed a histogram of WCS focus hits
per Munsell hue column, which showed peaks in columns 1, 9, 17,
and 29.
4
The Berinmo data are as reported by RDD, with one
qualification: RDD reported naming data only for every other

column of the array shown here. We have assumed that each
intervening column would have been named exactly as its
neighboring column on the right was. The array for Yaminahua
was obtained by assigning to each chip the label that was used
most often in naming that chip.
5
See http://www.icsi.berkeley.edu/wcs/data.html under “WCS
Mapping Tables” for mappings between CIEL*a*b*, Munsell, and
WCS coordinates. The CIEL*a*b* coordinates were obtained
using the CMC2 conversion software at www.munsell.com.
6
This random selection biases our test against finding that foci
cluster more tightly than centroids, since focus representations are
in part the product of a random process, while centroids are not.

1829

language l in the WCS, we calculated its “centroid
separation” (CSl) from the B&K dataset, as follows: For
each term t in l, we found the closest term t* in each B&K
language l*, and summed the distances – where distances
here are defined as CIEL*a*b* distances between centroids,
and c(x) stands for “centroid of term x”:

CS l = ∑

∑

min distance(c(t ), c(t*))

t ∈l l *∈BK t *∈l *

We analogously calculated the “focus separation” (FSl) of
each WCS language l from the B&K dataset – this time
using distances between foci, rather than between centroids.
Here, f(x) stands for “focus of term x”:
FSl = ∑

∑

min distance( f (t ), f (t*))

t ∈l l *∈BK t *∈l *

These calculations gave us, for each language in the WCS, a
measure of the distance of its centroids from those of B&K,
and an analogous measure of the distance of its foci from
those of B&K. A paired t-test revealed that the focus
separation (M=5596.98) was smaller than the centroid
separation (M=6391.78), t(109) = 10.2506, p < 0.0001.
Thus, while centroids do show universal tendencies (Kay &
Regier, 2003), best examples appear to show stronger
universal tendencies. This pattern is predicted by the
hypothesis that best examples reflect the universal structure
around which color categories are formed – and it is not
predicted by the competing hypothesis that best examples
are derived secondarily as the centers of categories that are
defined at their boundaries by local linguistic convention.

Study 3: Predicting boundaries from foci
We have so far emphasized universal tendencies in best
examples, but the cross-linguistic variation in category
boundaries that RDD underscore is very real. Here, we test
the hypothesis that cross-linguistically varying boundaries
can be predicted from foci by a computational model.

Model
The central concept of the model is that different languages
have color terms organized around different subsets of the
same 6 universal foci (cf. Kay & McDaniel, 1978; Steels &
Belpaeme, in press). For instance, some languages have
categories organized around only the black, white, and red
foci, while other languages make use of other foci as well.7
In the model, the choice of which foci are used affects
where the category boundaries are predicted to lie.
Although we have seen that the best examples of color
terms across languages form clear clusters in color space,
there is also evidence that languages vary slightly, but
significantly, in the exact location of these clusters (Webster
& Kay, in press). Consequently, we examined the best
7

Some languages, like English, appear to also use foci other than
the six discussed here. These languages are beyond the scope of
this paper.

example data for a language to be modeled, and took as
“foci” the peaks of the best example distributions for the
terms in that language. The model was initialized with
these foci, each labeled with the corresponding color term
from that language. The model predicted from this the full
extension of each of the color terms (see Lammens, 1994;
Steels & Belpaeme, in press for closely related proposals).
In the model, all color chips of the stimulus array, including
the foci, are represented in (3-dimensional) CIEL*a*b*
color space. A 3-dimensional Gaussian distribution is
centered at each focus to be included in the model. The
standard deviations (SDs) in all 3 dimensions of CIEL*a*b*
space for a single such “focus distribution” are constrained
to be the same – and the single SD associated with each
focus is a free parameter of the model. Thus, a model with
n foci will have n free parameters governing the widths of
the n focus distributions. Given these distributions, and
values for the free parameters, the model determines
category extensions from foci, by labeling cell i in the
stimulus array with the label of the focus distribution that
has highest density at that point in color space:

label (i ) = label (arg max f p f (i))
Here, f ranges over foci in the model, and pf(i) represents the
density of the focus distribution for f at the point in
CIEL*a*b* space corresponding to chip i of the stimulus
array. Once all points have been labeled, the results may be
mapped back to, and displayed in, the WCS stimulus array.
The model’s free parameters (SDs) were fit to data by a
coarse-to-fine search. Each free parameter initially ranged
from 1-15, with step size 2 (less systematic searches of
broader ranges did not yield better results). We noted those
parameter values that yielded the maximum number of chips
correctly classified. A series of successively finer searches
was then initiated, with the ith search ranging over values
one i-1 step size above and below the optimum values for
search i-1. The decreasing step sizes were 2, 1, .5, .2, .1.
The best fit for the finest of these searches was taken as the
overall fit of the model to the data.

Berinmo
Given the Berinmo best example data shown in Figure 3, we
analyzed Berinmo as having 3 chromatic foci: red, yellow,
and green (located at the 3 chromatic peaks in the Berinmo
best example data: G2, C8, and F18 – each is one chip away
from a WCS peak). We also assumed that the remaining
two Berinmo terms were focused at universal white (A0)
and black (J0). We fit the model, with the above 5 foci, to
RDD’s Berinmo naming data. These data are shown (again)
in the upper panel of Figure 5, while the lower panel shows
the model’s fit to the data. The best-fitting parameter values
were: SD(black) = 5.1, SD(white) = 3.2, SD(red) = 7.1,
SD(yellow) = 8.6, SD(green) = 10.1. 90% of chips were
correctly predicted. Several qualitative features of the
Berinmo data are also captured by the model: (1) a category
focused near yellow that extends into what we would call

1830

green in English, (2) a category that “encompasses much of
green, blue, and blue-purple” (RDD, p. 377), focused one
chip away from universal green,8 (3) a white/light category
that extends farthest downward around columns 28-38, and
(4) a black/dark category that extends somewhat up into
brown and purple – although in the simulation it does not
extend as far as in the data.

boundaries of these languages are similar to each other –
and dissimilar from Berinmo.
We retained the black, white, and red distributions in the
model, centered at the WCS peaks,10 with the SDs fixed at
the values obtained by fitting the Berinmo data – and
removed the yellow and green focal distributions. We then
predicted category boundaries from foci using this 3-focus
model. The results are shown in the bottom panel of Figure
6. Qualitatively, the boundaries are similar to those found
in the 3-focus languages of the WCS. Table 1 displays
quantitative measures of fit.

Figure 5: Berinmo naming data (top panel), and model fit to
those data, based on Berinmo foci (bottom panel). 90% of
chips are correctly labeled.
We also fit the model to Berinmo in a slightly different
manner: by assuming that the 5 foci were located at the
black, white, red, yellow, and green WCS peaks from Study
1, rather than the Berinmo foci which fall 1 chip away from
them. The best-fitting parameter values were: SD(black) =
5.5, SD(white) = 3.5, SD(red) = 6.5, SD(yellow) = 8.5,
SD(green) = 12.7. This time, with foci not drawn from the
language itself, the fit was not quite as good: 84% of chips
were correctly classified. These results suggest that the
rather small differences in the locations of foci across
languages may account for some cross-linguistic variation in
category boundaries.

Other languages
A natural objection to the above demonstration is that the
model was fit directly to the Berinmo data: with 5 free
parameters, a reasonable fit may be unsurprising.9 A
stronger test of the model would be to see whether the
parameter values obtained by fitting one language can also
predict boundaries in a rather different set of languages.

Figure 6: Top four panels show naming data from four 3focus WCS languages (see text). Bottom panel shows
model prediction given 3 WCS foci, with parameters fit to
Berinmo naming data.

We considered the subset of languages in the WCS that
have color terms centered in only three foci: black (near J0),
white (near A0), and red (near G1). There are four such
languages in the WCS, all spoken in west Africa, and with
naming data shown in the top four panels of Figure 6 – from
the top down: Bete (Kru, Ivory Coast), Ejagam (Bantoid,
Nigeria and Cameroon), Wobé (Niger-Congo, Ivory Coast),
and Yacouba (Niger-Congo, Ivory Coast). The category

Table 1: Model fit to 3-focus languages, using WCS foci.
Free parameters were fit to Berinmo naming data.
Language
Bete
Ejagam
Wobé
Yacouba

8

In this simulation, the green category actually extended to several
achromatic chips as well. Although RDD did not report naming
for achromatic chips, we suspect this is an over-extension.
9
Still, in other simulations, we have shown that there are possible
but unattested color naming patterns that this model cannot fit
well.

10

Percent correct
89%
88%
90%
84%

We chose WCS peaks, rather than peaks from Berinmo or the 3focus languages, since we wished to approximate universal foci in
this simulation.

1831

Thus, the structures and parameter values that provide a
reasonably good fit to the Berinmo data also provide a fairly
good fit to languages from a different part of the world, with
color category boundaries unlike those of Berinmo. Any
claims concerning the overall adequacy of this model will
have to await the results of far more comprehensive tests.
However, for now, the model does appear to support the
idea that cross-linguistically varying category boundaries
can be predicted fairly well from near-universal foci.

Discussion
We take these results to cast into question RDD’s proposal
that color categories are demarcated at their boundaries by
language in an only loosely constrained fashion, and that
best examples are epiphenomena of this process. Instead,
we view these results as supporting a universal tendency for
the named color categories of languages to be based on
favored percepts selected from restricted regions of color
space. The degree to which these universally favored
regions are based on color appearance (Kay & Maffi, 1999),
on universal statistical tendencies in the distribution of
reflective surfaces in the environment (Yendrikhovskij,
2001), on universal properties of ambient light sources
(Shepard, 1992), on the topography of perceptual color
space (Jameson & D’Andrade, 1997), or on socio-linguistic
negotiation among speakers (Steels & Belpaeme, in press),
cannot be assessed with any degree of certainty at this time.
Possibly all these factors, and perhaps others, play a role. It
is similarly not yet clear to what extent cross-language
variation in the precise location of foci may affect the
boundaries of color categories – or even to what extent it is
legitimate to approximate foci as points at all, rather than
(possibly somewhat irregularly shaped) areas. That named
color categories in the world’s languages are based to a
considerable degree on such favored regions of color space
can, however, be asserted with some confidence. At the
same time, color category boundaries do vary across
languages, and appear to affect non-linguistic color
cognition, as shown by RDD and others (e.g. Kay &
Kempton, 1984; Witthoft, Winawer, Wu, Frank, Wade, &
Boroditsky, 2003). We take our present findings to be
compatible with such Whorfian results, provided one allows
that the placement of category boundaries is itself
constrained by universal forces.

Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported by the National
Science Foundation under Grants Nos. 0130420 and
0418283.

References
Berlin, Brent and Paul Kay (1969). Basic Color Terms:
Their Universality and Evolution. Berkeley, California:
University of California Press.

Davidoff, Jules, Ian Davies, and Debi Roberson (1999).
Colour categories in a stone-age tribe. Nature, 398, 203204.
Heider, E. R. (1972). Universals in color naming and
memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology 93, 10-20.
Heider, E. R. and D. C. Olivier (1972). The structure of the
color space in naming and memory for two languages.
Cognitive Psychology, 3, 337-354.
Jameson, Kimberly and Roy G. D’Andrade (1997). It’s not
really Red, Green, Yellow, Blue: An inquiry into
perceptual color space. In C. L. Hardin & L. Maffi (Eds.),
Color categories in thought and language. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Kay, Paul, Brent Berlin, Luisa Maffi, and William
Merrifield (1997). Color naming across languages. In C.
L. Hardin & L. Maffi (Eds.), Color categories in thought
and language, pp. 21-56. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, England.
Kay, Paul and Willett Kempton (1984). What is the SapirWhorf Hypothesis? American Anthropologist, 86, 65-79.
Kay, Paul and Luisa Maffi (1999). Color appearance and the
emergence and evolution of basic color lexicons.
American Anthropologist, 101, 743-760.
Kay, Paul and Chad McDaniel (1978). The linguistic
significance of the meanings of basic color terms.
Language, 54, 610-646.
Kay, Paul and Terry Regier (2003). Resolving the question
of color naming universals. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 100, 9085-9089.
Lammens, Johan (1994). A computational model of color
perception and color naming. PhD dissertation, State
University of New York, Buffalo.
MacLaury, Robert E. (1997). Ethnographic evidence of
unique hues and elemental colors. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 20, 202-203.
Roberson, Debi, Ian Davies and Jules Davidoff (2000).
Colour categories are not universal: Replications and new
evidence from a stone age culture. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 129, 369-398.
Shepard, Roger N. (1992) The perceptual organization of
colors. In J. Barkow, L. Cosmides, and J. Tooby (Eds.),
The Adapted Mind. Oxford : Oxford University Press.
Steels, Luc and Tony Belpaeme (in press) Coordinating
perceptual categories through language: A case study for
colour. Behavioral and Brain Sciences.
Webster, Michael A. and Paul Kay (in press). Individual and
population differences in focal colors. In Robert E.
MacLaury, Galina V. Paramei and Don Dedrick (Eds.),
The Anthropology of Color. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Witthoft, Nathan, Jonathan Winawer, Lisa Wu, Michael
Frank, Alex Wade, and Lera Boroditsky (2003). Effects
of language on color discriminability. In Richard
Alterman and David Kirsh (Eds.), Proceedings of the 25th
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society [CD].
Yendrikhovskij, Sergej N. (2001). Computing color
categories from statistics of natural images. Journal of
Imaging Science and Technology, 45, 409-417.

1832

