UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Using Music to Tap into a Universal Neural Grammar

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/72s8b919

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Maye, Alexander
Werning, Markus

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Using Music to Tap Into a Universal Neural Grammar
Daniel G. Mauro (dmauro@ccs.carleton.ca)

Institute of Cognitive Science, Carleton University,
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1S 5B6
Abstract
The human brain is exquisitely sensitive to musical stimuli.
Cognitive neuroscientists and physicians are discovering that
mere exposure to different musical forms can induce a wide
variety of ‘extra-musical’ brain responses, alleviate the
symptoms of challenging neurological disorders and
accelerate physiological development in premature infants. I
suggest that music has the capacity to enhance both normal
and suboptimal neural functioning because there are parallels
between the temporal properties of musical forms and the
dynamic properties of distributed neural networks. According
to this musical brain metaphor, the brain uses neural codes
made up of rhythmic and frequency-based patterns that
resemble musical structures. Viewing the brain as a dynamic
system that operates according to ‘music-like' principles
provides a new and potentially useful approach for probing
the neural underpinnings of cognition at the appropriate
temporal scale. To this end, I introduce a theory of higher
brain function referred to as the Musical Brain Model.

Musical Structures and Neural Codes
The Computational Theory of Mind (CTM) is ubiquitous in
cognitive science. Fodor’s Language of Thought Hypothesis
(LOTH) is probably the most well known formulation of the
CTM. According to this theory, thinking takes place in an
inner mental language that consists of a symbolic system of
representations that is physically realized in the brain of
thinkers. While the LOTH addresses the formal properties
of mentalese, it says little about how this mental language
might be neurally implemented. At the same time, many
neuroscientists believe that higher order brain processes
must operate according to a universal neural grammar, a set
of syntactic principles for organizing neural events into
hierarchically structured sequences. In this paper, I suggest
that this universal neural language will turn out to have
music-like properties and that music can therefore be used
to tap into the neurophysiological details of that language.
In what follows, I survey a wealth of empirical findings
that motivate the idea that music is relevant to
understanding the brain at higher levels of organization.
Music is a universal feature that has been found in all
human cultures throughout recorded history. Cognitive
neuroscientists are discovering that individuals without
formal musical training possess both an inherent knowledge
of musical structure and neural substrates dedicated to
processing music. Moreover, the brain is surprisingly
responsive to a range of musical stimuli. It is known that
certain styles of music will alter brain chemistry, enhance
immune function and improve cortical synchrony in healthy
individuals and music-based therapies have been shown to
alleviate the symptoms of a variety of neuropsychological

disorders. Much of this musical sensitivity – this propensity
to understand and benefit from musical exposure, is already
evident in infancy and therefore cannot be legitimately
explained via long-term musical enculturation.
It would be of interest, then, to explain why infants seem
to possess innate musical capacities and also how music is
able to provide therapeutic benefits across a range of
neurological disorders. Expressed another way, is there
something about the dynamic super-organization of the
brain that makes it so responsive to musical stimuli?
According to the Musical Brain Model (MBM), the brain
uses frequency and timing-based neural codes that resemble
the structural building blocks of music and it is this
fundamental similarity that underlies the ability of music to
enhance both normal and suboptimal neural functioning in
humans. As such, music can be viewed as an appropriate
research tool with which to explore the dynamic workings
of the mind and brain. The MBM makes these notions more
explicit within a combined theoretical/methodological
framework that is intended to: a) explain diverse
experimental findings from a range of music-related
neuroscience literature, b) propose the idea of a dynamically
oriented neural language of the brain and c) introduce a
systematic music-based methodology for investigating the
structural details of that language.

The Musical Sensitivity of the Brain
Increasingly, cognitive scientists are beginning to appreciate
that a deeper study of musical processing may offer a unique
window into the brain and that music is an untapped
resource that can be utilized to investigate general properties
of cognition (Zatorre, 2003). Indeed, recent research in the
field of music cognition addresses a broad range of
important issues that are potentially relevant to
understanding general principles of higher brain function,
including the functional and neural architecture of language
and music, music-related deficits and modularity of brain
processing and music as a model for understanding
sensorimotor coupling and complex sequence learning in the
brain. In this section, I survey a variety of music-related
neural phenomena which are intended to highlight the
brain’s exceptional sensitivity to music and thereby
motivate key assumptions of the Musical Brain Model.

Extra-Musical Brain Responses
Listening to pieces from particular musical idioms has been
shown to produce a wide range of neurophysiological and
biochemical responses which appear to occur over and
above the neural mechanisms involved in integrating

1431

musical parameters into a coherent perceptual experience.
In other words, our perception of the surface features of a
particular piece of music relies on neural circuitry dedicated
to processing musical structures, whereas accompanying
emotional experiences or physiological responses are
associated with the activation of additional brain structures
(e.g., amygdala) and dynamic neural responses (e.g.,
hemispheric synchronization). Accordingly, I distinguish
between the cognitive processing of musical patterns (see
Lerdahl & Jackendoff, 1983) and the activation of what I
will be referring to as ‘extra-musical’ brain responses that
are induced by such patterns. These extra-musical responses
are numerous and include changes in brain chemistry (e.g.,
serotonin) and physiology (e.g., heart rate), enhanced
immune function, reduced levels of stress-related hormones
and improved long-range cortical synchrony. While it is
clear that extra-musical responses (EMRs) can influence the
physical, emotional and cognitive states of neurologically
intact individuals, EMRs also presumably underlie some of
the positive consequences of using music in a therapeutic
context. In particular, music has been successfully applied
to a variety of disorders, including psychological syndromes
(e.g., anxiety), neurological and cognitive disorders (e.g.,
Epilepsy, autism), language deficits (e.g., Broca’s aphasia)
and movement disorders (e.g., Parkinson’s disease).

Music and Neural Development
If passive exposure to music can generate such a diversity
of neural phenomena, one might expect that playing music
would confer similar benefits. Indeed, musical training has
been associated with changes in the size and organization of
various neural structures (e.g., corpus callosum, planum
temporale, somatosensory cortex) as well as enhanced
performance in nonmusical cognitive domains (e.g.,
reading, verbal memory, spatial reasoning). Recent research
suggests that these cognitive benefits may derive from early
musical training which alters the developmental patterning
of neural networks. Consistent with this idea, Altenmüller
(2003) has discovered that the type and extent of musical
training influences the complexity, distribution and number
of music processing centers in the brain.

Music and Infants
The ability to perceive and understand music is not limited
to adults. Remarkably, infants as young as 4 months old
come equipped with a wide range of musical
predispositions, including preferences for consonant
intervals and logical rhythmic arrangements, sensitivity to
musical phrase structure and contour and tendencies to
perceptually group notes (Trehub, 2000). Furthermore,
infants not only possess the ability to discriminate different
musical structures, they also benefit from listening to music.
Premature infants in neonatal intensive care units (NICUs)
who are intermittently exposed to appropriately chosen
music (e.g., lullabies) show increases in weight gain,
enhanced behavioural states, more stable physiological
measures and reduced hospital stays (Standley, 2001).

Musical Substrates are Widely Distributed
The fact that music induces a variety of extra-musical brain
responses, therapeutic benefits and cognitive advantages in
both adults and infants provides support for the claim that
musical stimuli are activating widely distributed neural
structures over and above those dedicated to music
processing. Imaging and lesion studies reveal that different
musical parameters are modularly processed in numerous
cortical and subcortical structures in the temporal, parietal
and frontal lobes of both hemispheres (Warren, 1999).
Moreover, listening to music also activates substrates
normally associated with the processing of other
(nonmusical) cognitive modalities, including reward and
emotion (Blood & Zatorre, 2001), language (Maess et al.,
2001) and vision and motor function (Bodner et al., 2001).
The literature reviewed above illustrates the exceptional
musical sensitivity of the brain. I argue that human
proclivities to enjoy music, understand musical structures
and derive therapeutic benefits from mere exposure to music
cannot be adequately explained by musical enculturation
(i.e. simple enjoyment-based arousal associated with longterm experiences with music). Although a minimal amount
of musical exposure is certainly necessary for a basic
appreciation of different musical forms, such exposure is
insufficient to explain musical comprehension in infants,
rehabilitation of complex neurological disorders or crosscultural sensitivity to music (Krumhansl et al., 2000).

Outlining the Musical Brain Model
I suggest that this high degree of musical sensitivity is most
easily understood by viewing the brain as a system that is
‘music-like’ in its design; that is, there are fundamental
similarities between the temporal properties of music and
the complex dynamic processes occurring in the human
brain. For example, we can speak of ‘harmonies’ between
communicating neural regions - the brain is a massively
parallel device that coordinates nonlocal neural regions by
means of common frequency signals. Similarly, we can refer
to ‘rhythmic phrases’ of neuronal assemblies – temporal
patterns embedded in neural firing sequences that can
encode and represent information dynamically. These
musical descriptions of brain activity are not to be
considered mere metaphors but rather can provide clues
towards a universal neural grammar. The Musical Brain
Model makes these kinds of notions more explicit by means
of four distinct, yet inter-related postulates: (1) Musical
pieces consist of temporal sequences (rhythms) of frequency
events (pitches) that are organized in serial (melody) and in
parallel (harmony). (2) The brain processes information by
means of temporal and frequency-based coding mechanisms
that occur in serial and parallel neural pathways. (3) The
acoustic ingredients with which musical pieces are created
synchronize with rhythmic and frequency-based neural
codes, thereby inducing a variety extra-musical brain
responses. (4) Music can be used as a systematic tool for
probing these dynamic brain coding mechanisms.

1432

Postulate #1: Music Consists of Temporally
Organized Frequency Events
The purpose of the first premise of the MBM is to define
music in terms of its most basic constituent structures in
order to establish a common frame of reference with which
to compare musical structures and neural coding
mechanisms. Most forms of music can be described in terms
of three essential components: melody, harmony and
rhythm. Melody consists of a horizontal sequence of
pitches, where each individual pitch is composed of a
fundamental frequency and a series of harmonic overtones.
Harmony consists of vertical arrangements of pitches
(chords) that support the melodic structure as it moves
through time. While melody can be considered a serial
organization of discrete frequency-based events, harmony
involves a parallel organization of frequency events. The
melodic and harmonic aspects of a piece are further
organized in terms of temporal (rhythmic) structures. The
essential components of rhythm are meter (regular
alternation of accented beats) and phrasing (temporal
pattern of musical events). Thus, within the context of the
Musical Brain Model, music may be defined as a patterned
temporal sequence (rhythms) of discrete frequency events
(pitches) that are organized in the serial (melody) and
parallel (harmony) dimensions.

Postulate #2: The Brain Organizes Information in
Terms of Frequency Codes and Temporal Codes
According to the second premise of the MBM, frequency
codes and temporal codes are the fundamental building
blocks of higher brain function - they are the means by
which information is organized, represented and
coordinated in the brain. Within the neurosciences, brain
waves were once considered an epiphenomenon, signs of
the brain’s idling activity. However, a recent upsurge in
EEG research reflects a growing emphasis on the functional
importance of the brain’s oscillatory and rhythmic activity.
Brain rhythms have both a frequency component and a
temporal component. I survey evidence showing how the
brain uses frequency-based codes to represent and organize
information and then consider the importance of timing
sequences as potential neural coding mechanisms.
Frequency Codes Neural oscillations and neuronal spiking
can be characterized in terms of frequency, usually
expressed in Hertz (the number of cycles/events that occur
per unit time). Frequencies are ubiquitous as a form of
information throughout the brain. For example, stimulus
intensity in various modalities (e.g., loudness, brightness) is
encoded by the average spiking frequency of neurons.
Although rate coding and frequency filtering are common
behaviours of individual neurons, frequency information is
also functionally important in large-scale brain activity.
Oscillations in distributed neural networks are crucial to
perceptual binding – the ability of the brain to integrate
various aspects of sensory input into a coherent and unified

whole. In particular, coherent oscillations in the gamma
frequency band (30 to 80 Hz) have been implicated in
linking visual, olfactory and auditory percepts.
On the lower end of the frequency spectrum, the
commonly known brain waves have been correlated with
different states of awareness. For example, alpha waves (8–
14 Hz) are prominent during relaxed states of awareness,
while beta waves (15–30 Hz) typically accompany an alert
or highly focused mental state. Interestingly, both very high
frequency and ultra slow oscillations have been recently
identified in cortical and subcortical structures, such as the
hippocampus (200 Hz ripple oscillations), somatosensory
cortex (600 Hz) and lateral geniculate thalamus (.025 -.01
Hz). Very high frequency oscillations are considered
important for information encoding processes (e.g., memory
consolidation) while ultra-slow oscillations may be involved
in integrating complex cognitive functions. The fact that
brain oscillations are found in widely distributed neural
structures and exist across a range of frequency bands
suggests that the frequency-based component of rhythms
serves an important functional role in coordinating large
scale brain activity.
Temporal Codes Neuronal oscillations in the gamma
frequency band may be important for integrating short-term
perceptual processes (e.g., object recognition), but they are
insufficient to explain cognitive functions which occur over
longer time scales. Modes of cognition as diverse as
language and spatial temporal reasoning require the
sequential ordering and manipulation of discrete information
over time. This kind of temporally extended cognitive
processing depends on the precise synchronization of neural
events over multiple time scales. Thus, temporal codes are
an ideal way with which the brain can dynamically represent
information. Three main types of coding mechanisms have
been described in the literature, two of which are timerelated: time-of-arrival (e.g., latency codes, inter-neuronal
synchrony codes); temporal pattern (e.g., complex pattern
codes, interspike interval codes); and connectivity (e.g.,
labelled-line, spatial-pattern codes). Combining these 3
coding archetypes provides for a rich variety of timingbased neural codes that could subserve different information
processing functions in the brain.

Postulate #3: Neural Coding Mechanisms Entrain
with Musical Structures
The third postulate of the MBM links the first two premises
by isolating shared principles of organization between
musical structures and dynamic neural processes. According
to the Musical Brain Model, our propensity to respond
favourably to music is a direct consequence of how the brain
is constituted. Specifically, the basic acoustic ingredients
with which most musical forms are created (e.g., organized
rhythms and frequencies) are structurally similar to
temporal and frequency-based brain coding mechanisms. I
suggest that certain properties of musical stimuli engage
dynamic neural mechanisms by means of entrainment.

1433

Entrainment Entrainment is the principle whereby two or
more systems synchronize their rhythmic activity. It is
known that the pendulums of grandfather clocks that are
placed in close proximity will begin to swing in synchrony,
or entrain to one another. The phenomenon of entrainment
is common in biological systems and is evident in dynamic
brain-environment interactions. The brain is very responsive
to external rhythms, particularly in the auditory realm.
Music with certain rhythmic parameters is capable of
triggering specific brain waves and physiological responses.
For example, slow Baroque music (60 bpm) will induce
alpha rhythms in the listener and slow down heart and
respiration rates; in contrast, music with driving rhythms or
fast tempos (e.g., rock, heavy metal) can stimulate beta
wave activity and speed up heart and respiratory rates.
Entrainment of brain rhythms with musical rhythms can be
explained in terms of forced oscillations. In contrast to
spontaneously occurring brain oscillations, forced
oscillations are those that are continuously driven by an
external periodic or rhythmic stimulus.
Explaining Musical Sensitivity The principle of
entrainment provides a plausible mechanism for explaining
the brain’s musical sensitivity (i.e. the existence of diverse
extra-musical responses). Rhythm is central to music and is
therefore crucial to uncovering links between musical
elements and dynamic brain organization. In particular,
meter and phrasing comprise the essential elements of
rhythm. Meter provides the predictable structured temporal
grid upon which musical elements are embedded, while
phrasing is variable and gives shape to musical fragments
by organizing pitches into complex temporal patterns. Brain
oscillations may entrain to the purely metrical aspects of
musical rhythms by phase-locking to repeatedly occurring
patterns of accented beats. Moreover, because meter is
hierarchical in nature, metrical structures on several
temporal levels may simultaneously drive neural
oscillations in multiple frequency ranges.

Postulate #4: Using Music as a Methodological Tool
for Investigating Neural Phenomena
According to the first three postulates of the Musical Brain
Model, rhythmic and frequency-based neural codes entrain
to musical structures to which they are similar. These
postulates form the theoretical basis for the final postulate
of the MBM, which describes the use of music as a
systematic methodology for probing the brain. There are
three aspects to the methodology. First, when certain types
of musical stimuli activate corresponding brain
mechanisms, global extra-musical responses will be
generated (e.g., enhanced cortical synchrony). Second, the
nature of these extra-musical responses will be correlated
with specific structural elements in the music (e.g., meter).
By means of refined experimentation, it should be possible
to extract the musical elements that are responsible for each
type of response. Third, once these musical constituents are
isolated, we may be able to infer something about

corresponding brain mechanisms (e.g., theta rhythms); that
is, the musical structures responsible for evoking a
particular brain activation pattern may provide clues as to
the nature of the neural mechanism underlying that
response.
A new research paradigm is emerging in which musicbased procedures are demonstrating positive therapeutic
effects for a variety of serious neurological disorders,
including Epilepsy, Parkinson’s Disease and Broca’s
aphasia. The implicit rational underlying these musical
therapies is that suboptimal neural functioning can be
enhanced by applying an appropriately chosen rhythmic
auditory or musical stimulus that synchronizes with relevant
neural processes. I examine three such music-therapeutic
approaches in order to illustrate the methodological
component of the Musical Brain Model.
Epilepsy Hughes et al. (1998) discovered that a majority of
epileptic patients (some of whom were in a coma)
demonstrated reduced seizure activity while listening to
certain styles of music. In particular, the music of Mozart
and Bach produced dramatic decreases in EEG epileptiform
activity. After analyzing the music of more than 55
composers, Hughes and Fino (2000) concluded that these
clinical improvements were linked to long-term periodic
changes in the music. Specifically, only composers whose
music revealed periodicities on the order of 10 to 60 seconds
produced the beneficial effect. They postulated that music
with long-term periodicities may be resonating with similar
kinds of brain rhythms. One candidate is the cyclic
alternating pattern (CAP), a 20 – 40 second rhythmic brain
cycle which is considered to be an integrating mechanism
for different regions of the central nervous system. This
example illustrates the three part nature of the MBM
methodology: (1) Listening to music produced a reduction
in seizure activity (global extra-musical response). (2) This
response was correlated with long-term periodicities in the
music (causal musical structure). (3) This musical structure
may be enhancing certain long term periodic brain rhythms,
such as the CAP (underlying neural mechanism).
Movement Disorders Rhythmic therapy has been
successfully used to rehabilitate motor function in various
movement
disorders
(e.g.,
Parkinson’s
Disease,
Huntington’s Disease). Thaut et al. (1999) found that
rhythmic auditory stimulation (RAS) produced sustained
improvements in movement performance (e.g., walking and
arm movements) that were more pronounced than gains
derived from conventional physical therapy. In order to
explain the facilitating effects of RAS, Thaut et al.
suggested that auditory neural rhythms may be stimulating
motor impulses in the cerebellum. This example nicely
illustrates the MBM methodology: (1) Rhythmic auditory
stimulation produced enhancements in motor function
(global extra-musical response). (2) This response was
correlated with simple auditory rhythms of a certain
frequency (causal structure). (3) This musical structure may

1434

improve the timing of motor movements by synchronizing
cerebellar rhythms (underlying neural mechanism).
Language Disorders It has been discovered that singing
ability is preserved in many individuals who have
impairments in producing speech. Based on this finding, a
technique called ‘Melodic Intonation Therapy’ (MIT) has
been utilized in the treatment of expressive aphasia. In MIT,
patients progress from singing short linguistic phrases that
are embedded into simple melodic patterns to repeating the
same phrases using normal speech prosody. Albert, Sparks
and Heim (1973) applied this technique to severely
expressive aphasics and observed substantial improvements
in vocabulary and grammatical structure over a six week
period. The MBM methodology is as follows: (1) Singing
simple linguistic phrases facilitated rehabilitation of speech
functions (global extra-musical response). (2) This response
was mediated by the element of musical melody (causal
musical structure). (3) This musical structure may activate
neural processes that overlap with those governing language
prosody (underlying neural mechanism).
Music-Based Approaches in Clinical Settings The
preceding examples provide just a sampling of the various
ways in which music has been used in therapeutic contexts.
The efficacy of these music-based techniques in alleviating
the symptoms of such diverse disorders suggests that there
is something special about the temporal and frequencybased structures inherent in music and their relationship to
dynamic neural coding mechanisms. In particular, musical
(and auditory rhythmic) stimuli seem to be able to affect
long-term positive changes and to impose order on
disorganized or suboptimal neural processes. Studying these
musically induced neural enhancements, particularly in
clinical populations, may therefore provide important clues
from which we can infer general properties of neural
organization.

Why Music is Ideal for Probing the Brain
Having introduced the basic components of the Musical
Brain Model, I now highlight some additional reasons why
using a music-based methodology is useful for probing
dynamic neural phenomena.
Temporal Principles First, both the brain and music are
organized according to temporal principles. Processes
associated with musical comprehension necessarily unfold
over extended periods of time (seconds to minutes) temporal scales that are comparable to the neural processes
underlying complex cognitive abilities (e.g., language,
spatial-temporal reasoning). Thus, examining the brain’s
responses to the time-based structures inherent in music
(e.g., rhythm, meter, tempo) may provide an ideal method
for getting at real-time neural processing mechanisms at
different temporal scales.

Musical-Neural Specificity Second, different forms of
music activate distributed brain regions in unique ways. If
specificity of musical structure is mirrored in specificity of
neural response, then systematically manipulating musical
parameters and detecting associated brain activity may
inform us about the nature of dynamic neural processes.
Imaging and EEG studies indicate that the brain responds
predictably to different styles or pieces of music (Petsche et
al., 1993). It appears that both the pattern and degree of
neural activation is influenced by the particular organization
of musical parameters. For example, EEG coherence
patterns within the different frequency bands have distinct
neurophysiological signatures that correspond to the style of
music that is being perceived (e.g., Bach, Beethoven,
Schoenberg). Furthermore, the degree to which large-scale
neural mechanisms resonate with musical forms will depend
on the temporal complexity of the musical stimulus. Certain
pieces of music (e.g, Mozart’s sonata in D Major for 2
pianos, K 448) have been shown to activate widely
distributed neural structures (temporal, prefrontal, occipital,
cerebellum), while other pieces (e.g., Beethoven’s fur Elise)
only engage basic auditory/music processing centers.
Language-Like Structures A third reason for using music
to probe the brain is that music has language-like properties
that could offer potential insights into the structural details
of the brain’s dynamic neural grammar. Perceiving music
involves detecting complex symbolic relationships between
groupings of discrete auditory events that are hierarchically
organized into structured sequences according to syntactic
principles. Similarly, higher brain function is governed by
highly ordered temporal and frequency-based neuronal
events that may be organized according to a kind of neural
syntax - a set of principles for combining discrete neural
events into structured sequences.
Despite the obvious similarities between music and
language, music differs from language in that its primitive
elements (i.e. notes) do not contain explicit content or
arbitrarily assigned meaning. For example, while the
meaning of a linguistic utterance is (largely) fixed by the
meanings of the individual words and the way those words
are combined, the interpretation of a passage of music is
almost entirely determined by its acoustic structure – by the
temporal context in which its component elements are
organized. Being (largely) devoid of extrinsic meaning,
musical forms are therefore ideal for understanding the brain
and associated cognitive processes. Extra-musical responses
that are induced by particular musical pieces can be directly
attributed to psychoacoustic properties of those pieces; in
other words, it is the musical structures themselves that
stimulate dynamic neural mechanisms (not some externally
derived content that is carried in those structures, as is the
case with language). The language of thought (LOT)
hypothesis suggests that the mind is a symbol processing
system that is organized in language-like ways. The
structural details of the neural language underlying that
representational system may turn out to be intimately related

1435

to the basic elements of musical organization. Indeed, the
idea of a ‘musical brain’ provides an evolutionary
explanation for the existence of music: Humans intrinsically
understand, enjoy, and benefit from music precisely because
properties of external musical forms mirror internal
principles of neural organization.

Music as Methodology in Cognitive Science
Music is much more than a casual form of entertainment. It
is a remarkably engaging and complex temporal
phenomenon from which human minds seem to derive
much physical, emotional and intellectual pleasure. The
degree to which music is able to influence so many aspects
of neural and cognitive functioning suggests that music,
approached in a scientific vein, may become a powerful
research tool for discovering general properties of the mind
and brain. Indeed, Janata et al. (2002) believe that “the use
of tonal music as a stimulus for probing the cognitive
machinery of the human brain has an allure that derives, in
part, from the geometric properties of the theoretical and
cognitive structures involved in specifying the distance
relationships among individual pitches, pitch classes
(chroma), pitch combinations (chords), and keys.” In a
recent fMRI study, Janata et al. discovered that patterns of
Western tonal musical structure appear to be mirrored in
patterns of human brain activity. Increasingly, experimental
findings point to this kind of intimate relationship between
aspects of musical structure and dynamic neural
organization.
In this paper, I introduced both a theoretical framework
and a methodological paradigm for tapping into this
putative link between music and brain. According to the
Musical Brain Model, the neural coding mechanisms with
which the brain processes information are reflected in the
basic ingredients of music. Because of this fundamental
similarity, structural elements inherent in particular musical
forms may produce specific extra-musical brain responses
by synchronizing appropriate neural mechanisms.
If the basic premise of the MBM is correct, then music
may turn out to be a useful noninvasive top-down approach
for exploring the mind/brain - music is a complex and
highly structured temporal stimulus that occurs over time
scales that are ideal for probing the neural underpinnings of
complex cognitive processes. The existing cognitive
neuroscience of music literature can guide this research
program by providing clues as to which musical styles to
utilize and how these styles may be linked with specific
brain activation patterns. By systematically manipulating
the basic elements of different musical forms it will be
possible to generate predictable extra-musical responses.
Continual refinement of the experimental paradigm should
produce increasingly specific brain responses, from which it
may be possible to infer underlying neural mechanisms.
Ideally, the findings associated with this musical
methodology can be integrated with results from existing
neuroscience approaches in order to produce converging
evidence about a universal neural grammar of the brain.

References
Altenmüller, E. O. (2003). How many music centers are in
the brain? In I. Peretz & R. Zatorre (Eds.), The
cognitive neuroscience of music. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Albert, M. L., Sparks, R. W., & Heim, N. A. (1973).
Melodic intonation therapy for aphasia. Archives in
Neurology, 29, 130-131.
Blood, A. J., & Zatorre, R. J. (2001). Intensely pleasurable
responses to music correlate with activity in brain
regions implicated in reward and emotion. Trends in
Cognitive Science, 98, 11818 -11823.
Bodner, M., Muftuler, L. T., Nalcioglu, O., & Shaw, G. L.
(2001). fMRI study relevant to the Mozart effect: brain
areas involved in spatial-temporal reasoning.
Neurological Research, 23, 683-690.
Hughes, J. R. Daboul, Y., Fino, J. J., & Shaw, G. L. (1998).
The “Mozart effect” on epileptiform activity. Clinical
Electroencephalography, 29, 109-119.
Hughes, J. R., & Fino, J. J. (2000). The Mozart Effect:
Distinctive aspects of the music – A clue to brain
coding? Clinical Electroencephalography, 31, 94-103.
Janata, P., Birk, J. L., Van Horn, J. D., Leman, M.,
Tillmann, B., & Bharucha, J. J. (2002). The cortical
topography of tonal structures underlying western
music. Science, 298, 2167-2170.
Krumhansl, C.L., Toivanen, P., Eerola, T., Jarvinen T., &
Louhivuori, J. (2000). Cross-cultural cognition:
Cognitive methodology applied to North Sami Yoiks.
Cognition, 76, 13-53.
Lerdahl, F., & Jackendoff, R. (1983). A generative theory of
tonal music. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Maess, B., Koelsch, S., Gunter, T. C., & Friederici, A. D.
(2001). Musical syntax is processed in Broca’s area: an
MEG study. Nature Neuroscience, 4, 540-545.
Petsche, H., Richter, P., Von Stein, A., Etlinger, S. C., &
Filz, O. (1993). EEG Coherence and musical thinking.
Music Perception, 11, 117 - 151
Standley, J. M.. (2002). A meta-analysis of the efficacy of
music therapy for premature infants. Journal of
Pediatric Nursing, 17, 107-113.
Thaut, M. H., Kenyon, G. P., Schauer, M. L., & McIntosh,
G. C. (1999). The connection between rhythmicity and
brain function: Implications for therapy of movement
disorders. IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology,
6, 101-108.
Trehub, S.E. (2001). Human processing predispositions and
musical universals. In N. L. Wallin, B. Merker & S.
Brown (Eds.), The origins of music. Cambridge,
Massachusetts: The MIT Press.
Warren, J. D. (1999). Variations on the musical brain.
Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine, 92, 571-575.
Zatorre, R. J. (2003). Music and the brain. Annals of the
New York Academy of Sciences, 999, 4-14.

1436

