UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Wayfinding with Maps and Verbal Directions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0z2397gs

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Meini, Cristina
Paternoster, Alfredo

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Wayfinding with Maps and Verbal Directions
Tobias Meilinger (tobias.meilinger@tuebingen.mpg.de)
Max-Planck-Institute for Biological Cybernetics
Spemannstr. 34, 72076 Tübingen, Germany
University of Freiburg - Centre for Cognitive Science
Friedrichstr. 50, 79098 Freiburg, Germany

Abstract
This experiment investigated the role of the source of
information as well as the route complexity for wayfinding
performance and wayfinding knowledge acquired.
Participants had to find a complex and a simple route in an
unknown city with figural instructions (map) and verbal
instructions (directions). The participants reported
transforming the map into verbal directions; therefore no
general difference between the instructions was found. On
oblique intersections which were difficult to code verbally
participants recalling the map tended to perform better but
built up worse route knowledge. Figural information from the
map was only used for wayfinding or pointing if these tasks
could not be solved otherwise.

Introduction
Imagine you are on your way to meet someone in a café in
the city centre. You have just arrived at the station but your
train was late so now you are in a rush. The café is nearby
but you are not exactly sure where it is. What do you do?
Use the big city-map on the station-wall or ask somebody
for directions?
The goal of the present study is to answer this question
and at the same time to explore how wayfinding knowledge
is represented in memory. At least two forms of knowledge
are distinguished: route and survey knowledge (e.g.
Herrmann, Schweizer, Janzen & Katz, 1998; Montello,
Waller, Hegarty & Richardson, 2004; Siegel & White,
1975). Route knowledge can be defined as a sequence of
places or landmarks connected by direction information or
locomotion patterns. It is one-dimensional or “string-like”
and usually measured through errors in a wayfinding task.
Survey knowledge can be defined as the knowledge of a
layout of places or landmarks and their direct spatial
interrelationships including distances and directions. It is
two-dimensional or “map-like” and usually measured in
shortcut behaviour, in a pointing task or in drawing a map.
The starting point of our present study is that the
acquisition of route and survey knowledge is usually studied
either by the direct experience of the actual environment
that is by navigating through a real or virtual environment or
it is studied by learning from maps or texts (e.g. Moeser,
1988; Richardson, Montello & Hegarty, 1999; Taylor &
Tversky, 1992; Thorndyke & Hayes-Roth, 1982). However,
what if individuals acquire their initial knowledge from
maps or verbal description and then find their way through
their environment? In daily life, this is very often the case.
Before we start our journey we plan the route by studying a
1473

map, asking other people, or – more recently – use a route
planner, for instance, from the web. Such route planning
systems typically provide the information as a marked route
on a map and as a “string-like” sentential description.
One obvious question is which source of information is
more helpful for wayfinding? Some studies tackled this
question: e.g. directions presented by tape during driving
increased wayfinding performance compared to map usage
during driving (Streeter, Vitello & Wonsiewicz, 1985).
However, visual information such as from a map is known
to interfere with the driving task more than verbal
information (Liu, 2001; Vollrath & Totzke, 2001). This
interference is specific for driving, e.g. when walking to a
goal via two levels of a building, participants who had a
map instruction showed shorter learning times and hesitated
less during navigation but did not commit less errors and
were not faster than participants with directions (Pazzaglia
& De Beni, 2001). No differences between map and text
instructions could also be found for navigating a virtual
desktop environment (Schlender, Peters, & Wienhöfer,
2000). These results are somehow heterogeneous. Maybe
the two information sources are not equally helpful on all
sorts of routes? Probably one source of information is more
helpful for simple routes and the other for highly complex
routes.
A third question is whether route and survey knowledge
are built up differently by means of verbal instruction or by
maps. In fact, route and survey knowledge can both be
expressed in a map as well as in directions. However, it
seems to be easier to express survey knowledge in a map as
survey knowledge is considered two-dimensional, and
measured e.g. through map drawing. On the other hand, the
linear structure of verbal directions parallels the onedimensionality of route knowledge. From a map where each
aspect is equally accessible this would have to be inferred
first.
This subjective impression motivates the hypothesis that
directions lead to better route knowledge whereas a map
leads to better survey knowledge. One aim of the study is to
test this hypothesis. The second aim is to investigate which
source of information - verbal descriptions or maps - results
in better wayfinding performance and how that is affected
by the complexity of the route. We report a field-experiment
in an urban environment in which participants learned
different routes (varying in complexity) from sentential
descriptions and from maps. We discuss our results in
relation to other accounts of human wayfinding and draw
some general conclusions about wayfinding, verbal

common features, i.e. features that were mentioned by the
majority of participants and were agreed on by two
independent raters. The formulations mentioned most often
were used for the directions.

descriptions, maps, and the representation of wayfinding
knowledge in memory.

Method
Participants
Six female and six male participants, mainly students
between 20 and 31 (M=24; SD=3.3) participated in the
experiment which took place in Tübingen. All participants
were recruited in Freiburg a city about 200 km away from
Tübingen. They received a list of different cities in the
South of Germany and only those people who mentioned
having never been to Tübingen before were selected for the
study. The selected participants were German native
speakers and they were paid for their participation. They all
were transported by bus, from Freiburg to Tübingen, on the
morning of the study.

The city and wayfinding materials

Go straight on.
Take the first right.
Straight on until it is not
possible to do so any more.
Then turn left.
Then turn sharp right at the
next opportunity.
Go straight on.
There is a crossroad to the
right.

Tübingen is an old university city in the south of Germany
first mentioned in 1078. Today 83000 citizens live in the
city. The study took place in the mediaeval city centre
where the participants had to find two different routes.
The complexity of the routes was systematically varied.
The simple route had 9 almost orthogonal intersections with
two or three possible choices of direction at each, summing
up to 21 possible choices (see Figure 1).
The complex route had 10 intersections with two to four
possible choices at each summing up to 23 possible choices.
Most intersections were at oblique angles (see Figure 2).

Do not take this one, but
the 2nd intersection sharp
right.
Go straight on and turn half
left.
Go straight past 2 streets on
the right.
On the 1st intersection turn
half left.
Here is your goal.

Figure 2: The map of the complex route and the
corresponding verbal directions translated into English.

Procedure

Go straight on.
At the 2nd intersection
turn right.
Turn right again at the 2nd
intersection.

Then left.
Then the 2nd to the right.
The 1st turn left.
Left again.
Here is your goal.

In the main experiment, each participant had to find the
complex and the simple route. Half of the 12 participants
got the map instructions on the complex route and the
directions on the simple route. The other half of participants
got the map instructions on the simple route and the
directions on the complex route. The order of conditions
was counterbalanced.
The participants were tested individually. They waited for
their turn in a university room, were escorted to one of the
starting points blindfolded and then turned around to
minimize prior orientation. Then they had three minutes to
study the maps or the verbal description presented on a
sheet of paper. If they were not able to answer a control
question they had two additional minutes study time. They
could not look at the maps or the written descriptions again
after this study period. Then the participants started to find
the way to the destination point. The experimenter followed
the participants and recorded (1) time to reach the goal, (2)
stops for orientation including their duration if longer than
five seconds, (3) getting lost, and (4) need for instructions.
After the participant had reached the goal she or he was
blindfolded again and then taken to the second starting
point. Here the same procedure as described above was
used.

Figure 1: The map of the simple route and the
corresponding verbal directions translated into English.
In the map-condition, the participants received a map that a
professional geographer constructed on the basis of official
maps. All streets on the maps had the same width and local
features like house corners were not shown on the map.
In the directions-condition, participants received the
instructions as written sentences on a paper. The verbal
descriptions of the directions-condition were produced
following the “skeletal description” procedure introduced by
Denis (1997). On the basis of the two maps, prior to our
main study six female and six male volunteers gave verbal
directions. Then these verbal directions were analysed for
1474

After reaching the goals some additional measures for
route and survey knowledge were gathered. To measure
survey knowledge, the participants were asked to point from
the goal to the starting point of the route. The exact
direction was marked by the experimenter in a 360° picture.
Then the participants estimated the Euclidian distance to the
start on a scale with two visible objects as anchors for
distances. Back in the waiting room, survey knowledge
from a vertical perspective was tested by presenting the
participants a map of the goal area of their first route and
asking them to draw in the start with a cross.
To measure route knowledge a choice reaction task was
used. Pictures of all intersections (as seen before crossing)
were presented on the screen. The participants had to
indicate the correct direction of the further route by pressing
a joystick to the right, left or front as fast as possible (see
Figure 3 on the left). They were told to pull the joystick, if
they did not know the intersection. The distracters were
pictures taken from the same area of intersections not
previously seen by the participants. All pictures were
presented in random order.
Finally, we also measured individual differences with a
German translation of the Santa Barbara Sense of Direction
Scale (Hegarty, Richardson, Montello, Lovelace & Subbiah,
2002).

The performance of the participants as a function of source
of information (map vs. description) is presented in Table 2.
Both groups took about the same time to walk the two
routes together, they stopped, got lost and needed the
instructions equally often no matter which instruction they
got (four Wilcoxon Tests all Z < .785, p > .433).
Table 2: Wayfinding performance for map and verbal
directions as instructions.

Time [min]
Stops
Got lost
Needed instructions

Getting Lost Per Person

The performance of the participants as a function of route
complexity is presented in Table 1. On the complex route
the participants walked longer (Wilcoxon Test, Z = 3.06, p =
.002), made more stops per person (Z = 2.99, p = .003) got
lost more often (Z = 2.17, p = .030) and needed further
instructions more often (Z = 2.12, p = .034).

Time [min]
Stops
Got lost
Needed instructions

Directions
M
SD
4.9
1.6
0.9
0.8
1
1
0.3
0.5

2,5

Map
Directions

2
1,5
1
0,5
0
Complex Route

Figure 4: Interaction between complexity of the routes and
source of information. Mean numbers of getting lost and
standard deviations are shown.

Wayfinding Performance

Simple route
M
SD
3
0.5
0.3
0.5
0.6
0.9
0.1
0.3

3

Simple Route

Results and Discussion

Complex route
M
SD
6.5
0.9
1.8
1
1.3
1
0.6
0.7

SD
1.8
1.4
1,1
0.7

However, visual inspection of Figure 4 suggests an
interaction between information source and route
complexity. On the simple route, participants got lost more
often, when they used a map, whereas, on the complex route
they lost their way more often with directions. Due to the
small number of participants this observation did not reach
statistical significance. (U-tests for instruction differences
on simple route: Z = 0.73, p = .465; difficult route: Z = 1.16,
p = .246).

Figure 3: The setting used for measuring route knowledge.
A picture of an intersection was presented and a participant
had to indicate the correct direction with a joystick as fast as
possible.

Table 1: Wayfinding performance on the complex and the
simple route.

Map
M
5.3
1.3
0.9
0.3

For the source of information no mean differences in task
performance could be found. This is in accordance with
other studies which also did not find a difference between
map and text instruction at least not in time or errors made
(Schlender, Peters & Wienhöfer, 2000; Pazzaglia & De
Beni, 2001). Why was there no difference? Schlender,
Peters and Wienhöfer (2001) proposed this was due to
rotating the map to align it with the environment which
equals the assumed performance advantage of the map. Still,
it would be surprising that in three independent studies
advantages and disadvantages balanced each other. We
propose a different explanation: In a questionnaire filled in
after the study all twelve participants mentioned that they
had translated the map into verbal directions. So it seems
that both groups used directions to guide their way: either
the ones self produced from the map or the ones given as

1475

Stops
Stop time [s]
Got lost
Needed instructions

Map
M
0.7
53
0.5
0.2

SD
0.5
31
0.5
0.4

Directions
M
SD
0.8
0.8
9
4
1
0.9
0.5
0.5

right angles, even if the experienced intersection was e.g.
120° (Gillner & Mallot, 1998; Tversky, 1981).

Route Knowledge
Our second assumption stated that the representation of
route knowledge is supported by verbal descriptions. This is
also illustrated by the fact that in constructing the verbal
directions from the map (see also method section) not one of
the twelve volunteers mentioned a single expression
describing survey knowledge, so no survey knowledge was
contained in the verbal directions at all. Contrary to our
expectations, participants with different sources of
information did not differ in their route knowledge, as
measured through the choice reaction task (ANOVA with
correct reactions, main effect source of information
F(1,135) = .27, p = .870)1. There was no main effect of
route complexity (F(1,135) = 0.36, p = .850), but there was
an interaction between route complexity and source of
information (F(1,135) = 5.1, p = .025). Interestingly, this
interaction was in the opposite direction to the one found in
the navigation performance (see Figure 4). On the complex
route participants reacted faster if they had verbal directions
as instruction whereas on the simple route participants with
a map reacted faster. So participants built up a better route
knowledge under conditions where they got lost more often.
As route knowledge and getting lost did not correlate
highly, this was probably not due to individual differences
but had to do with the experimental conditions (n = 12, r =
.30 p = .337)2. This supports the interpretation that this
interaction found in wayfinding performance is reliable.
12
Reaction Time [s]

instructions. Therefore no general performance difference
according to instruction was found.
The starting point of our study was the conjecture that the
usefulness of maps and verbal descriptions might depend on
the complexity of the route. Visual inspection indicated an
interaction between route complexity and source of
information in getting lost. This was despite the fact that the
chance for guessing the correct route was .5 at most
intersections. This interaction was also present in the
representational measures (see route knowledge section).
How does this observation fit with the interpretation of
translating the map into directions?
A closer look at the most difficult intersection (see Table
3 and Figure 2 the uppermost intersection with five arms)
reveals that the participants stopped equally often with both
instructions (U-test: Z = .365, p = .715). However,
participants with a map instruction stopped more than five
times longer than people with directions (U-test: Z = 2.46, p
= .014). What did they do? Did they just recall the verbal
directions they had constructed from the map and compare
them with their surrounding? This does not seem plausible
as participants instructed with verbal directions just stopped
for ten seconds. So what else did they do? Maybe they tried
to remember something else and that was the map. This
might have been effortful and time consuming and was
therefore not carried out at every intersection. However, if
the intersection was difficult like here it might have been
worth the effort: participants with verbal directions got lost
and needed the instructions twice as often as participants
with maps. Again, due to tests low in power and the small
number of participants this effect is not reliable (got lost: Z
= 1.04, p = .299; needed instructions Z = 1.17, p = .241).
This potential explanation is in accordance with results
showing that people associate the expressions “turn left” or
“turn right” automatically with right angles as they draw the
intersections like this (Klippel, 2003). Intersections not
describable in this scheme might cause problems. This is the
case for oblique intersections like those on the complex
route. Comparing both routes this obliqueness is also the
most plausible explanation for differences in difficulty: both
routes do not differ substantially on other factors like
number of intersections (9 vs. 10), possible choices (21 vs.
23) and number of turns required (six each).
In summary, our findings suggest that representing the
routes verbally can explain, first, problems with oblique
intersections, second, the lack of a main effect of source of
information in this and other studies, third, a possible
interaction between route complexity and source of
information and, fourth, it can explain results showing a
strong tendency in many subjects to recall intersections in
.
Table 3: Wayfinding performance at the most difficult
intersection on the complex route.

Map
Directions

10
8
6
4
2
0
Simple Route

Complex Route

Figure 4: Average reaction time and standard deviations of
correct reactions as a measure of route knowledge.
Why did the participants build up a better route knowledge
under conditions where they also got lost more often? More
learning time could not be the reason, as on the complex
route, only participants in the map condition stopped longer
(compare Table 3). These people built up worse instead of
better route knowledge. Still, this fits with the interpretation
1

The overall mean accuracy was 61%. No difference between
experimental conditions was found.
2
The performance measures on both routes were added together
for overall performance per person independent of instruction.
Correlations for each route separately show a very similar picture.
1476

that participants with a map instruction did not look at their
environment while stopping but tried to remember the map
they had seen before. Therefore their attention was not
focused on their surroundings, leading to a worse route
knowledge and less getting lost on average but not
necessarily on an individual level (compare Kane & Engle,
2000). Alternative explanations for the differences in route
knowledge could focus on increased attention when getting
lost or on more perspectives seen of an intersection (comp.
Bülthoff & Edelman, 1992). However, they would predict a
substantial correlation between getting lost and route
knowledge.

Survey Knowledge
Our assumption that the representation of survey knowledge
is eased by the map instruction was also not supported.
Participants with map and verbal directions did not differ in
their performance of pointing from the goal to the start
(systematic error expressed by mean deviations: U-Test
simple route: Z = 0.481, p = .630; complex route Z = 1.04, p
= .296; unsystematic error expressed by standard deviations:
simple route F(5,5) = 2.67, p > .10; complex route F(5,5) =
2.43, p > .10) and estimating the distance (deviation of
drawn distance to correct distance in mm. U-Test simple
route Z = 0.641, p = .522; complex route Z = 0.641, p =
.522).
So participants with a map instruction were not better in
pointing. Did they not remember any survey information
from the map? As marking the starting point in a map of the
goal area showed, this was not the case (see Table 4). For
participants with verbal directions the estimates of the
direction of the starting point were less accurate as shown in
their higher standard deviation a measure for the
unsystematic error (F(5,5) = 8.31, p < 0.025). On the other
hand, they performed better in the distance estimation than
participants with map instructions who overestimated the
distance (Binomial Test: 2 underestimations vs. 10
overestimations p = .039). However, the map the
participants had to draw in the starting point was 50% the
size of the map they were instructed with. Therefore the
overestimation in the map condition is plausible assuming
the participants orientated themselves on the size of the
original map. So the participants did remember survey
knowledge from the map, but they did not use it in the
pointing task. Possibly information from path integration
was more accessible than figural information from the map.
Just as self translated directions could be easier to access in
finding a route compared to figural layout information from
the map presumably only used at difficult intersections.

So the participants did not use survey knowledge from the
map for the pointing task. Did they use it for navigation?
Indeed three participants reported that they had tried to walk
into the direction of a (sub)goal when using a map. Is this
least angle strategy (Hochmair & Frank, 2002; Hölscher,
Meilinger, Vrachliotis, Brösamle & Knauff (2005) more
beneficial for finding a route than relying on route
knowledge that is just orientating on the turning at
intersections? It is not. Similar to Hölscher et al. (2005) the
application of the least angle strategy was correlated with
bad performance in navigation: participants got lost more
often (r =.84, p =.001) and needed the instructions more
often r =.78, p =.003)2. So for walking a specific unknown
route relying on survey knowledge is not to be
recommended. These participants also contributed
substantially to the error frequency in the condition with
map instruction. Excluding them, both groups showed no
difference in getting lost on the easy route, but the
difference on the difficult route was increased.
The greater importance of route knowledge compared to
survey knowledge in this study might also explain results in
individual differences: the performance in navigation was
not significantly correlated with the sense of direction
measured in the German version of the Santa Barbara Sense
of Direction Scale (four correlations to performance
measures, all r < .32, p > .326)2. Also contrary to other
studies (e.g. Moffat, Hampson & Hatzipantelis, 1998;
Lawton, 1996) no correlations of wayfinding performance
and gender could be found (four correlations r <. 10, p >
.763). These results are intelligible if it is taken into account
that the sense of direction is related to the usage of survey
knowledge, not to route knowledge relevant here (Hegarty
et al., 2002; Prestopnik & Roskos-Ewoldson, 2000) and that
gender differences are often related to the usage of survey
strategies (Lawton, 1994, 1996).
These results are limited to tasks in which a specific route
to an unknown goal has to be found with the help of
instructions. Finding a specific route does not involve
searching for the shortest route. It is kind of unusual to
search for shortcuts in given directions. In using a map to
reach a goal, it seems more plausible to look for the shortest
route first and then to try to memorise it, for example by
translating it into directions. It seems less plausible to
memorise the whole map and then to look for a shortcut

Conclusions

Table 4: Errors in distance and direction estimation of the
starting point when drawing a map given the goal area.

No global differences between map instruction and verbal
directions were found. We suggested that this was because
participants translated the map into directions. Oblique
intersections were more difficult for wayfinding. On such
intersections, which are not easily expressed in verbal
directions, recalling the intersection layout from the map
presumably helped finding the route. This led to worse route
knowledge. It seems that participants did not use figural
information from the map, if they could use directions for
navigation instead or path integration for a pointing task.
Maps or directions did not selectively enhance the
construction of survey or route knowledge. For finding a
specific unknown route, survey knowledge did not seem to

Direction error [°]
Distance error [mm]

Map
M
+15
+12

SD
20
15

Directions
M
SD
+7
49
-1
17

1477

have any advantage. Focusing on it could even lead to
worse performance. Practically speaking, for cities with an
orthogonal street layout, verbal directions are sufficient to
reach your goal, in other cases it would be better to use a
map.

Acknowledgements
The research was supported by grants from the DFG in the
Transregional Collaborative Research Center, SFB/TR 8
project. The author thanks Alexander Klippel for designing
the map, Thomas Fangmeier for all his help, Tanja Walther
and Gottfried Vosgerau for data collection, Anna Widiger
for support with data analysis and Lara Webber for proofreading.

References
Bülthoff, H.H. & Edelman, S. (1992). Psychophysical
support for a two-dimensional view interpolation theory
of object recognition. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 89,
60-64.
Denis, M. (1997). The description of routes: a cognitive
approach to the production of spatial discourse, Current
Psychology of Cognition, 16, 409-458.
Gillner, S. & Mallot, H.A. (1998). Navigation and
acquisition of spatial knowledge in a virtual maze.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 10, 445-463.
Hegarty, M.; Richardson, A.E.; Montello, D.R.; Lovelace,
K. & Subbiah, I. (2002). Development of a self-report
measure of environmental spatial ability. Intelligence, 30,
425-447.
Herrmann, T., Schweizer, K., Janzen, G. & Katz, S. (1998).
Route- and configurational knowledge – conceptual
considerations. Kognitionswissenschaft, 7, 145-159.
Hochmair, H., & Frank, A.U. (2002). Influence of
estimation errors on wayfinding decisions in unknown
street networks - analyzing the least-angle strategy.
Spatial Cognition and Computation, 2(4), 283-313.
Hölscher, C., Meilinger, T., Vrachliotis, G., Brösamle, M. &
Knauff, M. (2005). Finding the Way Inside: Linking
Architectural Design Analysis and Cognitive Processes.
In C. Freksa, M. Knauff, B. Krieg-Brückner, B. Nebel and
T. Barkowsky (Eds.), Spatial Cognition IV – Reasoning,
Action, Interaction (pp. 1-23). Berlin: Springer.
Kane, M.J., Engle, R.W. (2000). Working-memory capacity,
proactive interference, and divided attention: Limits on
long-term memory retrieval. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 26, 336358.
Klippel, A. (2003). Wayfinding choremes - Conceptualizing
wayfinding and route direction elements. Bremen:
Universität Bremen.
Lawton, C. (1994). Gender differences in way-finding
strategies: relationship to spatial ability and spatial
anxiety. Sex Roles, 30, 765-779.
Lawton, C. (1996). Strategies for indoor wayfinding: The
role of orientation. Journal of Environmental Psychology,
16, 137-145.

Liu, Y-C. (2001). Comparative study of the effects of
auditory, visual and multimodality displays on drivers’
performance in advanced traveller information systems.
Ergonomics, 44, 425-442.
Moeser, S.D. (1988). Cognitive mapping in a complex
building. Environment and Behavior, 20, 21-49.
Moffat, S.D., Hampson, E. & Hatzipantelis, M. (1998).
Navigation in a “virtual” maze: Sex differences and
correlation with psychometric measures of spatial ability
in humans. Evolution and Human Behavior, 19, 73-87.
Montello, D. R., Waller, D., Hegarty, M., & Richardson, A.
E. (2004). Spatial memory of real environments, virtual
environments, and maps. In G. L. Allen (Ed.), Human
spatial memory: Remembering where (pp. 251-285).
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Montello, D.R. (1993). Scale and multiple psychologies of
space. In A.U. Frank & I. Campari (Eds.), Spatial
information theory: A theoretical basis for GIS (pp. 312321). Berlin: Springer-Verlag, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science 716.
Pazzaglia, F. & De Beni, R. (2001). Strategies of processing
spatial information in survey and landmark-centred
individuals. European Journal of Cognitive Psychology,
13, 493-508.
PrestopnikJ.L. & Roskos-Ewoldson, B. (2000). The
relations among wayfinding strategy use, sense of
direction, sex, familiarity, and wayfinding ability. Journal
of Environmental Psychology, 20, 177-191.
Richardson, A.E., Montello, D.R. & Hegarty, M. (1999).
Spatial knowledge acquisition from maps and from
navigation in real and virtual environments. Memory &
Cognition, 27, 741-750.
Schlender, D., Peters, O.H. & Wienhöfer, M. (2000). The
effect of maps and textual information on navigation in a
desktop virtual environment. Spatial Cognition and
Computation, 2, 421-433.
Siegel, A.W. & White, S.H. (1975). The development of
spatial representations of large-scale environments. In
H.W. Reese (Ed.), Advances in child development and
behaviour (Vol. 10). New York: Academic Press.
Streeter, L. A.; Vitello, D. & Wonsiewicz, S.A. (1985).
How to tell people where to go: Comparing navigational
aids. International Journal of Man-Machine Studies,
22(5), 549-562.
Taylor, H.A. & Tversky, B. (1992). Spatial mental models
derived from survey and route descriptions. Journal of
Memory and Language, 31, 261-292.
Thorndyke, P.W. & Hayes-Roth, B. (1982). Differences in
spatial knowledge acquired from maps and navigation.
Cognitive Psychology, 14, 560-589.
Vollrath, M., & Totzke, I. (2000). In-vehicle communication
and driving: an attempt to overcome their interference,
[Internet]. Driver Distraction Internet Forum sponsored
by the United States Department of Transportation,
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration
(NHTSA).
Available:
http://www-nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/
departments/nrd-13/driver-distraction/PDF/33.PDF
Tversky, B. (1981). Distortions in memory for maps.
Cognitive Psychology, 13, 407-433.

1478

