UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
What Do We Get When Dipping a Brain Into Science? Properties of the Scientific Mind

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3s42r1jd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
Heintz, Christophe

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

What Do We Get When Dipping a Brain Into Science?
Properties of the Scientific Mind
Christophe Heintz (cheintz@ehess.fr)
Institut Jean Nicod – EHESS. 1bis, av. de Lowendal, F-75 017 Paris
fixed by Fodor’s definition is then an open empirical
question). Asserting that the mind is massively modular
consists in a radical denial of the existence of a domaingeneral cognitive ability that would pilot human thought; the
mind is said to be an organised composite of numerous
evolved cognitive modules.
Lastly, evolutionary psychologists tend to have a
minimalist attitude towards the plasticity of the mind. This is
because it is the genetic underpinning of an evolved cognitive
module that is being selected for during evolutionary history.
Now, the genetic endowment that causes the modular
architecture of an organism’s mind/brain does not change
over ontogeny and with enculturation. So the genetically
determined modular architecture of the mind does not change
in the course of the organism’s life.
While the above point is generally not controversial
for animal cognition, it seems at odds with what we know of
human creativity and flexibility. Cognitive scientists taking
evolutionary psychology seriously have thus attempted to
show what is special with human cognition. I present here my
own attempt with the special case of scientific cognition.
I provide a view of scientific cognition that takes the
three above constraints into account and emphasises the
essential role of meta-representational abilities. I thus show
that, contrary to Fodor (1983), scientific cognition can be
accounted for with the functioning of cognitive modules, and
that, contrary to Carey (1995) and others, the evolution of
knowledge does not require changes in the architecture of the
mind. The massive modularity thesis provides a view of the
mind that is a promising alternative to the views that rely on
plasticity and domain generality to account for scientific
cognition

Abstract
I argue that scientific cognition can be accounted for in a
massive modularity theoretical framework. Scientific cognition
is then described as a culturally informed reflection, allowed by
meta-representational abilities, upon the mandatory output of
preliminary modules.
Keywords: massive modularity;
metarepresentations; theories.

scientific

cognition;

It is a rather peculiar alchemy, one must admit, to
educate someone who is born for survival and reproduction so
as to make a scientist out of her. Studying the properties of
the scientific mind, I suggest, can be done by studying first
the brain as an evolved biological organ, and then the
transformation that scientific enculturation brings about.
While cognitive studies of science include mostly the analysis
of the semantic and inferential operations of scientists’
thoughts, the methodology I adopt in this paper allows raising
essential complementary questions regarding, in particular,
the biological implementation of the semantically
characterised cognitive processes. From this perspective, the
scientist’s mind is re-located exactly where it is: in between
biological evolution and cultural achievement – the result of
both as well as the cause of the latter. The perspective begets
another look at the venerable knowledge producer.
Evolutionary psychology holds that the biology of
the brain is a product, as any organ of a living organism, of
evolutionary history. As a consequence, one can fruitfully
understand the brain as having functions for which it has been
selected, i.e., functions that increase the chances of survival
and reproduction of the organism endowed with the brain in
the environment where it has evolved. The overall function of
the brain is to process information in such a way that it causes
its owner organism to behave adaptively in his environment.
Because the brain has been selected by evolution, one can
assume that it is successful in this task, i.e., that it implements
ecologically rational cognitive processes.
A second important point brought up by
evolutionary psychology is that there can be no evolutionarily
plausible story of a domain-general cognitive device. Rather,
the constraints of evolutionary theory imply that the mind is
made up of numerous cognitive devices that have their own
adaptive functions. This, together with arguments from
computational tractability (Carruthers, 2005), leads to a
hypothesis that the mind is wholly composed of biologically
realised cognitive devices designed to solve specific problems
met by the organism in his environment. Let us call these
cognitive devices modules (whether they meet all the criteria

Modules that make us scientists
If we admit that the scientist’s mind is made up of modules
that implement ecologically rational cognitive processes, then
the existence of scientific cognition raises the following
questions: How can a species that evolved as a huntergatherer species do science? How can we obtain scientific
rationality out of people’s ecological rationality? How can we
have gone beyond biologically implemented cognitive
heuristics, innate naïve theories, or psychologically
interpreted Kantian categories to obtain our scientific
understanding of the world? My first attempt to answer these
questions, however, consists in answering a more specific
one: How and why are cognitive modules put to work on
scientific problems?
Modules, according to the modular theory of
cognition, are put to work according to the biological
917

consequence of some state of the matter or laws of nature.
This is what happens when, for instance, we look at the light
of a bulb as being a consequence of moving electrons.
Cognitive studies of science have not ignored the
pervasiveness of metarepresentations in science. Scientific
practice, says Nancy Nersessian, “often involves extensive
meta-cognitive reflections of scientists as they have
evaluated, refined and extended representational, reasoning
and communicative practices” (Nersessian, 2002, p. 135).
Deana Kuhn has also pointed out the metacognitive skills at
work in scientific thinking. These include not only metastrategic competence (Kuhn & al., 1995), but also the ability
“to reflect on one’s own theories as objects of cognition to an
extent sufficient to recognize they could be wrong”(1996,
p.275).
Metacognition
and
other
more
basic
metarepresentative abilities are thus central to scientific
thinking, but most interestingly for our present purpose, they
also bridge the gap between lower cognitive abilities
processing the input from our sense organs and other
hardwired heuristics or naïve theories, and the abstract and
consciously controlled thinking practices of science. In
particular, problem representation consists in bringing a set of
representations and previous knowledge or ideas to bear on
the understanding, or interpretation, of incoming 'naïve' or
intuitive representations. Problem representation allows
cueing heuristics in the search of solutions. Gorman (2000)
illustrates this point with Kepler’s mental model of the solar
system and the application of heuristics as designed and
implemented in the discovery program BACON 1 of Herbert
Simon and his colleagues. Kepler’s particular problem
representation, he explains, was necessary for the heuristics to
apply and be useful. In general, the interpretation of naïve or
intuitive representations make possible directing them further
towards other heuristics, naïve theories or any modular
processes. For instance, our interpreting of electric
phenomena as a consequence of the movement of electrons
activates our naïve physics theories. In those cases,
metarepresentations act as routers of representations towards
the right module. The routings therefore make use of
ecological rationality for the development of our
understanding of the world and the construction of a scientific
rationality that is oriented towards truth rather than survival.
This development of scientific cognition is a cultural
achievement because evalutative, interpretive and routing
meta-representations have been developed with scientific
theories and practices during the historical evolution of
science. Thus, the ‘right’ that qualifies the choice of modular
processes and the ‘scientific’ or ‘rational’ that qualify the
thoughts has now to do with the normative aspects of
scientific traditions and paradigms. Problem solving using
heuristics, of course, is both learned by humans and
biologically given. One way the learning can happen is by
using already existing heuristics for solving problems that the
heuristics were not initially designed to apply to. This use of
heuristics for ends they were not originally created for is
coined ‘exaptation’ by Wimsatt (2000). He notes that
“evolution, human engineering, science, and culture all

hardwired architecture of the mind, which directs the flow of
information, thus feeding modules with specific inputs. Also,
modules can select their own inputs according to their formats
and domains. For instance, the view of a face-like stimulus
automatically triggers the face-recognition module. At this
level, learning can happen not only through enrichment of
modules’ databases but also through the fixation of
parameters determining the domains of modules. Nested
modularity, maturation of cognitive abilities through
interaction with the environment, enrichment, and many other
processes endow modular minds with much more flexibility
and adaptive potential than might initially be thought. None
of these processes, however, seems to allow for theoretical
innovation as we find it in the history of science, including,
for instance, the production of new theories. A brain made of
nested domain-specific modules may account for much of
animal cognition, but humans must have some special ability
that allows innovation.
I believe that this special ability is the ability to
meta-represent
our
own
representations.
Metarepresentational ability allows for the processing, using and
producing of representations of representations. The ability
may be implemented by one or more cognitive modules.
Some meta-representational modules, indeed, have an already
studied evolutionary history and satisfy the requirements of
evolutionary plausibility. Presumably, meta-representational
abilities appear with the ability to represent the
representations that others may hold – their mental state. This
ability, called Theory Of Mind (TOM), is adaptive by
allowing Machiavellian intelligence, the ability to manipulate
others’ behaviour, and is certainly at the basis of human
social life, including linguistic communication.
The relevant consequence of meta-representational
ability (or abilities) is that the product of mandatory modules
can be re-thought. In other words, mental representations can
be taken as input of metacognitive abilities so as to provide
meta-representations that will determine the attitude one will
hold with regard to the input representation. For instance, one
can think that the input representation X provides a true or a
false representation of the world through having the
metarepresentations ‘It is true that X’ or ‘It is false that X’ .
Metarepresentations can also express semantic relations
among representations (e.g. X contradicts Y) and evidence for
beliefs (e.g. A justifies my belief that B) (Sperber, 1996).
More generally, metarepresentational abilities allow for the
interpretation of representational output of previous (modular)
heuristics and naïve theories; these representations can be
reflected upon and given some further meaning through the
embedding of representations. The most obvious case is when
sounds uttered by some speaker are interpreted as conveying
what the speaker intends to communicate (Sperber & Wilson,
1986), but interpretation is also at work when our intuitions
are taken to reveal something about the world rather than
directly leading to (adaptive) behaviour. This happens, for
instance, when perceptive representations get embedded
within a framework theory; then, the perceptive
representation is metarepresented as a manifestation or

918

embodied in the innate endowment of the human mind. Does
that mean that the study of this endowment is irrelevant for
the study of scientific cognition? In other words, is this
endowment fully bypassed and of no consequence in
scientific cognition? Human intelligence appears to be able to
extend beyond its initial limits. This is paradigmatically
exemplified with conceptual change in science, where some
previously held beliefs are abandoned and replaced by new
beliefs incommensurable with them. In particular, conceptual
changes in science have rendered the content of science at
odd with intuitive beliefs. How can we have come to think,
and be now so convinced, that the earth is moving around the
sun while the contrary belief naturally imposes itself upon us?
While knowledge enrichment can be thought of as the
addition of new data to previously existing databases,
conceptual change and abandonment of previously believed
theories requires, on the part of the scientists, a new attitude
towards the stimuli of the newly theorised domain. What are
the cognitive processes accounting for these new attitudes?
Conceptual change is a key problem in science studies and an
account of it needs to include the events in people’s minds
that make these conceptual changes possible.
The existence of conceptual change raises two questions
for cognitive psychologists: first, what are the cognitive
processes that make conceptual change possible? Much work
has been done in cognitive studies of science on this topic.
Most notably, Nersessian (1992) has analysed the role of
physical analogy, the construction of thought experiments and
limiting case analyses. Carey has also pointed out the role of
mappings across cognitive domains for the creation of new
domains (e.g. Carey & Spelke, 1994). There is general
agreement
that
conceptual
change
involves
metarepresentational abilities; the debated point is on the
necessary development of these abilities and their
complexities for conceptual change to be possible (see Carey
& Johnson, 2000). The second question is: What are the
cognitive processes that are implemented once conceptual
change is achieved?
I argue that the cognitive processes allowing conceptual
change have little effect on the structure of the mind and its
component abilities; all that is needed is enrichment of metarepresentational knowledge. The same intuitions and abilities
sustain pre-conceptual change and post-conceptual change
cognition. In other words, although the cognitive
development of children and adults is obviously relevant to
science studies, if only because people are being educated, or
not, in a culture impregnated with science, the ontogenic
developments do not change the genetically determined
modular architecture of the mind. I henceforth defend a
strong continuity thesis, which asserts that the infant and the
mature scientist have the same cognitive abilities (after
maturation) organised in an identical way. By contrast, Carey
and Gopnik defend a weak continuity thesis which asserts that
only the discovery processes need be identical in child and
scientific cognition. Carey and Gopnik both hypothesise that
conceptual change in science is based on isomorphic changes
in people’s mind. They thus develop a theory of cognition

systematically reuse constructs in new contexts that drive
their elaboration in new directions”. I suggest that scientific
thinking is well characterised as a systematic exploitation of
human
cognitive
abilities
by
constructing,
via
metarepresentations, exaptative heuristics and intuitions. In
the next sections, I provide a more detailed characterisation:
first, I argue that the exploited human cognitive abilities are
innate and undergo no structural change during an
individual’s
lifetime;
second,
I
describe
how
metarepresentations exploit cognitive abilities, thereby
allowing scientific cognition and reflexive beliefs.

The innate mind and the historicity of science
I feel that an important gap in science studies is the study of
the role of our primary intuitions in scientific knowledge.
Social studies accord little importance to these cognitive
events that are intuitions, while cognitive studies are much
more focused on higher reasoning practices (induction,
abduction, analogical reasoning, thought experiment, etc.).
The continuity thesis, which asserts that scientific cognition is
of the same nature as lay cognition, has raised important
debates that could bear on the distinction and relation
between reflexive and intuitive thinking, between metarepresented knowledge and direct output of nonmetarepresentational modules (see Sperber, 1997, for the
distinction between intuitive and reflective beliefs). However,
the empirical stake of the debate has not focussed so much on
the use of common sense in scientific cognition (with the
exception of Atran, 1990) as on whether the higher reasoning
practices of scientists are used by laymen and children.
Concerning the normative rational practices, such as the use
of deductive logic, psychologists have found that laymen
mostly do not follow them, and thus do not answer the
normative criteria. On the other hand, most theories in
developmental psychology have asserted that children do
think in similar ways to scientists, including hypothesistesting, theory formation that allows them to develop theories
that are incommensurable with the theories they replace, and
general processes of belief formation leading to the ‘scientist
as child’ metaphor (Gopnik, 1996). That norms of reasoning
may not be followed by lay people comes as no surprise from
the perspective of ecological rationality; and it is also
unsurprising, with respect to the 'minimal plasticity of the
mind' credo of massive modularity, that creative thinking in
children and adult scientists relies on the same cognitive
processes and abilities; creative thinking is not based on a
cognitive ability that develops only when doing science.
From the perspective of this paper, however, the question
involves the role of naïve theories, biologically implemented
heuristics, and ‘lower’ cognitive processes with percepts as
output. These are innate endowments that provide our
unconscious and non-reflexive thinking and guide most of our
actions; they are pervasive in day-to-day cognition, but their
content is often inconsistent with contemporary scientific
theories. People do not reason with quantum mechanics for
grasping things and we do not normally think of ourselves as
moving in a Riemann space. Scientific knowledge is not
919

certainly the best analysis, if not the only possible one, for
cognitive psychology. But the integration of cognitive
psychology with biology – from either brain imaging or
evolutionary psychology – imposes and allows stronger,
existential, claims for ‘modules’. The integration is desirable
not only for the reduction of semantic properties to biological
ones – a naturalistic programme of its own – but also because
the semantic functioning of the mind is likely to be highly
constrained by its physical implementation. In other words,
the embodiment of the mind is likely to have some
consequence on its functioning. One is not only interested in a
detailed account of what the mind does (a semantic-functional
account), but also in how it actually does it (a realist account).
Defining modules as cognitive organs raises the empirical
problem of distinguishing between the initial endowment of
the mind as what is genuinely modular, and later cognitive
achievements as developed upon modular abilities. There is
no a priori reason that later cognitive achievements be
implemented in the same way as modular abilities or have the
same epistemic properties. Cognitive processes implemented
through modular abilities are even probably very different
from cognitive processes implemented through intuitive
theories. This is because:
- Modules, as cognitive organs, should implement cognitive
processes that are ecologically rational, since they have been
selected for increasing the chance of survival and
reproduction. Intuitive theories need not be ecologically
rational, but may have different properties stemming from the
conditions in which they developed (e.g., answering some
culturally developed criteria of rationality).
- While modular abilities implement their processes on
cognitive devices whose biological hardwire is directly
informed by genes, intuitive theories need to develop their
physical implementation during learning.
- It seems implausible that modules as cognitive organs could
transform in any drastic way: organs such as the hand or the
liver, can change within a rather limited range; their basic
structure is encrypted in the genes and cannot change without
genetic mutation.
However, pursuing the analogy between physiology and
the architecture of the mind suggests an answer for the
problem of the implementation of intuitive theories. Notice,
indeed, that we can use our hands and liver in ways that are
certainly not the function they have been selected for. Organs
can enlarge their actual functioning beyond the limits of their
evolved designed function. For instance, we can use our
hands to play the piano, while they certainly have evolved for
grasping, and we can use our liver for the digestion of
Champagne, while it more probably has evolved for digesting
the food consumed by hunter-gatherers. The hypothesis is
therefore that hunans can use their cognitive modules in
novel ways, for which they were not designed by evolution.
This, in turn, can lead to conceptual change and the
development of new intuitive theories. Atran and Sperber’s
work (Atran, 1990, 1998; Sperber, 1996) provides an account
of theory change along these lines. Implementations of new
theories, they assert, do not replace modular abilities, but on

that differs from the minimal plasticity of the structure of the
mind defended here. For Carey and Spelke (1994), scientific
development provides, with conceptual change, a counter
example to a Sperberian picture, where cognitive
development (ontongeny) is characterised by enrichment of
innate modules only, and conceptual change is enabled by
metacognitive abilities. “Reflection by itself”, they say, “will
not produce conceptual change” (pp. 180). What is at stake,
for cognitive studies of science, is whether the innate abilities
mentioned above (naïve theories, innate heuristics) are put to
work in scientific cognition, or whether scientific cognition
relies on other abilities that develop during ontogeny. If we
are in the latter case, then cognitive studies of science should
concentrate on the role of the acquired abilities at work in
scientific cognition rather than, as I have argued up to now,
on the innate abilities designed by evolution. Evolutionary
psychology would then not be immediately relevant to
science studies and the task would be to discover, with other
means, the developed cognitive abilities sustaining scientific
cognition.
Regarding the fixity of the modular architecture of the
mind, I will not argue against Churchland and Gopnik or
Karmiloff-Smith because their models all rely on domaingeneral abilities or important plasticity of the mind. I have
mentioned that my reasons for not adopting these theories
come from evolutionary psychology. Carey’s framework,
however, is the most compatible with the one defended in this
paper. Carey distinguishes core theories from intuitive
theories: core theories are those theories that are innate
endowment and which account for the behaviour of infants,
while intuitive theories are constructed during cognitive
development. Examples of core theories are the already
mentioned naïve physics, naïve psychology, and naïve
quantitative reasoning. Examples of intuitive theories are
number cognition, after, among other things, the integration
of the concepts of zero and infinity and the construction of
mappings between numbers and geometry. Children also
develop, Carey argues, an intuitive theory of biology, which
arises after conceptual change in the concept of living things.
A third example of intuitive theory is provided by conceptual
change in the years 4 to 12 in the interrelated concepts of
matter, weight and density (see Carey & Spelke, 1992: 184194).
For Carey, core theories are modules in a sense akin to
the one already used in this paper, but Carey further takes
intuitive theories to be modules, thus rejecting the criterion of
innateness as a necessary property of cognitive modules
(1995, p. 274). Although the problem may appear merely
terminological, there are some reasons to insist that modules
be defined as cognitive organs, and thus answer some kind of
innateness criterion (such as being determined by the
genotype). At bottom, the distinction is between semantic
criteria of identification (Carey: identifying a theory on the
basis of which people explain the phenomena pertaining to its
domain) versus realist-existential assertions about the
structure of the mind (Sperber-Atran: identifying cognitive
organs). Semantic analysis of the cognitive processes is

920

people as intentional agents, even when he adopts the most
radical behaviourist theories. In a sense, contemporary
science is highly unintuitive: While beliefs vary greatly,
phenomenology varies comparatively little (e.g., through the
trained repartition of attention and other non-structural
changes).
Another difference between Carey and Sperber-Atran
lies on the biological basis of mental theories that develop
during ontogeny. Because Carey uses a semantic criterion for
distinguishing abilities, she is not able to distinguish between
abilities that reflect the working of a (biological) cognitive
device and abilities that cut across and use cognitive devices.
A semantic criterion is not sufficient for the circumscription
of cognitive domain of (biologically realised) modules. Carey
consequently postulates the existence of mental devices that
develop during ontogeny: the intuitive theories. These
intuitive theories have a status in between modular innate
abilities and scientific theories. They are mental devices as
innate modules, but they are developed in the same way as
scientific theories. In their argumentation against Sperber,
Carey and Spelke present intuitive theories as the necessary
mental ground of scientific theories. The counter-argument
that I have presented, however, consists in showing that the
mental ground of scientific theories need not be a mental
cognitive device of its own that somewhat mirrors the content
of scientific theories. Such a view seems to stem from a
persistent simplification of the constitution of scientific
theories, which are reduced to sets of beliefs and its ensuing
reasoning abilities, i.e., a semantic characterisation of
scientific theories. With this simplistic view, the development
of science and conceptual change is indeed in need of its
mental counterparts: the same theories and change put within
the mind of the scientists. Consideration of the problem of the
physical implementation of scientific theories, however,
raises new problems and show the limits of Carey’s purely
semantic analyses. At the level of the brain, I have argued that
scientific cognition is implemented by modular primary
abilities together with reflection – including semantic
evaluation – upon their output. Likewise, Erana and Martinez
(2004) have argued against a semantic reductive view of
scientific theories, pointing out the complex of mental,
cultural and artifactual interacting components of scientific
theories. Taking into account the physical implementation of
the scientific theories outside the brains of the scientists
similarly allows Erana and Martinez to argue against Carey’s
and in favour of Sperber-Atran’s view of cognition.
Let me clarify my criticism: I fully agree with Carey and
Spelke that there must be some mental implementation of the
semantic content of theories. I have no argument against the
idea of intuitive theories, insofar as they describe semantic
properties of people’s cognition. But I have invoked the
importance of specifying their physical implementation and
rejected, on biological grounds, the hypothesis that non-innate
theories are implemented by their own cognitive device. I
have hinted at an account of an implementation of non-innate
knowledge and theories by calling on the working of
biologically realised modular abilities, including meta-

the contrary continue to rely on them. Atran uses neoDarwinian theory to illustrate theory implementation without
replacement. Neo-Darwinian theory has a notion of species as
sets of animals that live in the same ecological niche and that
can interbreed. This notion is incommensurable with the
naïve notion of species, which is essence-based and
associated with a favoured rank within the folk taxonomy.
However, Atran argues, the adoption of neo-Darwinism does
not cause the elimination of naïve pre-theoretical intuitions.
What happens, rather, is that naïve thinking still provides the
basic intuitions and percepts upon which scientists reflect so
as to interpret them within a neo-Darwinian framework. So
the ecologist doing fieldwork still perceives animals as
entities at the generic species level and with essences as
intrinsic teleological causes. But in his university office, the
same ecologist will interpret his data thus gathered through
his basic cognitive abilities, especially naïve biology, in the
light of the most recent scientific theories. Naïve biology is a
cognitive organ that presumably evolved as an adaptive skill
for the hunter-gatherer (we can also suppose that some kinds
of naïve biology are present in other animals’ cognitions); it is
nonetheless put to work to do science, a function it did not
evolve for. Scientific reflection upon the output of the naïve
biology module bestows a theory that is inconsistent or
incommensurable with naïve biology. The new theory does
not emerge through the transformation of the module, which
continues to provide the same intuitions and percepts; it
emerges due to a reflective attitude upon the module's output.
The cognitive processes sustaining the theory therefore lie in
the functioning of the naïve biology module, together with
some sets of meta-representations which provide the context
for the interpretation of the outputs of the module. Scientific
enculturation need not generate new cognitive structures. It
is, on the contrary, implemented through enrichment only,
consisting of beliefs that will constraint future interpretations
and reflections upon our primary intuitions.
For Carey, some core theories might be overthrown and
replaced by intuitive theories: this is conceptual change. For
Sperber and Atran, core knowledge (or naïve theories or
modular abilities) are biological endowments that do not
disappear with cognitive development, even when knowledge
that is inconsistent with core knowledge is elaborated. Beliefs
obviously change, but this does not alter or transform the
architecture of the mind, which consists of an arrangement of
modular abilities constraining information flows. Thus,
change of beliefs and the evolution of knowledge do not
create new intuitions or perceptive abilities (neither
ontogenetically nor historically); new beliefs, cultural and
historical variations, always rely on the same basis of
intuitions: the output of biologically realised cognitive
devices. This hypothesis is corroborated by the fact that
scientists act and think in everyday life exactly as laypeople.
The expert in quantum mechanics continues to see a cup as a
cup, rather than as a complex of interacting elementary
particles; the biologist, as Atran points out, continues to see
the tree as a tree, even if this category has no scientific
counterpart; and the psychologist continues to understand

921

Carey, S. & S. Johnson (2000). Metarepresentation and
conceptual change: Evidence from Williams Syndrome. In
Sperber, D. (Ed.), Metarepresentation.
Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 225-264.
Carruthers, P. (2005). The case for massively modular models
of mind. In R.Stainton (ed.), Contemporary Debates in
Cognitive Science. Blackwell
Erana and Martinez (2004). The Heuristic Structure of
Scientific Knowledge. Journal of Cognition and Culture 4:
3-4, pp. 701-31.
Fodor, J. (1983). The Modularity of Mind, Cambridge: MIT
Press.
Gorman, M. (2000). Heuristics in technoscientific thinking
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 23, p. 752
Gopnik, A. (1996). The Scientist as Child. Philosophy of
Science 63 (4), pp. 485-514.
Nersessian, N. J. (2002). The cognitive basis of model-based
reasoning in science. In Carruthers, P., Stich, S. & Siegal,
M. (eds.) The Cognitive Basis of Science.Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Nersessian, N. J. (1992.) How do scientists think? Capturing
the dynamics of conceptual change in science. In Giere, R.
N. (ed.) Cognitive Models of Science. University of
Minnesota Press. Minneapolis, MN. 3--45.
Kuhn, D. (1996). Is good thinking scientific thinking? In
Modes of thought: explorations in culture and cognition,
David R.Olson and Nancy Torrance (eds.) Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Sperber, D. (1996). Explaining Culture: A Naturalistic
approach. Oxford: Blackwell
Sperber, D. (1997). ‘Intuitive and reflective beliefs’ Mind and
Language 12 (1) pp. 67-83.
Sperber, D. & D. Wilson (1995). Relevance: Communication
and Cognition (2nd ed.). Oxford: Blackwell
Todd, P. & G. Gigerenzer (2000). Precis of Simple Heuristics
that Make us Smart. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 23, pp.
727-41.
Wimsatt (2000). Heuristics refound. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 23, p. 766-7.

representational abilities. I have defended the theory that
asserts that the cognitive architecture of the mind is innately
fixed and does not vary with learning. At first glance, this
may appear to contradict our knowledge that beliefs,
scientific beliefs included, greatly vary in space and time.
But the historicity of science is not a counter-argument to the
thesis that there is an innate mind, i.e., a genetically
determined fixed structure of cognitive abilities. On the
contrary, it is the innate mind that provides the dynamics of
scientific development. I have thus sketched a view of the
mind where conceptual change is implemented through the
working of pre-conceptual change cognitive devices and the
processing action of meta-representations. The latter can feed
in modules with new representations, thus exploiting the
module processes for further inferences – this is what
happens, for instance, when the light of a bulb is understood
as the manifestation of the movement of very small objects
(electrons). Meta-representations can also distinguish among
illusory and revealing intuitions through giving them a
semantic status. They provide new meaning to these intuitions
by embedding them in acquired knowledge.

References
Atran, S. (1990). The Cognitive Foundations of Natural
History. New York: CUP.
Atran, S. (1998). ‘Folkbiology and the anthropology of
science: Cognitive universals and cultural particulars’.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 21.
Carey, S. and E. Spelke (1994). Domain-specific knowledge
and conceptual change. In Hirschfeld, L. A. and S. A.
Gelman (eds.) Mapping the mind: Domain specificity in
cognition and culture. New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press
Carey, S. (1995). On the origin of causal understanding. In D.
Sperber, D. Premack, & A. J. Premack (eds) Causal
cognition: A multidisciplinary debate. New York, NY:
Oxford University Press

922

