UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
What's Your Definition of Synaesthesia: A Matter of Language or Thought?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5471c5sr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Magliano, Joseph P.
McNamara, Danielle S.
Millis, Keith K.
et al.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

What’s Your Definiton of Synaesthesia: A Matter
of Language or Thought?
Carmen Mª Bretones-Callejas (cbreton@ual.es)
Department of English and German Philology, University of Almería. La Cañada.
Almería, 04120. Spain
concepts and experience (Lakoff and Johnson, 1999:19,
Bretones, 2001).

Abstract
Synaesthesia takes place when ordinary stimuli elicit
extraordinary conscious experiences. As a rhetorical
figure, synaesthesia consists on giving a thing a
quality that in fact it cannot have because the thing
and the quality are perceived by different senses (e.g.
“white noises”). But the physiological and the
conceptual or linguistic realities are in fact part of a
whole that can be approached from different
perspectives. This paper shows them and tries to
analyze the main thought processes hiding behind this
intriguing phenomenon, hoping to rise a new current
of discussion and stressing the importance of an
interdisciplinary approach to the study of synaesthesia,

Approaches to Synaesthesia
As a rhetoric figure, synaesthesia consists on giving a thing a
quality that in fact it cannot have because both, the thing and
the quality, are perceived by different senses. For instance:
‘white voices’. In the case of literary synaesthesia, three
types of study could be considered (Erzsébet, 1974):

Keywords: Cognition; linguistics; neuroscience,
psychology, perception, synaesthesia.

•

The analysis of sensorial combinations in the rhetoric of
a single poet, within the framework of characterization of
his/her individual style. For example, works on Oscar
Wilde by Ullman, on Heine by Silz, on Baudelaire by
Roeding, on Montale by Rosiello, and on Ungaretti by
Gutia.

•

The study of synaesthesia parallels in the style of
different poets. For example, in the work on Keats and
Byron by Ullmann, or on Eminescu , Arghezi and
Sadovaenu by Mancas.

•

The elaboration of a comprehensive view about the
synaesthetic charachteristic of a literary school or a
certain period: The Renaissance and Baroque, or the
Romanticism, for instance.

Introduction
Synaesthesia [also spelled synesthesia], from Greek syn (with
or joined together) and aesthesis (sensation), means ‘the
union of senses’. This word possesses the same root as the
word anesthesia, which means ‘with no sensation’ or ‘without
the use of the senses’. It has been widely established that
synaesthesia occurs when an individual receives a stimulus in
one sensory modality and experiences a sensation in another
(Bretones 2005). However synaesthesia usually occurs within
the same modality; e.g. color-grapheme synaesthesia where
individuals perceive colors when presented with achromatic
digits or letters (Baron-Cohen et al., 1996, Elias et al., 2003).
Thus, in a broad sense we could say that synaesthesia takes
place when ordinary stimuli elicit extraordinary conscious
experiences.

Under the linguistic approach to synaesthesia, we must first
distinguish the psycho-physiological process and its linguistic
projection. The opinions of linguists concerning the concept
of synaesthesia can be contradictory too:

Synaestesia has been interpreted by many as different things
(Galeyev, 1999). It has been consigned to abnormality,
philosophy or metaphor for centuries, but on the other hand as
a physiological fact because for some individuals certain
stimuli cause “real” synaesthetic responses or synaesthetic
perception. The challenge, thus, seems to find at what level
syneasthesia is taking place: as (1)inter-sensorial connections
or bonds [being the term ‘synaesthesia’ used to describe the
result of its manifestations in specific fields such as arts]; or
as (2)phonetic tropes and stylistic figures, relative to semantic
inter-sensorial transfers. These two levels are, in fact, deeply
linked showing proof of the inseparability of categories,

337

1.

Taking interest in the acoustic synaesthesia, conferring
sensorial properties to the sounds of speech, to the names
of the days and the months and so on (Slawson, 1968,
1985).

2.

Considering synaesthesia as a linguistic category, or
according to a more restricted interpretation, the sphere
of syneasthesia is limited only to sensorial fields (e.g.
White stillness, velvet warmth. This sphere can be
widened to the sensorial combinations proper, but also
the associations between abstract notion and a sensorial
impression (e.g. Sweet desire, blue slyness) (Erzsébet,
1974).

3.

Synaesthesia semantically incompatible components are
subordinated to a common dominant notion: the notion
of the sensorial field, introducing not only the notion of
combinations of different sensations but also some
oxymorons whose elements belong to the same sensorial

Day investigates this pattern and tries to determine the
synaesthetic metaphors used in English through corpus
analysis (1996) and the study of human subjects (2000). He
obtained data from the language in written texts and
electronic sources such as The World Library’s Greatest
Books Collection, The Oxford Text Archive, and Project
Gutemberg, which include texts by Chaucer, Shakespeare,
Merville or even Michael Crichton (Day, 1996). Using the
percentages of concurrency of each synaesthetic metaphor,
Day (1996:8) obtained the following patter:

field (eg. Blind light, dumb song) those combinations
which traditionally have never been considered as
synaesthetic (Erzsébet, 1974).
Some consider that if the elements of the combination are
semantically compatible (1) we cannot speak about
synaesthesia (e.g. Silent night, the rustle of the red poppy), so
for (2) and (3) synaesthesia is the syntactic relation between
elements semantically incompatible, denoting sensations from
different sensorial spheres (Ward & Simner 2003). Likewise,
the conventional semantic viewpoint narrows its definition
and the traditional syntactic one widens it. According to a
widespread view, synaesthesia appears through semantic
transfer, the transfer of a feature, based on similarity of two
concepts. Some consider it completely subordinated to
methaphor. Others postulate that it is produced by the transfer
of the name based on simultaneous contiguity of the
sensations, thus pointing out the relationship of synaesthesia
with metonymy. Different researchers have reached different
models of this intersensorial phenomenon. Some through a
diachronic perspective such as Williams (1976), Classen
(1993) or Evans & Wilkins (2000), and others through a
synchronic perspective such as Ullmann (1964), Day (1996),
Cacciari (1998) or Bretones (2001). In Ullmann’s view
synaesthesia is at the border line of synaesthesia proper, i.e.,
the category of direct name-transfer based on synaesthetic
similarity, and of pseudosynaesthesia, i.e., the association of a
concrete sensation with an abstract notion), name-transfer
based on simultaneous sense-contiguity.

hearingÆvisionÆsmellÆtemperatureÆtasteÆtouch
Synaesthetic transfer is, thus, considered one of the
most common types of metaphoric transfer, i.e., the
transmission of information from one sensory modality to
another (Williams, 1976: 463). Recent working metaphorical
analysis makes it clear that many of our most basic concepts
(and our reasoning via those concepts) are embodied: Lived
experiences in our bodies inspire and constrain the way we
conceive and articulate many of our other experiences
(Lakoff & Johnson, 1999). That is exactly what metaphor
does if we base metaphor on experiential, body-linked,
physical core of reasoning abilities (Bretones, 2001).
“Metaphor, with its capacity to introduce a sensory logic at
the semantic level is a way to fill this gap[…] since
metaphors allude to a more complex scenario of interrelated
meanings and experiences of the world”(Cacciari, 1998:
128).
One should not come away with the impression that
all our knowledge about our sensory and perceptual
experiences can be captured in a set of independent - or even
interrelated - verbal categories; nor that sensory/perceptual
experiences themselves reduce in any simple manner to a list
of attributes. Still, the study of synaesthetic metaphor may
serve as a useful model system (Marks, 1978). By being
amenable to psychophysical analysis, synaesthetic metaphors
not only permit ready quantification, but enable us to assess
development trends in the ways that at least certain aspects of
such metaphors are interpreted. A psychophysics of
synaesthetic metaphor may eventually reveal much about
perception and language; but to appreciate the depth and
extent of human metaphorical capacity will demand a
psychological analysis that is as yet hardly found in our
philosophy (Marks, 1983, 2000).

Ullmann (1964) claimed the possibility of a basic pattern of
performance for synaesthesia:
“[…] further investigations might also reveal that the
movement of synaesthetic metaphors is not haphazard but
conforms to a basic pattern. I have collected data for the
sources and destinations of such images in a dozen
nineteenth-century poets, French, English and American,
and have found three tendencies which stood out very
clearly: (1) transfers from the lower to the more
differentiated senses were more frequent than those in the
opposite direction: over 80 per cent of a total of 2000
examples showed this 'upward' trend; (2) touch was in
each case the largest single source, and (3) sound the
largest recipient [...]” (Ullmann, 1964: 86).

According to Ullmann (1964), the less differentiated senses
would be smell and taste, and the most differentiated ones
hearing and vision. He proposes the following model of
synaesthesia:

The study of synaesthesia could also be divided in
two general groups that in a way overlap: First, synaesthesia
proper as the stimulus of a sensorial input induce sensation in
a different sensory module. Second, cognitive synaesthesia
or categorial synaesthesia, which entails synaesthetic
addition to the categorial systems of each culture or
individual. Synaesthesia makes an interesting topic of
investigation in that the subject matter is an internal, mental
state whose existence we can infer from the findings of
behavioral testing (Harris & Baron-Cohen, 1995). The
growing interest in synaesthesia has led to numerous
experimental studies that rely upon self-reports given by

smell/taste Æ hearing/vision Æ touch
This model is followed by Day (1996), but some others do
not agree with his ranking (Cacciari 1998, Bretones 2001),
which can be interpreted by talking of smell or taste in terms
of hearing or vision and so, of hearing or vision in terms of
touch. Classen (1993), in a study fundamentally based on
observations, determines the following synaesthesicmetaphoric rank in English:
hearing Æ vision Æ smell Æ taste Æ touch

338

are not experienced by most people under comparable
conditions (only by those considered synesthetes). It is
considered by many as a normal brain process that is
prematurely displayed to consciousness in a minority of
individuals. In the other extreme, we find Maurice MerleauPonty’s belief (1962) that synaesthetic perception is the rule
that we unlearn (probably trough pruning effect), though we
are unaware of it because scientific knowledge shifts the
center of gravity of experience so that we unlearn how to see,
hear, and generally speaking, feel. Ramachandran and
Hubbard (2001) see synaesthesia as a window into
perception, thought and language. Rich & Mattingley (2002)
show that synaesthesia has been considered as a reaction to a
physical stimulus, but they also prove that it can be activated
with the mere thought of a particular stimulus or concept.

subjects with synaesthesia, or upon objective quantification
of data according to traditional methods of experimental
psychology or neuroscience. Varying criteria have been
applied to the diagnosis of synaesthesia although in general
scientists have always differentiated clinical synaesthesia
from metaphor, literary tropes, sound symbolism, and
deliberate artistic contrivances that sometimes employ the
term ‘synaesthesia’ to describe their multi-sensory joinings.
Synaesthesia proper has some define neurological
components (Grossenbacher et al., 1999, 2001) and it is
believed to pass on genetically through X-chromosomes
(Cytowic, 1995; Harrison, 2001). The percentage of
synaesthesic human beings varies according to the kind of
synaesthesia we are referring to (Day, 2000). It is estimated
that we can find 1 “basic cognitive synaesthete” (colored
letters) in every 500 people, 1 “proper synaesthete” (colored
musical sounds or colored tastes) in 3,000, and 1 “multiple
synaesthete” (multiple synaesthetic experiences) in 15.000. It
is possible that more than half of the human beings are “basic
synaesthetes” in which one considers high sounds as bright
and low sounds as dark (Day, 2000). And it might be
possible that all human beings are synaesthetic at birth
(Baron-Cohen, 1993, Harrison, 2001). Cytowic (1995)
proposed five criteria for the diagnosis of a type of clinical
synesthesia called ideopathic or developmental synesthesia
as opposed to acquired forms of clinical synesthesia such as
drug induced synesthesia, epileptic synesthesia, and
synesthesia due to acquired brain lesions:
-

Synesthesia is involuntary but elicited.

-

Synesthesia is projected. If visual, a photism will appear
outside the body in the region close to the face.

-

Synesthetic percepts are durable and discrete. The
associations for an individual Synesthete are stable over
their lifetime. If a sound is blue, it will always be blue.

-

Synesthetic experience is memorable. Many synesthetes
exhibit hypermnesis.

-

Synesthesia is emotional in nature. A synesthetic
experience is accompanied by a sense of noetic certitude.

The pairings between eliciting stimuli and the resulting
synaesthetic experiences differ widely between synaesthetes,
for any given synaesthete, there appears to be high
consistency of the pairings between eliciting stimuli and
synaesthetic experiences over time (e.g., Baron-Cohen et al.,
1987, 1993; Dixon et al., 2000; Mattingley et al., 2001;
Odgaard et al., 1999 ; Svartdal & Iversen, 1989). There are
different studies that locate this phenomenon on the brain.
Synaesthesia appears to be a left-hemisphere function that is
not cortical in the conventional sense, and the hippocampus is
critical for its experience (Cytowic, 1995). Functional
imaging studies (Robertson, 2003; 2005) have shown that
areas within the ventral pathway that normally register shape,
color and words are activated in synaesthetes, but in addition,
there is also parietal activity, which for the most part has been
downplayed. Some have argued that the automaticity and
consistency of the synaesthetic experience represent direct
connections between cortical feature maps, perhaps through
synaptic connections that fail to undergo normal synaptic
pruning during development. This explanation of
synaesthesia has been favored by various investigators and is
consistent with findings from behavioral experiments
suggesting that synaesthetic binding occurs before attention.

Conclusions
Synaesthesia takes place when ordinary stimuli elicit
extraordinary conscious experiences, and as a conceptual
feature synaesthesia consists on giving a thing a quality that
in fact it cannot have, because the thing and the quality are
perceived by different senses. This is reflected in thought and
in common linguistic expressions such as “white voices” or in
idiomatic expressions such as “to strike a sour note”.
There is, thus, a different perspective to consider the study of
Synaesthesia. The proposed approach brings together
classically separated realms: the linguistic and the
neuroscientific and cognitive ones. But both the physiological
and the conceptual or linguistic realities could be considered
as part of a whole.

Synaesthesia, according to Cytowic (1995), is the involuntary
physical experience of a cross-modal association, because the
stimulation of one sensory modality causes a perception in
one or more different senses.
Within cognitive synaesthesia, certain groups of things that
our individual cultures teach us to set together or categorize in
certain or specific way –such as the letters, the numbers, or
the names of persons– also have some kind of sensorial
addition, such as a smell, a color or a flavor. The most
common forms of cognitive synaesthesia entail elements such
as characters written in color (graphemes), numbers, time
units, and notes or harpsichords. For example, a person could
perceive different colors with different spoken vowels or
different consonantic sounds. Synaesthesia is a conscious
experience of systematically induced sensory attributes that

Further research should be done using such interdisciplinary
approach, taking into account all the elements mentioned in
this paper which hopes to rise a new current of discussion.

339

Galeyev, B. M. (1999). “What is Synaesthesia: Myths and
Reality.” Leonardo Electronic Almanac, 7(6). At
http://prometheus.kai.ru/mif_e.htm, 6/18/00.
Grossenbacher, P. G. & Lovelace, C. T. (2001). “Mechanisms
of
Synaesthesia:
Cognitive
and
Physiological
Constraints.” Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 5: 36-41.
Harrison, J. E. (2001). Synaesthesia - the strangest thing.
Oxford: O.U.P.
Ione, A. & Tyler, C. (2004). “Neuroscience, History and Arts
Synesthesia: Is F-Sharp Colored Violet?” Journal of
History of the Neurosciences, 13(1): 58-65.
Lakoff, G. & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the Flesh.
New York: Basic Books.
Lovelace, Grossenbacher, & Crane. (1999). “Theories.” At
http://www.ncu.edu.tw/~daysa/theories.html, 6/18/00
Lyons, A. D. (2000). “Synaesthesia-A Cognitive Model of
Cross
Modal
Association”.
At
http://www.users.bigpond.com/tstex/synaesthesia.htm,
6/18/00.
Luria, A. R. (1969). The Mind of a Mnemonist. London:
Basic Books.
Marks, L. E. (1978). The Unity of the Senses: Interrelations
among the Modalities. New York: Academic Press.
Marks, L. E. (1983). “Categories of Perceptual Experience: A
Psychophysicist Peruses Synesthetic Metaphors.” In
Geissler, H.G. (Ed.). Modern issues in perception.
Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Publishers B.V. Pp. 351352.
Marks, L. E. (2000). “Synesthesia.” In Cardena, E., Lynn, S.
J.& Krippner, S. (Eds.) Varieties of anomalous
experiences.. American Psychological Association,
Washington, DC. Pp.121-149.
Mattingley, J. B. et al. (2001). “Unconscious priming
eliminates automatic binding of colour and alphanumeric
form in synaesthesia.” Nature, 410: 580-582.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1962). Phenomenology of Perception.
London: Routledge.
Odgaard, E. C., Flowers, J. H., & Bradman, H. L. (1999). An
investigation of the cognitive and perceptual dynamics of
a colour-digit synaesthete. Perception, 28: 651-664.
Ramachandran, V. S. & Hubbard, E. M. (2001).
“Synaesthesia: A Window into Perception, Thought and
Language. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 8(12):3-34.
Rich, A. N. & Mattingley, J. B. (2002). “Anomalous
Perception in Synaesthesia: A cognitive Neuroscience
Perspective”. Nature Reviews, 3: 43-52.
Robertson, L. C. (2003). “Binding, Spatial Attention And
Perceptual Awareness.” Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 4:
93-102.
Robertson, L. C. & Sagiv, N. (Eds). (2005). Synaesthesia:
Perspectives from Cognitive Neuroscience. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Slawson, W. (1968). "Vowel quality and musical timbre as
functions of spectrum envelope and fundamental
frequency." Journal of Acoustical Society of America 43:
87-101.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to the Ramon y Cajal National Project and to funds
from the Spanish Ministry of Science and Technology, the
University of Almería, and the Regional Government of
Andalucia’s investigation group Hum-807(Literature and
Culture in the English Speaking Countries).

References
Baron-Cohen, S. & Harrison, J. (1996). Synesthesia: Classic
and Contemporary Readings. Oxford: Blackwell.
Baron-Cohen, S., Harrison, J., Goldstein, J.H. & Wyke, M.
(1993). “Coloured speech perception: Is synaesthesia
what happens when modularity breaks down?”
Perception, 22: 419-426.
Bretones-Callejas, C. M. (2001). “Synaesthetic Metaphors in
English.” ICSI Technical Report, 8. September 2001. At
http://www.icsi.berkeley.edu/techreports.
Bretones-Callejas, C.M. (2005). “Synesthesia”. In Keith
Brown(Ed.). Language and Linguistics Enciclopedia.
Cambridge: Elsevier.
Cacciari, C. (1998). “Why Do We Speak Metaphorically?
Reflections on the Functions of Metaphor in Discourse
and Reasoning”. In Katz, Albert N.; Cacciari, Cristina;
Gibbs, Raymond W. Jr.; Turner, Mark. 1998. Figurative
Language and Thought. New York & Oxford: O.U.P. Pp.
119-157.
Campen, C. van. (1997). “Synesthesia and Artistic
Experimentation”. Psyche, 3(6), (November 1997). At
http://psyche.cs.monash.edu.au/psyche-index-v6.html,
6/18/00.
Classen, C. (1993). Worlds of Sense. Exploring the Senses in
History and across Cultures. London/New York:
Longman.
Cytowic, R. E. (1995). “Synesthesia: Phenomenology and
Neuropsychology. A Review of Current Knowledge”.
Psyche,
2(10),
July
1995.
At
http://psyche.cs.monash.edu.au/v2/psyche-2-10cytowic.html, 6/18/00.
Cytowic, R. E. (2002). “Touching tastes, seeing smells - and
shaking up brain science.” Cerebrum, 4(3): 7-26.
Day, S. (1996). “Synaesthesia and Synaesthetic Metaphors”.
Psyche,
2(32),
July
1996.
At
http://psyche.cs.monash.edu.au/v2/psyche-2-32-day.html,
6/5/00.
Day, S. A. (2004). “Trends in Synesthetically Colored
Graphemes and Phonemes –2004 revision.” At
http://home.comcast.net/~sean.day/Trends2004.htm,
6/1/04.
Elias, L. J., Saucier, D.M., Hardie, C. & Sarty, G.E. (2003).
“Dissociating semantic and perceptual components of
synaesthesia: behavioural and functional neuroanatomical
investigations.” Cognitive Brain Research, 16: 232-237.
Erzcébet, P. D. (1974). “Synaesthesia and Poetry.” Poetics,
11: 23-44.
Evans, N. & Wilkins, D. (2000). “In the Mind’s Ear: The
Semantic Extensions of Perception Verbs in Australian
Languages”. Language, 3(76): 547-592.
340

Slawson, W. (1985). Sound Color. University of California
Press.
Ullmann, S. (1964). Language and style. Oxford: Basil
Blackwell.

Ward, J. & Simner, J. (2003). “Lexical-gustory synaesthesia:
linguistic and conceptual factors.” Cognition, 89: 237261.
Williams, J. M. (1976). "Synaesthetic Adjectives: A possible
Law of Semantic Change". Language, 52(2): 461-478.

341

