UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
When Nominal Features are Marked on Verbs: A Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation Study

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2wh989vm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Caramazza, Alfonso
Fierro, Brigida
Finocchiaro, Chiara

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

When Nominal Features are marked on Verbs: A Transcranial Magnetic
Stimulation Study
Chiara Finocchiaro (c.finocchiaro@sns.it)
Laboratorio di Linguistica, Scuola Normale Superiore, 56126 Pisa, Italy

Brigida Fierro (fierro@unipa.it)
Dipartimento di Neurologia and O.O.P., Via La Loggia 1, 90100 Palermo, Italy

Alfonso Caramazza (caram@wjh.harvard.edu)
Cognitive Neuropsychology Laboratory, Department of Psychology, Harvard University, 33 Kirkland Street Cambridge, MA
02138 USA

Fox, & Petersen, 1994; Petersen, Fox, Posner, Mintum, &
Raichle, 1988; 1989; Perani, Cappa, Schnur, Tettamanti,
Collina, Rosa, & Fazio, 1999).
Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) has
also been used to show that morphosyntactic operations on
verbs can be selectively impaired (Shapiro, Pascual-Leone,
Mottaghy, Gangitano, & Caramazza, 2001). One of the
major advantages of the rTMS technique is that it
demonstrates not only that a brain region is active during the
performance of a given task but that the area is actually
necessary for the task being performed (Walsh &
Rushworth, 1999). When applied at low frequency (1 Hz),
rTMS temporarily interferes with cognitive processing
beyond the duration of a train of pulses (Pascual-Leone,
Walsh, & Rothwell, 2000).
Shapiro et al. (2001) found that, following rTMS targeted
to a portion of the left prefrontal cortex along the midfrontal
gyrus anterior and superior to Broca’s area, both verb and
pseudo-verb production were significantly impaired,
whereas noun and pseudo-noun production were unaffected.
The participants’ task was to produce singular or plural
noun forms and 3rd person singular or plural verb forms in
response to specific cues. The fact that the morphological
operation always involved the same kind of phonological
material (add or subtract /s/ as in a car/some cars, they
jump/he jumps), ruled out any explanation in terms of
phonological differences between verbs and nouns.
Furthermore, the fact that the same pattern of results was
obtained for real words and pseudo-words suggests that the
left prefrontal cortex is sensitive to the grammatical
properties of nouns and verbs independently of other
conceptual-semantic properties that may be correlated with
words of different grammatical classes.
The objective of the current study was to extend the
research on the neural correlates of grammatical category to
a special class of pronouns, widespread in Romance
languages, called clitics (e.g., in Italian, lo and la in portalo
and portala ‘bring it [masculine]/[feminine]’ respectively).
Although clitics have nominal referents and are specified for
nominal features (e.g., gender), they attach to verbs and
depend phonologically and syntactically on verbs.
Italian clitics can precede (i.e., they are proclitics) or
follow (i.e., they are enclitics) the verb (cf. lo porto ‘I bring

Abstract
It has often been claimed that verb processing (as
opposed to noun processing) is subserved by specific
neural circuits in the left prefrontal cortex. In this study,
we took advantage of the unusual grammatical
characteristics of clitic pronouns in Italian (e.g., lo and
la
in
portalo
and
portala
‘bring
it
[masculine]/[feminine]’ respectively) – the fact that
clitics have both nominal and verbal characteristics to
explore the neural correlates of verb processing. We
used repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation
(rTMS) to suppress the excitability of left prefrontal
cortex and to assess its role in producing
verb+det+noun and verb+clitic phrases. Results showed
an interference effect for both kinds of phrases when
stimulation was applied to the left but not the as right
prefrontal cortex. However, the interference effect was
significantly greater for the verb+clitic than for the
verb+det+noun phrases. These findings suggest that
clitics increase the morphological complexity of verbs,
thus supporting the view that they are treated as affixlike elements.

Introduction
Increasing interest in the neural basis of grammatical class
has led to converging evidence that nouns and verbs are
subserved
by
distinct
neural
mechanisms.
Neuropsychological reports on brain-damaged subjects have
shown that nouns and verbs can be selectively impaired
(Caramazza & Hillis, 1991; Damasio & Tranel, 1993;
Berndt & Haendiges, 2000; Shapiro, Shelton, & Caramazza,
2000), thus setting the stage for a thorough investigation
with new methodologies. Electrophysiological studies of
verb and noun perception show increased left-lateralized
anterior positivity for verbs (Dehaene, 1995; Federmeier,
Segal, Lombrozo, & Kutas, 2000). Studies using positron
emission tomography (PET) and functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) have demonstrated that left
prefrontal and medial frontal cortex are recruited in verb
processing tasks (Raichle, Fiez, Videen, MacLeod, Pardo,
672

length and frequency as reported in the Corpus di Italiano
Contemporaneo (1988). For the experimental task, mean
picture name frequency was 68, mean letter length was 6.1,
mean syllable length was 2.6. For the naming task, mean
frequency was 56, mean letter length was 7; mean syllable
length was 2.7. Twelve additional pictures were used as
practice trials at the beginning of the control task, and
twenty at the beginning of the experimental task.
Five verbs were selected. Each verb was paired with ten
pictures.
Stimulus presentation was randomized for each
participant. Particular care was taken to avoid semantic,
phonological, or associative relations between consecutive
trials.

him/it’ vs. portalo ‘bring him/it [you]’), depending on the
verb form. In enclisis, the clitic and the verb are combined
into one word, with the clitic forming a kind of affix. In this
study, only enclitic object forms were used (e.g., portalo
‘bring him/it [you]’. See Finocchiaro & Caramazza, in
press).
Because of their nominal properties, clitics require
conceptual-semantic and grammatical information about
their noun referents (e.g., gender, number, and case
features). Because of their connection to verbs, at some
processing stage they must be combined with the verb.
However, the formation of the verb-clitic cluster may be
localized at different levels: morphological (e.g., Crysmann,
2000; Monachesi, 1999) or phrasal (i.e., syntactic, e.g.,
Kayne, 1991; Uriagereka, 1995; Belletti, 1999).
The lexicalist view holds that clitics are affix-like
elements. Therefore, the verb-clitic relation is exactly
parallel to the verbal base-verbal affix relation, in that
neither clitics nor verbal affixes are supposed to fill an
argument position. Instead, both of them would attach to the
verb in the lexicon. The syntactic approach assumes that
the object clitic is generated in argument position. Then,
according to one of the most influential analysis (e.g.,
Kayne 1991), the clitic left-adjoins to a functional head,
yielding the clitic-Verb order in cases where the functional
head dominates the verb. (The Verb-clitic order in Italian is
thought to result from the verb’s having moved leftward
past the functional head to which the clitic has adjoined). As
already noted, the main objective of this study was to
determine whether the circuits dedicated to verb processing
are also involved in processing the clitics that attach to
them. Thus, we used low-frequency rTMS in order to
transiently disrupt the normal functioning of the same
portion of the left prefrontal cortex targeted in Shapiro et al.
(2001).
The syntactic account of clitic formation predicts no
difference between verb+det+noun and verb+clitic phrases
after rTMS disruption. This is because the syntactic relation
between a verb and its direct object is independent from the
grammatical category of the object itself (noun, pronoun).
On the other hand, the morphological account predicts that
the presence of a clitic would increase the morphological
complexity of the verb, thus increasing – exactly like a
verbal affix - the involvement of the brain region devoted to
verb morphology.
In the present experiment, we tested participants before
and after left and right rTMS on a task that required the
production of verb+det+noun or verb+clitic phrases.
To anticipate the results, it was found that left rTMS – as
opposed to right rTMS - interfered with the production of
both phrase types; however, the magnitude of interference
was significantly stronger for verb+clitic than
verb+det+noun phrases.

Procedure
Each subject participated in two sessions separated by at
least one week. In the first session, rTMS was applied to the
targeted area to only one hemisphere and to the other
hemisphere in the second session. The procedure for each
session was the same: participants were first familiarized
with all the pictures; they then named a set of 40 control
pictures both before and after rTMS application. They rested
for half an hour, and then did the experimental phrase
production task before and after another rTMS application.
During the picture familiarization phase, pictures were
presented one at a time. For each item, a fixation cross first
appeared for 500 ms, followed by a picture for 2000 ms,
with the object’s name appearing beneath the picture for the
final 1500 ms. Participants were asked to name the picture
aloud upon seeing its name. The next trial initiated after 800
ms.
During the next part of the experiment, participants
named control pictures without word prompts. Twelve
practice trials preceded the set. For each item, a fixation
cross appeared for 500 ms and was immediately followed by
the picture. The participant was to name the picture, which
would immediately disappear. The inter-trial interval was
fixed at 2000 ms.
After one block of picture naming, 600 pulses of 1Hz
rTMS were applied to the left or right hemisphere of the
participant, and the naming task was repeated.
Participants then rested for half an hour, after which they
began the phrase production task. Twenty practice trials
preceded the experimental trials. For each trial, a fixation
cross appeared on the screen for 500 ms, followed by the
infinitive form of a verb (e.g., guardare ‘to look at’) for 250
ms, and then a picture of an object. Participants were
instructed to inflect the verb in the second person singular of
the imperative (e.g., guarda ‘look at’) and, depending on the
experimental condition, to follow it with either the
appropriate object clitic pronoun (lo ‘it’ [m] or la ‘it’ [f]) or
the appropriate determiner and noun (e.g., guarda il tavolo
‘look at the table’). Verbs were presented in capital letters in
32-point Arial font. The inter-trial interval was fixed at 2500
ms.
Six hundred pulses of 1Hz rTMS were then applied to the
same hemisphere stimulated for the naming task, and the
phrase production task was repeated.

Methods
Materials
Ninety black-and-white pictures of objects were selected:
fifty pictures for the experimental task; forty for the control
task (see the Appendix). Picture names were controlled for
673

The same procedure was followed for both sessions for
each participant, with rTMS applied in the second session to
the hemisphere not stimulated in the first session. There was
a minimum interval of 1 week between sessions.

Results
Experimental task
Discarded data accounted for 3.8% of the verb+clitic
condition and for 4.8% of the verb+det+noun condition. No
significant effects emerged from the error analysis.
Analysis of response latencies revealed a main effect of
Site (F (1,548) = 23, p < .001), showing that subjects were
slower after left rTMS than after right rTMS. There was also
an interaction of Condition X Site (F (1,548) = 4, p = .04).
Duncan post-hoc analyses showed that the difference
between right and left stimulation was significant for both
the verb+clitic (p < .001) and the verb+det+noun conditions
(p < .05). In addition, the reaction time differences (∆)
between
pre-rTMS
performance
and
post-rTMS
performance were the same for both conditions when rTMS
was delivered to the right hemisphere (p = .9), but not when
rTMS was delivered to the left hemisphere ( p = .046.). The
latter finding shows that left rTMS – as opposed to right
rTMS - significantly reduced the learning effect in both
conditions. However, the magnitude of the interference was
greater for the verb+clitic condition than the verb+det+noun
condition (See Figure 1).

Application of rTMS
Magnetic stimulation was delivered by a Cadwell highfrequency magnetic stimulator equipped with a water-cooled
figure-of-eight coil (each loop 4.5 cm in diameter). In each
experimental session, two trains of 600 pulses were
delivered at 1Hz frequency and 100% of the motor
threshold. Motor threshold (MT) was determined for each
subject as the minimum stimulus intensity able to elicit in 5
or more of ten consecutive stimulations a motor evoked
potential (MEP) of at least 50 uV in contralateral first dorsal
interosseous.
The scalp position for stimulation in each subject was 6
cm anterior and 1 cm ventral to the motor spot for the first
dorsal interosseous muscle. In the left hemisphere, this
position targeted an inferior portion of the midfrontal gyrus
just anterior and superior to Broca’s area (see Shapiro et al.
2001). This position was marked on tightly fitting Lycra
caps worn by subjects. The order of hemisphere stimulation
was counterbalanced across participants.

100

Participants

80

∆RT (msec)

Eleven right-handed native Italian speakers (ages 22-38)
volunteered for the experiment. All participants were
healthy and had no history of neurological or psychiatric
illness. All participants gave their informed consent to the
experiment, which was approved by a local ethics
committee. Each participant was randomly assigned to
group 1 (N = 6) or group 2 (N = 5). All participants
performed the control task.

RIGHT

60

LEFT

40

20
V + CL

V + NP

Figure 1: Effects of left and right rTMS on production of
verb+clitic and verb+det+noun phrases. Error bars depict
standard errors of the means.

Statistical Analysis
The following were scored as errors and excluded from the
main analysis: responses that differed from the targets,
failures to respond, failures of recording equipment, RTs
above 2000 ms and below 300 ms, and RTs exceeding each
participant’s mean by more than 3 s.d.
A repeated-measure ANOVA was performed on the
reaction time differences (∆) between pre-rTMS
performance and post-rTMS performance for each
hemisphere. The same procedure was followed for the
experimental task and the control task.
There were two variables, each with two levels: Condition
(verb+clitic vs. verb+det+noun), and Site (left vs. right).
Condition was treated as a between-subjects variable; site
was treated as a within-subject variable.
The same statistical analysis was performed with
participants’ errors as dependent measures.

Control task
Discarded data accounted for 5.1% of the verb+clitic
condition and for 5.75% of the verb+det+noun condition.
Error rates did not differ across conditions.
For RTs, the only significant effect was a main effect of
Condition (F (1, 438) = 6.5, P = .01). This finding reflects
the fact that, independently of site, participants in the
verb+det+noun condition were significantly faster after the
application of rTMS than participants in the verb+clitic
condition (51.1 msec vs. 22.7 msec). However, the amount
of facilitation was unaffected by the side of stimulation for
both conditions (verb+clitic: 20.4 msec, SE 8 (right) vs. 25
msec, SE 8 (left); [verb+det+noun]: 45 msec, SE 11 (right)
vs. 57 msec, SE 15 (left)).

674

reveal processing of the morphosynatx of verb-clitic
clusters.
Another alternative explanation can be formulated in
terms of differences in the semantic content of clitic phrases
and noun phrases. In other words, it could be argued that the
differential patterns of performance between the verb+clitic
and verb+det+noun conditions reflect the different semantic
content of clitics and nouns. Perhaps a fully specified noun
engages a much more extensive neural network than a clitic.
However, it must be noted that input conditions were the
same for both the verb+clitic and verb+det+noun phrases.
Participants had to extract the same type of semantic
information from a given picture independently of the
response format. Moreover, the information needed for the
selection of of the grammatical features for the NP and the
clitic is the same in the two cases. Thus, it is not clear how
the same type of information could recruit different
semantic neural networks depending on the specific
condition.
These considerations receive additional support from
those linguistic analyses that draw a parallel between the
function of situationally salient definite NPs and deictic
pronouns (e.g., von Heusinger, 2002). Accordingly, both
clitics and NPs would be functionally equivalent in our
experimental context, in that they both denote a contextually
salient object (i.e., the pictured object) in the response to be
produced. Note further that, even assuming a difference in
semantic processing between clitics and NPs, it is not clear
how this difference would be modulated by the application
of rTMS to a given brain area. Our results could also be
compatible with a syntactic account based on grammatical
class differences between nouns and pronouns. On this
view, the pattern of effects observed here should be
attributed to processing differences between grammatical
categories (pronouns versus nouns) rather than to
differences in verb processing. The reasoning would be that
the neural substrates for pronoun and verb processing
overlap more than the neural substrates for noun and verb
processing. Although this hypothesis cannot be dismissed, it
must be noted that clitic production was compared to
determiner + noun production, and not to bare noun
production. Crucially, clitics – as well as the corresponding
strong pronouns - and articles both require grammatical
information about the noun’s number and gender. There is
no principled reason to believe that these properties are
retrieved from different neural structures for pronouns
versus articles. Therefore, until independent evidence is
available on the neural correlates of grammatical classes
other than nouns and verbs, the most straightforward
interpretation of our data is that the differential impact of
left rTMS on the production of verb+clitic and
verb+det+noun phrases is to be attributed to the peculiar
morphological relation between verb and clitic rather than to
the clitics’ grammatical class (pronoun).
Follow-up research with similar experimental designs as
the one used here could help discriminate between the
grammatical category and the morphological accounts. For
example, it would be interesting to compare the behavior of
strong pronouns (e.g., demonstratives such as questo/questa
‘this [mas.]/this [fem.]’ and quello/quella ‘that [mas.]/that

Discussion
Our results support the view that the left prefrontal cortex
plays a crucial role in processing a verb’s morphology. It is
well known that the repetition of production tasks with a
limited set of stimuli causes a robust decrease in response
latency over time. Our results show that rTMS applied to the
left prefrontal cortex substantially reduces the magnitude of
this learning effect for verb production. When people must
name pictures (that is, when they have to produce nouns),
there is no difference in effect between left and right rTMS.
Unlike Shapiro et al. (2001), verb morphology was not
directly manipulated in this study. The same verb form was
produced in every trial from the infinitive form. It is quite
interesting that even such a simple morphological operation
is sufficient to show selective involvement of the left
prefrontal cortex in verb production.
This study is original in showing the differential effects of
left rTMS on the production of verb+det+noun and
verb+clitic phrases. After right rTMS, there is an equal
amount of facilitation - due to the repetition of the task- in
both conditions. After left rTMS, there is a significant
reduction of this facilitation effect for both conditions.
Crucially, however, this reduction is significantly greater for
the verb+clitic than the verb+det+noun phrase condition.
This finding can be attributed to the special status of clitics:
although clitics have nominal referents, they are
phonologically and syntactically dependent on the verb.
This dependency is particularly strong in the case of
enclitics, as they are orthographically attached to verbs. We
conjecture that (en)clitics may increase the morphological
complexity of the verb -- indeed, clitics seem to be treated
as verbal affixes rather than as nominal particles.
Of course, this is not to deny the syntactic relationship
clitic-verb. The hypothesis simply states that this syntactic
relationship is not responsible for the differential patterns of
rTMS effects found for the verb+clitic vs. verb+det+noun
conditions, for otherwise the interference from left rTMS
would be the same for verb+clitic and verb+det+noun
phrases. This latter expectation derives from the fact that the
syntactic relation between the verb and its object does not
vary depending on the object’s grammatical category – noun
vs. pronoun.
Alternatively, one may want to appeal to a phonological
explanation of the clitic results. According to this account,
left rTMS could be disrupting the phonological processes
associated with the verb-clitic integration. In this case, our
results would not speak to the morphological aspects of
cliticization. However, there is independent evidence that
the left brain area stimulated in this study - the inferior
portion of the midfrontal gyrus just anterior and superior to
Broca’s area - is more sensitive to morphosyntax than to
phonology. Thus, Shapiro et al. (2001) found that the
application of rTMS to this brain area interfered with verb
and pseudo-verb production but not with noun and pseudonoun production. Since their task always involved the same
kind of phonological material (add or subtract /s/)
independently of the grammatical class of the given
stimulus, a phonological account of the results is not
plausible. Hence, the most straightforward view seems to
be that the effects of rTMS on clitic production do indeed
675

phonology, morphology, and syntax. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Damasio A, & Tranel D. (1993). Nouns and verbs are
retrieved with differentially distributed neural systems.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA,
90, 4957–60.
Dehaene, S. (1995). Electrophysiological evidence for
category-specific word processing in the normal human
brain. NeuroReport, 6, 2153–2157.
Federmeier, K., Segal, B., Lombrozo, T., & Kutas, K.
(2000). Brain responses to nouns, verbs and class—
ambiguous words in context. Brain, 123, 2552–2466.
Finocchiaro, C., & Caramazza A. (in press). The production
of pronominal clitics: Implications for theories of lexical
access, Language and Cognitive Processes.
Kayne, R. (1991). Romance clitics, Verb Movement, and
PRO. Linguistic Inquiry 22, 647-686.
Monachesi P. (1999). A Lexical Approach to Italian
Cliticization. Stanford: CSLI.
Pascual-Leone, A., Walsh, V., & Rothwell, J. (2000).
Transcranial magnetic stimulation in cognitive
neuroscience—virtual lesion, chronometry, and functional
connectivity. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 10, 232–
237.
Perani D., Cappa S., Schnur T., Tettamanti M., Collina S.,
Rosa M., & Fazio F. (1999). The neural correlates of verb
and noun processing: A PET study. Brain, 122, 2337–44
Petersen, S., Fox, P., Posner, M., Mintum, M., & Raichle,
M. (1988). Positron emission tomographic studies of the
cortical anatomy of single word processing. Nature, 331,
385–389.
Petersen, S., Fox, P., Posner, M., Mintum, M., & Raichle,
M. (1989). Positron emission tomographic studies of the
processing of single words. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 1, 153–170.
Raichle, M., Fiez, J., Videen, T., MacLeod, A.-M., Pardo, J.,
Fox P., & Petersen, S. (1994). Practice-related changes in
human brain functional anatomy during nonmotor
learning. Cerebral Cortex, 4, 8–26.
Shapiro K., Pascual-Leone A., Mottaghy F., Gangitano M.,
& Caramazza, A (2001). Grammatical distinctions in the
left frontal cortex. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 13,
713-720.
Shapiro, K., Shelton, J., & Caramazza, A. (2000).
Grammatical class in lexical production and
morphological processing: Evidence from a case of fluent
aphasia. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 17, 665–682.
Uriagereka J. (1995). Syntax of clitic placement in Western
Romance. Linguistic Inquiry, 26, 79-123.
von Heusinger, K. (2002). Reference and representation of
pronouns. In H.J. Simon & H. Wiese (Eds.), Pronouns –
Grammar and Representation. Amsterdam/Philadelphia:
John Benjamins .
Walsh, V., & Rushworth, M. (1999). A primer of magnetic
stimulation
as
a
tool
for
Neuropsychology.
Neuropsychologia, 37, 125–135.

[fem.]’) with enclitics. According to the grammatical class
account, demonstratives should pattern with enclitics as they
are both members of the class of pronouns. On the other
hand, according to the morphological account,
demonstratives should pattern differently from enclitics,
since they do not form a morphological unit with the verb as
is the case for enclitics. However,predictions regarding the
behavior of demonstrative pronouns can only be tentative
since they appear to be semantically different from third
person pronouns. For instance, it has been argued (e.g.,
Bhat, 2004) that whereas the identification of third person
pronouns – as well as the identification of NPs – only
require pragmatic (i.e., linguistic) information, the
identification of demonstratives and other proforms requires
a more substantial (i.e., semantic) identification.
A different but related question concerns the behaviour
of proclitics (e.g., clitics that do not orthographically attach
to verbs, as in lo guardo ‘I look at it’). The predictions of
the grammatical class account are the same as for
demonstratives: on the assumption that all types of pronouns
behave the same, the behavior of enclitics and proclitics is
expected to be the same. The predictions derived from then
morphological account are not clear and depend on how the
well known asymmetries between enclitics and proclitics are
interpreted. Specifically, the morphosyntactic relation
between the proclitic and the host verb appears to be less
strong than the relation between the enclitic and the host
verb (Benincà & Cinque 1993). Thus, according to the
morphological account, expectations on proclitics crucially
depend on their supposed status – morphological affixes or
free morphemes. In the first case, they would pattern with
enclitics, whereas in the second case they would pattern
with noun phrases.

Conclusions
Our results extend in an important way the research on the
neural correlates of grammatical class. We have shown that
when nominal features attach to verbs, they are processed,
in part, by the same neural circuits that are involved in
processing verb morphology.

References
Bhat, D.N.S. (2004). Pronouns. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Belletti, A. (1999). Italian/Romance clitics: Structure and
derivation. In H. van Riemsdijk (Ed.), Clitics in the
Language of Europe. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Benincà P. & Cinque, G. (1993). Su alcune differenze fra
enclisi e proclisi. In Omaggio a Gianfranco Folena (vol.
3). Padova: Editoriale Programma.Caramazza A., & Hillis
A. (1991). Lexical organization of nouns and verbs in the
brain. Nature, 349, 788–90.
Corpus di italiano contemporaneo (1988). Istituto di
Linguistica Computazionale del CNR di Pisa, unpublished
manuscript.
Crysmann, B. (2000). Clitics and coordination in linear
structure. In B. Gerlach & J. Grijzenhout (Eds.), Clitics in
676

Verbs
comprare ‘to buy’, guardare ‘to look at’, portare ‘to bring’,
prendere ‘to take’, trovare ‘to find’

Authors’ notes
This research was supported in part by NIH grant DC
04245. We thank Kristen Geiger for editorial assistance.

Appendix

Control task

Materials to be used in the experiment

Feminine Pictures
carriola ‘wheelchair’, ciliegia ‘cherry’, lumaca ‘snail’,
siringa ‘syringe’, scimmia ‘monkey’, spazzola ‘brush’,
sciarpa ‘scarf’, matita ‘pencil’, panchina ‘bench’, tigre
‘tiger’, ballerina ‘dancer’, maschera ‘mask’, gabbia ‘cage’,
spada ‘sword’, colonna ‘column’, porta ‘door’, bomba
‘bomb’, pipa ‘pipe’, pianta ‘plant’, campana ‘bell’

Experimental task
Feminine Pictures
banana ‘banana’, macchina ‘car’, pistola ‘gun’, tenda ‘tent’,
zucca ‘pumpkin’, chiesa ‘church’, farfalla ‘butterfly’,
piramide ‘pyramid’, sirena ‘siren’, tromba ‘trumpet’,
chitarra ‘guitar’, croce ‘cross’, ruota ‘wheel’, sedia ‘chair’,
sella ‘saddle’, carota ‘carrot’, chiave ‘key’, mucca ‘cow’,
racchetta ‘racket’, scala ‘ladder’, foca ‘seal’, giraffa
‘giraffe’, pera ‘pear’, scarpa ‘shoe’, scopa ‘broom’

Masculine Pictures
vaso ‘vase’, fucile ‘rifle’, disco ‘disc’, coltello ‘knife’,
telefono ‘telephone’, piede ‘foot’, treno ‘train’, braccio
‘arm’, occhio ‘eye’, pinguino ‘penguin’, tagliere ‘chopping
board’, tubo ‘tube’, portafoglio ‘wallet’, ananas ‘pineapple’,
biberon ‘feeding bottle’, semaforo ‘traffic-light’, aquilone
‘kite’, tamburo ‘drum’, lucchetto ‘padlock’, ventaglio ‘fan’

Masculine Pictures
giornale ‘newspaper’, letto ‘bed’, libro ‘book’, rossetto
‘lipstick’, serpente ‘snake’, albero ‘tree’, calendario
‘calendar’, dado ‘dice’, orologio ‘watch’, sole ‘sun’, anello
‘ring’, birillo ‘skittle’, carciofo ‘artichoke’, cubo ‘cube’,
imbuto ‘funnel’, cappello ‘hat’, fungo ‘mushroom’, osso
‘bone’, timone ‘helm’, topo ‘mouse’, leone ‘lion’, ombrello
‘umbrella’, pettine ‘comb’, piatto ‘plate’, scheletro
‘skeleton’

677

