UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Writing Direction Influences Spatial Cognition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4tt0k00j

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Bergen, Benjamin
Chan, Ting Ting

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Writing Direction Influences Spatial Cognition
Ting Ting Chan (tingc@hawaii.edu)
Benjamin Bergen (bergen@hawaii.edu)
Dept of Linguistics, 569 Moore Hall, 1890 East-West Hall
Honolulu, HI 96822
writing system orientation influence our spatial
representations of sequences of events?
Some evidence suggests that writing system orientation
may influence other aspects of cognition. For example, in
speakers of some European languages, the mental
representation of numerical magnitude is related to the leftright axis. Large numbers preferentially elicit rightwards
responses, and small numbers leftward responses (the
SNARC effect - Dehaene, et al. 1993). But when French
speakers (French is written from left to right) are compared
with Iranian speakers (who write from right to left), only
French speakers but not Iranian speakers display the
SNARC effect (Dehaene, et al. 1993). This suggests a
significant relation between the mental number line and
writing direction. Similar effects have been found for nonnumerical ordinal information, which appears to also be
spatially coded (Gevers et al. 2003).
Other evidence for relativistic effects of writing system
direction is found in a study by Maas and Russo (2003),
showing that in relating language about two-participant
events to pictures, Italians (whose writing system runs from
left to right) tend to place the agent on the left of the patient,
while Arabic speaking participants (whose system goes
from right to left) place the agent on the right of the patient.
The hypothesis that writings system direction can
influence more general aspects of cognition is called into
question by work by Tversky et al. (1991), who examined
the relationship between the direction of different writing
systems and people’s mental representation of temporal,
spatial, quantitative and preference relations in English,
Hebrew and Arabic speakers. Their subjects were asked to
perform a sticker-placing task under various conditions and
their responses were deemed to reflect spatial
representations of time, quantity, and preference. The results
showed a significant influence of writing system direction
on spatial representation of temporal concepts, but not on
the quantity or preference.
An even stronger argument against possible relativism
caused by different orientations of writing systems is put
forward by Chatterjee et al. (1999), who claim that normal
right-handed subjects tend to process information from their
left to their right hand side due not to their writing system
but to the differential properties of right- and lefthemisphere possessing. They argue that the left cerebral
hemisphere, where language is predominantly processed by
right-handers, selectively directs attention with a left to right
vector. So, normal right-handed subjects tend to pay
attention to the left side of their visual field, which may
influence their expectations about where events start
(Chatterjee 2001). They further argue that this may lead to a
similar preference for left to right actions, as well.

Abstract
The world's languages make use of different writing system
orientations, running from left to right, from right to left, or
from top to bottom. Interacting with writing systems is an
important component of how literate humans gain and convey
information, and as such the spatial routines we engage in
while reading and writing may well have an impact on the
spatial organization of other cognitive functions, like
memory, visual attention, expectations about the orientations
of processes, and so on. Three experiments tested for effects
of writing system orientation on spatial cognition, using
literate speakers of English, Mainland Chinese, and
Taiwanese. The first experiment addressed memory for
information in different parts of the visual field; the second,
the differences in visual attention; and the third, the
arrangement of sequential events in space. The results suggest
that the orientation of a writing system is engrained in
speakers' perceptual and motor routines to the point that it
surfaces when they perform these other spatial tasks. More
generally, the findings reported here support the idea that
idiosyncratic characteristics of particular languages can
influence general cognition.
Keywords: writing systems, relativity, attention, memory,
sentence production, vision

Introduction
We live in a world replete with information, and for many
literate people, reading and writing is one of the main
channels by which it is accessed and conveyed. Writing
systems vary across languages, in particular through the
direction in which the text is written. While English runs
from left to right, Japanese goes from top to bottom, and
Arabic unrolls from right to left. Knowing how to read and
write a particular language thus entails mastery of
perceptual and motor routines whose spatial characteristics
are determined by the conventional orientation of the
writing system. (‘Orientation’ and ‘direction’ are used
interchangeably in this paper to denote the systematic
spatial organization of a written language.) To write in
English, one starts on the left and moves rightward, while
performing the same task in Arabic entails the reverse
action. Similarly, reading in the two languages requires
readers to begin collecting visual information in different
parts of the visual field.
But does the conventional orientation of written systems
affect how people interact with and think about space
beyond language? For example, do different writing systems
influence where in the visual field we tend to focus first for
non-linguistic information? Do they influence how we
package information about the world? Do differences in
412

remember as many as they could. This task aimed to test
how memory (mediated by visual attention) may be
influenced by writing orientation.
As suggested above, eye movements are closely related to
how we organize and perceive information (Griffin 2004).
The way we gaze at locations is associated with how we
process information. If we are used to collecting information
from left to right, we may tend to look at things on the left
side of our visual field first. This would suggest that English
and Chinese speakers, accustomed as they are to the left-toright writing system, should tend to process non-linguistic
information from left to right, while Taiwanese speakers
should start on the right. If attending first to a particular part
of the visual field makes subjects more likely to recall
objects located there, this would imply that Taiwanese
speakers will be most likely to recall pictures in the upper,
right-hand quadrant of the visual field, while English and
Chinese speakers will recall more pictures in the upper, lefthand quadrant than their Taiwanese-speaking counterparts.

The question thus remains, what nonlinguistic cognitive
processes, if any, can writing system orientation
systematically influence? As shown by Griffin (2004), "eye
movements are tied to our organization of information" (9).
Patterns of interaction with writing may seep out beyond the
borders of language. In order to test this hypothesis, we
conducted three different experiments on speakers of
Taiwanese, Mainland Chinese, and English, testing how
subjects with different writing systems perform several
spatially orientated tasks. The tasks tested whether learning
to use a writing system creates routines of interaction with
space, where the subjects tend to collect information or
perform actions along the same orientation.
The English writing system, written from left to right,
contrasts with the Taiwanese writing system, which can be
written in several directions: while most current writing runs
top-to-bottom starting on the right, small amounts of current
literature are beginning to adopt the English-like left-toright style (shown in the small, grey box in Figure 1). It
could be that differences in the direction of these different
writing systems will affect aspect of general cognition like
visual attention, and arranging of sequential information. In
order to ensure that differences between Taiwanese and
English speakers do not result from cultural differences
other than writing system, we also include Mainland
Chinese speakers (referred to as ‘Chinese’ at points in this
paper). The Mainland Chinese writing system has been
oriented from left-to-right horizontally, like English, for the
past 50 years despite a long history of top-to-bottom
writing. As a result, Mainland Chinese speakers represent a
left-to-right writing system, in a culture that is much more
similar in most ways to Taiwanese culture than is American
culture.
English

Chinese

Mostly left-first

Method
Subjects Ten right-handed English speakers (9 Americans
and 1 British), aged between 20-50 years (mean = 31.5, s.d.
= 8.73), ten right-handed Chinese speakers, aged between
23-45 years (mean = 31.3, s.d. = 7.65), and ten right-handed
Taiwanese speakers aged between 20-49 years (mean =
28.1, s.d. = 6.57), were tested individually. All English
speakers were monolingual, except three who spoke some
Spanish. All Taiwanese and Chinese speakers were native
speakers of those languages and were L2 English speakers.
All were born in Taiwan or Mainland China and received
education there before leaving for the States between 0.2
years and 6 years before being tested (mean=2.8 years). All
additionally stated that they still read Chinese occasionally
even though they now reside in the United States.
All subjects in all three groups were either doing or had
already finished their Bachelors, Masters or PhD degree,
thus having reached an average or greater level of literacy.
In tables and figures, we identify English speakers as E,
Mainland Chinese as C and Taiwanese speakers as T.

Taiwanese

Mostly right-first

Figure 1: Writing system orientations

Instructions Subjects were told that they would see
multiple images on a single screen for three seconds. They
were responsible for remembering as many of these items as
possible, and would be asked to list them right afterwards.
All instructions were provided orally in the first language of
the subjects (i.e. Mandarin or English), and no written
instructions were given at any point, in order to avoid the
possibility that subjects might be primed by having recently
read text in their native language.

In all three experiments described below, all stimuli used
were non-linguistic. There were two reasons for this. First,
as argued by Tversky and et al. (1991) "many pictorial
communiqués are produced similarly by and can be
comprehended by speakers of different languages with little
or no training" (516). So, pictorial stimuli can minimize any
unnecessary bias provoked by linguistic codes (like
numbers or words) on different language speakers. Second,
our main interest is in the relationship between the direction
of different writing systems (language) and general
cognition, like how they represent sequences, attend to the
visual field, and so on.

Apparatus A portable laptop computer was used to run the
experiment, which involved the presentation of an image in
the Microsoft PowerPoint program. The images in the
experiment were all selected from the Canvas program.

Experiment 1: Image Recall

Procedure and materials Before a run, the experimenter
made sure that 1) the subject could look at the computer
screen comfortably and also that there was no unbalanced
light reflection from the screen, and 2) the subject sat

The first experiment used an image recall task. Subjects
saw an array of pictures on a screen and were asked to
413

directly in front of the computer screen without leaning to
either side. Then subjects were told the name of the
experiment and the instructions, and the experiment began.
First, subjects saw a screen with 42 black-and white
images (7 items on the vertical axis and 6 items on the
horizontal axis) arranged in landscape format for 3 seconds.
All these images ranged from 0.17 to 0.53 inches wide and
from 0.29 to 0.49 inches high, and the centers were
separated from each other by the same distance. Images
were drawn from the graphics resources accompanying the
Canvas program, and depicted common objects that were to
the extent possible not culturally biased, such as fruits,
household objects and appliances, and animals. After 3
seconds, the screen went blank and remained blank until the
end of the task. After the screen went blank, subjects were
asked to name all the images they could remember.

Chinese and Taiwanese speakers, p=0.066, but no difference
between English and Chinese speakers. For quadrant 2,
significant effect appears of native language on response
number, F (2,27)=4.587, p<0.05. Fisher’s post hoc test
shows that the effect results from a significant difference
between English and Taiwanese speakers, p<0.01 and a
nearly significant one between Chinese and Taiwanese
speakers, p=0.058. For quadrant 3, the result shows no
significant effect, F(2,27)=1.473, p=0.247. For quadrant 4,
the ANOVA shows a marginally significant effect of native
language, F (2,27)=2.953,p=0.069, where post hoc tests
show that the effect is significant between English and
Taiwanese speakers, p<0.05 and close to significant
between Chinese and Taiwanese speakers, p=0.077, but not
significant between Chinese and English speakers.

Results

English and Chinese speakers were much more likely to
remember an image that appeared in the top, left-hand side
of the screen (Q1) than were Taiwanese speakers, and
Taiwanese speakers were much more likely to remember an
image in the upper right-hand side of the screen (Q2) than
were Chinese and English speakers, respectively.
These results conform to the hypothesis offered above that due to the orientations of their writing systems, English
and Chinese speakers tend to attend to the upper, left-hand
part of the visual field, while the upper, righthand part of the
visual field get more attention from Taiwanese speakers.
They also tend to indicate that native speakers of
Taiwanese recall more items in quadrant 4 than did English
or Chinese speakers, though these effects only approached
significance. This may be due to the variation in the
Taiwanese writing system, which, as seen in Figure 1, can
be written from top-to-bottom, starting on the right. If some
Taiwanese speakers are using this gaze pattern, Q2 followed
by Q4, then we would expect greater number of recalled
objects in Q4 by Taiwanese speakers than by others, the
effect observed to approach significance.
A finding of note is that while English speakers differed
significantly from Taiwanese speakers in their behavior in
the two upper quadrants, differences between Chinese and
Taiwanese speakers, though showing the same trend, only
approached significance. The heritage Chinese writing
system, running from top to bottom, may still have lingering
effects on modern-day Mainland Chinese speakers, which
could explain why they attend more to the upper, right-hand
quadrant, where this writing system begins.
Since this experiment involves a recall task, it is
important to consider how memory effects might influence
its results. In particular, what the relation was between the
manner in which subjects scanned the scene, encoding
objects, and the set of objects they recalled. Two effects are
of interest, primacy and recency effects (Altmann, 2000):
words presented at the beginning and the end of a list of
items are recalled better than words presented in the middle.
It could be that the tendency for subjects to recall objects in
the location where their primary writing system starts is due
to a recency effect.
But there is reason to think this might not be the case.
Due to the speed of the task (subjects only had three seconds

Analysis

Since no subjects recalled any items in the bottom row, this
row is not included in the analysis. In order to analyze the
relationship between native language and location of
recalled items, the screen is divided into four quadrants
(Qs), as seen in Figure 2.
X X X
X Q1
X X
X X X

X X X
X Q2
X X
X X X

X X X
X Q3
X X
X X X

X X X
X Q4
X X
X X X

Figure 2: The division of items into four quadrants
Thus, each of the four quadrants contains 9 items. The mean
number of response per quadrant for the three native
languages is shown in Figure 3.
E=3.0
C=2.8
T=1.5

E=0.9
C=1.6
T=3.0

E=1.4
C=0.8
T=0.5

E=0.02
C=0.4
T=1.2

Figure 3: Mean frequency of recall in Q1-Q4
Differences in recall among the groups for each quadrant
were tested by a separate one-way ANOVA for each
quadrant. We used this method rather than placing all
quadrants in a single factorial analysis with quadrant as an
independent variable because quadrant was strictly speaking
not an independent variable, but a category of response. For
quadrant 1, we see a marginally significant effect of native
language on number of responses, F (2,27) = 2.884,
p=0.073. Fisher’s Post hoc tests show that there is a
significant difference between English and Taiwanese
speakers, p<0.05 and a marginally significant one between
414

to look at the screen) subjects, who remembered on average
5.7 items, would have had no more than 500ms to fixate on
any single item thatthey recalled – suggesting that they
recalled the majority of the items they looked at closely.
Because of the small number of items they encoded, there
was probably little time for loss of intermediate items.
This results described here demonstrate that differences in
the direction of writing systems can have an impact on the
spatial characteristics of visual attention. But since this task
does not distinguish effects due to memory from effects due
to attention, we conducted a second experiment focusing
exclusively on visual attention.

They had to use the first object they saw as the subject of
the sentence. Again, no written instructions were provided.
Procedure Subjects, who were the same 30 subjects used in
Experiment 1, heard two sample sentences before the
experiment began: 1) The long-eared dog is jealous of the
short-eared dog. (sentence starting from RÆL) 2. 2) The
baby girl makes the baby boy cry. (sentence starting from
LÆ R). During the experiment, each set of pictures was
presented separately, directly in front of the subjects. All
instructions were given in the first language of the subject.

Results

Experiment 2: Sentence Composing Task

The results showed that, as predicted, English and Chinese
speakers used the image on their left as the subject of the
sentence more frequently than the object on their right hand
side, and vice versa for Taiwanese speakers. Figure 4
provides the mean number of sentences starting with the
object on the left and right by English, Chinese and
Taiwanese speakers respectively.

Memory for images, thus seems to differ significantly,
depending on writing system orientation. But how much of
this is due to memory and how much to visual attention?
The second experiment tested visual attention through a
different methodology, asking subjects to compose simple
sentences based on two images, appearing on the right and
left hand side of a paper respectively. The purpose of this
task was to observe whether the side that subjects would
tend to focus on first (as measured by their tendency to start
the sentence with the image on that side) was again
influenced by writing direction. English and Chinese
speakers were hypothesized to be more likely to take the
image on the left as the subject of the sentence, as their
writing systems start there, while the Taiwanese speakers
might tend to take the image on the right as the subject.

3.3

Taiwanese

6.7

5.9

Chinese

Sentences starting from
Left

4.1

Sentences starting from
Right

Method
Materials Subjects were presented with 10 pairs of blackand-white images. These included 5 pairs of animate objects
and 5 pairs of inanimate objects. Each picture was nondirectional - the picture was not oriented to either side, but
was shown head-on. For example, a picture of a horse faced
the reader without either being depicted as moving, looking,
or leaning to either side. Each pair of pictures depicted
entities with equivalent animacy1, printed on the left and
right sides of a landscape format sheet of paper. All pictures
were taken from the ArtClip website and modified by the
Microsoft Photo Edit program. The 10 sets of pictures were:
1) man / woman
2) jellyfish / starfish
3) monster / alien
4) horse / zebra
5) crab / lobster

English

6.8

0%

20%

40%

3.2

60%

80%

100%

Figure 4: Sentences starting from the left and right
Native language significantly effects sentence orientation, as
shown by a one-way ANOVA, F (2,27)=7.275, p<0.01.
Fisher’s post hoc test shows a significant difference between
English and Taiwanese speakers, p<0.01 and between
Chinese and Taiwanese speakers, p<0.05, but none between
Chinese and English speakers, p=0.353.

6) cactus / flower
7) chair / table
8) house / castle
9) tape / scissors
10) car / motorcycle

Analysis
These results show that how speakers’ native languages are
written has an influence on how they compose sentences –
specifically whether they begin their sentences with an
object appearing on the left or the right. One interpretation
of this result is that this is due to a sort of visual iconicity,
where subjects relate the images they see to their
orthographic representations, and then in generating
sentences read off these written words in their minds eye.
Another interpretation is that the effect is directly due to
how their visual attention passes over the presented images.

Instructions The subjects were asked to compose a simple
sentence (in their first language) based on each set of
pictures as quickly as possible. There were four conditions
they had to follow: 1) They had to mention the two objects
shown in the picture in their sentence. 2) They could not use
the conjunction ‘and’ to connect the two objects. 3) They
were encouraged to use verbs to connect the objects. 4)
1
The two objects had the same animacy since sentential subjects
tend to have higher animacy than sentential objects (Forrest, 1993).

2

415

R-right/ L-left are from the perspective of the subjects.

cardboard, and were limited to only 6-8 seconds. Again, no
written materials of any sort were provided

English and Chinese speakers might be more likely to start
looking at an image from the left, and thus begin a sentence
with the entity depicted there, while Taiwanese speakers
begin on the right with the same effect.
Importantly, both explanations depend on differences in
the order in which attention is placed on the visual field –
the main difference being whether it is the actual perceived
visual field or the imagined one. Consequently, regardless
of which account is correct, the results suggest that where
people attend first depends on their writing system.
Differences in visual attention may thus indeed explain the
tendency in the first experiment for subjects to recall objects
appearing in the part of their visual field where their writing
system begins. It remains to be seen, however, whether
writing system orientation affects higher cognitive
capacities as well. This is the topic of the third experiment.

Procedure After receiving instructions, subjects had the
larger cardboard circle placed in front of them. They were
handed the three pictures in a stack (randomized for each set
of pictures, and for each subject), face-down. Subjects
flipped them over at the same time and started arranging
them in a sequential order. Each set of pictures was given
separately and was to be analyzed individually. Again, all
instructions were given in the subject's native language.

Results
Most arrangements were clear and easy to score and there
were no missing data. There were five patterns: left to right,
right to left, top to bottom, bottom to top and clockwise
starting from the top. In this paper, we will code them as
LR, RL, TB, BT and CW respectively (Figure 5). All these
directions are defined from the perspective of the subjects.

Experiment 3: Arrangement Task
If low-level cognitive processes like visual attention can be
influenced by writing system orientation, higher ones might
be as well. This third experiment was an arrangement task,
in which subjects were asked to spatially arrange pictures
depicting three stages of development of a natural entity,
like a plant or a human, from the earliest to the latest stage.
The aim was to examine whether speakers of the different
language arrange sequences in different directions. We
focus in this experiment on temporal sequences because
they are known to be structured at least partly in terms of
space, and differently across languages (Boroditsky 2001).
Hypothetically, conventional writing orientation may affect
the orientation of sequential information. Thus, Taiwanese
speakers may arrange pictures from right to left or top to
bottom while English and Chinese speakers could tend to
arrange them from left to right.

LR

RL

TB

123

321

1
2
3

BT
3
2
1

CW
1
3

2

Figure 5: The five observed arrangement patterns
All but three subjects used exactly the same orientation
for each of the sets of pictures (s)he ordered. In the
remaining cases, the orientation a subject used for the
majority of the responses was coded as his/her response
pattern. English speakers only used the LR arrangement
pattern. Chinese speakers also displayed a strong tendency
for LR, though a few also used a TB orientation. The
Taiwanese speakers displayed all five patterns, with the
most common being the LR and TB orientations. By
contrast with the English and Chinese subjects, who never
placed the images in a RL orientation, the Taiwanese
speakers did so about 20% of the time (Figure 5).

Method
Materials The materials were composed of 5 sets of blackand-white images. Each set contained 3 pictures depicting a
living thing’s growth process. The 5 sets of pictures were:
1) Seed / sapling / big tree
2) Egg/ little chicken/ big chicken
3) Larva / pupa / butterfly
4) Tadpole / young frog/ adult frog
5) Baby / girl / woman

Direction
English
Chinese
Taiwanese
Total
10
26
13
49
LR
0
0
7
7
RL
0
5
13
18
TB
0
1
2
3
BT
0
1
3
4
CW
10
33
38
81
Total
Figure 5: Direction Frequencies by Language

Each picture was printed on a round piece of white paper
with a 3-inch diameter. Another, bigger round piece of
white cardboard with a 9.1-inch diameter was prepared as
the tray for subjects to arrange the small paper circles on.
Subjects. Subjects were the same 30 participants in the
previous two studies, in addition to 23 more Chinese and 28
Taiwanese speakers, who were included because of the
larger number of cells, seen in Figure 5.

The expected differences are for English and Chinese
speakers to have proportionally more responses in the LR
pattern than Taiwanese speakers, who are anticipated to
have relatively more responses in the RL and TB patterns.
Pairwise chi-square tests comparing these three critical
conditions reveal a significant relationship between native

Instructions Subjects arranged each set of three pictures in
sequence from the earliest to the latest stage, on the

416

The experiments seen above offer counterevidence to
Chatterjee’s (2001) claim that spatial orientation is
controlled by universal properties the hemispheres of the
brain. In our experiments, writing system orientation
mattered, and if a pre-linguistic left-to-right preference
exists, it was obscured by differences in writing systems.
Though there are many other possible factors, writing
system appears to be particularly influential on people’s use
of space. Since Chinese and Taiwanese speakers share many
of the same core cultural values, traditions, and history, if it
were other cultural factors than writing direction that were
causing differences between English and Taiwanese
speakers, Chinese speakers should pattern with Taiwanese
speakers. Yet, as we have seen, the behavior of the Chinese
speakers is closely aligned with that of the English speakers
and different in each task from that of the Taiwanese
speakers, though not necessarily as different as the English
speakers’ behavior is.
To conclude, these results support the proposal that
writing system orientation influences spatial cognition. We
have seen that the location where a writing system starts is
where speakers attend first, where they remember objects
best, and where they spatially represent the beginnings of
temporal sequences. These differences in behavior may in
turn influence how we interpret the world and language
about it. More broadly, it seems that writing system
orientation is another idiosyncratic linguistic characteristic
that can have an impact on our cognitive system in general.

language and the direction of arrangement of sequences for
both the comparison of English and Taiwanese, χ2=11.33,
p<0.01 and Chinese and Taiwanese, χ2=14.84, p<0.001. As
predicted, English and Chinese speakers have different
preferences for arranging sequential information from
Taiwanese speakers.

Analysis
Chinese speakers, as expected, displayed a dominant LR
pattern, consistent with their writing and reading direction.
The overall result supports a relationship between writing
system orientation and spatial representations of sequences.
The results from the Taiwanese speakers ranged broadly.
Responses from the post-test interview may help us
understand the broad range of responses the experiment
elicited. We asked each subject why they arranged the
pictures in the particular pattern. For LR, RL and TB
patterns, the answers were predictable. They reported
arranging these pictures mainly based on their reading and
writing habits. As Taiwanese can be written in all three
directions, heterogeneous results are not surprising.
In addition, the TB pattern may result from how time is
understood in Chinese and Taiwanese culture. As shown by
Boroditsky (2001), in Chinese culture, the past is described
and thought about as up, while the future is described and
thought about as down. This cultural concept may help to
explain the result why a significant portion of Taiwanese
and Chinese speakers placed the earliest picture at the top
and the latest at the bottom, but no English speakers did so.

References

General Discussion

Altmann, E. M. (2000). Memory in chains: Modeling
primacy and recency effects in memory for order. In
Proceedings of Cognitive Science 22 (pp. 31-36).
Boroditsky, L. (2001). Does language shape thought?
English and Mandarin speakers' conceptions of time.
Cognitive Psychology, 43(1), 1-22.
Chatterjee, Anjan (2001). Language and space: some
interactions. Trends in Cognitive Sciences. 5,2.
Chatterjee, A et.al. (1999). Verbs, events and
spatialrepresentation. Neuropsychologia, 37, 395-402.
Dehaene, S., Bossimi, S., & Giraux, P. (1993). The mental
representation of parity and number magnitude. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 122, 371-396.
Forrest, L. (1993). Syntactic subject and focus of attention.
Unpublished Dissertation, University of Oregon.
Gevers, Wim, Reynvoet Bert, & Fias Wim. (2002). The
mental representation of ordinal sequences is spatially
organized. Cognition, 87, 87-95.
Griffin, Zenzi M. (2004). Why look? Reasons for eye
movements related to language production. In J. M.
Henderson & F. Ferreira (Eds.), The Interface of
Language, Vision, and Action: Eye Movements and the
Visual World. New York: Psychology Press
Maas, A. & Russo, A. (2003). Directional bias in the mental
representation of spatial events: nature or culture?
Psychological Science, 14, 4, 296.
Tversky, B., Sol, K., & Winter, A. (1991). Cross-Cultural
and Developmental Trends in Graphic Productions.
Cognitive Psychology, 23, 515-557.

In line with the original hypothesis, the studies described
above provide clear evidence that the direction of different
writing systems does influence nonlinguistic aspects of
spatial cognition. The results of the first experiment
supported the hypothesis that the direction of writing
systems would affect the location where speakers tend to
remember information, perhaps influenced by where they
tend to place visual attention first. The same effect was seen
in the results of the second experiment, which showed that
the location subjects look first is consistent with writing
system orientation. As a result, speakers with different
writing systems displayed different patterns of sentence
production. English and Chinese speakers focused on the
left first, composing most of the sentences from the left and
vice versa for the Taiwanese speakers.
When we look at the results of the third experiment, we
find that, more interestingly, the direction of a writing
system doesn't affect just attention, but also active
production of sequential arrangements. For English
speakers, the exceptionless LR pattern demonstrates that
spatial representations for sequences take left as the
beginning, proceeding towards the right, while this tendency
is slightly less strong among Chinese speakers. For
Taiwanese speakers, the various patterns, as discussed
above, tell us that not just the writing systems (though this
may be the most important factor) but also other factors like
cultural values and individual variation may affect people’s
representation of sequences.
417

