UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Young Children's Attribution of Causality under Uncertainty

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/83r4h5nr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Chater, Nick
Ellefson, Michelle R.
Johnstone, Emma L.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Young Children’s Attribution of Causality under Uncertainty
Emma L. Johnstone (E.L.Johnstone@warwick.ac.uk)
Michelle R. Ellefson (M.Ellefson@warwick.ac.uk)
Nick Chater (N.Chater @warwick.ac.uk)
Institute for Applied Cognitive Science
Department of Psychology
University of Warwick
Coventry, CV4 7AL UK

Abstract
In previous studies, causal contingencies have been suggested
to play an important role in causality judgments. However,
little is known about how children might use causal
contingencies to inform their judgments of causality,
especially under uncertainty. In the current study, we found
that young children are sensitive to both conditional and
unconditional causal contingencies. Furthermore, children’s
performance was remarkably similar to the performance of
adults in previous studies. Children’s sensitivity to statistical
properties is a robust finding across a number of cognitive
domains and might reflect an application of a fundamental
cognitive mechanism that directs cognition, more generally,
rather than only causal knowledge acquisition.

Introduction
A fundamental question in human cognition is how people
learn dependencies between events. These dependencies
may range from the connection between light and food in an
animal conditioning experiment, to the acquisition of
experienced-based causal knowledge by developing
children, to the creation of parsimonious scientific theories
by scientists and statisticians. Questions concerning how
such dependencies are learned, how far such learning is
justified by normative principles, and how far different
types of dependency learning, by child, adult, or animal, are
analogous, and have been a central focus of cognitive
science for more than a century.
Dependencies come in distinct types: contingency and
causality. The contingency between Event A and Event B
typically is viewed as determined by the joint probabilities
of different combinations of A/ A and B/ B, and perhaps
joint probabilities with other events, as we discuss later.1
Which exact function of these joint probabilities produces
the psychologically appropriate measure of contingency has
been a subject of much debate. A reasonable case may be
made for a wide range of measures, including functions of

P(B|A)- P(B), P(B|A) - P(B| A), P(B|A)/ P(B|A), P(B|A)/
P(B| A), among others. Here, we shall focus on the
difference between the probability of B, in the presence of
A, and the probability of B, in the absence of A, P(B|A) P(B| A). This measure, P, is used widely in the study of
dependency learning.
Causality explains how much the intervention necessary
to bring about Event A leads to a change in the probability
of Event B?2 As Pearl (2000) points out, questions of causal
dependency go beyond what is determined by the joint
distribution. For example, the joint distribution of two
perfectly correlated variables gives no clue that one causes
the other. For example, a thermometer may be correlated
perfectly with air temperature. However, the joint
distribution of temperature and mercury levels does not
capture the fact that, if the air temperature rises, the mercury
would rise, whereas if the mercury rises, e.g., by warming
the bulb, the air temperature remains unchanged.
Following the voluminous philosophical and technical
literature (e.g., Mackie, 1974), it can be argued that
causality is determined by interventions. However, in many
contexts, animals, children, and scientists alike must infer
causality though observation only. In classical conditioning,
the animal cannot intervene to bring about the light or the
food. Similarly, in astronomy, geology, and many social
sciences, scientists’ have limited capacity to intervene.
Hume’s (1739) reaction to this state of affairs was to reject
the concept of causality entirely. An alternative would be to
limit the power of inferences from observation to causation,
subject to certain assumptions. A rich technical literature
has begun to address the conditions under which such
inferences can be made reasonably (Pearl, 2000; Glymour,
Scheines, Spirtes, & Kelly, 1987). In this paper, we consider
a very simple case. Here, background causal knowledge
specifies a candidate causal structure; leaving the question
of whether particular causes are facilitatory, inhibitory, or
simply irrelevant.

1

The joint probabilities are simply, in this case, P(A, B), P(A,
B), P( A, B), P( A, B). More generally, in a set of random
variables, X1,…, Xn, the joint probability distribution is P(X1,…,
Xn). As we shall see below, the contingency between Xi may Xj
depend on other Xk where i j k.

2
Recently, causal dependency has been characterized mathematically by Pearl (2000), by the introduction of the do operator. Our
discussion is based on Pearl’s analysis, but we avoid formal details
here.

1060

Consider the following causal scenario used by Spellman
(1996; for a second related example see also Baker, Mercier,
Vallée-Tourangeau, Frank, & Pan, 1993). Two fertilizers,
one red and one blue, are tested to see if they help a plant to
bloom. Background knowledge tells us that fertilizer is
likely to influence the plant; the plant will not influence the
fertilizer; and, presumably, the fertilizers will not influence
each other causally. The structure of these dependencies,
taken from Spellman (1996), is represented in Figure 1.
To see how causality and contingency can dissociate,
consider the following cases. First, suppose that both the red
and blue liquids cause the plant to be more likely to bloom
and that the presence of the liquids is not independent.
Specifically, when blue is used, then red is used half the
time. When blue is not used, then red is used all the time.
Thus, the plant may bloom often when blue is not used,
because of red’s presence. The numbers can be arranged so
that even though blue is causally efficacious, P = 0.
Intuitively, this means that if we learn that a particular plant
was given the blue liquid, then it does not alter our
expectation about whether it will bloom. Although blue
causes increased blooming, the absence of blue indicates the
presence of red, which also causes increased blooming.3
Nonetheless, you should use the blue liquid, given a chance
to do so, because of its positive causal power.
Keeping the overall contingencies constant, it is possible
to arrange the opposite pattern. Here, the presence of blue
impedes blooming. However, when blue is present, then red
is typically present, masking blue’s effect and leading to P
= 0 (Table 1, condition 3). Alternatively, the case arises

where blue has no causal impact, and P = 0 (Table 1,
condition 2). Thus, very different causal powers of blue may
be associated with the same level of contingency.
The opposite case is also possible. Again following
Spellman (1996), consider a scenario where the presence of
blue reliably causes a plant to bloom, where it does not
bloom otherwise. Therefore, red is causally irrelevant
(Figure 2). But if red is positively correlated, uncorrelated,
or negatively correlated with blue, then the P for red can
be positive, zero or negative, respectively.
Spellman’s experimental set-up provides an efficient
method for examining sensitivity to causal or contingency
information during a causal judgment task. However, her
discussion has a slightly different focus. She highlights the
question of whether people focus on conditional
contingencies, i.e. controlling for blue, with
P=
P(blooms|red, blue)-P(blooms| red, blue) and
P=
P(blooms|red, blue)-P(blooms| red, blue), rather than
focusing on the unconditional conditional contingency, i.e.,
P = P(blooms|red) - P(blooms| red). Here, we adopt the
perspective that these conditional contingencies are
indications of underlying causality only, and that
understanding causality is the real objective of the cognitive
system in everyday understanding of the world.4
The dominant focus of this contingency research has been
with adults. However, little is known about children’s
sensitivity to causal contingencies. Earlier studies have
indicated that children have an appropriate understanding of
causal structure that is more sophisticated than described
initially by Piaget (e.g., 1930), extending across both
physical (e.g., Bullock, Gelman, Baillargeon, 1982; Spelke,
Breinlinger, Macomber, & Jacobson, 1992) and biological
domains (e.g., Gelman & Wellman, 1991; Kalish, 1996).
Young children are able to make appropriate predictions of
outcomes based on single causes and generate appropriate
explanations regarding how single causes determine effects
(e.g., Hickling & Wellman, 2001). Furthermore, studies by
Gopnik and colleagues have indicated that young children
can learn and understand the role of single and multiple
causes, enabling them to make accurate causal predictions
and effective interventions to modify outcomes.
For example, Gopnik and Sobel (2000) showed children a
“blicket detector”. When a “blicket” was placed on top of
the blicket detector, it lit up and played a song. Blickets
were various types of blocks, although not all potential
blocks were blickets. The results of multiple experiments
indicated that children were able to understand the causal
strength of the blickets. Further studies have indicated that
children could effectively activate the detector by placing a
blicket on top of it and deactivate the detector by removing
a blicket (e.g., Gopnik, Sobel, Schulz, & Glymour, 2001).

3
A slight modification of these numbers can lead to blue having a
negative contingency with blooming, even though it has a causally
positive effect. generating Simpson’s (1951) paradox, as elegantly
explained in a causal framework by Pearl (2000), and attracting
considerable interest in cognitive psychology (e.g., Hintzman,
1980).

4
Contingency information, whether conditional or not, is never a
completely reliable indication of causality. This is because, among
other things, additional unknown causes remain possible. These
unknown causes correlate with the observable causes in the ways
that we have discussed, potentially leading to a disconnection between causality and contingency.

Blue liquid (y/n)
Plant blooms (y/n)
Red liquid (y/n)

Figure 1. Presumed causal structure in Spellman’s (1996)
Conditions 1 to 3.

Blue liquid (y/n)
Plant blooms (y/n)
Red liquid (y/n)
Figure 2. Presumed causal structure in Spellman’s (1996)
Conditions 4 to 6.

1061

Gopnik et al. (2001) used the detector to investigate
children’s attribution of causality, given one versus two
potential causes. In the “one-cause condition”, children saw
each block individually and together on the detector.
Individual presentations each occurred once and the joint
presentation occurred twice. The first block activated the
detector, the second block did not activate the detector, and
both blocks together activated the detector. Thus, the first
block activated the detector on three of the three trials where
it was presented and the second block activated the detector
on two of the three trials where it was presented.
In the “two-cause condition”, children saw each block
presented individually. The first block was presented three
times and activated the detector on each presentation. The
second block was presented three times and activated the
detector on two of the three presentations. Again, the first
block activated the detector on three of the three trials where
it was presented and the second block activated the detector
on two of the three trials where it was presented.
The results indicated that children gave the first block a
stronger causal rating than the second block in the one-cause
condition. In contrast, in the two-cause condition, the
children gave the two blocks similar causal ratings. These
results suggest that young children are sensitive to the
relative contribution of two causes, i.e., their causal
contingencies.
It may be that Gopnik et al.’s (2001) causality judgments
were based on the effect of individual presentation and not
on the effect of dual presentations. Therefore, Sobel,
Tenebaum, and Gopnik (2004) further investigated
children’s use of causal contingencies to make accurate
interventions, i.e., activating or deactivating the detector. In
both the “inference condition” and the “backwards blocking
condition”, children saw the detector activate after both
blocks were presented together. Next, in both conditions,
children saw one block presented alone. In the inference
condition, the detector did not activate. In the backwards
blocking condition, the detector did activate. In both
conditions, children considered one block to be a blicket and
one block not to be a blicket. In the inference condition the
blicket was the block that was not presented alone.
Conversely, in the backwards blocking condition, the
blicket was the block that was presented alone. These results
suggested that children might infer independent causal
strength when dealing with multiple causes, indicating that
children are sensitive to conditional contingencies.
These and other studies have been able to address a
number of questions regarding the nature of children’s
sensitivity to causal relations with single and multiple cues
and how children use this knowledge to accurately predict
and modify outcomes. However, there are a number of
questions that remain unanswered. For example, how do
children deal with uncertainty? Gopnik et al. (2001) began
to address the influence of children’s causal ratings when
one of the blocks produced different effects. However, little
is known about how children will respond when both blocks
produce different effects on different trials. Using a fusion

of Gopnik and colleagues’ blicket detector and Spellman’s
(1996) conditions, we can assess how children might deal
with uncertainty in multiple causes. Using this paradigm, we
can begin to explore children’s relative sensitivity to
conditional and unconditional contingencies. To have a
complete comparison of conditional and unconditional
contingencies, participants need exposure to each block
alone, the blocks together, and no blocks. This creates a
situation where children are exposed to apparently
unexplainable activation effects in the absence of causal
cues, as well as uncertain outcomes of regular causal cues
over a series of trials; allowing for an exploration of the
consistency of children’s causal predictions given additional
experience.
Based on the consistency of the causal judgments of
adults and young children, as found in the work by Gopnik
and colleagues (e.g., Gopnik, Glymour, Sobel, Schulz,
Kushnir, & Danks, 2004), we expected that young children
in this experiment would perform similarly to the adults of
Spellman (1996). When considering two potential causes,
we expected that young children’s causal predictions and
causal ratings of the strength of these causes would be
sensitive to changes in the relative strength of the
conditional and unconditional probabilities of each of these
causes. Second, we expected that children’s causal
predictions would be dependent on the certainty of the
outcome. Specifically, when the outcome is consistent,
children’s causal predictions would reflect the actual
outcome, whereas when the outcome is inconsistent,
children will make more positive predictions based on
children’s tendency to perseverate to the more salient
positive predictions.

Method
Participants
One-hundred-fifty student volunteers were recruited from
local middle-class primary schools. The mean age was 5.72
years (SD = 0.88, range = 4.16 to 7.40). There were 78 females and 72 males. Twenty-five children were randomly
assigned to each condition, with the range and distribution
of children’s ages and sex similar across the six conditions.

Materials
The stimuli were computerized versions of Gopnik and colleagues’ blicket detector. The detector was used in this
study to diminish the impact of any prior knowledge of
causal structures. In this version, the detector was a gray
box. The detector activated when certain blocks were placed
on top of it. There were two different color blocks in each
condition (Block A and Block B).

Design and Procedures
The experiment was conducted with individual children in a
quiet space outside the students’ normal classroom. The
experiment lasted about 10 minutes and consisted of one
block of 40 trials, presented randomly on a laptop computer.

1062

Table 1. The trial presentations and contingencies for conditions 1 to 6.

Condition
1

2

3

4

5

6

Trial Presentation1
A, B
A, B
A, B
A, B

5/5
10/15
5/15
0/5

8/102
8/102
2/102
2/102

10/15
5/5
0/5
5/15

15/15
0/5
5/5
0/15

10/10
0/10
10/10
0/10

5/5
0/15
15/15
0/5

Contingencies
A Unconditional
A Conditional

.5
.67

.6
.6

.5
.67

.5
0

0
0

-.5
0

B Unconditional
B Conditional

0
.33

0
0

0
-.33

1
1

1
1

1
1

Note:

1
2

Number of trials where machine was activated over number of presentations
This is a slight modification of Spellman’s (1996) trial presentations to accommodate a lesser
number of overall trials.

The distribution of the trials for each condition was a
slight modification of Spellman (1996) and is listed in Table
1. Spellman presented a total of 80 trials, which allowed for
an exact consistency of conditional probabilities across
Conditions 1 to 3. Here, the number of trials was decreased
to 40 to prevent fatigue. This required the proportion of trials within each cell for Condition 2 to be modified slightly.
At the beginning of the experiment, children were shown
the detector and told, ‘This is a blicket machine’. Next they
were shown an array of blocks and told ‘Blickets make the
blicket machine light up and play a song. Some of these
may be blickets.’ During each trial, children were asked to
predict whether or not the detector would activate, based on
the visual presentation: Block A alone, Block B alone,
Block A and B, and no blocks. The position of the block
was consistent across trials to prevent the children from
using position as a cue to whether or not the detector activated. Block A was always on the left side and Block B was
always on the right side. After each prediction, children
would see whether or not the detector activated.
At the end of the experiment, children were asked to indicate whether or not each block, presented randomly, was a
blicket. The seven possible options, given a score on a 7point blicket rating scale were:
1 - Always NOT a blicket.
2 - Mostly NOT a blicket.
3 - Sometimes NOT a blicket.
4 - Equally both a blicket and not a blicket.
5 - Sometimes a blicket.
6 - Mostly a blicket.
7 - Always a blicket.
This rating scale was used instead of Spellman’s (1996)
scale because a range of –100 to 100 would have been too

difficult for children. However, we used terms similar to
Spellman’s in determining these options.

Results
Analyses
The data were screened to ensure a normal distribution and
to identify outliers. The mean proportion of positive predictions and blicket ratings were subjected to mixed model
repeated measures ANOVAs (Block Type × Condition).
Condition was manipulated between participants and Block
Type was manipulated within-subjects. Planned comparisons were conducted for the hypothesized main effects and
interactions described earlier, with Bonferroni correction
procedures applied to control for Type I error. Unless otherwise stated, all main effects, interactions, and planned
comparisons were tested using an α of .05.

Causal Predictions
Overall, the mean proportion of ‘Yes’ predictions supported
our hypotheses. There was a significant main effect of
Block Type, F (3,144) = 242.96, MSE = .356, a main effect
of Condition, F (5,144) = 4.38, and a Block Type × Condition interaction, F (15,144) = 23.00 (see Figure 3). Further
analyses indicated that the main effect of Condition was a
result of children responding ‘Yes’ more often to Conditions
1 to 3 than to Conditions 4 to 6, F (1,149) = 17.82. Overall,
children responded ‘Yes’ most often when both blocks were
presented, followed by Block A alone, F (1,144) = 37.85,
then Block B alone, F (1,144) = 47.49, then no blocks, F
(1,144) = 381.93. The significant interaction indicated that
when both blocks were presented, children responded ‘Yes’
more often in Conditions 1 to 3 than in Conditions 4 to 6.

1063

Mean Proportion 'Yes' Responses

100%

Children responded ‘Yes’ more often to Block A than to
Block B in Conditions 1 to 3. Conversely, they responded
‘Yes’ more often to Block B than to Block A in Conditions
4 to 6. When no blocks were presented, children responded
‘Yes’ more often in Conditions 1 to 3 than in Conditions 4
to 6.

Both
Block A
Block B
None

80%

60%

40%

Causal Ratings

20%

For the most part, the causal ratings supported our hypotheses. There was a significant main effect of Block Type, F
(1,288) = 36.63, MSE = 1.55, and Block Type × Condition
interaction, F (5,288) = 69.84 (see Figure 4). Overall, children gave Block B a higher causal rating than Block A.
Planned comparisons indicated that the causal ratings of
Block B were larger in Condition 1 than in Condition 3,
with no significant differences in the causal ratings of Block
A across Conditions 1 to 3. The causal ratings of Block A
were larger in Condition 4 than in Condition 5 and Condition 6, with no significant differences in the causal ratings of
Block B across Conditions 4 to 6. We transformed the results of Spellman (1996) to fit our 7-point rating scale. The
results of the young children in our experiment are remarkably similar to the Spellman’s results, with the exception of Block A across Conditions 4 to 6. Here, children’s
causal ratings decrease with decreased unconditional contingencies, whereas Spellman’s adults showed consistent
causal ratings despite decreases in unconditional contingencies.

0%

Mean Proportion 'Yes' Responses

Condition 1

Condition 2

Condition 3

Both
Block A
Block B
None

100%

80%

60%

40%

20%

0%

Condition 4

Condition 5

Condition 6

Figure 3. The mean proportion of ‘Yes’ responses.
Children
Adults

Discussion

7

Mean Causal Rating

6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Blk A
Blk B
Condition 1

Blk A
Blk B
Condition 2

Blk A
Blk B
Condition 3

Children
Adults
7

Mean Causal Rating

6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Blk A
Blk B
Condition 4

Blk A
Blk B
Condition 5

Blk A
Blk B
Condition 6

Figure 4. The mean causal ratings for Block A and Block B,
as compared to the adults in Spellman (1996).

Previous research suggests that adults use only conditional
contingencies (e.g., Spellman, 1996). Here, we found that
children used both conditional and unconditional contingencies to inform their attributions of causal strength.
The results confirmed our hypotheses about children’s use
of conditional contingencies. When faced with uncertainty,
as in Conditions 1 to 3, children made more positive predictions than during consistent outcomes, as in Conditions 4 to
6. Specifically, children’s proportion of ‘Yes’ responses in
Conditions 4 to 6 reflected their accurate learning of the
outcomes. The greater proportion of ‘Yes’ responses in the
uncertain Conditions 1 to 3 appeared to indicate that children might be optimizing, predicting ‘Yes’ with a greater
frequency. Across the conditions, the proportion of ‘Yes’
responses was higher when both blocks were on the detector
than when either block was presented individually, even
under uncertainty. This may suggest an additive effect of
presenting both blocks over individual blocks, with children
predicting that the detector must activate if both blocks were
present. However, additional studies designed to specifically
address this issue must be conducted before we can make
conclusions about additive effects.
An obvious difference between our results and Spellman’s
(1996) results occur in Conditions 4 to 6. Here, the children
appear to be sensitive to changes in unconditional contingencies, as evidenced by the decrease in their causal ratings
of Block B across Conditions 4 to 6. Specifically, when
conditional contingencies vary alongside consistent unconditional contingencies, then causality judgments were sensi-

1064

tive to changes in these conditional contingencies. Conversely, when unconditional contingencies vary alongside
consistent conditional contingencies, then causality judgments were sensitive to the changes in these unconditional
contingencies. It may be the case that children benefit from
attention to unconditional contingencies in a manner that
adults do not. When judging causal strength, unconditional
contingency information may be irrelevant to adults, but
used by young children. Regardless of how children treat
the causal efficacy of unconditional contingencies, it is clear
from the results here, that young children are sensitive to
and utilize both types of contingency in their causal judgments, even under uncertainty. This provides support for the
notion that children are able to simultaneously consider
multiple cues when learning about the causal strength of
various potential causes.
The current study addresses the sensitivity of children’s
causal predictions and causal ratings to relative alterations
in conditional and unconditional contingencies under uncertainty. However, we have yet to address whether holding
these contingencies equal and altering the relative frequency
of presentations results in performance changes. Goedert
and Spellman (in press) found that adults are sensitive to
frequency alterations. However, this sensitivity appears to
be dependent on the framing of the task.
The current sample of children ranged from 4- to 7-yearolds. Children within this age range may approach this task
differently. Therefore, further studies should address
whether there are quantitative differences in the causal predictions and causal ratings of children of different ages.
In summary, the results here suggest that children use statistical dependencies like causal contingencies to inform
their judgments of causality, to determine the relative
strength of multiple causes, and to discern uncertainty.
Children have remarkable sensitivity to statistical dependencies during language acquisition (e.g., Thiessen & Saffran, 2003) learning complex structures (e.g., Ellefson,
Young, Christiansen, & Espy, 2005) and memory (e.g.,
Kirkham, Slemmer, Johnson, 2002); and they effectively
integrate statistical information from multiple cues (e.g.,
Christiansen & Monaghan, in press). If attending to statistical properties is a fundamental cognitive skill, then it is entirely reasonable that children would find statistical dependencies useful in determining the causal efficacy of potential
causes.

References
Baker, A.G., Mercier, P., Vallée-Tourangeau, F., Frank, R.,
& Pan, M. (1993). Selective associations and causality
judgments: Presence of a strong causal factor may reduce
judgments of a weaker one. JEP:LMC, 19, 414-432.
Bullock, M., Gelman, R., Baillargeon, R. (1982). The development of causal reasoning. In W.J. Friedman, (Ed.),
The Developmental Psychology of Time (pp. 209-254).
New York: Academic Press.
Christiansen, M.H. & Monaghan, P. (in press). Discovering
verbs through multiple-cue integration. In K. Hirsh-Pasek
& R.M. Golinkoff (Eds.), Action meets words: How children learn verbs. New York: Oxford University Press.

Ellefson, M.R., Young, M.E., Christiansen, M.H., & Espy,
K.A. (2005). The Utility of Structural Cues to Facilitate
Student Learning of Complex Information. Manuscript
submitted for publication.
Gelman, S.A., & Wellman, H.M. (1991). Insides and essence: Early understandings of the non-obvious. Cognition, 38, 213-234.
Glymour, C., Scheines, R., Spirtes, P., & Kelly, K. (1987).
Discovering causal structure: Artificial intelligence, philosophy of science, and statistical modeling. San Diego,
CA: Academic Press.
Goedert, K.M., & Spellman, B.A. (in press). Non-normative
discounting: There is more to cue interaction effects.
Learning and Behavior.
Gopnik, A., & Sobel, D.M. (2000). Detecting blickets: How
young children use information about causal properties in
categorization and induction. Child Dev., 71, 1205-1222.
Gopnik, A., Glymour, C., Sobel, D.M., Schulz, L.E.,
Kushnir, T., & Danks, D. (2004). A theory of causal learning in children: Causal maps and Bayes Nets. Psych. Rev.,
111, 3-32.
Gopnik, A., Sobel, D.M., Schulz, L.E., Glymour, C. (2001).
Causal learning mechanisms in very young children: twothree-, and four-year-olds infer causal relations from patterns of variation and covariation. Dev. Psych., 37, 620629.
Hickling, A.K., & Wellman, H.M. (2001). The emergence
of children’s causal explanations and theories: Evidence
from everyday conversation. Dev. Psych., 37, 668-683.
Hintzman, D. L. (1980). Simpson'
s paradox and the analysis
of memory retrieval. Psych. Rev., 87, 398-410.
Hume, D. (1739). A Treatise of Human Nature: Being an
Attempt to Introduce the Experimental Method of Reasoning into Moral Subjects.
Kalish, C.W. (1996). Preschoolers’ understanding of germs
as invisible mechanisms. Cog. Dev., 11, 83-106.
Kirkham, N.Z, Slemmer, J.A., & Johnson, S.P. (2002). Visual statistical learning in infancy: Evidence for a domain
general learning mechanism. Cognition, 83, B35-B42
Mackie, J. (1974) The Cement of the Universe. Oxford, UK:
Clarendon Press.
Pearl, J. (2000). Causality: Models, Reasoning and Inference. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Piaget, J. (1930). The child’s conception of physical causality. New York: Harcourt, Brace.
Simpson, E.H. (1951). The interpretation of interaction in
contingency tables. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society
(Series B), 13, 238-241.
Sobel, D.M., Tenenbaum, J.B., & Gopnik, A. (2004). Children’s causal inferences from indirect evidence: Backwards blocking in Bayesian reasoning in preschoolers.
Cognitive Science, 28, 303-333.
Spellman, B.A. (1996). Acting as intuitive scientists: Contingency judgments are made while controlling for alternative potential causes. Psych. Science, 7, 337-342.
Thiessen, E.D., & Saffran, J.R. (2003). When cues collide:
Use of stress and statistical cues to word boundaries by 7to 9-month-old infants. Dev. Psych., 39, 706-716

1065

