UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Bayesian model of navigation in squirrels

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5jx2d3kv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Waisman, Anna
Lucas, Christopher
Griffiths, Thomas
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Bayesian model of navigation in squirrels
Anna S. Waisman (annawais@uw.edu)
Institute for Learning and Brain Sciences, Portage Bay Building, Room 450
Seattle, WA 98195 USA

Christopher G. Lucas (cglucas@gmail.com)
Department of Educational Psychology, Baker Hall 342c
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Thomas L. Griffiths (tom_griffiths@berkeley.edu)
Lucia F. Jacobs (jacobs@berkeley.edu)
Department of Educational Psychology, 3210 Tolman Hall #1650
Berkeley, CA 94720 USA
Abstract
Fox squirrels have an impressive ability to remember the
location of stored food. In doing so, they combine information
from landmarks of different types. We deﬁne a Bayesian
model that indicates how an ideal observer would optimally
integrate landmark cues, and fit this model to the decisions
made by squirrels in a spatial memory task. The resulting
model provides a unifying framework for characterizing
different strategies to cue integration, and a tool for
investigating the circumstances under which particular cues
are used. We show that the best fitting models changed
depending on the season at testing and the details of the task.
These analyses support previous claims that squirrels adopt
flexible strategies in landmark use.
Keywords: spatial cognition; Bayesian modeling; spatial
memory; animal cognition; navigation

Introduction
Animals of many kinds display remarkable skill at spatial
navigation, and formal models of how animals navigate
have many potential uses. For example, one can use them to
develop robots capable of autonomous movement (Thrun,
2005) and to aid in designing new animal conservation
principles (Fevre, Bronsvoort, Hamilton & Cleaveland,
2006; Simons, 2004). In this paper, we analyze the problem
of identifying a spatial location from memory as a kind of
Bayesian inference. This approach provides a way to
quantify degrees of belief and uncertainty, and thus provides
a natural framework in which to develop an “ideal observer”
model. In cases where multiple kinds of landmarks are
available, the Bayesian approach allows us to take into
account the perceived reliabilities of each landmark or
landmark type. This information can be used to identify the
location most consistent with the animal’s memory.
Formalizing spatial memory in these terms gives us a tool
for identifying which types of landmarks animals use in
navigation, what factors influence the use of these
landmarks, and what kinds of strategies animals are using
based on how they use those landmarks in combination.
Birds and other animals that are either nectar-feeding or
store food have excellent spatial memory abilities due to
natural selection pressures, and have often been used in

spatial memory experiments. Traditionally, such animals
have been described as using landmarks in a hierarchical
fashion by which the animal works its way down its
preference hierarchy of landmark types until it finds the
rewarded location (Brodbeck, 1994; Clayton & Krebs,
1994; Herz, Zanette & Sherry 1994). Bats, hummingbirds,
and squirrels have shown such preference hierarchies
(Healy & Hurly, 1998; Jacobs & Shiflett, 1999; Thiele &
Winter, 2005; Vlasak, 2006a).
This traditional hierarchical model has recently been
challenged by converging evidence in favor of the plasticity
of landmark use in both mammals and birds (Pigeons:
Legge, Spetch & Batty, 2009; Chickadees: LaDage, Roth,
Fox & Pravosudov, 2009; Flying Squirrel: Gibbs, Lea &
Jacobs, 2007; Fox Squirrel: Waisman & Jacobs, 2008). We
were interested in exploring in more detail how different
combinations of landmark types trade off in guiding search
behavior and whether animals might be using Bayesian
inference to determine their search strategy. This would
explain the flexibility in their search strategies, and predict
their strategies in a wide range of novel situations.
The plan of the paper is as follows. In the first section, we
briefly explain the general structure of a Bayesian model of
landmark use. In the second section, we describe a series of
cue combination experiments with squirrels and the specific
model that we used to characterize their behavior. In the
third section, we demonstrate how the model can be used to
examine factors that influence the use of landmarks. The
final section concludes the paper.

A Bayesian analysis of cue combination in
squirrel spatial navigation
To construct a Bayesian model of squirrel spatial navigation
we must first define the problem of squirrel spatial
navigation in Bayesian terms. For simplicity, the model
presented here will focus on the navigation problem
encountered by a single species – the fox squirrel. A squirrel
must rely on environmental landmarks and its memory of
those landmarks when searching for food. Environments
change and a squirrel’s memory has finite precision. This
leads to a navigational problem for which the ideal solution

1274

requires accounting for these sources of error by
determining the probability that the food is hidden in a
particular location. To do this, the squirrel must consider the
variability of landmarks including global landmarks, local
landmarks, and the perceptual features of candidate
locations. More formally, we imagine that the squirrel is
choosing between a discrete set of locations L, trying to
identify the location l∈ L that matches a remembered set of
landmarks m. Locations have a history of being used for
storage, with p ( l ) being the probability of each location
being used. The squirrel seeks to compute p ( l∣m) , the
posterior probability of each location given the information
provided by the memory m. This can be done by applying
Bayes’ rule,
p ( m∣l ) p ( l )
p ( l∣m )=
∑ l ∈L p ( m∣l ) p ( l )
(1)
where p ( m∣l ) is the probability of the remembered
landmarks m given that l was the true location. In order to
simplify the problem, we will restrict our attention to the
case where the types of landmarks that comprise the
memory m and their associated sources of uncertainty are
independent, and no location is more likely a priori. In this
case, Equation 1 becomes
∏k p ( mk∣l )
p ( l∣m )=
(2)
∑ l ∈L ∏k p ( mk∣l )
where k indexes specific types of landmarks and mk is the
part of the memory corresponding to landmark type k.
The distribution of mk given l – the probability of
recalling that landmark k takes its remembered value given
that l is where the food is currently hidden – depends on that
landmark’s tendency to change and the accuracy and
granularity of the squirrel’s memory. For example, if k = 0
corresponded to color cues, then p ( m0∣l ) represents the
probability of remembering that the color of the location
was red given that the color of the true location was blue.
The case where the memory for each landmark is normally
distributed was explored in Cheng, Shettleworth,
Huttenlocher and Rieser (2007), where it was argued that
pigeons might combine such landmarks optimally. The
basic prediction produced by this account is that animals
should rely on the perceived reliability of either individual
landmarks or landmark categories.
Existing evidence suggests that this is the case. For
example, animals initially preferring one of two landmarks
switched their preference when given evidence that the nonpreferred landmark was more reliable (Biegler & Morris,
1996). In terms of broader categories of landmarks, the most
reliable landmarks are considered to be the global
landmarks, the far away, large landmarks that are not only
the most immovable objects in the environment, but also the
ones that are least distorted by changes in visual angle or
across seasonal changes to the local environment
(Shettleworth, 2003). This phenomenon is further supported
by evidence that many species of animal prefer to use global

landmarks when available. However, what would
distinguish the behavior of a Bayesian model from that of
other models would be the optimal combination of available
landmarks based on their reliabilities. In the remainder of
the paper, we explore whether this approach can
characterize the strategies that squirrels use in identifying
spatial locations from memory.

Applying the model to squirrel navigation
To test the model outlined in the previous section, we
analyzed data from a series of experiments in which fox
squirrels needed to identify a location based on several
different types of landmarks, taken from Waisman and
Jacobs (2008). These experiments manipulated the
environment in which squirrels were making decisions in
order to produce conflict in the information provided by
different types of landmarks, and thus provided a good test
of our model.
Free-ranging fox squirrels were initially trained to feed
from a fixed location within a square array of four feeders
(see Figure 1a). Identification of a location could be done
using three types of landmarks. Extra-array (EX) landmarks
were those that were external to the feeder array, including
objects such as large trees and bushes. Intra-array (IN)
landmarks were the non-rewarded feeders in the array.
Unique feature (UF) landmarks were defined as any features
unique to the feeder, including scent and the color and shape
of ceramic figurines that were placed on top of the boxes.
Squirrels were then tested in two transformed versions of
the array. In hierarchy tests, all three landmark types were in
conflict with one another, with no two types being
consistent in the location they identified (see Figure 1b). In
the majority tests, one landmark type was in conflict with
the other two landmark types (see Figure 1c). This provided
a test of the majority strategy, examining whether the
squirrels always chose the location consistent with the
majority of the landmark types.

Experimental setup
Data taken from these experiments were originally analyzed
using binomial one-tailed tests. See Waisman and Jacobs
(2008) for further discussion of the data. In summary, in
Experiment 1, squirrels chose the majority location
significantly greater than chance and chose the UF location
in the hierarchy test (p < 0.05 for all tests). Since fox
squirrels are known to prefer EX landmarks in hierarchy
tests, the choice of UF in this experiment was perplexing.
The contrast suggested that the particular experimental setup
had somehow increased the saliency of the UF landmarks.
To further explore this possibility, squirrels were tested at
the same time the following year, summer, using a different
experimental setup and found that, while squirrels continued
to choose the majority location in all three majority tests,
they now chose the EX location in the hierarchy test (p <
0.05 for all tests). From this pattern of data, it was
concluded that the experimental setup had indeed increased
the saliency of the UF landmarks.

1275

To investigate possible seasonal effects on landmark use,
the experiment was also run in the spring, using the second
experimental setup, with less salient UF landmarks. In this
experiment, squirrels no longer chose the majority location
when it was the combination of IN and UF landmarks, and
chose the EX location in the hierarchy test (p < 0.05). The
spring data suggest that squirrels were no longer taking into
account UF landmarks when making spatial decisions.
Taken altogether, the data are consistent with the proposal
that squirrels are using a majority strategy when possible,
but that there are both seasonal and salience effects on the
use of UF landmarks. The results suggested that rather than
being limited to a strict hierarchy, as has been proposed in
earlier studies, squirrels used a more flexible majority
strategy when possible.

Figure 1: (a) A training trial in which feeder D is rewarded.
(b) Hierarchy test: the entire array is moved horizontally and
feeder D is switched with feeder A. Unique feature (UF)
cues indicate search at D, intra-array (IN) landmarks
indicate search at A, and extra-array (EX) landmarks
indicate search at C. (c) Majority tests based on having been
trained to feeder D.

Applying the model to the experiment
The Bayesian model introduced in the previous section
gives us a sophisticated tool for characterizing the strategies
that squirrels used in these experiments. Again, the
squirrel’s problem is to determine which location has the
highest posterior probability of being correct given its
memory of the location. We will use l to denote candidate
locations and their associated landmarks. These landmarks
include all three types of landmarks: extra-array, array
position, and unique features. The squirrel’s memory of the
location m contains recalled values for extra-array ( m EX ) ,
intra-array ( mI N ) , and feature ( mUF ) cues. The squirrels
were naive and had no information besides the landmarks
leading them to prefer one particular location over another,
and local landmark and feature cues were novel and

independently varying, so our earlier formulation (Equation
2) applies, yielding
p ( l∣m) ∝ p ( m EX∣l ) p ( mI N∣l ) p ( mUF ∣l )
(3)
Our model is thus defined by specifying the likelihood
terms for each of these types of landmarks (e.g. p ( mEX∣l ) ).
We adopted a slightly different probabilistic model for
each landmark type. For global landmarks, EX, we assumed
that recalled locations are distributed normally around the
true location, in accordance with previous cue integration
2
2
models: p ( mEX∣l ) = N ( m EX∣l , σ I ) , where σ
is a
parameter representing the variance associated with
location. The landmark's value is represented as twodimensional vectors (where the components give a location
in centimeters from the true location) and I is the twodimensional identity matrix. For intra-array landmarks, IN,
we characterized the difference between a candidate true
location and the recalled location as a perturbation in grid
positioning in either of two independent, orthogonal
directions. If we let the probability of a perturbation in each
2−p p
direction be ϵ I N , then p ( mI N ∣l ) =( 1−ϵ I N ) ϵ I N , where p
is the number of perturbations out of a possible two. For
feature-based cues, UF, if the probability that a feature
differs between the hypothesized location and the squirrel’s
memory is ϵUF (e.g the probability that the squirrel
remembers red but the true location is blue), so
p ( mUF ∣l )=1−ϵ UF if the recalled and candidate features are
identical, else ϵUF /3 given that there are three other
locations with their own distinct features.
2
Under this specification, the three parameters σ , ϵ I N ,
and ϵUF capture the reliability of each type of landmark, and
by extension the strength of the evidence that that landmark
type provides and the likelihood that the squirrel will prefer
that type of landmark when all three are in conflict. The
results of the experiment indicate the percentage of squirrels
choosing a particular observed location, which can be used
to estimate these parameters from the data. We compute the
log-likelihood of the choices made by the squirrels by
assuming that they used a standard probability-matching
decision rule, with the probability of choosing a location
being equal to the posterior probability of that location.

Model results for all experiments
We can use this Bayesian model as the basis for defining a
nested hierarchy of models that differ in the assumptions
they make about the landmarks that fox squirrels use in
choosing locations (see Figure 2). The simplest model sets
the parameters to values that make all landmark type values
2
equally likely: σ =∞ , ϵ I N =0.5 and ϵUF =0.75 . This
model corresponds to completely uniform choices of
location. The fit between this model and the data is
represented by its log likelihood value: -257.92. We can
then examine the effects of estimating the parameters
associated with each landmark type. The model that only

1276

Figure 2: Predictions of each model in the nested hierarchy analysis, labeled with which parameters were estimated and the
test type. Plot 1 represents the hierarchy test, while 2, 3, and 4 represent the majority tests. Each quadrant represents the
posterior probability of an observed location, corresponding to the four locations shown in Figure 1. Darker indicates higher
probability, while lighter indicates lower probability.
estimated the UF parameter, ϵUF , gave a similar loglikelihood of -257.68. Thus, the UF landmark on its own
does not provide a significant amount of information for
explaining the data. In contrast, the log likelihood values
yielded by estimating either the EX parameter σ 2 , or the
IN parameter, ϵ I N , on their own were significantly different
from that of the chance model (-173.79 and -235.37
respectively; p < 0.01 for both, by a likelihood-ratio test).
As one can see in Figure 2, of the two estimated
parameter models, the model that estimated both the EX and
IN parameters most closely fit with the raw data, with a loglikelihood of -160.11. However, most of this fit seems to be
captured by the EX parameter, since the model with EX and
UF parameters also does well at fitting the data, with a loglikelihood of -172.48. Even so, the log-likelihood of the
model that estimated parameters for all three landmark
types, -155.32, was significantly better at predicting the data
than any combination of only two parameters or one
parameter on its own (p < 0.01 for all comparisons). This
model estimated the values of the parameters to be 239.01
for σ 2 , 0.30 for ϵ I N and 0.60 for ϵUF . So while it seems that
EX has the greatest influence on the choices of the squirrels,
their behavior is consistent with that of a model that uses all
three landmark types.

Further uses of the Bayesian framework
In this section, we consider how these results relate to
squirrels’ choice of strategy, and how the model can be used

to explore variation in the importance of landmark types due
to differences in salience and season.

The majority strategy and Bayes
In the study from which we took our data, when fox
squirrels were presented with situations in which each
landmark type indicated a different location, they
predominantly relied on external, global landmarks.
However, when presented with situations in which two
landmark types were consistent with one another and in
conflict with the preferred, global landmarks, they chose to
search in the location consistent with the greatest number of
landmark types. Waisman and Jacobs (2008) called this the
majority strategy. These results support the idea that
squirrels are able to adapt their search strategy to the
particular spatial context.
This type of decision strategy can be modeled using a
Bayesian approach. Under the same distributional
assumptions as before and a maximizing or probability
matching decision rule, the squirrel is most likely to visit the
location for which p ( m∣l ) is maximal. For this location l i ,
p ( mEX∣li ) p ( m I N∣l i ) p ( mUF∣li )> p ( mEX∣l j ) p ( m I N∣l j ) p ( mUF∣l j )
for all j≠i . Equivalently, we can represent this relationship
in terms of the evidence provided by each feature, i.e., the
log odds of the recalled landmark values for location i
versus j. For instance, the evidence provided by the intrap ( m I N ∣l i )
) . For the
array landmarks is e I N ( i , j )=log (
p ( m I N ∣l j )

1277

b.

a.

Figure 3: Model predictions for the seasonal and salience analyses. Format is the same as Experiment 1. (a) are the analyses
using the subset of the data that were collected only in the spring, Experiments 2-4. (b) are the analyses using the subset of
the data that were collected using the second experimental setup, Experiments 2-5.
majority strategy to apply, no one type of landmark may
provide evidence dominating the combined evidence from
the other two: the maximum possible evidence for one
landmark type cannot exceed the the sum of the maximum
negative evidence provided by the other two. We can
establish some bounds on σ 2 (in terms of a maximal
distance d between candidate and recalled locations), ϵ I N
and ϵUF that determine when a majority strategy will no
longer apply: violations of
max ea ( i , j )<max eb ( j , i )+max ec ( j ,i )
for any combination of cues a, b, and c imply that, as a
group, the squirrels' behavior deviates from a majority
strategy.
Determining whether a set of parameters is consistent
with the majority strategy requires computing the maximal
evidence that can be provided by each kind of cue. In our
−1
2 −2
model, this is ( 2 σ 2) d 2 for EX, log( ( 1− ϵI N ) ϵ I N ) for IN,
1−ϵUF
) for UF. Plugging these values into the
and log(
ϵUF / 3
constraints identified in the previous paragraph, we obtain
the following inequalities:
−1

(2 σ 2)

2 −2

2

−1

d <log( ( 1−ϵI N ) ϵ I N )+log( ( 1−ϵUF ) 3ϵUF )
2 −2

log( ( 1− ϵI N ) ϵ I N )< ( 2σ

2 −1

)

2

−1

d +log( ( 1−ϵ UF ) 3ϵUF )
2 −2

log( ( 1− ϵUF ) 3ϵUF )<log( ( 1−ϵ I N ) ϵ I N )+( 2 σ
−1

2 −1

)

d

2

If these inequalities are satisfied, then our Bayesian model
will produce behavior consistent with the majority strategy.
Waisman and Jacobs (2008) concluded that squirrels only
used the UF cues and thus a majority strategy during the
summer season. Accordingly, we evaluated these criteria
using parameter estimates from only the summer experiment
data. The parameter estimates computed from the summer
experiments were: 318.98 for σ 2 0.30 for ϵ I N and 0.40 for

ϵUF . Using these values, the inequalities for the majority
strategy were satisfied, suggesting that squirrels’ cue
combination behavior in the summer season can be
explained by the use of a majority strategy.

Capturing variations in salience and season
We analyzed the possible salience and season effects by
repeating the analyses from the previous section on two
different subsets of the data: one that included only
experiments run in the spring, and another excluding
Experiment 1 in which the experimental setup included
stimuli that seemed to increase the saliency of UF
landmarks. Figure 3 summarizes these analyses.
Seasonal effects
Using data from only the spring experiments (Figure 3a),
the inclusion of ϵUF with a log likelihood of -158.99, while
significantly better than having no parameters, a log
likelihood of -162.20 (p < 0.05), did little to enhance any
model in which it was included. The inclusion of both IN
and EX parameters was, however, significantly better than
including either parameter alone (IN: -150.94; EX: -98.70;
EX & IN: -89.53; p < 0.01 for both comparisons). Unlike
the models using the full data set, the log likelihoods of both
the model that included only the IN and EX parameters and
the model that optimized all three parameters were identical.
The model including the EX and IN parameters estimated
the parameters to be 209.09 for σ 2 and 0.30 for ϵ I N . These
results suggests that the squirrels were not taking UF
landmarks into account when making spatial decisions at
this time, as concluded in Waisman and Jacobs (2008).
Salience effects
In the analyses that excluded Experiment 1, the experiment
that used the setup with more salient UF landmarks, the log
likelihood of the model that optimized the IN and EX
parameters was once again near identical to that of the

1278

model that included all three parameters, with values of
-121.8 and -120.7 respectively (Figure 3b). The model that
included the IN and EX parameters estimated the
parameters to be 210.25 for σ 2 and 0.26 for ϵ I N . Since,
once again, the model that best matched the squirrels’
behavior was the one that did not optimize the parameter for
the UF landmark, these analyses support the idea that they
were less salient in the experimental setup.

Summary and Conclusion
Taken together, the results of these analyses illustrate how
our Bayesian framework can be used to characterize the
landmarks used by animals in navigation. Across all data
sets that we ran, the extra- array parameter, σ 2 , resulted in a
statistically significant improvement in fit whenever it was
added to a model (p < 0.01 for all comparisons). This agrees
with previous research stating that for squirrels in the field
the global landmarks are the most salient when navigating
(Jacobs & Shiflett, 1999; Vlasak, 2006a, b). The fact that for
both the spring data set and the data set excluding the first
experiment, optimizing the parameter for the unique feature
landmarks, ϵUF , yielded no predictive power beyond that of
the other landmark types, corroborates the conclusion that
UF landmarks were less salient to the squirrels both in the
spring and when using the second experimental setup. From
these analyses we can conclude that a Bayesian model is a
useful tool for exploring the spatial strategies. The pattern of
choices exhibited by the squirrels matched that of a rational
model taking into account all three available landmark
types. Additionally, model comparisons provided a tool for
investigating both seasonal and salience effects in the data.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank José Lopez and Ted Claire for
constructing the feeders. The research was supported by a
grant to L.J. from the University of California at Berkeley
Committee on Research, a sabbatical appointment to L.J. at
the Santa Fe Institute and funding from the James S.
McDonnell Foundation Causal Learning Collaborative. The
research followed federal and university animal care and use
rules and guidelines and complied with APA ethical
standards in the treatment of animals.

References
Biegler, R., & Morris, R. (1996). Landmark stability:
Studies exploring whether the perceived stability of the
environment influences spatial representation. Journal of
Experimental Biology, 199(1), 187-193.
Brodbeck, D. R. (1994). Memory for Spatial and Local
Cues - a Comparison of a Storing and a Nonstoring
Species. Animal Learning & Behavior, 22(2), 119-133.
Cheng, K., Shettleworth, S. J., Huttenlocher, J., & Rieser, J.
J. (2007). Bayesian integration of spatial information.
Psychological Bulletin, 133(4), 625-637.
Clayton, N. S., & Krebs, J. R. (1994). Memory for Spatial
and Object-Specific Cues in Food-Storing and Nonstoring

Birds. Journal of Comparative Physiology a-Sensory
Neural and Behavioral Physiology, 174(3), 371-379.
Fevre, E. M., Bronsvoort, B., Hamilton, K. A., &
Cleaveland, S. (2006). Animal movements and the spread
of infectious diseases. Trends in Microbiology, 14(3),
125-131.
Gibbs, S., Lea, S., & Jacobs, L. F. (2007). Flexible use of
spatial cues in the southern flying squirrel (Glaucomys
volans). Animal Cognition, 10(2), 203-209.
Healy, S. D., & Hurly, T. A. (1998). Rufous hummingbirds'
(Selasphorus rufus) memory for flowers: Patterns or
actual spatial locations? Journal of Experimental
Psychology-Animal Behavior Processes, 24(4), 396-404.
Herz, R. S., Zanette, L., & Sherry, D. F. (1994). Spatial
Cues for Cache Retrieval by Black-Capped Chickadees.
Animal Behaviour, 48(2), 343-351.
Jacobs, L. F., & Shiflett, M. W. (1999). Spatial orientation
on a vertical maze in free-ranging fox squirrels (Sciurus
niger). Journal of Comparative Psychology, 113(2), 116127.
LaDage, L. D., Roth, T. C., Fox, R. A., & Pravosudov, V.
V. (2009). Flexible cue use in food-caching birds. Animal
Cognition, 12(3), 419-426.
Legge, E. L. G., Spetch, M. L., & Batty, E. R. (2009).
Pigeons' (Columba livia) hierarchical organization of
local and global cues in touch screen tasks. Behavioural
Processes, 80(2), 128-139.
Shettleworth, S. J. (2003). Memory and hippocampal
specialization in food-storing birds: Challenges for
research on comparative cognition. Brain Behavior and
Evolution, 62(2), 108-116.
Simons, A. M. (2004). Many wrongs: the advantage of
group navigation. Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 19(9),
453-455.
Thiele, J., & Winter, Y. (2005). Hierarchical strategy for
relocating food targets in flower bats: spatial memory
versus cue-directed search. Animal Behaviour, 69, 315327.
Thrun, S., (2005). Probabilistic robotics / Sebastian Thrun,
Wolfram Burgard, Dieter Fox. Cambridge, Mass. :: MIT
Press.
Vlasak, A. N. (2006a). Global and local spatial landmarks:
their role during foraging by Columbian ground squirrels
(Spermophilus columbianus). Animal Cognition, 9(1), 7180.
Vlasak, A. N. (2006b). The relative importance of global
and local landmarks in navigation by Columbian ground
squirrels (Spermophilus columbianus). Journal of
Comparative Psychology, 120(2), 131-138.
Waisman, A. S., & Jacobs, L. F. (2008). Flexibility of cue
use in the fox squirrel (Sciurus niger). Animal Cognition,
11(4), 625-636.

1279

