UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Comparison of Nepalese and American Children’s Concepts of Free Will

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/24g1r156

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Chernyak, Nadia
Kushnir, Tamar
Sullivan, Katherine
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Comparison of Nepalese and American Children’s Concepts of Free Will
Nadia Chernyak (nc98@cornell.edu), Tamar Kushnir (tk397@cornell.edu), Katherine M. Sullivan
(kms278@cornell.edu), & Qi Wang (qw33@cornell.edu)
Department of Human Development, Martha Van Rensselaer Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853 USA
recent study which examined adult intuitions of free will
across cultures found that the basic belief in free will is not
culture-dependent (Sarkissian, Chatterjee, De Brigard,
Knobe, Nichols, & Sirker, in press). Further evidence of the
universality of free will intuitions comes from studies
linking the “illusion of conscious will” to our ordinary
physical experience of agency (Haggard & Tsakiris, 2009;
Wegner, 2002). These two different types of evidence point
to the fact that the experience of, and belief in, free will may
be universal. Thus, to the extent that children share adult
intuitions, children across cultures should articulate similar
universal beliefs.
However, because issues of caste, traditional gender
values, and a strong sense of familial and moral obligations,
it is possible that a strong belief in constraint, rather than
free will, is deeply infused into Eastern thinking even from a
young age. Some work in cross-cultural psychology
suggests that individualistic and collectivist cultures differ
in their construal of choice, a concept closely related to free
will. For example, Americans, unlike their East-Asian
counterparts, are more prone to construing mundane,
everyday actions such as selecting a pen to write with as a
unique choice (Savani, Markus, Naidu, Kumar, & Berlia,
2010), to construing interpersonal obligations as choices
(Miller, Bersoff, & Harwood, R. L., 1990), and to
attributing others’ behavior as intentionally chosen rather
than situationally constrained (Morris & Peng, 1994).
Given both shared human experiences and cultural
diversity in beliefs, we propose a universal existence of free
will that manifests in nuanced versions across cultures. In
this work, we compared children ranging from four to
eleven years of age across two cultures: the United States
and Nepal. Because of strong family, moral, and social
obligations stressed in Nepalese culture, this group of
children may be particularly susceptible to “constrained”
free will. We included this wide age range because past
developmental research has shown that cultural differences
often increase with time (Miller, 1984; Wang 2004).
In this study, we surveyed children in both cultures about
a variety of intuitions regarding free will and constraint. In
particular, we looked at children’s beliefs about whether
they have free will to perform (1) simple, unconstrained
actions (e.g., drinking milk instead of juice), (2) physically
and mentally constrained actions (e.g., floating in the air
instead of falling after a jump, doing something you don’t
know how to do), and (3) socially constrained actions (e.g.,
causing harm to another person, breaking the rules).
We predicted three main hypotheses:

Abstract
Recent work finds that children as young as four years old
have an intuitive belief in free will. To what extent is this
early-developing intuition universal, and to what extent
culturally situated? We surveyed school-aged children (4-11)
in two countries (Nepal and the United States) about their
beliefs about people’s “free will” to follow personal
preferences; break physical and mental constraints; and break
social constraints. Results showed both universal and
culturally-learned beliefs in free will. Children across cultures
shared the early-developing intuitions of free will and
constraint, though American children were more likely
construe actions as choices. While American children were
more likely to believe in the free will to break social
constraints as they aged, Nepali children showed the opposite
pattern. These findings show that while a basic notion of free
will is present and early-developing across both cultures,
construals of choice are also culturally learned over time.
Keywords: free will, social
psychology, development

cognition,

cross-cultural

Introduction
Our folk psychology involves the ability to reason about
freedom of choice. Recent work in both social and
developmental psychology finds that the belief that we are
free to do otherwise (i.e., make a choice to take a different
course of action) is intuitive (see Baer, Kaufman, &
Baumeister, 2008) and early-developing (Chernyak,
Kushnir, & Wellman, 2010; Kushnir, Wellman, &
Chernyak, 2009; Nichols, 2004). Moreover, a belief in free
will is fundamental to our everyday social cognition, and
informs much of our intuitions about agency, attribution,
and moral responsibility (Nichols & Knobe, 2007; Phillips
& Knobe, 2009; Pizarro & Helzer, 2010; Vohs & Schooler,
2008).
What is the origin of this important belief? Recent studies
suggest that even 4-year-olds have the ability to reason
about free will (Chernyak et al. 2010; Kushnir et al., 2009).
Importantly, preschoolers discriminate between actions
which are free and actions which are not free, such as
actions in which one is physically or mentally constrained
and therefore does not have the choice to do otherwise.
However, work on preschoolers’ developing concepts of
free will has exclusively focused on children from Western,
individualistic societies, in which freedom of choice is
stressed from a young age. Do children from more
collectivist societies, in which choice is stressed to a lesser
degree, share similar intuitions?
Past work points to two competing conclusions. On the
one hand, free will is thought to be a cognitive universal. A

144

1) Children across cultures should share the basic
universal, early-developing complementary notions
of freedom and constraint. Therefore, children from
both the United States and Nepal would likely state
that simple, unconstrained actions are freely chosen,
whereas physically and mentally constrained actions
are not. We should also expect to see consistency
across ages.

Procedure All children were interviewed in a quiet corner
or separate room at the local school or in the home.
Participants were read the questionnaire by the
experimenter. The questionnaire was first devised in
English, and then translated into Nepali by the third author.
The translation was then independently verified by two local
Nepalis versant in American culture, for both grammatical
errors and cultural acceptability. Small changes to ensure
cultural acceptability were made (e.g., changing the word
“fork” to “hands”; using traditional Nepalese names for
characters) for select items.

2) Cultural variations in free choice to act against social
constraints should emerge early but also increase
with age. Specifically, Nepali children may be less
likely to state that socially constrained actions (such
as social and moral conventions) are freely chosen as
they get older, whereas American children would be
more likely to state that such actions are freely
chosen as they get older.

Questionnaire The questionnaire consisted of 27 childappropriate items in the following general format:
“Peter draws a picture every day. He always uses a pen to
make his picture. But today, he wants to do something
different. Peter wants to make his picture with pencils.”

3) There may also be age-related and/or culture related
changes in action predictions that temper the basic
folk-psychological intuition that that people generally
choose to act based on their desires (Wellman &
Miller, 2006). As such, Nepali children may be less
likely than American children to state that characters
will act on their desires, in particular when social
factors such as obligations and rules conflict. This
difference should also increase with age.

The complete set of 27 items fell into 9 categories (3 items
per category). Table 1 shows a sample item from each
category. In the first category of items, the target actions
were simple, unconstrained actions; they were both possible
and did not violate any known laws, norms, or rules. The
next two sets of items comprised physically and mentally
constrained actions. That is, the target action was impossible
because it violated either a physical law (e.g. solidity of
matter) or a mental constraint (e.g., knowledge). The next
six categories comprised socially constrained items. For
these, we included three items in which the target action
violated a known convention. Importantly, we contrast
social norms (e.g., gender-appropriate dress), artifact
conventions (e.g., common use), and moral norms (e.g.,
harm). We also included actions which violate rules (either
arbitrary or justified by an appropriate explanation). Finally,
we included actions which show a character who wants to
perform an action which does not violate any conventions or
rules but is selfish (that is, it prioritizes helping oneself over
helping another).
Pilot work showed that the full 27-item questionnaire
was too lengthy for young children. Thus, each child was
asked 9 items only, one from each category. Items were
counterbalanced across participants. Two orderings of the 9
items (forwards and backwards) were counterbalanced
across participants as well. 2

Experiment
We devised a questionnaire in which we asked children to
answer a series of questions about choices and actions.
Children heard a series of vignettes, each about a character
who displays a consistent behavior over time (e.g., always
using a pen to draw a picture), but wants to engage in a new
action on one occasion (e.g., wants to use a pencil).
Children were then asked two questions about the desired
action: whether the character could choose to perform it
(Free Will Judgment) and whether the character is going to
perform it (Action Prediction). Each of the vignettes fell
into the three categories mentioned above - unconstrained
actions, physically and mentally constrained actions, and
socially constrained actions. Details are provided below
(and also in Table 1).

Method
Participants Fifty-two Nepalese children aged 4-11 (M =
8.02, SD = 1.94) participated. Participants were recruited
from Kathmandu and the Annapurna Himalayan villages.
Participants were recruited via local schools, as well as by
being approached at their homes (in rural areas). A
comparison sample of 32 American children aged 4-11 (M =
7.06, SD = 1.83), were recruited from preschools,
elementary schools, and afterschool programs in a small
university town and a mid-sized urban city. 1

Dependent Measures After hearing each item, participants
were asked to answer two questions related to the
character’s desire to perform the target action: (1) a Free
Will Judgment regarding whether the character can act in
line with his/her preference (e.g., “Can Peter make his
picture with pencils today – yes or no?”); and (2) an Action

2
1

A small set of the eldest children were able to complete
more than one subset. For these children, only their first
responses were analyzed.

Age recorded only in integers.

145

Table 1: Sample Questionnaire Items by Category
Category

Example

Free Choice

“Peter draws a picture every day. He always uses a pen to make his picture. But today, he wants
to do something different. Peter wants to make his picture with pencils.”

Physical Laws

“Bobby walks to the store every day. He always walks around the big brick wall. But today, he
wants to do something different. Bobby wants to walk right through the big brick wall.”

Mental Constraints

“Andrew draws pictures every day. He always draws a picture of a dog. But today, Andrew
wants to do something different. Andrew wants to draw a monkey. But Andrew has never seen a
monkey before. He doesn’t know what a monkey looks like.”

Social Norms

“Gary puts on his clothes every day before he goes outside. He always puts on a shirt and pants.
But today, Gary wants to do something different. Gary wants to wear his sister’s dress today.”

Artifact Conventions

“It is raining in Ben’s town today. He always uses an umbrella when it rains. But today, Ben
wants to do something different. Ben wants to use a bucket when it rains.”

Moral Norms

“Pat sees his friend every day. He always tells his friend something nice. But today, Pat wants to
do something different. Pat wants to say something that will make his friend cry.”

Arbitrary Rules

“Dina’s mom tells her that she has to sit on the green chair during dinner. She always listens to
her mom and sits on the green chair. But today, Dina wants to do something different. Dina
wants to sit on the red chair.”

Justified Rules

“Polly’s parents tell her not to lift her little sister because she’s too heavy for Polly and Polly
might get hurt. Polly always listens to her parents and doesn’t lift her little sister. But today,
Polly wants to do something different. Polly wants to lift her little sister.”

Selfish Act

“Timmy eats lunch with his friends. He always helps his friends clean the table after they are
done eating. But today, Timmy wants to do something different. Timmy wants to go play
outside and not help his friends clean the table.

Prediction regarding whether the character will act in line
with that preference (e.g., “What do you think Peter will do
today – make his picture with a pen or make his picture with
pencils?”).

answered that the characters had the Free Will to perform
simple unconstrained actions, Binomial p’s < .001. In
contrast, the majority of both American and Nepalese
children answered that the characters did not have the Free
Will to act against Physical Laws (American: 30/32 (94%);
Nepalese: 35/52 (67%)), or against Mental Constraints
(American: 22/32 (69%); Nepalese: 34/52 (65%)), all
Binomial p’s ≤ .05. Thus, children in both cultures share the
complementary intuitions that some actions are freely willed
and some are not free.
To investigate whether these universal intuitions show
any developmental or cultural variation, we performed a set
of binary regression analyses for each of these items. In
each regression, we used culture (US vs. Nepal), age, and
age x culture interaction as predictors and Free Will
Judgment as the response variable. Due to the number of
analyses and statistical tests, we used a stringent alpha level
of .01 for all regression analyses. For each of these three
item types, none of these predictors were significant (all p’s

Coding For each question, participants were given a score
of “0” if they answered “no” and “1” if they answered
“yes”.

Results
Our first hypothesis was that children of both cultures
would share a universal, early-developing intuition of free
choice as well as the complementary notion of constraint.
Thus, we would expect no cultural differences in the first
three categories of vignettes (Free Choice, Physical Laws,
and Mental Constraints). The dark bars in Figure 1 show
responses to the Free Will Judgment for each of these three
types of vignettes. An overwhelming majority of both
American (29/32; 91%) and Nepalese children (46/52; 88%)

146

>.01). These analyses lend further support to the idea that
the notions of free choice and constraint are early
developing and culturally universal.

Free Will judgment scores, although this effect was, by our
strict criteria, only marginal (β = -3.32, SE = .86), t(29) = 2.63, p < .05. The overall results thus confirm our analysis
that with increased age, American children showed an
increased tendency to endorse the free will to act against
social constraints, while Nepalese children showed a
decreased tendency.

Figure 1: Proportion of “Yes” Responses to the Free Will
Judgment and Action Prediction Questions for the Free
Choice, Physical Laws, and Mental Constraints Items
(Bars represent 95% confidence intervals for each mean)
Thus far, the above analyses indicate that both American
and Nepalese children share the intuition that simple free
actions are free, and unambiguously constrained actions are
not. The next set of analyses investigates cultural variation
by focusing on our second hypothesis, namely that culture
would shape what is and isn’t a constraint across time. That
is, as they age, American children would show a greater
tendency to believe in the free will to perform socially
constrained actions (e.g., social norms, artifact conventions,
moral norms, arbitrary and justified rules, and acts which
prioritize the self over others), while Nepalese children
would show a decreased tendency to believe in the freedom
to act against social constraints.
To investigate this hypothesis, we first summed each
child’s Free Will Judgments for the socially constrained
items. Therefore, each child received an overall score of 0-6
for the Free Will Judgment (Cronbach’s α = .80).
We then ran a linear regression with culture, age, and an
age x culture interaction as the predictor variables, and Free
Will Judgment score (0-6) as the response variable. The
results of this analysis are shown in Figure 2. There was a
significant main effect of culture (β = 9.39, SE = 1.70), t(79)
= 5.51, p < .001, a significant main effect of age (β = .86,
SE = .18), t(79) = 4.67, p < .001, and a significant culture x
age interaction (β = -1.26, SE = .23), t(79) = -5.60, p < .001.
To investigate this interaction, we then ran two followup regressions, separately for each culture. For the Nepalese
children, a linear regression with Free Will Judgment score
(0-6) as the response variable and age as the predictor
variable confirmed that age positively predicted Free Will
Judgment score, (β = 6.07, SE = 1.10), t(50) = 5.52, p <
.001. For the American children, age negatively predicted

Figure 2: Regression Lines for Free Will Judgment Sums
(0-6) of the Socially Constrained Items (Social Norms,
Artifact Conventions, Moral Norms, Arbitrary Rules,
Justified Rules, and Selfish Acts) vs. Age.
Our final hypothesis was that there may be cultural
variation in children’s construal of actions as choices (like
for adults in previous studies, e.g., Savani et al., 2010). To
investigate this, we began with children’s Action Prediction
responses for the “universal” vignettes (i.e., Free Choice,
Physical Laws, and Mental Constraints). These are shown
in the light bars of Figure 1 next to the Free Will Judgment
responses, for comparison. The significant majority of both
American (30/32; 94%) and Nepalese children (38/52; 73%)
predicted that the characters would end up performing
simple, desired actions (i.e., Free Choice items; Binomial
p’s < .01). Moreover, children of both cultures predicted
that the characters would not act against either Physical
Laws (American: 29/32 (91%); Nepalese: 41/52 (79%)) or
Mental Constraints (American: 22/32 (69%); Nepalese:
41/52 (79%)), all Binomial p’s ≤ .05.
Binary logistic
regressions confirmed these results (i.e., age, culture, and
age x culture interactions were not significant predictors for
Action Prediction scores, all p’s > .01). Thus, for these
actions, we see no evidence of developmental or cultural
differences.
However, we did see both developmental and cultural
variation of Action Predictions for the social constraint
items. We once again summed each child’s Action
Prediction answers across the six social constraint questions,
resulting in a score of 0-6 (Cronbach’s α = .71). We then ran
a linear regression with culture, age, and an age x culture

147

interaction as the predictor variables and Action Prediction
score (0-6) as the response variable (see Figure 3). There
was a significant main effect of culture (β = 4.93, SE =
1.57), t(77) = 3.14, p < .01, main effect of age (β = .58, SE =
.17), t(77) = 3.45, p < .01, and culture x age interaction (β =
-.74, SE = .21), t(77) = -1.77, p < .01.
Once again, to investigate the interaction more closely,
we ran two follow-up linear regressions, separately for each
culture. In each regression, we used Action prediction score
as the response variable and age as the predictor variable.
For the Nepalese children, age did not significantly predict
Action prediction scores, p > .10. However, for the
American children, age positively predicted Action
prediction scores (β = .58, SE = .19), t(29) = 3.13, p < .01.
Thus, with increased age, American children were more
likely to endorse the idea that the characters would act on
their desires, even when those desires went against social
constraints. Nepalese children, however, showed no such
age-related changes. We thus confirm our third hypothesis
that there is cultural variation in the tendency to construe
actions as choices.

Discussion
These results provide evidence for the idea that at least
two intuitions related to free will – that of freedom of choice
and understanding of situational constraint – are intuited
from early in development. Specifically, our results found
that children in both the United States and Nepal stated that
simple acts (such as drinking milk instead of juice) are free
and acts that violate physical and mental laws are not.
These results are in line with past work which has found
that adults from the U.S, Hong Kong, India, and Colombia
all believe an indeterminist universe (Sarkissian et al., in
press). Moreover, our study adds to this work by finding
evidence for the idea that beliefs in free will may be
culturally universal and emerge early in development. This
study moves us one step closer to a developmental account
of cultural universals on free choice and constraint.
We also found evidence for cultural learning in
children’s concepts of free will. Older Nepali children were
less likely than younger Nepali children to state that
breaking social norms, artifact conventions, moral norms,
arbitrary or justified rules; or performing selfish acts was a
free choice. However, American children showed the
opposite pattern: older American children were more likely
than younger American children to state that breaking such
social constraints was a free choice. These age-related
changes are mirrored in past work (Miller, 1984; Wang,
2004).
Finally, we found evidence that American children were
more likely than Nepalese children to believe that people
would act on their preferences. Critically, however, this
pattern was not found for preferences that posed no
constraint (i.e., simple choices), but only for preferences
which were constrained by societal norms such as social and
artifact conventions. Moreover, American children in
particular showed an increased tendency over time to
believe that the characters would act against such norms.
These results support previous theoretical and empirical
work arguing for both universal and culturally constructed
intuitions about the underlying causes for behavior (see Liu,
Wellman, & Tardif, & Sabbagh, 2006; Wellman & Miller,
2006). While links between desire and action are earlydeveloping and culturally universal, over time we learn to
consider obligation and responsibility as motivators of
action as well, even when such deontic considerations
conflict with our own preferences.
Together, these data point to how culture shapes
cognition over time. To the extent that one’s culture
provides evidence for social learning, Nepali and American
children may have answered in this pattern having learned
what people around them actually do and don’t do.
One intriguing finding is the difference between the
youngest children in both cultures. Specifically, our results
indicate that younger Nepali children say characters can and
will chose to act against social constraints, while younger
American children are more likely to say they can’t and
won’t. This difference may be due in part to our very small
sample of younger children. On the other hand, this could

Figure 3: Regression Lines for the Action Prediction Sums
(0-6) of the Socially Constrained Items (Social Norms,
Artifact Conventions, Moral Norms, Arbitrary Rules,
Justified Rules, and Selfish Acts) vs. Age.
Together these results show both universalities in free
will endorsements as well as a cultural divergence over
time. Over time, American children were less likely to view
social constraints as constraints on choice whereas Nepalese
viewed social norms as constraining across all ages.
Importantly, such age-related changes were not observed for
the Free Choice, Physical Laws, and Mental Constraint
items, thus suggesting that social constraints are particularly
susceptible to age and cultural variation.

148

also be due to differing interpretations of the word “can”. It
is possible that the younger American children, in answering
that the characters “can’t” perform certain actions meant to
say that the characters shouldn’t. This interpretation is
consistent with our preliminary work which has found that
even American children at times respond as if moral rules as
constrain their choices (Chernyak et al., 2010) and possibly
warrants further investigation.
This study is the first to take a developmental approach to
study cross-cultural differences in the belief in free will.
Further research is needed to tease apart the specific
mechanisms for how culture shapes this understanding over
time. For example, future work could more specifically
examine how beliefs in free will and constraint are
transmitted via parental beliefs, learned from one’s
schooling environment, or encoded and transmitted through
one’s language. Additionally, it may be important to look
more closely at free will beliefs across the lifespan to more
closely examine the impact of development.
Overall, we believe that this cross-cultural
developmental approach is a fruitful area for future research.
Our work follows a small by strong following of studying
conceptual learning across cultures (Liu et al., 2006; Miller,
1984). In further studying how concepts in young children
differ and don’t differ across cultures, we may study how
cultural context provides evidence for children to learn.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the members of the Early
Childhood Cognition Lab, and especially Katy Braun, Sarah
Fogel, Kristyn Herlihy, Lauren Latella, Nikki Klein, and
Thomas Rucker for their assistance with data collection and
study materials; Rabindra Parajuli for translation and help
with data collection in Nepal; Banu Oja and Janak Rai for
their very helpful suggestions on creating the Nepali study
materials.
This work was supported by a McDonnell Collaborative
Initiative on Causal Learning grant awarded to T. K.

References
Baer, J., Kaufman, J. C., & Baumeister, R. F. (Eds.) (2008).
Are We Free? Psychology and Free Will. New York,
NY: Oxford University Press.
Chernyak, N., Kushnir, T., & Wellman, H. M. (2010).
Developing notions of free will: Preschoolers’
understanding of how intangible constraints bind their
freedom of choice. Proceedings of the Thirty-Second
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26022606.
Haggard, P. & Tsakiris, M. (2009). The experience of
agency: Feeling, judgment and responsibility. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 18, 242-246.
Kushnir, T., Wellman, H. M., & Chernyak, N. (2009).
Preschoolers’ understanding of freedom of choice.
Proceedings of the Thirty-First Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society, 87-92.

149

Liu, D., Wellman, H. M., Tardif, T., & Sabbagh, M. A.
(2004). Theory of mind development in Chinese children:
A meta-analyses of false-belief understanding across
cultures and languages. Developmental Science, 44, 523531.
Miller, J. G. (1984). Culture and the development of everyday
social explanation. Attitudes and Social Cognition, 46,
961-978.
Miller, J. G., Bersoff, D. M., & Harwood, R. L. (1990).
Perceptions of social responsibilities in India and the
United States: Moral imperatives or personal decisions?
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 58, 33-47.
Morris, M. W., & Peng, K. (1994). Culture and cause:
American and Chinese attributions for social and physical
events. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67,
949-971
Nichols, S. (2004). The folk psychology of free will: Fits
and starts. Mind and Language, 19, 473-502.
Nichols, S., & Knobe, J. (2007). Moral responsibility and
determinism: The cognitive science of folk intuitions.
Nous, 41, 663-685.
Phillips, J., & Knobe, J. (2009). Moral judgments and
intuitions about freedom. Psychological Inquiry, 20, 3036.
Pizarro, D. A. & Helzer, E. (2010). Freedom of the will and
stubborn moralism. In R. F. Baumeister, A.R. Mele, &
K. D. Vohs (Eds.) Free Will and Consciousness: How
Might They Work? New York, NY: Oxford University
Press.
Sarkissian, H., Chatterjee, A., De Brigard, F., Knobe, J.,
Nichols, S., & Sirker, S. (in press). Is belief in free will a
cultural universal? Mind & Language.
Savani, K., Markus, H. R., Naidu, N. V. R., Kumar, S., &
Berlia, V. (2010). What counts as a choice? U.S.
Americans are more likely than Indians to construe
actions as choices. Psychological Science, 21, 391-398.
Vohs, K. D., & Schooler, J. W. (2008). The value of
believing in free will: Encouraging a belief in
determinism increases cheating. Psychological Science,
19, 49-54.
Wang, Q. (2004). The emergence of cultural self-construct:
Autobiographical memory and self-description in
American and Chinese children. Developmental
Psychology, 40, 3-15.
Wegner, D. (2002). The Illusion of Conscious Will.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wellman, H. M., & Miller, J. G. (2006). Developing
conceptions of responsive intentional agents. Journal of
Cognition and Culture, 6, 27-55.

