UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Developmental Trend in the Structure of Time-Estimation Performance

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/23n1v58h

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Greshman, Lori
Wallot, Sebastian
Kloos, Heidi
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Developmental Trend in the Structure of Time-Estimation Performance
Lori J. Gresham (greshalj@mail.uc.edu)
University of Cincinnati, Department of Psychology,
105 Dyer Hall, Cincinnati, OH 45221-0376, USA

Sebastian Wallot (wallotsn@mail.uc.edu)
University of Cincinnati, CAP Center for Cognition, Action & Perception,
Edwards I, Cincinnati, OH 45221-0376, USA

Heidi Kloos (heidi.kloos@uc.edu)
University of Cincinnati, Department of Psychology,
125 Dyer Hall, Cincinnati, OH 45221-0376, USA

Guy Van Orden (guy.van.orden@uc.edu)
University of Cincinnati, CAP Center for Cognition, Action & Perception,
Edwards I, Cincinnati, OH 45221-0376, USA

Abstract
The current paper reports analyses of the structure of
variability in a time-estimation task. Children between
5 and 11 years pressed a button each time they judged
that a brief time interval had passed. In two conditions,
children either picked their own time interval, their
preferred pace, or they were given an imposed pace of
400 ms (2.5 Hz). The resulting trial series were
subjected to detrended fluctuation analysis to estimate
the complexity of the temporal coordination between
child and task. Results show a developmental trend,
from an overly random to more clearly fractal
performance when the target time interval was
predetermined by the experimenter, but not when the
target time interval was chosen spontaneously.

in task performance require a coordination of mind and
body with the task demands of the environment. In
particular, we assume that mind and body conjoin in
interaction-dominant dynamics, such that changes on any
one timescale of mind or body are reflected across all the
timescales of the mind and the body (within available
constraints). Interaction-dominant dynamics allows the
coordination of mind and body with task demands to be
perpetually updated, and thus to reside in a state of
preparedness, poised to anticipate the available possibilities
for behavior within the task environment (Kloos & Van
Orden, 2010; Van Orden, 2010; Van Orden, Kloos, &
Wallot, in press). The question addressed in this paper then
pertains to the development of such coordination.

Coordination and the Structure of Variation in
Repeated Measures
5B

Keywords: pink noise; cognitive development; time estimation

Introduction

0B

Central to cognitive development is the question of how to
best characterize the progression from a young mind to a
more mature one. Does the trajectory include a progression
from undifferentiated to differentiated thought, from
implicit to explicit thought, from local to global thought,
from isolated to interrelated thought, or from concrete to
abstract thought? Or is it the other way around? While such
developmental proposals differ in a variety of ways, they
have one thing in common: They focus exclusively on
changes in mental entities, thus baring an important
limitation: In discounting the intricate coordination between
mind and task environment, these accounts cannot address
how such coordination might develop.
The current research uses the development of motor
coordination as a model to understand the development of
cognitive performance (cf., Riley, Shockley, & Van Orden,
in press). Our assumption is that developmental differences

Before a behavior can take place, the mind and body must
be coordinated to meet the immediate demands of a task
performance. Some of the parts that must be coordinated are
changing on fast timescales (e.g., metabolic cell activity),
while others are changing on slower timescales (e.g., the
movement of the limbs), and still others change even more
slowly (e.g., the overt intention to perform as instructed).
For adaptive and flexible performance to be possible, all
changes must be coordinated to remain consistent, one with
another, within limits, and no single timescale should
dominate coordination. Thus, in the ideal, a participant
maintains a balance among tendencies toward
uncoordinated changes, versus tendencies toward overly
coordinated changes, in a flexible coupling across the mind
and body.
Idealized interaction-dominant dynamics predicts longrange correlations in repeatedly measured response-time
data. Such long-range correlations can be visualized as
fractal patterns known as pink noise (Van Orden, Holden, &

3547

Turvey, 2003). Pink noise has been demonstrated in the
variability of reaction time for a wide array of motor and
cognitive tasks, including repeated aiming, walking, tapping
to the beat of a metronome, time estimation, reading,
searching for a target, or categorizing letter strings (Aks,
Zelinsky, & Sprott, 2002; Diniz, Wijnants, et al., 2010;
Chen, Ding, & Kelso, 2003; Ding, Chen, & Kelso, 2002;
Gilden, 2001; Hausdorff, Zemany, Peng, & Goldberger,
1999; Kello, Beltz, Holden, & Van Orden, 2007; Kello,
Brown, et al., 2010; Wijnants, Bosman, Hasselman, Cox, &
Van Orden, 2009).
Idealized pink-noise dynamics can be contrasted with
dynamical patterns in variation that are either uncoordinated
and overly random dynamics or overly regular and rigid
dynamics. In particular, if coordination is not sufficiently
constrained, performance variation will tend towards overly
random white-noise fluctuations. In this case, the
coordination takes place among overly independent
components. If, on the other hand, coordination becomes too
constrained, performance variation will tend toward overly
regular brown-noise fluctuations. This is consistent with a
coordination dominated by components that have slow highamplitude changes. Both cases may depart from pink noise,
a signature of the loss of complexity when the tendencies
depart too far from a balance in behavior (Van Orden, et al.,
in press).

intervals converged within a narrower range near pink noise.
In other words, while the final performance in both the
adults‟ precision-aiming task and stride intervals of
children, trended toward pink noise, the convergence came
from opposite directions, whiter noise in the training task
and browner noise in stride intervals –– white to pink versus
brown to pink, respectively.
The current project took these findings as starting points
to investigate coordination in the model task of time
estimation. Time estimation has sometimes been seen as a
combination of cognitive and motor activity that could be
divided cleanly (e.g., Gilden, 1997; Wing & Kristofferson,
1973). More recently, however, time-estimation data with
adults was shown to reflect interaction-dominant dynamics.
We therefore use this task as a model to investigate the
development of mind-body-task coordination in children.
Children from 5 to 11 years of age estimated a short time
interval repeatedly. In the preferred-pace condition,
children pressed a button, repeatedly, at a pace that they
chose to be comfortable for them. In the imposed-pace
condition, children estimated repeatedly an imposed target
interval of 400 ms. We expected to see a cross-section of
changes in the development of coordination, especially in
the imposed pace condition. The preferred pace condition
allows idiosyncratic compensation that may, or may not,
appear in a cross-section of development.

Development of Coordination in Performance

Method

6B

1B

As discussed above, changes in the patterns observed in
variability, across a repeatedly measured performance,
signify changes in the capacity for coordination among
mind, body and task demands. Changes toward less random,
coordination, or vice versa towards more regular
coordination, can tell us about changes in the respective
balance among tendencies.
How then do changes in coordination present themselves
in development? A first hint comes from a study of adults in
a speeded precision aiming task, the Fitts task (Wijnants et
al., 2009). Over five blocks of practice, participants held a
stylus with their non-dominant hand and moved it back and
forth, touching one of two target dots, at each extreme. As
movement times got faster, while sustaining accurate
touching of the target dots, the movement times across trials
became more long-range correlated. Most important, the
variation across movement times changed from overly
random, whiter noise converging on the fractal pattern of
pink noise. Practice yielded a more constrained yet flexible
dynamic in the coordination.
A second hint comes from a developmental study of
stride-to-stride variability human gait (Hausdorff et al.,
1999). Children between 3 and 14 years of age walked on a
treadmill while stride intervals were measured using forcesensitive switches in participants‟ shoes. Unlike the novice
participation in the precision-aiming task, the less practiced
performance of the youngest children spanned a range
extending from overly regular brown-noise variation to pink
noise. With increasing age, however, the variation in stride

Participants

7B

Participants (33 girls and 37 boys, total) were 5-year-olds (N
=12; mean age = 70 months), 7-year-olds (N = 20; mean age
89.7 months), 9-year-olds (N = 18; mean age = 113.1
months) and 11-year-olds (N = 20; mean age = 136.2
months). They were recruited from daycare centers and
elementary schools in the greater Cincinnati area to
participate in either the preferred-pace condition or the
imposed-pace condition (N = 35 per condition).

Apparatus

8B

The button used to record a child‟s time estimates was a
force sensor (Biometrics Ltd., Ladysmith, VA), attached to
the top of a round Macintosh computer mouse. The mouse
was small enough to fit easily into a child‟s hand. Data were
collected and recorded on a PC computer using DataLINK
PC Software v. 3.00 (Biometrics Ltd., Ladysmith, VA).

Procedure

9B

Participants were tested individually, either in the lab or at
their school. The cover story involved a robot that needed
power to return to its planet (see Figure 1). He can get
power through a power pod (the force sensor), provided the
power pod is pressed at the exact rate of the robot‟s energy
pulse. For the duration of the task, a power-point display
was used with a grid of 30 stars, arranged in five rows of
six. Each star contained the prompt „Give Me Power‟.
Children were told that the give-me-power stars would turn

3548

into robot food, as they repeatedly pressed the button. The
robot could return to his planet once all of the stars are
replaced by robot food.

'Power,' the robot appeared, smiled, and then flew off to its
planet.

Results

Figure 1: Example of the introduction slide, depicting the
robot with „no energy‟.
Children participated in one of two conditions. In the
preferred-pace condition, children were told that the robot
would get power if the button was pressed at a constant pace
that suited the child. The robot would get no power were the
button to be pressed too fast, or pressed too slowly. To set
the pace, children pressed the button in about 30 time
estimates, in which they found their preferred pace. Once
the child had found a rhythm, the researcher reminded the
child how important it was to keep pressing that way until
the end of the game, after which data collection began.
In the imposed-pace condition, a metronome was sounded
during the initial phase, set to 400 ms (2.5 Hz). The
researcher explained that the metronome pace is the energy
pulse of the robot and asked the child to press the button at
the same pace as the energy pulse. After about 30 button
presses, with the metronome turned on, the metronome was
switched off, and the child was asked to “remember in their
head” when to press the button, and to continue pressing the
button, at the same pace, until the end of the game. Data
collection started when the metronome was switched off.
With the start of data collection, a PowerPoint display
was initiated, which continued for 10 minutes, to provide
participants with a sense of their progress through the
experimental session. The PowerPoint appeared on a
computer screen, displaying a horizontal bar near the bottom
of the screen, which filled in from left to right, taking 20
seconds to accumulate continuously. The fill-in rate was
independent of the participant‟s button presses to avoid
feedback about the child‟s time estimates.
Each time the bar filled to its right-most point, a „GiveMe-Power‟ star changed to become a circle that bore the
word 'Power.' A star at the top left of the screen changed
first, followed next by its adjacent star to the participant's
right, and so on, left-to-right and top-to-bottom. Once the
first row of stars had all changed to 'Power,' a „Level 1‟ sign
appeared, followed by “Level Up!” When the second row of
stars had all changed to 'Power,' a „Level 2‟ sign appeared,
again followed by “Level Up!”, and so on, through Level 4.
After the fourth row was complete, a „Level 4‟ sign
appeared, followed by “Expert Level”. At the end of the
session, when the last row of stars had all changed to

Trial series consisted of pressing the button, releasing the
button, pressing the button again, releasing the button again,
and so on. The time between two button presses (and two
button releases) is composed of two events: the time
between releasing the button and pressing it again (referred
to as „button press time‟) and the duration that the button
remains in contact before being released (referred to as
„button contact duration‟) For both of these measures, the
analyses required several hundred data points and
participants ranged from 400-1500 data points. Fewer data
points yield less stable estimates of the δ statistic.
Kello, Anderson, Holden and Van Orden (2008) had
found previously that button press times can vary
independently of button contact durations and their patterns
of variation can be manipulated independently (see also
Holden, Choi, Amazeen and Van Orden, in press). Thus, the
response-component of removing the finger from the button
(button contact duration) appears to reflect different task
constraints than the response component of pressing the
button (button pressing time).
Developmental differences in time estimation may be
more closely associated with the act of pressing the response
button than releasing the button, or so we anticipated from
previous findings. Consequently, for the analyses, we
created a button contact-duration data-series and a button
press-time data-series, for each child, and subjected these
data to detrended fluctuation analysis (a measure of the
pattern of the structure of the variation across a data series).
The resulting statistic, δ reveals the scaling relation between
magnitude of change and frequency of changes at particular
magnitudes (Peng, Havlin, Stanley, & Goldberger, 1995).
The statistic δ in the presence of random white noise would
be approximately δ = 0.5, for pink noise it would be
approximately δ = 1.0, and for brown noise it would be
approximately δ = 1.5. The δ statistic can be transformed
into a fractal dimension (FD); A FD = 1.5 indicates white
noise, and a FD = 1.2 indicates pink noise. We are most
interested, as described, in the direction of change in the
noise structure across the cross-section of development.
Figure 2 shows the mean δ for button contact durations,
as a function of age and condition. Consistent with previous
findings, there was no reliable change in δ for button contact
durations, due to condition, and this null result extended as
well to age (and there was no reliable age x condition
interaction, Fs < 1). Indeed, the correlation between age and
δ was low for both of the pace conditions (preferred pace: r
= .004, imposed pace: r = .20). Also consistent with
previous findings, mean δ (M = 0.74) was relatively closer
to the δ = 1.0 of pink-noise, than to white noise (cf. Kello et
al., 2008; Holden et al., in press).

3549

Button Contact Durations

Preferred Pace
Imposed Pace

0.90

DFA Exponent

0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
5 y.o.

7 y.o.

9 y.o.

11 y.o.

Age

Figure 2: Mean DFA for button contact durations.

How did coordination differ between releasing the button
(button contact duration) and pressing it once again (button
press time)? Figure 3 portrays the mean δ statistic across
these data series as a function of age and condition. Planned
contrasts revealed that age did not reliably affect the δ
statistic in the preferred-pace condition, r(33) =.17, p > .05),
but produced a reliable developmental trend in the imposedpace condition, r(33) = .45 p <.01), this despite the
imbalance of numbers of participants, with fewer children
represented at age 5. Older children exhibited less random
'pinker' variation in data series compared to younger
children in the imposed-pace condition.
Button Press Time

Preferred Pace
Imposed Pace

0.80

DFA Exponent

0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
5 y.o.

7 y.o.

9 y.o.

11 y.o.

Age

Figure 3: Mean DFA for „button press time‟ data series.

Discussion

2B

Developmental questions that focus exclusively on
hypothetical changes in mental entities, share a common
limitation: they do not show substantive interest in the
interaction and coordination of mind and body to keep pace
with changing demands in a task environment. Further, they
cannot address how such coordination might develop. This
becomes particularly salient in a contrast with respect to
general systems theory or complexity theory, where the first
question one must ask, to decide methods and analyses, is

“How do the system‟s components interact?” (Holden et al.,
2009).
The question was posed here, as concerns the
development of the coordination among mind, body and
task demands. Children of different ages performed time
estimations, repeatedly, at their preferred pace or at an
imposed target pace of 400 ms (2.5 Hz). Results showed
that children across the age-range could perform the task,
and all produced variation in performance near the pink
noise predicted by interaction-dominant dynamics. The
locus of developmental changes was in the time between
releasing a response button and pressing it again for the next
judgment. Also, the developmental trend that appeared,
appeared only in the condition of an imposed pace.
Interestingly, the fractal structure of variation changed in
development as a trend from whiter noise for younger
children to pinker noise for older children. Thus the
development trend in the imposed pace may suggest an
increase in the capacity to follow instructions, stay on task,
and capitalize on the constraints inherent in an imposed pace
of responding. It is even possible that the developmental
changes, in the direction of pink noise, coincide with an
increase or a refinement in the capacity for voluntary
control. The same account, however, could accommodate
the same result as a change in involuntary control that
decreases tendencies toward random variation. The more
basic idea that is entailed is the tradeoff among the
tendencies toward random or overly regular dynamics in the
coordination of the mind and body with task demands
(Kloos & Van Orden, 2010; Van Orden, 2010).
Our results describe how development of time estimation
performance proceeds from younger to older children:
Stronger long-range correlations that indicate more strongly
coupled component interactions, giving rise to a more
pronounced fractal pattern in the observed performance.
That is, the organization of body and mind becomes more
closely intertwined, yielding a more regular coordination
through development compared to the more random
variation in the performance of younger children.
Perhaps, the embodiment of component dynamics in
younger children is not yet sufficiently coupled, voluntarily,
to sustain reliable adjustments to the changing task
demands, across the repeatedly measured time estimates, at
the imposed pace of the target, distinguishing one judgment
from the next. This issue is less salient when the child
responds at their preferred pace, which may better reflect or
compensate for their developmental status, at every age of
development.
It is known, for example, that the optimal pace for time
estimation, at an imposed pace, changes throughout the
lifespan (McAuley, Jones, et al., 2006). In this light, the
demands of keeping a fixed imposed pace supplies
unsystematic perturbations of time estimates, reflecting the
distance from preferred pace, and whiten the variation in
performance. The latter hypothesis would also suit changes
due to practice, from Wijnant et al., (2009). The change to
pinker noise, in that case, could be due to compensation for

3550

the deviations from preferred pace, which would have
remained constant, presumably, throughout the blocks of
practice. Again these two kinds of hypotheses are not
distinguished in the present data, and will be pursued soon
in our future research. The sole hypothesis that is
distinguished clearly in these data is the tradeoff among
tendencies toward random variation with tendencies toward
regular variation, and its prediction of the developmental
trend that we have observed.

reflects the metastability of cognition. Cognitive Science,
32, 741-754.
Kello, C. T. & Van Orden, G. C. (2009). Soft-assembly of
sensorimotor function.
Nonlinear Dynamics in
Psychology and the Life Sciences, 13, 57-78.
Kello, C. T., Brown, G. D. A., Ferrer-i-Cancho, R., Holden,
J., Linkenkaer-Hansen, K., Rhodes, T., Van Orden, G. C.
(2010). Scaling laws in cognitive sciences. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 14, 223-232.
Kloos, H., & Van Orden, G. C. (2010). Voluntary behavior
in cognitive and motor tasks. Mind and Matter, 8, 19-43.
McAuley, J. D., Jones, M. R., Holub, S., Johnston, H. M.,
Miller, N. S. (2006). The Time of Our Lives: Life Span
Development of Timing and Event Tracking. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 135, 348–367.
Peng, C.-K., Havlin, S., Stanley, H. E., & Goldberger, A. L.
(1995). Quantification of scaling exponents and crossover
phenomena in nonstationary hearbeat time series. Chaos,
5, 82-87.
Riley, M., Shockley, K., & Van Orden, G. (in press).
Learning from the body about the mind. Topics in
Cognitive Science.
Van Orden, G. (2010). Voluntary performance. Medicina,
36, 581-594.
Van Orden, G. C., Holden, J. G., & Turvey, M. T. (2003).
Self-organization of cognitive performance. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 132, 331-350.
Van Orden, G., Kloos, H., & Wallot, S. (in press). Living in
the Pink: Intentionality, Wellbeing, and Complexity. In C.
A. Hooker (Ed.), Philosophy of Complex Systems.
Handbook of the Philosophy of Science, Amsterdam:
Elsevier.
Wing, A. M., & Kristofferson, A. B. (1973). Response
delays and the timing of discrete motor responses.
Perception and Psychophysics, 14, 4-12.
Wijnants, M. L., Bosman, A. M. T., Hasselman, F., Cox, R.
F. A. & Van Orden, G. C. (2009). 1/f scaling in
movement time changes with practice in precision
aiming. Nonlinear Dynamics, Psychology, and the Life
Sciences, 13, 79-98.
H

H

Acknowledgments

3B

The authors thank Anna Haussmann and Adam Kiefer for
their help with data collection. This research was supported
by grants from the National Science Foundation (BCS
0728743, BCS #0642716 and BCS #0843133 to GVO; DRL
#723638 to HK; DHB #0728743 to GVO and HK) and from
the National Institute of Child Health & Human
Development (HD #055324 to HK).

References

4B

Aks, D. J., Zelinsky, G., & Sprott, J. C. (2002). Memory
across eye movements: 1/f dynamic in visual search.
Journal of Nonlinear Dynamics in Psychology & the Life
Sciences, 6, 1-25
Chen, Y., Ding, M., & Kelso, J. A. S. (2003). Long range
dependence in human sensorimotor coordination. Lecture
Notes in Physics, 621, 309-323.
Ding, M., Chen, Y., & Kelso, J. A. (2002). Statistical
analysis of timing errors. Brain and Cognition, 48, 98106.
Diniz, A., Wijnants, M.L., Torre, K., Barreiros, J., Crato,
N., Bosman, A.M.T., Hasselman, F., Cox, R.F.A., Van
Orden, G.C. & Delignières, D. (in press). Contemporary
theories of 1/f noise in motor control. Human Movement
Science.
Gilden, D. L. (1997). Fluctuations in the time required for
elementary decisions. Psychological Science, 8, 296–301.
Gilden, D. L. (2001). Cognitive emissions of 1/f noise.
Psychological Review, 108, 33-56.
Hausdorff, J. M., Zemany, L., Peng, C.-K., & Goldberger,
A. L. (1999). Maturation of gait dynamics: stride-to-stride
variability and its temporal organization in children.
Journal of Applied Physiology, 86, 1040-1047.
Holden, J.G., Choi I., Amazeen P.G., Van Orden, G. (in
press) Fractal 1/f dynamics suggest entanglement of
measurement and human performance. Journal of
Experimental Psychology and Human Perception and
Performance.
Holden, J. G., Van Orden, G. C., & Turvey, M. T. (2009).
Dispersion of response times reveals cognitive dynamics.
Psychological Review, 116, 318-342.
Kello, C. T., Beltz, B. C., Holden, J. G., & Van Orden, G.
C. (2007). The emergent coordination of cognitive
function. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
136, 551-568.
Kello, C. T., Anderson, G. G., Holden, J. G., & Van Orden,
G. C. (2008). The pervasiveness of 1/f scaling in speech

3551

