UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Network Analysis Approach to Understand Human-wayfinding Problem

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/62x4q95s

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Iyengar, Sudarshan
Zweig, Nina
Natarajan, Abhiram
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Network Analysis Approach to Understand Human-wayfinding Problem
S. R. Sudarshan Iyengar (sudarshan@csa.iisc.ernet.in)
Department of Computer Science and Automation, Indian Institute of Science, Yeshvantpur
Bangalore - 560012

Katharina A. Zweig (katharina.zweig@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de)
Interdisciplinary Center for Scientific Computing, (IWR) University of Heidelberg
Speyerer Strae 6 69115 Heidelberg, Germany

Abhiram Natarajan (abhiram@cs.brown.edu)
Department of Computer Science, Brown University
Providence, RI 02912

C. E. Veni Madhavan(cevm@csa.iisc.ernet.in)
Department of Computer Science and Automation, Indian Institute of Science, Yeshvantpur
Bangalore - 560012
Abstract
We have considered a simple word game called the wordmorph. After making our participants play a stipulated number of word-morph games, we have analysed the experimental
data. We have given a detailed analysis of the learning involved in solving this word game. We propose that people are
inclined to learn landmarks when they are asked to navigate
from a source to a destination. We note that these landmarks
are nodes that have high closeness-centrality ranking.

Introduction
Human navigation has been a topic in spatial cognition
for quite some years now (Aginsky, Harris, Rensink, &
Beusmans, 1997; Hart & Moore, 1973; McDonald &
Pellegerino, 1993; Moore & Golledge, 1976). To understand how humans explore a complex environment,
Moeser (Moeser, 1988) conducted an experiment and observed how nurses learned to traverse in a hospital building which had a very complex structure. Aginsky et. al.,
(Aginsky m. fl., 1997) proposed two strategies that humans
adopt in learning to navigate, they infer from their experiments that humans follow either a visually dominated or a
spatially dominated strategy to solve a route-learning problem. Basakya et al., (Baskaya, Wilson, & zcan, 2004) explore
spatial orientation and wayfinding behavior of newcomers in
an unfamiliar environment. Passini (Passini, 1984) has proposed that in wayfinding problem, one learns whatever is necessary and sufficient to achieve a goal.
In recent years, another type of complex environment has
attracted scientific research, namely complex networks. It
has been known for a long time that most real-world networks belong to the type of so-called small worlds (Watts
& Strogatz, 1998), i.e., that they have a small average distance and that it is thus easy to reach each node within only
a few steps. This has first been demonstrated by a classic
experiment by Milgram (Milgram, 1967) in which he asked
the participants to send a letter via acquaintances to some
person unknown to them. Most of the letters reached their

target within only a few steps. This basic finding was also
reproduced by Watts et al., (Sheridan Dodds, Muhamad, &
Watts, 2003) using emails. Since the experimental results
were quite clear, only decades later Kleinberg finally asked
the question of how people are essentially able to find the
short paths in a small-world without any further information
(Kleinberg, 2000b, 2000a). Since there are potentially many
paths of short length, this is indeed not totally obvious. In his
model Kleinberg assumes that each target is associated with
a location, given by geometric coordinates. In this setting
he proves that only a restricted type of small-worlds enables
people to navigate within them efficiently. In a follow-up paper, Simsek and Jensen (Simsek & Jensen, 2008) show that a
similarly efficient navigation can also be achieved in a model
based on degree and homophily. To our knowledge, none of
these models have been tested with real humans.
The word-morph game presents a well defined navigation problem in a complex network: given two words
w1 , w2 of the same length, one is asked to find a sequence
of words from w1 to w2 such that each successor differs
in only one letter from the predecessor. Fig. 1 shows
some examples of feasible solutions for the word pairs
(BOY, PER), (CAR, SHY ), (AXE, NUT ), and (T RY, POT ).
Note that these are just one of the many possible solutions.
In this work, we combine the word-morph game problem
with a network analytic approach to understand how humans
navigate in these complex networks. In the given setting, a
navigator is neither equipped with geometric information as
in Kleinberg’s model, nor is there a notion of homophily between words that is meaningful for solving the puzzle. Thus,
the navigation strategy cannot be described by any of the
models sketched before. The simple setting allows to directly
identify the strategy by which people learn to navigate in a
complex network. We can show that they quickly identify
so-called landmark words which they use most frequently in
their navigation. We can also show that these landmark words
have a central position in the complex network, leading to a

2836

BOY − PER

CAR − SHY

AXE − NUT

T RY − POT

BOY
|
BAY
BAT
CAT
CAR
PAR
|
PER

CAR
|
CAT
PAT
PET
SET
SEE
SHE
|
SHY

AXE
|
APE
ACE
ACT
ANT
AND
AID
BID
BIT
BUT
|
NUT

TRY
|
T OY
T ON
T IN
SIN
SIT
PIT
|
POT

that any two consecutive words differ in exactly one letter.
E.g., for the pair (CAR, SHY ), the following sequence is a
solution:
(CAR,CAT, PAT, PET, SET, SEE, SHE, SHY ).
The rules of the word-morph game defines a natural relation
'R on all words in Lk , i.e., regarding the rules, any two words
v, w in Lk are related if they differ by exactly one letter. Thus,
(Lk , 'R ) defines a graph on the words in Lk , which we call the
word-morph network G(Lk ) on Lk . In the following, Lk will
be the set of all three-letter words in English, as defined by
the Oxford dictionary (Catherine & Angus, 2005), and G(L3 )
is the respective graph. G(L3 ) is shown in Fig. 2(a), a part of
the full network is shown in Fig. 2(b).

Figure 1: Exemplary word-morph games.

direct correlation between the network’s structure and human
navigation in it. Once these landmark words have been detected by a navigator, the time she needs to navigate from one
point to any other point decreases significantly. The approach
of our paper can be easily generalized to observe more specific questions about how humans navigate in complex networks as we will discuss in the summary. The paper is organized as follows: Sect. gives the necessary definition, before
the experimental setting is explained in detail in Sect. . The
results of the experiments are discussed in Sect. , followed
by a discussion of related work in Sect. . We finish with a
conclusion in Sect. , which discusses possible generalizations
of our network analytic approach to the human wayfinding
problem.

(a)

Definitions
A graph G = (V, E) is composed of a set of nodes V and a set
of edges E ⊆ V ×V , with |V | = n and |E| = m. A way between
two nodes u and v is any sequence of edges (e1 , e2 , . . . , ek )
with e1 = (u, x1 ), e2 = (x1 , x2 ), . . . , ek = (xk−1 , v). A path is a
way with no repeating nodes. The length of a way is defined
as the number of edges in it. A shortest path between two
nodes u and v is a path with length l, such that, every other
path between u and v is of length greater than or equal to
l. Two nodes are said to be connected if there exists a path
between them. The distance d(v1 , v2 ) between any two nodes
is defined as the length of a shortest path between them, or
set to ∞ if there exists no path between them. Any maximal
set of pairwise connected nodes is called a component of the
graph. Let Σ be a set of letters, and Σ∗ be the set of all possible
concatenations. Let L ⊆ Σ∗ be some language and Lk denote
the set of all words with the same number of letters k. For a
given L and k, one instance of a word-morph game consists of
two words (start, end) ∈ Lk × Lk . A solution of this game is
any sequence of words start = w1 , w2 , w3 , . . . , wk = end such

(b)

Figure 2: (a) The word-morph network G(L3 ) composed of
all three-letter words in English. (b) A part of G(L3 ) together
with the ranking of the nodes, as defined by the closeness
centrality.
A centrality index is a real-valued function C : V → R on
the nodes (Brandes & Erlebach, 2005). The intuition is that
the higher the value of this function, the more central this
node is for the network. There are various indices; in this
article we use the so-called closeness centrality (Sabidussi,
1966) CC (v), which is defined as the reciprocal of sum of the

2837

distances of v to all other nodes w:
CC (v) = 1/

by sorting the words accordingly. For each of the 65 game
instances, we stored the word pairs that was given to the participant and her solution. Time was recorded for 10 participants. Participants entered their solutions via an interactive
computer program. They were not allowed to use any writing
aids.

∑ d(v, w)

w∈V

For any given graph, a centrality index can be used to define a
ranking on the nodes, by sorting the nodes non-decreasingly
by their centrality value. Fig. 2(b) shows the ranking of 15
nodes in a subgraph of G(L3 ).
To understand the exploration and navigation of humans
in a complex network, we conducted a series of word-morph
games with 20 different participants. The experimental setting will be described in the following.

Results
We will first discuss the properties of G(L3 ) together with the
graphs G(Pi ). We will finally describe the results concerning
the actual game solving process.

General properties of G(L3 )

The Experiment
The experimental setting: The experiment was conducted
on 23 participants (16 men and 7 women ). 3 participants
(all men) gave up before playing the first ten games. The 20
participants whose data is presented in our analysis are all
those who completed exactly 65 games. The average time
that participants took to play all the games was 233 minutes.
Participants played the game without taking any break in between. All 20 participants were graduate students of the age
group 20−25 of the Indian Institute of Science. None of them
knew the game before hand. From the list of all 967 threeletter words contained in the Oxford dictionary (Catherine &
Angus, 2005), each participant Pi first selected the words she
knew. This set is denoted by V (Pi ) ⊆ L3 , and the respective
graph is denoted by G(Pi ). After that, the game was explained
to the participant and we asked her what her initial strategy
will be to solve the game (Question I). After the first 15 games
we asked whether any kind of difficulties arose while playing
the game (Question II). After playing another 50 games, the
participant was then asked whether their initial game solving
strategy was useful (Question III).
Creating the word-morph instances: Every participant’s
graph G(Pi ) had a biggest component, which was almost the
same as the graph except for 5 to 10 words. Exact statistics
are provided in the results section (Sect. ). Smaller components were either isolated nodes, or isolated edges. Only
the biggest component was retained and the rest were deleted
from G(Pi ) - for every i. We shall henceforth mean, by G(Pi ),
the biggest component of the graph.
All 65 word pairs were chosen to be distinct. For the
first 15 games, word pairs (wi , w j ) were choosen such that
each of the word pair’s d(wi , w j ) was 5. The distance between words was increased by 2 units every 10 games thereof.
This was easily possible, as the diameter which is defined as
max{d(u, v) : u, v ∈ V } of the graphs G(Pi ) on an average was
12.3.

Table 1: Properties of G(L3 ) and G(Pi )
Property
Nodes in graph
Nodes in Biggest component
Number of components
Diameter
Average path length
Average degree

G(L3 )
967
967
1
9
3.54
16

Max
626
619
12
14
4.29
11.8

Min
306
297
5
10
3.69
7.6

Avg
446.8
438.3
7.1
12.3
3.97
9.6

In Table 1, the second column contains the properties of
G(L3 ), while the third fourth and fifth columns respectively
contains information on maximum, minimum and average
values of the G(Pi ), for all 1 ≤ i ≤ 20.
The first observation is already astonishing: while the first
10 games took our participants 10 to 18 minutes per game,
after around 15 games, they became reasonably faster. Their
solving time dropped to 2 minutes per game. It furthermore
dropped to a mere 12 a minute after 28 games. Fig shows the
time taken vs the game number. Time taken is averaged over
10 participants.
Participants found it very difficult to solve the first few
games. It can be easily seen from Fig. 3 that the time spent
to solve the instances were significantly higher on the first 10
games as compared to that of the successive games.

Analysis of the answers to the three questions
• Answer to QI: 100% of the participants answered that the
strategy which they thought will work, was to first find a
word which matches one letter of the final word, then starting from that one to find a word which matches the final
word in two letters.
• Answer to QII: After 15 games, 95% of the participants
said that they were finding it extremely difficult to solve
the game.

Information logging and post-processing of the data:
For each participant Pi her selected vocabulary V (Pi ) was
saved and G(Pi ) computed. For this graph, the closeness centrality was computed for all nodes and their rank determined

• Answer to QIII: 100% of the participants felt that the strategy which they answered in QI did not work and that they
found a new strategy: “Navigating through certain words
made the game very easy to solve.”

2838

20

YAK(183)-YAM(158)-DAM(99)-DAY(48)-DRY(167)TRY(178)-THY(171)THE(156)-SHE(166)-SEE(114)-BEE(90)-BYE(157)EYE(180)-EVE(195)AVE(204)-AWE(210)

Time
18
16

Time Taken (in minutes)

14
12
10

500

8
450

6

400

4

350
300
CENTER

2
0
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

250
200

70

Game Number

eve

yak

try thy
yam

oak

150

dry

dam
bee

way

cap

awe
ave

bye
see

oar
100

Figure 3: Average time taken per game in seconds vs number
of games played.

eye

she
the

war

50
day

say
sap
0
0

The answers show that the subjective impression after 15
games is that the game is still difficult to solve. It is very interesting to note that 100% of all participants chose the same
initial strategy and that all of them changed to a different one
finally. They also state that they used a subset of words as via
media to navigate through the network. In the following we
will show how to determine these words for each participant
by an analysis of the solutions. A deeper analysis regarding
the relationship of this set to the structure of the word-morph
network will then reveal that this set is an absolutely nonrandom selection.
To illustrate, let us consider a few games played by one of
our participants, Ms. Hilda. In 46 out of the total 65 games
that Ms. Hilda played, she used at least one of the words
HIT ,OAT , and AID to navigate from any given word to any
other word. Below are some of the word-morph games that
Ms. Hilda played. Note the usage of the landmark word AID:

2

4

6

8

10
12
14
WORD NUMBER

16

18

20

22

24

Figure 4: A rank plot for the game (CAP − AW E) where the
rank is computed with respect to the word-morph network of
the according participant.
Fig. 4, shows the rank of the i-th word in the solution vs
i, i.e., its trajectory through the word-rank space. Such a plot
will be called a rank plot in the following. Note that such
a path can contain local minima, i.e., words whose closeness
centrality rank is lower than that of both neighboring words in
the solution. We call such a word a minimum word in the solution. The path shown in Fig. 5(a) contains only one minimum
word (AID), while the solution shown in Fig. 5(b) contains
three minima words (MAT , BEY and CRY ).
350
age
300

ace

250

act

toy
too

200

ton
alt

EGO AGO ADO ADD AID BID BAD BAY BOY TOY TOE
WOE
SAY BAY BAD BID AID ADD ADO AGO EGO
BAY BAD BID AID ADD ADO AGO EGO EGG
ASS ASK ARK ARM AIM AID BID BAD BAR EAR
THY TOY BOY BAY BAD BID AID ADD ADO AGO AGE

tan

150
ban
100

all
bad
ail

50
aid

One Minima

bid

0
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

(a) One Minima word
350
tan

We noticed that participants used certain landmark words
repeatedly to navigate on the network. To understand how
these words are used to navigate in the network, we will now
introduce two definitions concerning the trajectory of a single
solution. Let S(Pi , x) = {w1 , w2 , . . . , wk } be the solution of
participant Pi for the x-th game as defined by the word pair
(w1 , wk ). To each word, we assign its closeness centrality
rank in G(Pi ). Consider, e.g., the word pair (CAP − AW E)
and its solution by one of the participants in which each word
is assigned its rank:
CAP(59)-SAP(23)-SAY(33)-WAY(73)-WAR(125)OAR(116)-OAK(163)-

2839

300

ten

250

fro

men

fry

200
try
met
day

mud

150

dry
mad

bud

mat

100

cry

bed

bay

bey
Three Minimas

50
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

(b) Three minima words

Figure 5: Minima of a path

14

16

5

100
human generated
computer generated
90

4

80
percentage of center-strategicness

Center Strategicness Measure

Center Strategicness
4.5

3.5

3

2.5

2

1.5

1

70
60
50
40
30
20

0.5
0

10

20

30
40
Game Number

50

60

10

70

0
0

5

10

15

20

25

Subjects

Figure 6: Plot of average centerstrategicness vs the number
of games played

Center-strategicness of the path: The number of minima
words in a solution is called the center-strategicness of the
path. Thus, the center-strategicness of the path in Fig. 5(a)
is 1, whereas the center-strategicness of the path in Fig. 5(b)
is 3. We call a solution center-strategic if it has exactly one
minimum word. The solution depicted in Fig. 5(a) is centerstrategic whereas the solution depicted in Fig. 5(b) is not
center-strategic.
The absolutely surprising result is that after 22 games
out of 65, each and every single participant only uses
center-strategic paths.

Main Inference: Fig. 6 gives us a very important inference, we have plotted mean of the center-strategicness of
the paths which the participants took Vs game number. The
curve hits 1 at 22nd game and remains 1 henceforth. Put in
simple terms, after playing a few games, participants used
only center-strategic paths.
The sudden decrease in average solving time is tightly
coupled to the identification of a set of landmark words. This
set of words is then used in a center-strategic way to
navigate efficiently through the network.
Note that this strategy is indeed very efficient: instead
of learning the whole network which would potentially allow to find the shortest path for any two given words,
participants learned only a few important landmark words
and they first navigated to these landmark words and then
reached the final word. Interestingly, the paths chosen in
that way were considerably longer than the shortest paths.
Path length deviation of a participant Pi is denoted as ∆(Pi )
and is defined as the average of the ratios of actual path
length is to shortest path length of all 65 games. The
set {∆(G(P1 )), ∆(G(P2 )), . . . , ∆(G(P20 ))} has minimum 1.22,
maximum 1.37 and an average of 1.254. Which signifies that
the paths taken by the participants were far from being the
shortest path.
To understand whether the peculiar structure of the wordmorph network in general or the word-morph networks of the
single participants in specific caused this effect, we computed

Figure 7: Percentage of center-strategic solutions of each participant (subject) Pi of all 65 solutions (red bars) in comparison with the expected percentage of center-strategic paths in
a random walk scenario in G(Pi ).
the average fraction of center-strategic paths in the following
way: Given a word pair (w1 , w2 ), we compute random paths
of length less than or equal to 20, using the random walk procedure in which every path is explored with the same probability. For example, out of 18, 197 random paths between
AXE and NUN only 3, 128 paths turned out to be centerstrategic. The fraction of center-strategic paths between AXE
to NUN is thus 17%.
For each participant Pi we computed this fraction for each
of the 65 word pairs in her respective graph G(Pi ), and averaged over the fraction. Furthermore, for all 65 solutions we
computed the fraction of center-strategic solutions for each
Pi . Fig. 7 shows for each participant the fraction of centerstrategic solutions and the average fraction of center-strategic
paths of all possible solutions. It can be clearly seen that the
human navigator chooses center-strategic paths with a significantly higher probability than the virtual random walk procedure. This result rules out the fact that the structure of the
network itself dictates the usage of center-strategic paths.

Related work
Of special interest to us is the work by Moeser (Moeser,
1988), in which he reports on results of a study conducted
in a five-storey hospital which had a very complicated structure. It was noted that the student nurses did not learn new
ways to navigate better even after two years of their stay in
the hospital. The reason for this is well explained by the work
by Passini, which says that humans learn only what is necessary and sufficient to achieve a goal (Passini, 1984). We believe that these necessary and sufficient things which people
learn in order to navigate in a complex network like the wordmorph network, are the nodes with a high centrality-ranking.
Allen (Allen, 1997) has proposed certain important issues
in production and comprehension of route directions by attempts to way-find a destination. He suggests that technological innovations aimed at providing verbal information to

2840

assist wayfinding activity be incorporated within a framework
focused on the ecology of wayfinding behaviour. Maguire et
al., (Maguire, Burgess, & O’Keefe, 1999) discuss how Complexity and content of the environment affects navigation success apart from the sex and age of the participant. Golledge
(Golledge, 1995) has analysed the kind of paths that people
select in virtual vs real environment. Guidice et al., (Giudice,
Bakdash, & Legge, 2007) propose that the similarity in learning and wayfinding behaviour observed between verbal and
visual conditions indicate that the spatial representation built
up from verbal learning is functionally similar to that developed from visual learning.

Environmental Psychology, 17, 317-331.
Allen, G. L. (1997). From knowledge to words to wayfinding: Issues in the production and comprehension of route
directions. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer
Verlag, Category: Wayfinding and Map Interpretation, Volume 1329/1997, 363-372.
Baskaya, A., Wilson, C., & zcan, Y. Z. (2004). Wayfinding
in an unfamiliar environment. Environment and Behavior,
36, 839-867.
Brandes, U., & Erlebach, T. (2005). Network analysis. I
(s. 16-61). Springer-Verlag.
Catherine, S., & Angus, S. (2005). Oxford dictionary of
english. Oxford University Press.
Giudice, N. A., Bakdash, J. Z., & Legge, G. E. (2007).
Wayfinding with words: spatial learning and navigation using dynamically updated verbal descriptions. Psychological Research, Springer Verlag, 71, 347358.
Golledge, R. G. (1995). Path selection and route preference
in human navigation: A progress report. Spatial Information Theory A Theoretical Basis for GIS, Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, Springer Verlag, 988, 207-222.
Hart, R. A., & Moore, G. T. (1973). Image and environment:
Cognitive mapping and spatial behaviour. Basic Books.
Kleinberg, J. (2000a). Navigation in a small world. Nature,
406, 845.
Kleinberg, J. (2000b). The small-world phenomenon: An
algorithmic perspective. I Proceedings of the 32nd acm
symposium on theory of computing.
Maguire, E. A., Burgess, N., & O’Keefe, J. (1999). Human
spatial navigation: cognitive maps, sexual dimorphism, and
neural substrates. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 9,
171-177.
McDonald, T., & Pellegerino, J. W. (1993). Psychological
perspectives on spatial cognition. Advances in psychology,
96, 47-82.
Milgram, S. (1967). The small world problem. Psychology
Today, 1, 61–67.
Moeser, S. D. (1988). Cognitive mapping in a complex building. Environment and Behavior, 20, 21-49.
Moore, G. T., & Golledge, R. G. (1976). Environmental
knowing. Hutchinson and Ross.
Passini, R. (1984). Spatial representations, a wayfinding perspective. Environmental Psychology, 4, 153-164.
Sabidussi, G. (1966). The centrality index of a graph. Psychometrika, 31, 581603.
Sheridan Dodds, P., Muhamad, R., & Watts, D. J. (2003).
An experimental study of search in global social networks.
Science, 301, 827-829.
Simsek, O., & Jensen, D. (2008). Navigating networks by
using homophily and degree. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 105, 12758 12762.
Watts, D. J., & Strogatz, S. H. (1998, June). Collective dynamics of ’small-world’ networks. Nature, 393, 440-442.

Conclusion
As far as we know, this study is the first study that aims at understanding the navigation of humans in virtual complex networks. With a simple approach and the help of network analysis we gathered convincing evidence how humans explore
such a network in a way that is sufficient (but not necessarily
optimal) for navigation in it. We showed that the efficiency
with which the network is explored increases drastically after
the identification of a set of landmark words. Furthermore,
these words belong to a network analytically determinable
set of the most central nodes in the according word-morph
network. Our work has thus direct implications for the design of complex connection or transport networks used by
humans. By using the representation as a network, we can
predict which parts of the connections will be used most and
thus need special attention in the design phase to, e.g., make
sure that streets are broad enough or that a lift’s or tram’s capacity is sufficient.
In general, our simple approach of asking participants to
find a set of paths in a given network allows for very controllable experiments. Due to the simple experimental setting,
the paths chosen by a participant give direct evidence of her
mental map of the network. We envision different variants
of the basic way-finding problem in which nodes or edges
are associated with additional information. One idea is to
test Kleinberg’s navigation hypothesis for humans by asking
them to navigate through an artificial network where nodes
are associated with geometric coordinates. Another experiment could explore how participants react to a blockage, i.e.,
a (temporal) removal of those landmark nodes they identified
beforehand. Furthermore, a longer series of games would also
be interesting: we suspect that after a while participants will
finally explore the whole network by searching for short cuts.
This could eventually turn into a personality test, based on the
intuition that outgoing, innovative people are more likely to
step out of the known paths sooner than others. In summary,
we hope that the basic approach underlying this study opens
a new field in the analysis of human wayfinding in complex
networks.

References
Aginsky, V., Harris, C., Rensink, R., & Beusmans, J. (1997).
Two strategies for learning a route in a driving simulator.

2841

