UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Preliminary Report on the Effects of Mild Traumatic Brain Injury on Spatial Attention

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7m35j43r

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Sinnett, Scott
Lim, Ahnate
Thacker, Jeremy

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Preliminary Report on the Effects of Mild Traumatic Brain Injury on Spatial
Attention
Scott Sinnett (ssinnett@hawaii.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Hawaii at Manoa
2530 Dole Street, Honolulu, HI 96822
Ahnate Lim (ahnate@hawaii.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Hawaii at Manoa
2530 Dole Street, Honolulu, HI 96822
Jeremy Thacker (thackerj@hawaii.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Hawaii at Manoa
2530 Dole Street, Honolulu, HI 96822

Abstract
The objective of this investigation was to measure subtle
disturbances in information processing after mild traumatic brain
injury (TBI) for spatially presented stimuli as compared to a
sample of control participants. Participants completed a temporal
order judgment task requiring the correct identification of the order
of two asynchronously presented stimuli that were precued either
by a peripheral or central cue. Point of subjective simultaneity
(PSS) scores demonstrated a dissociation in spatial attentional
control. Specifically, deficits for the group with mild TBI were
observed for peripheral cues, while volitional attentional control
during the centrally cued task was spared, when compared with
controls. These data suggest that peripheral distraction strongly
captures attention, possibly making disengagement from that
location difficult, whereas directed and volitional control over
attention is largely spared, as indicated by indistinguishable PSS
scores when compared with healthy controls after central cues.
Key words: mild traumatic brain injury, spatial attention,
endogenous, exogenous, perception

Introduction
A blow to the head can result in a traumatic brain injury
(TBI) and lead to a disruption in normal brain functioning.
The provoking incident can result from a projectile or object
striking and piercing the skull and directly damaging brain
matter, or can occur without damage to the skull (i.e., closed
head injury). An estimated 1.7 million Americans suffer a
traumatic brain injury (TBI) each year (National Center for
Injury Prevention and Control). Of this, three quarters are
concussions or other forms of mild TBI. This creates a huge
financial burden for both the medical system and those who
have incurred a mild TBI, as quite frequently a myriad of
persistent cognitive deficits can be observed after mild TBI
(Schretlen & Shapiro, 2003).

Despite extensive research into mild TBI, little is known
of the exact disturbances of cognition. This is, in part, due to
the utilization of traditional assessments of human cognition
(e.g., WAIS-R). While commonly used and theoretically
sound, these types of cognitive assessment are generally
more global and incapable of measuring subtle deficits of
information processing (e.g., a modulation in exogenous or
endogenous attention on the order of milliseconds).
Hall and Chapman (2005) recently discussed a number of
cognitive deficits associated with mild TBI, and more
importantly, how these participants perform on a number of
paradigms designed to assess cognitive functioning.
Specifically, these authors mention deficits in information
processing speed, attention, and reaction time, as evidenced
by difficulty with the Stroop color naming task (Lee,
Lyketsos, & Rao, 2003; Stroop, 1935) and the 2 & 7
Processing Speed Test (see for example Cicerone & Azulay,
2002). While informative in their own right, neither of these
tests is able to provide a precise measurement of specific
mechanisms of attention or processing speed. For instance,
the Stroop task is a classically used task that demonstrates
the influence of an ignored stimulus, while the 2 & 7
Processing Speed Test purports to measure sustained
attention (i.e., the ability to selectively attend to relevant
stimuli and ignore irrelevant stimuli).
Cicerone and Azulay (2002) presented participants with
mild TBI with cognitive dysfunction with a variety of
traditionally used paradigms designed to measure cognitive
functioning. Specifically, patients were given the Digit Span
subtest from the Weschler Memory Scale (Wechsler, 1955),
the Trail Making Test Parts A and B (see Reitan & Wolfson,
1986), the Paced Auditory Serial Addition Test (PASAT;
see Diehr, Heaton, Miller, & Grant, 1998), the Continuous
Performance Test of Attention (CPTA; Cicerone, 1997), the
Stroop task, and the 2 & 7 selective attention test (Ruff &
Allen, 1996). Interestingly, only certain tests resulted in
significant differences when comparing mild TBI
participants with normal healthy controls. Specifically, the

2586

authors claim that tests involving measures of processing
speed (PASAT and CPTA) were most effective at
exemplifying differences between mild TBI participants and
controls.
While results such as those discussed above are indeed
informative, upon a closer review of the cited works, the
picture remains less clear as to exactly how other cognitive
functions are affected. In a meta-analysis of 39 TBI
investigations investigating 1716 patients, Schretlen and
Shapiro (2003) show that cognitive functioning is
interrupted to a greater degree after moderate-severe TBI
when compared with mild TBI. While this is hardly
surprising, this meta-analysis is important as it represents
grouped data across a number of experiments that have
assessed cognitive functioning after TBI. The overall
conclusion was that cognitive functioning is affected more
profoundly after moderate-severe TBI than mild TBI, while
also suggesting that information processing and memory are
interrupted after mild TBI.
Unfortunately, only a few of the studies reported in
Schretlen and Shapiro’s (2003) meta-analysis involved
rigorous and precise measures of information processing.
Moreover, the control groups among studies varied from
normal participants, to injured controls, to self-controls.
Further, the experimental measures differ greatly, therefore
complicating the overall conclusions. For example, Borgaro
et al. (2004) tested participants with the Barrow
Neurological Institute Screen for higher cerebral functions
(BNIS), which has more to do with patients’ ability to
correctly orient themselves rather than a precise
measurement of information processing. Regardless of the
potential difficulties in understanding the cognitive deficits
associated with mild TBI, the representative research all
supports the notion that cognitive functioning is adversely
affected. Here, we extend this research to specific measures
of information processing related to spatial and temporal
attention in order to determine how attention might be
adversely affected in the spatial domain.
In a further example, McMillan and Glucksman (1987)
investigated cognitive functions with a battery of
neuropsychological tests on 24 individuals with moderate
TBI. This battery included sections from the WAIS-R.
Memory was assessed using sections from the Weschler
Memory Scale (Wechsler, 1955) and a reconstruction of the
Rey-Osterreith Complex Figure test, while information
processing was assessed with the PASAT. Despite this
rather large battery of neuropsychological tests, mild TBI
participants only differed on one section of the PASAT and
on subjective reports of memory disturbances, again
highlighting the notion that information processing is
adversely effected, but that more precise measures are
needed.
The PASAT is often used as a measure of auditory
processing speed. However, it should be noted that this test
involves simple arithmetic calculations of sequentially
presented auditory numbers, and fails to directly measure
actual processing speed. Therefore, while this test (and other

widely accepted measures of cognition, i.e., the WAIS-R,)
are well validated and accepted in the literature, it is
possible that they measure only global disturbances of
constructs of cognition such as memory, intelligence, and
visuo-spatial processing. Subtle disturbances of specific
mechanisms of attention, such as reflexive or volitional
attention, manifested by a reduction in the ability accurately
judge the temporal order of cued targets would not be
captured by these types of neuropsychological tests.
Therefore, the present research addresses this precise
question. Specifically, what are, if any, the effects of mild
TBI on the ability to process targets that have been
peripherally or centrally cued. The results of McMillan and
Glucksman’s (1987) investigation further exemplify the
need for this research. Indeed, even though their participants
were moderately injured, they were still unable to observe
consistent deficits in memory and information processing
with a traditional battery of neuropsychological tests,
suggesting that these tests would not be an adequate
measure of information processing for mild TBI (Dikmen,
Machamer, & Temkin, 2001; Gentilini et al., 1985;
Goldstein, Levin, Goldman, Clark, & Altonen, 2001).
Given the limited capacity of the human attentional
system, a subset of incoming stimuli must be selected for
goal driven behavior to proceed. Generally speaking,
attention is oriented to a spatial position either exogenously
(i.e., involuntary, stimulus-driven) or endogenously (i.e.,
voluntary, goal-driven; see Theeuwes, 2010). We presented
participants with mild TBI and healthy normal controls with
a classic paradigm; the temporal order judgment task (TOJ),
and included either peripheral or central (i.e., exogenous or
endogenous) cues. Participants were required to determine
the presentation order of two successively presented targets.
Accuracy data from this task can be used to measure the
amount of time that two events can be separated from each
other for the observer to still perceive them as asynchronous
events, also referred to as the point of subjective
simultaneity (PSS). Importantly, the targets were either nonpredicatively cued by either a peripheral flashing box, or
central arrow. Therefore, the distracting cue leads to a shift
in spatial attention, requiring the non-cued side to be
presented before the cued side for the participant to perceive
them as being presented simultaneously (i.e., the PSS score;
see Spence, Shore, & Klein, 2001; West, Stevens, Pun, &
Pratt, 2008). If a disturbance of spatial attention is
manifested in participants with mild TBI, then it is likely
that the cue will not capture or direct attention as efficiently
as it would with uninjured control participants. This could
lead to smaller PSS scores when comparing patients with
controls. Conversely, it is possible that the group with mild
TBI might have trouble disengaging from the cue, thereby
leading to higher PSS scores.

Method
Participants

2587

A total of eight mild TBI participants (3 female, average age
35, SD=16, average years of education 17) were recruited
via class announcements and posters at the University of
Hawaii at Manoa. Participants self-presented as having had
a medical professional diagnose them with a mild TBI
within the past four months (average time since injury 80.1
days). They were either paid $5 for their time, or were given
course credit. An additional 10 control participants (5
female, average age 22, SD=5, average years of education
15.5) were recruited using the same mechanisms.

Participants began with an SOA of 267 ms that would
increase or decrease depending on whether the participant
made a correct or incorrect response. On trials where an
invalid cue was presented and a correct response was made,
the SOA would decrease by one screen refresh rate (16.7
ms). Accordingly, the SOA would increase a screen refresh
if an incorrect response was given. The experiment was
terminated when a total of fourteen correct/incorrect
reversals were recorded.
Exogenous condition

Materials
Prestimulus interval = 1000ms

+

The stimuli were presented on a 2.66 GHz Intel Core 2 Duo
Apple/Windows (dual boot) iMac with a 20” screen using
DMDX Version 3.2.6.6 software (Forster & Forster, 2003).
Observers sat approximately 60 cm from the computer
monitor. Participants made a key press response with the
“Z” and “/” keys on the computer keyboard to make
“horizontal target first” and “vertical target first” responses,
respectively. Each trial contained placeholders (2 mm x 2
mm) in the periphery of the screen with a thickness of 1
mm, separated by 10.5 cm. The horizontal stimulus had a
width of 1 cm and a height of 1 mm. The vertical stimulus
was identical, but rotated 90 degrees.

Exogenous cue = 45ms

+

Cue-target interval = 45ms

+
+

SOA

+

Until response

Endogenous condition
Prestimulus interval = 1000ms

+

Procedure

Endogenous cue = 45ms

The display for both the peripheral and central cue
conditions consisted of two boxes and a fixation cross that
remained on the screen throughout the trial. As can be seen
in Figure 1, a non-predictive cue for peripheral trials was
presented by thickening the placeholder box from 2 to 8
pixels immediately following a pre-cue interval of 1000 ms.
After 45 ms the box returned to its original size. Each
peripheral location (left and right box) was equally likely to
be cued. The first target stimulus (either a horizontal or
vertical line) was presented in one of the placeholder boxes,
after which the second stimulus was presented in the other
box at stimulus onset asynchronies (SOAs) contingent on
the previous trial’s response (see the description of the stepfunction design below for SOAs). Participants pressed the
“Z” key to indicate that the “horizontal target” appeared
first, or the “/” key if they thought the vertical line had
appeared first. Both stimuli had an equal chance of being
cued, of appearing in either the left or right boxes, and of
being presented first. The central cue condition was
identical with the exception that an arrow was displayed in
the middle of the display instead of a box brightening in the
periphery. The peripheral and central conditions were
presented separately and counterbalanced.
An adaptation of Stelmach and Herdman’s (1991) stepfunction procedure was used (see also West et al., 2008).

Cue-target interval = 45ms

+
+

SOA

+

Until response

Figure 1. Stimuli and procedure for the TOJ tasks. On each trial
participants were presented with two placeholder boxes on either
side of fixation. After 1000 ms one randomly chosen placeholder
(or a central arrow) was cued for 45 ms. Following a cue-target
interval of 45 ms, the onset of either stimuli occurred in one of the
placeholders. The onset time of the second stimulus was
determined by the step-function procedure.

Results
The PSS was calculated by averaging the SOA of the last
six turning points in the staircase design (for review of
methodology, see Dixon, 1991) in order to determine the
minimum amount of time that the uncued item needed to
appear before the cued item in order for both items to be
perceived as appearing on the screen simultaneously.

2588

200

120
100
80

100

150

200

250

300

350

Exogenous PSS (ms)
Figure 3. Exogenous (x-axis) and endogenous (y-axis) PSS scores
in the TOJ task for each person with mild TBI and control
participant. The area defined by the dotted vertical lines represents
the 99% confidence interval for normal performance in the
exogenous task based on the control data, and the area defined by
the dotted horizontal lines similarly represents the 99% confidence
intervals for the endogenous task.

100

Discussion

0

50

PSS (ms)

60

Endogenous PSS (ms)

40

50

150

Mild-TBI
Controls

Mild-TBI
Controls

20

A mixed-design ANOVA was conducted on the PSS
scores with task type (peripheral or central cues) as the
within subjects factor and participant type (mild TBI or
control) as the between subjects factor. There was a
significant main effect of task type F (1,16) = 16.1, p < .01
and participant type F (1,16) = 7.7, p < .01. The interaction
was also significant F (1,16) = 8.5, p < .01. Planned t-test
comparisons as well as Bonferroni corrected post hoc tests
demonstrated that the PSS score for peripheral cues was
larger than the PSS for central cues for both mild TBI (156
ms vs. 49 ms, t(7) = 3.24, p < .01) and healthy control
groups (65 ms vs. 48 ms, t(9) = 1.96, p < .05; see Figure 4).
Lastly, and perhaps most importantly, PSS values for
peripheral cues were significantly larger for the group with
mild TBI (156 ms) when compared with the controls (65
ms, t(2.83) = 7.2, p < .01) while there was no difference
between participants with mild TBI and the healthy controls
for central cues (49 and 48 ms respectively, p > .5; see
Figure 2).

Exogenous

Endogenous

Figure 2. Average PSS scores for the exogenous (peripheral cues)
and endogenous (central cues) conditions for both persons with
mild TBI and healthy controls.

As highlighted in Figure 3, in the exogenous (peripheral)
condition, all but one person with mild TBI fell outside of
the 99% confidence intervals, which are based on the
performance of the control participants. In this case,
confidence intervals varied from 52.5 ms to 78.4 ms. For the
central endogenous condition, confidence intervals based on
the PSS for the control data was 19.4 ms to 77.5 ms.
Opposite of the performance for peripheral cues, all but one
person with mild TBI scored within the confidence interval
of the controls.

These results suggest that the participants with mild TBI
have an interesting dissociation in performance when
compared with healthy controls. This is demonstrated by
equivalent performance for non-predictive central cues on
the one hand, and clear deficits for the peripheral cues on
the other. That is, the group with mild TBI had a greater
propensity for attentional capture by peripheral cues
indicated by much higher PSS (156 ms) when compared
with the control group (48 ms).
The dissociation in PSS scores is of key importance for
two reasons. First, it suggests that peripheral and central
cues are governed by separate mechanisms (i.e., automatic
vs. volitional). This notion is further supported by the
findings for the control group, as peripheral cues had a
larger effect on the PSS than central cues. These findings
are also of particular interest given the short cue-to-target
interval (45 ms) used for both the peripheral and central
conditions, as typical central cuing effects require a much
longer interval (see for example Jonides, 1981). For
instance, in Spence et al.’s (2001; see also Shore, Spence, &
Klein, 2001) seminal study, the peripheral condition had a
60 ms cue-to-target interval, while the central arrow
condition had an interval of 405 ms.
The second important point of discussion arising from
this dissociation is that it argues against the possibility that
the cue (central or peripheral) is simply found to be more
distracting or that the mild TBI participants have trouble
disengaging from the cue. This would be similar to a

2589

purported mechanism explaining hemispatial neglect
relating to these patients’ inability to disengage from
ipsilesionally presented stimuli (see Posner, Walker,
Friedrich, & Rafal, 1984; Posner, Walker, Friedrich, &
Rafal, 1987; but see also Pellegrino, Basso, & Frassinetti,
1997). Specifically, Posner et al. (1984; 1987) suggested
that patients with brain lesions leading to hemispatial
neglect take longer to respond to contralesional stimuli due
to attention being directed first, and captured by ipsilesional
stimuli. It is possible that in the peripheral cue condition
here, mild TBI participants’ attention was captured by the
cue and subsequently they had difficulty disengaging
attention. This could also be explained by a winner takes all
attentional account (see Desimone & Duncan, 1995) with
attentional resources being utilized in detecting and
processing the peripheral cue. However, this does not seem
to be the case for the central cue, as participants with mild
TBI had identical PSS scores, suggesting that the directional
information afforded by the cue was used equivalently by
both the group with mild TBI and the control participants.
The neurological underpinnings of mild TBI have only
recently been explored, but illuminate a potential reason for
a slowdown in information processing speed. As normal CT
imaging accompanies the cognitive deficits in mild TBI,
diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) appears to be better suited
for measuring the involved brain damage. In an exploratory
study by Bazarian et al. (2007) it was noted that diffuse
axonal injury (DAI) seems to play a critical role in the
deficits observed after mild TBI. Accordingly, the degree of
DAI could be related to the severity of cognitive deficits.
Indeed, Niogi et al (2008) recently looked at the amount of
white matter damage in a group of participants with mild
TBI and correlated this damage to motor response time.
Critically, more extensive DAI was correlated with a
slowing of response speed. This reduction in processing
speed could result in a number of cognitive deficits,
including but not limited to deficits in processing spatial
(both central and peripheral) cues (see for example
Crawford, Knight, & Alsop, 2007; De Monte et al., 2005).
A future consideration could correlate the severity of DAI in
individuals with mild TBI with the degree to which
attention is either captured or directed in this task.
As this pilot study was exploratory in nature, there are a
number of things that should be considered. For instance,
we allowed a relatively long post-injury period (4 months)
for inclusion in the study. It could be argued that any
cognitive deficits after mild TBI are transient and unlikely
to be observed after such a long time. However, a similar
time period was recently used by Levin et al. (2008), who
correlated white matter damage in children suffering mild
TBI (3 months post-injury) with cognitive functioning using
a Flanker task (Eriksen & Eriksen, 1974). A second
potential concern is that participants self-reported the mildTBI. Although a requirement that this diagnosis was first
confirmed by a medical doctor, medical records were not
accessed in this pilot study to confirm this diagnosis.
However, it should be noted that despite this limitation, it is

apparent that the group with mild TBI performed
significantly differently from the control group, confirming
the veracity of the participants’ claims. Lastly, the average
age of the control group was much younger than that of the
group with mild TBI. While future research will include the
appropriately age matched group, it is important to note
again that performance was equivalent for the endogenous
condition, therefore suggesting that the observed
dissociation is likely to be attributable to the disturbances in
information processing associated with the mild TBI, as
opposed to any group difference based on age.
These preliminary findings demonstrate a disruption in
attention after mild TBI. It is apparent that reflexive
attention appears adversely affected when using peripheral
cues, while no differences were seen between groups for
central cues. This dissociation would indicate that after mild
TBI the attentional system has difficultly disengaging
attention after being exogenously captured, while
nevertheless maintaining normal levels of volitional control
over endogenous orienting. Lastly, and perhaps most
importantly, the present findings demonstrate the need for
future research involving precise measurements of
information processing.

References
Bazarian, J., Zhong, J., Blyth, B., Zhu, T., Kavcic, V., &
Peterson, D. (2007). Diffusion tensor imaging detects
clinically important axonal damage after mild traumatic
brain injury: a pilot study. Journal of Neurotrauma,
24(9), 1447-1459.
Borgaro, S., Prigatano, G., Kwasnica, C., Alcott, S., &
Cutter, N. (2004). Disturbances in affective
communication following brain injury. Brain Injury,
18(1), 33-39.
Cicerone, K. (1997). Clinical sensitivity of four measures of
attention to mild traumatic brain injury. The Clinical
Neuropsychologist, 11(3), 266-272.
Cicerone, K., & Azulay, J. (2002). Diagnostic utility of
attention measures in postconcussion syndrome. The
Clinical Neuropsychologist, 16(3), 280-289.
Crawford, M., Knight, R., & Alsop, B. (2007). Speed of
word retrieval in postconcussion syndrome. Journal of
the International Neuropsychological Society, 13(01),
178-182.
De Monte, V., Geffen, G., May, C., McFarland, K., Heath,
P., & Neralic, M. (2005). The acute effects of mild
traumatic brain injury on finger tapping with and
without word repetition. Journal of Clinical and
Experimental Neuropsychology, 27(2), 224-239.
Desimone, R., & Duncan, J. (1995). Neural mechanisms of
selective visual attention. Annual review of
neuroscience, 18(1), 193-222.
Diehr, M., Heaton, R., Miller, W., & Grant, I. (1998). The
Paced Auditory Serial Addition Task (PASAT): norms
for age, education, and ethnicity. Assessment, 5(4), 375.

2590

Dikmen, S., Machamer, J., & Temkin, N. (2001). Mild head
injury: facts and artifacts. Journal of Clinical and
Experimental Neuropsychology, 23(6), 729-738.
Dixon, W. (1991). Staircase bioassay: the up-and-down
method. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 15(1),
47-50.
Eriksen, B., & Eriksen, C. (1974). Effects of noise letters
upon the identification of a target letter in a nonsearch
task. Perception & Psychophysics, 16(1), 143-149.
Forster, K., & Forster, J. (2003). DMDX: A Windows
display program with millisecond accuracy. Behavior
Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 35(1),
116.
Gentilini, M., Nichelli, P., Schoenhuber, R., Bortolotti, P.,
Tonelli,
L.,
Falasca,
A.,
et
al.
(1985).
Neuropsychological evaluation of mild head injury.
Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery & Psychiatry,
48(2), 137.
Goldstein, F., Levin, H., Goldman, W., Clark, A., &
Altonen, T. (2001). Cognitive and neurobehavioral
functioning after mild versus moderate traumatic brain
injury in older adults. Journal of the International
Neuropsychological Society, 7(03), 373-383.
Hall, R., & Chapman, M. (2005). Definition, diagnosis, and
forensic implications of postconcussional syndrome.
Psychosomatics, 46(3), 195.
Jonides, J. (1981). Voluntary versus automatic control over
the mindís eyeís movement. Attention and performance
IX, 9, 187-203.
Lee, H., Lyketsos, C., & Rao, V. (2003). Pharmacological
management of the psychiatric aspects of traumatic
brain injury. International Review of Psychiatry, 15(4),
359-370.
Levin, H., Wilde, E., Chu, Z., Yallampalli, R., Hanten, G.,
Li, X., et al. (2008). Diffusion tensor imaging in
relation to cognitive and functional outcome of
traumatic brain injury in children. The Journal of head
trauma rehabilitation, 23(4), 197.
McMillan, T., & Glucksman, E. (1987). The
neuropsychology of moderate head injury. Journal of
Neurology, Neurosurgery & Psychiatry, 50(4), 393.
Niogi, S., Mukherjee, P., Ghajar, J., Johnson, C., Kolster,
R., Sarkar, R., et al. (2008). Extent of microstructural
white matter injury in postconcussive syndrome

correlates with impaired cognitive reaction time: a 3T
diffusion tensor imaging study of mild traumatic brain
injury. American Journal of Neuroradiology, 29(5),
967.
Pellegrino, G., Basso, G., & Frassinetti, F. (1997). Spatial
extinction on double asynchronous stimulation.
Neuropsychologia, 35(9), 1215-1223.
Posner, M., Walker, J., Friedrich, F., & Rafal, R. (1984).
Effects of parietal injury on covert orienting of
attention. Journal of Neuroscience, 4(7), 1863.
Posner, M., Walker, J., Friedrich, F., & Rafal, R. (1987).
How do the parietal lobes direct covert attention?
Neuropsychologia, 25(1), 135-145.
Reitan, R., & Wolfson, D. (1986). The Halstead-Reitan
Neuropsychological Test Battery.
Ruff, R., & Allen, C. (1996). Ruff 2 & 7 Selective Attention
Test: Professional Manual: Psychological Assessment
Resources.
Schretlen, D., & Shapiro, A. (2003). A quantitative review
of the effects of traumatic brain injury on cognitive
functioning. International Review of Psychiatry, 15(4),
341-349.
Shore, D. I., Spence, C., & Klein, R. M. (2001). Visual prior
entry. Psychological Science, 12(3), 205-212.
Spence, C., Shore, D. I., & Klein, R. M. (2001).
Multisensory prior entry. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 130(4), 799-832.
Stelmach, L. B., & Herdman, C. M. (1991). Directed
attention and perception of temporal order. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 17(2), 539-550.
Stroop, J. (1935). Studies of interference in serial verbal
reactions. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 18(6),
643-662.
Theeuwes, J. (2010). Top-down and bottom-up control of
visual selection. Acta psychologica.
Wechsler, D. (1955). Manual for the Wechsler Adult
Intelligence Scale.
West, G. L., Stevens, S. A., Pun, C., & Pratt, J. (2008).
Visuospatial experience modulates attentional capture:
evidence from action video game players. Journal of
Vision, 8(16), 13 11-19.

2591

