UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Acquiring English dative verbs: proficiency effects in German L2 learners

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/78c1t032

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Wolk, Christoph
Wolfer, Sascha
Baumann, Peter
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Acquiring English dative verbs: proficiency effects in German L2 learners
Christoph Wolk* (christoph.wolk@frias.uni-freiburg.de), Sascha Wolfer† , Peter Baumann† ,
Barbara Hemforth‡ , Lars Konieczny*†
* Freiburg

Institute for Advanced Studies, Starkenstr. 44
D-79104 Freiburg i. Br., Germany
† Center for Cognitive Science, University of Freiburg, Friedrichstr. 50
D-79098 Freiburg i. Br., Germany
‡ Laboratoire de Psychologie et de Neuropsychologie Cognitives, CNRS, Université Paris Descartes,
71 ave Edouard Vaillant, 92100 Boulogne-Billancourt, France
Abstract
This paper investigates the influence of probabilistic information in the second language on the processing of English dative alternation constructions in German learners of English.
We present two eye-tracking studies (visual world and reading)
with evidence that the probabilistic patterns of the target language influence L2 processing when the initial preference is violated, and indications that these patterns have a greater effect
on more experienced speakers. We also observed a constrasteffect of L1, such that comprehenders expected constructions
that occur more often in L2 than in L1, even if L2 lexical statistics suggested otherwise.
Keywords: Sentence processing, dative alternation, second
language acquisition, expectation-based language processing

Introduction
In many languages, semantically dative sentences can be realized with two different object orders that only slightly differ in meaning, one in which the recipient comes before the
theme and one where the reverse is true. In English, the former ordering is achieved by two bare noun phrases, as in
(1-a), and the latter by having the recipient as a prepositional
phrase, as in (1-b).
(1) a.
b.

double object dative (DO)
I gave [her]recipient [the book]theme .
prepositional dative (PO)
I gave [the book]theme to [her]recipient .

The dative alternation has received considerable attention
from first- and second language acquisition researchers during the 1980s, especially from the perspective of generative grammar. These studies focused primarily on investigating the following two questions by means of grammaticality judgments and sentence completion tasks: First, how well
do learners acquire hard constraints on the possibility of alternation, such as the fixed prepositional realization of most
verbs of Latin origin such as donate; second, what is the order
in which speakers acquire the possible realizations for verbs
that do alternate. Major results (e.g. in Mazurkewich, 1985;
Mazurkewich & White, 1984) were that verb-specific constraints are acquirable as hard constraints for first language
learners with rare errors, but are only learned as softer constraints — or sometimes not learned at all — for second language learners. With regard to acquisition order, the prepositional dative realization tends to be acquired earlier and easier
for second language learners.

Recent research on first language (L1) dative alternation
patterns, however, has switched the focus from presumably
’hard’ constraints on the possibility of alternation to the
softer, probabilistic determinants of actually observed variation. This was motivated by cross-linguistic similarities
in grammatical preferences (Bresnan, Dingare, & Manning,
2001) as well as the fact that in both naturally occurring language and experimental investigation ’hard’ constraints turn
out to be surprisingly violable (Bresnan & Nikitina, 2008;
Bresnan, 2007) while simultaneous consideration of multiple ’soft’ constraints led to considerable success in prediction of realizations, reading time, and fluency of production
(Bresnan, Cueni, Nikitina, & Baayen, 2007; Bresnan & Ford,
2010; Tily et al., 2009). With regard to acquisition, children
have been shown to mirror the probabilistic realization patterns of their environment (Marneffe, Grimm, Arnon, Kirby,
& Bresnan, to appear). Second language studies within this
probabilistic paradigm, however, are still rare; one exception
is the study by Frishkoff, Levin, Pavlik, Idemaru, and Jong
(2008), who used the results of (Bresnan et al., 2007) to investigate how both native and second language (L2) speakers learn to predict dative choice from examples, and found
that L2 learners improve quickly when presented with stimuli
containing a high degree of contrast between alternation preferences. Individual factors that were found to be reliable predictors for L1 speakers in corpus models have, however, also
been shown to influence L2 learning at various proficiency
levels. These include among others pronominality (Le Compagnon, 1984), givenness and persistence (Marefat, 2005),
and weight (Tanaka, 1968; Callies & Szczesniak, 2008).
The goal of this paper is to investigate how attuned L2
learners are to fine probabilistic details of their target language. One predictor that is, due to its inherently probabilistic nature, especially suited for this research question is verb
bias. More specifically, each dative verb has a specific idiosyncratic degree of preference in alternation choice; this
preference is in general not predictable from semantics or
morphology. A learner’s acquisition of verb bias should thus
be seen as direct instances of fundamentally experience-based
learning. The experiments reported here are based on English
L2 learners with German as L1. Like English, and unlike
most L1s of previous studies, German has a double object dative; in contrast, the use of the prepositional dative is limited

2401

Figure 1: Visual stimuli example (Tily et al., 2008)

to certain verbs.

Visual World Study
Tily et al. (2008) conducted a visual world eye-tracking experiment capable of tapping into very early and fine-grained
expectations built up during sentence comprehension. Participants were looking at visual stimuli with depictions of the
agent, recipient and theme of the sentence they were listening to simultaneously. Using verbs that either had a double
object or prepositional object bias they found that participants were sensitive to the statistic information conveyed by
the verbs. Anticipatory eye-movements (Altmann & Kamide,
1999) towards the depiction of the first argument arrived reliably earlier when it was compatible with the argument order
suggested by the verb bias (Tily et al., 2008). The expectation effect showed up even at the second argument, where animacy information already could have disambiguated the arguments’ thematic role as recipient (animate) or theme (inanimate). Since this paradigm and the experiment established
very early and subtle effects of statistical biases, they seem
very well suited for our purpose of investigating interference
effects in second language learners. We therefore reran Tily
et al. (2008)’s study in our lab in Freiburg with German L2
learners of English, varying in L2 proficiency.

Materials and Design
The materials contained seven pairs of verbs, which were
picked to allow sentences to be constructed with the same
nouns as recipient and theme. For each pair of verbs, four sets
of subject, theme and recipient nouns were chosen, yielding
28 sentence pairs. From each sentence pair four versions were
constructed along a 2×2 design (see sentences (2)) crossing
the factors verb bias (towards prepositional object construction vs. towards double object construction) and construction
(prepositional object, PO vs. double object, DO), yielding
112 sentences. Stimuli were rotated and distributed onto four
lists such that each list contained exactly one condition of
each item, and in any given list, each condition occurred the
same number of times. Forty-four filler items not containing datives were added. The order of items in each list was
randomized. To avoid subtle auditory cues, sentences were
cross-spliced so that the part up to and including the verb was
standardized across conditions.
(2) a.

b.

PO/DO bias, PO construction
The maid will offer/serve the wine to the prince.
PO/DO bias, DO construction
The maid will offer/serve the prince the wine.

Participants and Procedure
We tracked gaze positions from 38 participants on depictions
of the subject, recipient and theme of the stimulus sentences.
The picture of the subject always appeared at the top of the

screen, the recipient and theme appeared at the bottom, their
position (left or right) was cross-balanced over all trials. At
the beginning of each trial, the depictions were presented visually with corresponding words for two seconds (Figure 1).
After the appearance of a fixation cross, the visual stimulus
was presented without words, and the target sentence was presented auditorily. Gaze position was recorded with an EyeLink 1000 (SR Research) and participants were paid e 7.50
or received course credit for their participation. After the experiment, participants’ scores in a subset of the TOEFL test
(structure section) were collected.
Participants were assigned into two proficiency groups by
means of a median split (a score of 15 out of 20) on the test
scores.

Hypotheses
If German L2-learners have captured the subtle statistical biases of English, we would expect a pattern similar to that of
native English speakers. However, depending on their proficiency level, they might not yet have picked up all those
subtleties, and should then exhibit one of several behaviors:
1. Beginners might exhibit a general bias towards the word
order predominant in L1 (German). That would predict
a general expectation of Double-Object constructions, i.e.
the expectation of the recipient in first argument position,
and the expectation of the theme in second argument position.
2. More proficient learners might have captured some more
fine grained differences between English and German, e.g.
the fact that prepositional objects are far more common in
English that in German. In that sense, PO-constructions
might just in general sound more English (contrast effect).
3. Highly proficient learners might have captured even the
fine-grained statistical biases of the L2.

Results
Figures 2 & 3 show a clear general tendency to look at the recipient (black lines) first, irrespective of the construction. In

2402

Figure 2: Looks to argument-depictions in double object construction. (a) High-proficiency group (b) Low-proficiency group
(b)
0.7

0.7

(a)

0.6
0.5
0.3
0.2
0.1

show
send
0

the princess
500

the necklace

1000

1500

The pirate will

0.0

0.0

The pirate will

recipient - do-bias
recipient - po-bias
theme - do-bias
theme - po-bias
agent - do-bias
agent - po-bias

0.4

Fixation proportion

0.4
0.3
0.1

0.2

Fixation proportion

0.5

0.6

recipient - do-bias
recipient - po-bias
theme - do-bias
theme - po-bias
agent - do-bias
agent - po-bias

2000

2500

show
send
0

the princess
500

Time (msec)

the necklace

1000

1500

2000

2500

Time (msec)

Figure 3: Looks to argument-depictions in prepositional object construction. (a) High-proficiency group (b) Low-proficiency
group
(b)

show
send
0

0.7

the necklace to the princess
500

1000

1500

The pirate will

0.0

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

Fixation proportion

0.4
0.3
0.1

0.2

Fixation proportion

The pirate will

recipient - do-bias
recipient - po-bias
theme - do-bias
theme - po-bias
agent - do-bias
agent - po-bias

0.5

0.6

recipient - do-bias
recipient - po-bias
theme - do-bias
theme - po-bias
agent - do-bias
agent - po-bias

0.5

0.6

0.7

(a)

2000

2500

show
send
0

Time (msec)

the necklace to the princess
500

1000

1500

2000

2500

Time (msec)

sentences with PO datives (Figure 3) the recipient is looked at
the most during the whole sentence for DO bias verbs (solid
lines), while for PO verbs (dotted lines), there are early looks
at the theme (light blue lines), which is the actual first argument in the PO construction. This pattern can be observed for
both proficiency groups.

almost no difference between verb biases (solid vs. dotted
lines). For the high-proficiency group, there is a clear difference depending on verb preference, such that PO-aligned
verbs lead to more and earlier gazes toward the theme, as indicated in the difference between the solid and dotted blue
lines in Figure 2a.

For DO dative realizations, there is a clear difference between proficiency groups: In the low-proficiency group (Figure 2b), gazes follow the constituents of the sentence, with

Discussion
As a first result, participants consistently look at the recipient earlier and longer compared to the theme. This could be

2403

attributed to the fact that the recipient is animate, and thus visually more interesting: Tily et al. (2008) report a similar effect for English native speakers. Another explanation for this
pattern is that German learners of English might generally
expect dative sentences to follow the familiar recipient-theme
pattern from their native language.
In PO dative constructions, verb bias shows a similar effect across proficiency groups, indicating that learners acquire subtle probabilistic patterns in the target language rather
early. This contrasts with the DO datives, where no effect
of verb bias for less proficient speakers was found. How
could this be? Consider that, as noted earlier, participants
tend to look at the recipient first, probably for non-linguistic
reasons. In the PO condition (theme-first), this is incompatible with the actual linguistic realization, hence triggering an
early re-direction of attention. Apparently, learners can make
better use of stored statistical knowledge about language during this phase. DO datives behave differently, in that their
order matches the default order. Less experienced speakers
can just ignore verb bias, as they are already looking at the
correct image. Learners with more experience, on the other
hand, are led astray by their probabilistic expectations, leading to more gazes towards the argument matching the bias,
but not the observed realization. In general, the results are
consistent with the hypothesis that less proficient speakers
are more strongly affected by L1 generic construction-biases,
and even more so when the construction meets the expectation, although it is not possible to disentangle the influence of
structural bias and visual interestingness on the basis of this
experiment. More proficient speakers have captured more
lexically specific statistic biases of the L2 and exhibit these
across constructions.

Verb bias was captured by the best linear unbiased predictors (BLUPs). The BLUPs were calculated based on the large
regression model reported in Bresnan et al. (2007). Verbs
across the whole range of attested verb biases, i.e. from almost exclusively prepositional object to almost exclusively
double object, were used.
(3) a.

animate/collective/pronominal recipient, PO construction
The delivery man | will | offer | the materials | to the
worker/the factory/him | before the end of the week.

b.

animate/collective/pronominal recipient, DO construction
The delivery man | will | offer | the worker/the
factory/him | the materials | before the end of the
week.

Participants and Procedure
The results reported here stem from 29 participants, who received e 7.50 or took part for course credit. 36 target sentences together with 64 filler sentences were presented to the
participants, preceded by 4 training trials. Before each sentence, a fixation target appeared at the position of the first
letter of the sentence, then each sentence was presented in
whole. Each sentence was followed by a comprehension
question. After the experiment, participants completed the
same subset of the TOEFL test as in the first experiment.
Data was collected using an EyeLink 1000 (SR Research)
with chinrest, sampling the pupil position and the cornea reflection at a 1000 Hertz rate.

Results

Reading Study

For data analysis sentences were divided into 6 interest areas
as indicated by " | " in (3) (which were not present in the
actual stimuli). The first area comprised all words up to will,
the second area consisted only of will, followed by an area
which contains only the verb and then two areas consisting
of the first and second verb-argument. The sixth area covered
the rest of the sentence. Only results from the first and the
second argument areas will be reported.

It is still an open question whether verb bias influences L1
comprehenders’ reading of dative sentences. Moreover, the
effects in the visual world study could have been influenced
by the presentation of the visual stimuli before the spoken
target sentence, so that participants could start building expectations even before the sentence was uttered. Finally, by
using written stimuli we could avoid the confounding of animacy and structural bias that was present in the Visual World
experiment. We therefore conducted an eyetracking reading
study. In this study, we also used a more fine-grained representation of verb-biases, which were taken from the entire
spectrum and entered the model as a continuous variable.

Table 1: Mean reading times.

Design and Materials
We constructed 36 English sentences in a 2×3 design (see
the sentences in (3)), crossing the factors dative construction
(prepositional object, PO vs. double object, DO) and type of
recipient (singular animate, ani vs. collective, col vs. pronoun, pro). Stimuli were distributed across six lists according
to a latin square rotation scheme such that each participant
read each item in only one of the conditions.

2404

FPRT
RPD
TRT

POani
563
673
920

FPRT
RPD
TRT

POani
741
834
1213

First argument
POcol POpro DOani
551
543
618
664
755
846
1126 1126
1388
Second argument
POcol POpro DOani
729
388
587
815
453
766
1311 723
1224

DOcol
517
681
1258

DOpro
249
307
464

DOcol
619
916
1402

DOpro
519
629
978

Whole trials were discarded if First Pass Reading Times
for any of the postverbal dative arguments exceeded 2000 ms,
or if no reading time measures were available for either postverbal dative argument or the two preceding regions, which
were used to calculate spill-over covariates, leading to the removal of the data of three participants.
We fitted1 separate linear mixed effects models (Pinheiro
& Bates, 2000) for First Pass Reading Times (FPRT), Regression Path Durations (RPD) and Total Reading Times (TRT).
Our baseline model consisted of the log number of characters in the interest area, as well as the log regression path
durations of the 2 preceding areas as spill-over covariates to
control for possible influences of reading difficulties on prior
regions. Random effects for items and participants as well
as participant-specific random slopes for interest area length
were also included in the baseline model.
We then enriched this baseline model in a stepwise manner.
The experimental factors construction and recipient as well
as the verb bias BLUPs and the TOEFL scores of the participants were consecutively included as fixed effects. Furthermore, we tested all interactions between these factors. Effects
were only included in the model if they improved the overall
fit of the model (as determined by a likelihood-ratio test). We
will restrict our reporting of statistical values to TRTs, as the
effects here are the most consistently reliable; in FPRTs and
RPDs, the predictors usually either reach significance as well,
or trend in the same direction.
Construction had a reliable effect on the first argument
(|t| = 3.401, p > 0.001), and a marginally significant effect
on the second argument (|t| = 1.941, p < 0.0533): in the
prepositional object condition, the first argument (being the
theme, e.g., the materials) was read faster than the first argument in the double object condition (being the recipient, e.g.,
the worker/the factory/him), and the same is true for the second argument. Unsurprisingly, learners with higher TOEFL
scores read faster (first argument: |t| = 2.713, p < 0.001, second argument: |t| = 2.064, p < 0.05). There was also a reliable two-way interaction between verb bias and construction.
In the prepositional dative construction, verb bias did not reliably affect reading time (first argument: |t| = 1.629, p > .1,
second argument |t| = 0.463, p > .6). In the double object construction, however, participants read both the first
(|t| = 2.592, p < .001) and second (|t| = 2.267, p < .05) argument faster, the more the verb was biased toward the double object dative. Finally, we found an effect of recipient
type on the second argument. While there was no difference
between animate and collective recipients (|t| = 0.084, p >
.9), reading times in sentences with pronominal recipients
(|t| = 2.424, p < .05) were reliably faster. In other words:
in prepositional datives, pronominal recipients are read faster
than other recipients, and in double object datives, themes
1 All models were fitted using the statistical software package R
(R Development Core Team, 2011) version 2.12.1, using the lme4
package version 0.999375-33. The reported p values were determined via MCMC sampling, using the function mcmcsamp from the
package lme4.

are read faster after prepositional recipients than after other
recipients. The interaction that could distinguish between
these two cases did not reach significance (likelihood-ratio
test, p < .172); the trend suggests, however, that the effect
results primarily from double object themes being read faster
after pronominal recipients.

General Discussion
The results of the eyetracking-while-reading study share
some similarities with those of the visual world study: both
studies found that learners can make use of subtle statistical
properties of the target language. In the visual world study,
we found an effect of L2 proficiency on the gaze patterns
for the two groups in the DO construction (see Figure 2).
More precisely, proficient learners show eye movement patterns that are influenced by the verb bias; in contrast, such a
difference was not observed for the less proficient group. For
PO datives, both groups showed an effect of verb bias. We argued that this difference results from a general trend toward
looking at the recipient first, which matches the word order
in the double object dative. If the actual realization is not
compatible with this tendency, speakers need to change their
gaze pattern, and the speed of this change is faster if the verb
prefers the prepositional dative. In the DO case, the initial
looking-preference toward the recipient is supported by the
sentence, and an effect of verb bias would require speakers to
look away from the image that matches what they are hearing.
This does not happen for less proficient learners; as they gain
more second language experience, however, the relative importance of stored statistical information increases, so that it
is not only used for repairing gazes that do not fit the expectation, but can actually lead comprehenders astray from the
correct gaze pattern. We provided two possible causes for the
tendency to look at the recipient first: that recipients, which
are animate, are more visually interesting than the inanimate
themes, or that this tendency matches typical pattern of dative realizations in German, where the prepositional dative is
very restricted and the overall word order pattern is strongly
biased towards recipient-theme order.
In the reading study, we found a reliable effect of verb bias
on the total reading times of both the first and the second argument in double object datives, such that a better match between bias and actual realization leads to faster reading times.
While this does indicate that verb bias plays a role while reading, the details of this result seem to be the inverse of those
of the visual world study: instead of a consistent effect in
PO datives, we find an effect on DO datives only. This can,
however, be explained by a similar reasoning. Let us assume
that readers tend to expect the theme-first order. This expectation is correct in PO dative sentences, and verb bias does
not have an effect there. In DO datives, the expectation does
not match the realization, and verb bias has an effect on the
subsequent repair. This assumption is supported by the fact
that reading times in the PO condition were lower for both
post-verbal arguments, and it is consistent with the findings

2405

of previous research that the PO realization tends to be acquired earlier and more easily. Looking back at the interpretation of the visual world study, this suggests that L1 structural bias does not have an effect, and that the recipient-first
patterns observed there are rooted in the visual characteristics of the stimuli. On the other hand, these results would
also be consistent with the three-stage development process
suggested in the hypothesis section of the visual world experiment. The median test scores were rather high for both experiments (15 out of a possible 20); thus it may be that we are
primarily observing differences between learners who have
already built up hypotheses on the ’Englishness’ of the PO
dative. This is, however, not unusual for English as a Second
Language research on the dative alternation, which generally
tends to focus on advanced learners. Still, a broader spectrum
of learners would allow a more complete description of the interplay and development of probabilistic determinants in second language acquisition. Finally, differences in method and
modality of presentation make arguments across both tasks
somewhat difficult, and it would be preferable to fully tease
apart visual animacy and structural bias in the visual world
paradigm. Doing so would, however, require equal animacy
status of both roles in the stimuli, which is difficult to realize given the meaning of typical dative verbs and the need for
simple, clear visualization.

Conclusion
We presented two experiments providing evidence that L2
learners are capable of capturing subtle statistical lexical biases in the second language. These effects show up in both
spoken and written language processing, indicating a complicated interaction of statistical biases of lexical and sentential entities. Acquisition appears to progress from capturing
course grained contrasts to L1 (PO-bias) to more fine grained
construction statistics, including lexical biases.

Acknowledgments
We want to thank Daniel Mueller, Anne Karina Feldmeth, and
Julia Schuldes for many fruitful discussions and their support
in running the experiments.

References
Altmann, G., & Kamide, Y. (1999). Incremental interpretation at verbs: Restricting the domain of subsequent reference. Cognition, 73, 247-264.
Bresnan, J. (2007). Is syntactic knowledge probabilistic? Experiments with the English dative alternation. In S. Featherston & W. Sternefeld (Eds.), Roots: Linguistics in search
of its evidential base. (pp. 77–96). Berlin: Mouton de
Gruyter.
Bresnan, J., Cueni, A., Nikitina, T., & Baayen, H. R. (2007).
Predicting the dative alternation. In G. Boume, I. Kraemer,
& J. Zwarts (Eds.), Cognitive Foundations of Interpretation
(p. 69-94). Amsterdam: Royal Netherlands Academy of
Science.

Bresnan, J., Dingare, S., & Manning, C. D. (2001). Soft constraints mirror hard constraints: voice and person in English and Lummi. In Proceedings of the lfg 01 conference
(pp. 13–32). Stanford: CSLI Publications.
Bresnan, J., & Ford, M. (2010). Predicting syntax: Processing dative constructions in American and Australian varieties of English. Language, 86(1), 186–213.
Bresnan, J., & Nikitina, T. (2008). On the gradience of the
dative alternation. In Reality exploration and discovery:
Pattern interaction in language and life. (pp. 1–23). Stanford: CSLI Publications.
Callies, M., & Szczesniak, K. (2008). Argument realisation, information status and syntactic weight – a learnercorpus study of the dative alternation. In M. Walter
& P. Grommes (Eds.), Fortgeschrittene lernervarietäten
korpuslinguistik und zweitsprachenerwerbsforschung (pp.
165–187). Tübingen: Niemeyer.
Frishkoff, G., Levin, L., Pavlik, P., Idemaru, K., & Jong, N.
de. (2008). A model-based approach to second-language
learning of grammatical constructions. In Proceedings of
the 30th conference of the cognitive science society (pp.
916–921). Washington, D.C..
Le Compagnon, B. (1984). Interference and overgeneralization in second language learning: the acquisition of english
dative verbs by native speakers of french. Language Learning, 34, 39–57.
Marefat, H. (2005). The impact of information structure as a
discourse factor on the acquisition of dative alternation by
L2 learners. Studia Linguistica, 59(1), 66–82.
Marneffe, M.-C. de, Grimm, S., Arnon, I., Kirby, S., & Bresnan, J. (to appear). A statistical model of the grammatical
choices in child production of dative sentences. Language
and Cognitive Processes.
Mazurkewich, I. (1985). Syntactic markedness and language
acquisition. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 7(1),
15–35.
Mazurkewich, I., & White, L. (1984). The acquisition of the
dative alternation: Unlearning overgeneralizations. Cognition, 16, 261–283.
Pinheiro, J. C., & Bates, D. M. (2000). Mixed-effects models
in S and S-PLUS. New York: Springer.
R Development Core Team. (2011). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. Vienna, Austria.
Tanaka, S. (1968). The selective use of specific exemplars
in second-language performance: The case of the dative
alternation. Language Learning, 18(1-2), 63–88.
Tily, H., Gahl, S., Arnon, I., Snider, N., Kothari, A., & Bresnan, J. (2009). Syntactic probabilities affect pronunciation
variation in spontaneous speech. Language and Cognition,
1(2), 147–165.
Tily, H., Hemforth, B., Arnon, I., Shuval, N., Snider, N., &
Wasow, T. (2008). Eye movements reflect comprehenders knowledge of syntactic structure probability. In Architectures and mechanisms for language processing. Cambridge, UK.

2406

