UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Acquiring Word Learning Biases

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8tm653pg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Sim, Zi
Yuan, Sylvia
Xu, Fei

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Acquiring Word Learning Biases
Zi L. Sim (zilin@berkeley.edu)
Sylvia Yuan (shyuan@berkeley.edu)
Fei Xu (fei_xu@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720 USA

Abstract
Previous research has shown that infants can acquire a “shape
bias” in word learning when presented with labels that are
perfectly correlated with object shape. However, little
research examines whether children can acquire a non-shape
word learning bias. Research on inducing this bias can help
inform the origins of the shape bias. In our experiment, 3
year-old children successfully acquired a new bias even with
relatively few objects and a short training session, illustrating
the relevance of the overhypothesis formation account in
explaining the acquisition of early inductive constraints.
Keywords: shape bias; overhypothesis; word learning;
inductive constraints

Introduction
How does a child, learning his/her first language, map
words to their referents? According to Quine (1960), a
young child learning his first language, is similar to a
traveler in a new place without any knowledge of the local
language. When a native speaker says “Gavagai!”, there is
an infinite number of referents for the word, such as whole
objects, parts of objects, or properties of objects. How does
the traveler, or the child, then map the word “gavagai” to the
correct referent?
Early word learning is thus an inductive problem, where
the young child attempts to make inferences about words
and their referents. Children appear to be remarkably
proficient at solving such problems of induction. They
circumvent the mapping problem, and quickly map the
words they hear to the correct object category (Bloom,
2000; Markman, 1989; Carey & Bartlett, 1978).
The apparent ease at which young children learn suggests
that their learning is supported by strong inductive
constraints (Markman, 1989). In the domain of word
learning, a possible inductive constraint is the shape bias
(Landau, Smith & Jones, 1988), the tendency for children to
extend new object names on the basis of shape similarity.
This shape bias has been demonstrated in various studies
(e.g. Landau et al., 1988; Soja, Carey & Spelke, 1991;
Samuelson, 2002) and has also been consistently linked
with an increased rate of noun acquisition in children (e.g.
Smith, Jones, Landau, Gershkoff-Stowe & Samuelson,
2002), suggesting that this particular bias may aid children
in mapping new words to their referents quickly.
How does the shape bias emerge? While one would be
hard-pressed to find a truly nativist account of the shape
bias, some might still argue that the shape bias is an innate

constraint that a child is born with, especially because it
emerges early in development. The nativist account posits
that children are biased to pay attention to shape of objects,
and to generalize labels according to shape. However, such
a nativist account neither addresses how the shape bias came
to be an innate constraint, nor the processes and
mechanisms behind the bias (Xu, Dewar & Perfors, 2009).
Furthermore, children do not approach word learning with
an expectation that extension of labels is solely guided by
shape similarity. For example, children consider the
taxonomic categories (Cimpian & Markman, 2005) and the
solidity (Soja et al., 1991) of objects. Hence, a nativist
account of the shape bias is one that is difficult to defend.
While a nativist account of the shape bias has been widely
rejected, other theories fall on a continuum between the
constraint being innate, and the constraint being learnt. The
“shape-as-cue” account, for example, (Bloom, 2000;
Markson, Diesendruck & Bloom, 2008) falls at the center of
such a continuum.
The proponents of the “shape-as-cue” account argue that
children organize objects by shape because shape serves as a
reliable cue to object kinds. In this account, a shape bias
emerges from two different understandings: first, children
understand that count nouns refer to object categories
(Dewar & Xu, 2007) and second, they perceive shape to be
a reliable and available cue to object category membership.
Consequently, on this account, the perceptual dimension
of shape is not special – when other cues such as texture or
function are more reliable cues for object category
membership, children use them in their extension of novel
names (Booth & Waxman, 2002; Ware & Booth, 2010), and
a shape bias will not emerge.
However, the shape-as-cue account leaves the origins of
the shape bias unaddressed. For example, how do children
come to believe that shape is a reliable cue of object
category membership? We investigate this question in the
current study, by asking whether children can acquire a
different bias when given the relevant input.
Another account, the Attentional Learning Account
(ALA) proposed by Smith and her colleagues (Smith et al.,
2002), addresses the origins of the shape bias more fully, by
positing that the bias is a learnt constraint. According to
ALA, the development of word learning biases is supported
by connectionist networks, which allow children to learn
from the many “correlations among linguistic devices,
object properties, and perceptual category organization”
(Colunga & Smith, 2005) in their learning environment.

2544

For example, solid rigid objects tend to be organized into
categories according to their shapes. Children notice such
regularities and begin to form associations between object
names and object shapes in individual categories. This
association forms the first-order generalization, which refers
to the structure of individual categories: “cups are cupshaped; balls are ball-shaped; etc.”. Then children make
associations across these learned categories, forming the
second-order generalization: “X‟s are X-shaped,” and that
categories are organized by the similarities in shape. These
learned associations later direct children to attend to shape
when learning new names (Smith et al., 2002).
In summary, the ALA argues that the shape bias is a
learnt constraint, and derives entirely from the evidence that
children encounter in their learning environment and the
associations that they make between names of object
categories and the properties of objects.
While ALA makes a strong case for how the shape bias
emerges from regularities in children‟s environment, there
are alternative explanations for the bias‟ origins. A recent
framework construes the shape bias as an overhypothesis,
describing its emergence via computational principles of
hierarchical Bayesian model (Goodman, 1955; Kemp,
Perfors & Tenenbaum, 2007; Xu et al., 2009). According to
Goodman (1955), overhypothesis refers to an over-arching
generalization that one makes across different categories. As
such, an overhypothesis is analogous to the second-order
generalization identified in the ALA by Smith et al. (2002).
The point of divergence between the ALA and the
overhypothesis formation account occurs in their respective
explanations for how children acquire the higher order
generalizations that aid their noun extensions. On the one
hand, the ALA appears to be a bottom-up associative
process, as suggested by the 4-step model describing the
ALA in Smith et al. (2002). In relation to higher order
generalizations, the authors argue that “the child makes a
higher-order generalization across learnt categories about
the common structure of named object categories,” implying
that the first order generalizations form the basis for higher
order generalizations. Thus, children first begin by
collecting evidence for lower levels of generalizations, and
then move into making higher order generalizations.
On the other hand, the overhypothesis formation account
describes learners as collecting statistical evidence and
making generalizations at multiple levels simultaneously. In
fact, it may be possible to make a second order
generalization before the first order generalization, or to be
more confident about the higher-order generalization (Kemp
et al., 2007; Xu et al., 2009).
Accordingly, ALA strikes one as a rather laborious
process that requires a lot of time for learning and large
amounts of data, while the overhypothesis formation
account suggests that learning can occur at rapid speeds
with relatively sparse data.
Therefore, the overhypothesis formation account provides
a new framework to explain how the shape bias may be
quickly acquired from inputs in the child‟s environment. For

example, when children encounter evidence that cups have
cup-shapes, their hypothesis that “cups are all cup-shaped”
has an increased probability of being true, while other
hypotheses, such as “cups are all red in color,” decrease in
probability correspondingly. At the same time, their
overhypothesis that “X‟s are all X-shaped” has an increased
probability of being true as well. Through the collection of
data describing labeling instances and adjusting their
hypotheses accordingly, children can acquire a shape bias
that manifests itself as a constraint, an expectation that
objects in the same category tend to have the same shape
(Kemp et al., 2007). More importantly, the overhypothesis
account also predicts that learners can rapidly learn to apply
these generalizations to new instances, extending brand-new
labels even when provided with only one or a few positive
exemplars. The overhypothesis formation account is thus a
powerful mechanism that can account for the acquisition of
this inductive constraint.
Despite their differences, both accounts have a common
premise – that the shape bias is learnt. Two lines of
empirical research can demonstrate that the shape bias is
indeed acquired from the statistical regularities in the
environment: one is to conduct training studies on the shape
bias itself; the other is to see if young children can be
trained to acquire a different bias given the relevant input.
In the first line of research, training studies are used to
induce a shape bias in children younger than the age at
which they show a reliable tendency to extend novel names
by shape. In Smith et al. (2002), experimenters labeled
objects that were organized perfectly according to shape,
once a week for 7 weeks to 17-month-old infants. Objects of
the same shape had the same label, and this training
facilitated the emergence of a shape bias. Clearly, the shape
bias is learnt from input in the environment, justifying the
Attentional Learning Account.
However, note that these results are also consistent with
the overhypothesis formation account. In fact, the
sparseness of the data presented, coupled with the speedy
success of the infants, suggests that the overhypothesis
formation account may be more in line with the results than
the ALA (Xu et al., 2009).
In the present study, we pursue the second line of
research, attempting to show that the shape bias is learnt by
inducing a non-shape word learning bias in children through
training. If the shape bias is indeed acquired from data in the
environment, presenting children with objects organized and
named according to similarities in a different dimension,
such as color or pattern, should cause them to pick up a
color or pattern bias respectively.
One study that had earlier explored this line of research is
Samuelson (2002), which provided 15 – 20 month-old
infants with intensive naming experience using solid
exemplars either organized by shape similarity (Shapebiased condition) or material similarity (Material-biased
condition). Infants in the Shape-biased condition extended
labels by shape reliably in the generalization task. However,

2545

infants in the Material-biased condition did not reliably
extend labels by material.
As the author speculates, the children did not acquire a
material bias potentially because of their previously learnt
noun labels, which prevented them from developing a
material bias. However, we contend that the non-emergence
of the material bias may have resulted from material being a
more subtle dimension than shape. Hence, the infants might
have been overwhelmed by the salience of the shape
dimension, and failed to notice that the exemplars were
labeled and organized by their material. Accordingly, using
a different dimension with a higher perceptual salience may
facilitate the emergence of a non-shape word learning bias.
Recent research has illustrated that infants have the
capacity to form overhypotheses over different dimensions,
such as shape and color. In Dewar & Xu (2010), an
experimenter sampled from 3 boxes and produced 4 objects
from each box that were identical in shape. 9 month-old
infants looked significantly longer when the objects taken
from a fourth box did not match in shape, indicating that
they had formed an overhypothesis from the familiarization
trials that “objects from the same box are uniform in shape”.
Furthermore, this learning was not limited to the shape
dimension; infants could form an overhypothesis about
color uniformity given the appropriate input.
These results suggest that the mechanism for
overhypothesis formation is present very early, and that
infants have the capacity to acquire a non-shape bias, at
least in non-linguistic tasks. Thus, we consider it likely that
children can rapidly develop a different bias when presented
with appropriate regularities in a word learning context.
We designed an experiment asking if children can acquire
a non-shape word learning bias when provided with the
appropriate regularities. The procedure was modeled after
Smith et al. (2002), except that the training phase was
limited to a single 10-minute session. Three year-old
children were provided with a naming experience consisting
of exemplars categorized according to either shape or
pattern. They were then asked to make first-order
generalizations, where they had to extend a label that they
had previously heard on to a novel object, and second-order
generalizations, where they had to extend a novel label to a
new object. Also, we chose to use pattern as the dimension
of interest, as it is another perceptual dimension that is
readily available. With such a short training session, a rapid
induction of a non-shape word learning bias would suggest
that overhypothesis formation can better account for the
developmental origins of the shape bias.

Method
Participants
Forty-eight English-speaking 3-year-olds (23 boys and 25
girls) with a mean age of 38.7 months (range = 29.9 to 46.9
months) were tested. All were recruited from Berkeley,
California, and its surrounding communities. An additional
9 children were tested but excluded due to failing to make a

correct choice during the practice trials (N = 3), side bias1
(N = 3), parental interference (N = 2) or refusal to point (N
= 1).

Materials and Procedure
The children were tested individually in the laboratory in
front of a laptop, with their parents seated behind them in
the testing room. Each child was randomly assigned to a
Shape condition, a Pattern condition, or a Control condition.
They were introduced to novel nonsense words under the
cover story of two stuffed animals (Doggy and Mr.
Crocodile) sharing their language with us, an animal for
each critical block. The cover story served to discourage the
children from possibly using the biases they may have
previously acquired. Novel objects with various shapes and
patterns were presented on the laptop. The words labeling
the novel objects were used in sentences with count nouns
syntax, such as “Look, this is a blick!”.
Shape and Pattern Conditions The procedure for the
experimental conditions (Shape or Pattern) consisted of a
practice phase and 2 critical blocks of trials. Each critical
block consisted of a training phase, followed by a test phase.
There was a 1 minute interval between the 2 critical blocks,
to re-engage the child in the task.
In the practice phase, each child received 2 practice trials.
In each practice trial, the child was presented with a target
item – a novel-looking object – that was labeled with a
novel name (e.g. blick, geel, toopa). Then, the child was
presented with 2 choice items: an identity match, which was
identical to the target item, and a distracter, which differed
from the target item in both shape and pattern.
In the training phase of each critical block, each child saw
16 novel objects, presented either in 2 categories with 8
members each (2-category set), or 4 categories with 4
members each (4-category set). In the shape condition, each
category had objects that were identical in shape but
differed in pattern, and in the pattern condition, each
category had objects that were identical in pattern but
differed in shape. (See Figure 1.) Objects in the same
category were labeled with the same nonsense word. Each
object category was presented 3 times, and was associated
with its label 5 times.
In the test phase, each child was given a first-order
generalization test, and a second-order generalization test. In
the first-order test, each child was presented with a familiar
target object, an object previously shown in the training
phase. This object was paired with its name, “Doggy said
this was a X.” At test, the child was shown 2 new objects: a
shape-match object, which was identical to the target in
shape but not pattern, and a pattern-match object, which
was identical to the target in pattern but not shape. (See
Figure 2.) The child was then requested to choose between
the two objects by being asked, “Can you point to another
X?”

2546

1

5 or more points to the same side out of 6 trials. See procedure.

pattern-extension (extending labels to novel objects
according to pattern).

Results

SHAPE
CONDITION

An alpha level of 0.05 was used in all statistical analyses.
Preliminary analyses of the percentage of pattern-extension
found no effects of gender, age-split (whether the children
were younger or older than the median age of the group) or
category structure (2- vs. 4-category set used in training
phase). Subsequent analyses were thus collapsed over these
variables.

PATTERN
CONDITION

Figure 1: One set of stimuli used in training phase.

Familiar Target

Shape-Match

Pattern-Match

FIRST-ORDER GENERALIZATION
Figure 3: Percentage of pattern-extension in pattern, shape
and control conditions. Error bars represent SE.

Novel Target

Shape-Match

Pattern-Match

SECOND-ORDER GENERALIZATION
Figure 2: One set of stimuli used for test trials.
In the second order test, each child was presented first
with a novel target object, an object that had never been
used in the training phase. This novel object was then paired
with a novel label, “Doggy told me this is a X.” At test, the
child was asked to extend the novel label by choosing
between 2 new objects: a shape-match object and a patternmatch object. (See Figure 2.)
Control Condition In the control condition, the training
phases were removed from the critical blocks, and the
children entered the test phase immediately after the
practice phase. The control condition provided a baseline
measure of the children‟s extension of novel words
according to shape or pattern.

Coding
In the test trials of the 3 conditions, choosing a patternmatch object was scored as 1 point, and the maximum score
for each child was 4 as there were 4 test trials in total. The
children‟s scores were then converted into percentage of

As Figure 3 indicates, the children‟s percentage of
pattern-extension varied according to the condition they
were assigned to. Using the children‟s percentage of
pattern-extension in the test trials, a 3x2 repeated measures
analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed with
Condition (Shape vs. Pattern vs. Control) as a betweensubjects factor and Order of Generalization (1st order
generalization vs. 2nd order generalization) as a withinsubjects factor. The analysis revealed a significant main
effect of Condition, F (2, 45) = 6.91, p = .002; the children
are significantly more likely to make extensions by pattern
in the Pattern condition than in the Shape or Control
conditions. The analysis also revealed no main effect of
Order of Generalization, F (1, 45) < 1; children were equally
successful in the 1st-order generalization task and the 2ndorder generalization task. There was no significant
interaction between Condition and Order of Generalization,
F (2, 45) < 1.
Critically, we were interested in the effect of training in
both the Shape and Pattern conditions. Children in the
Shape condition extended labels to new instances by pattern
16% (SE = 6) of the time, Patten condition 59% (SE = 10)
of the time and Control condition 27% ( SE = 10) of the
time. Children in the Pattern condition were significantly
more likely to make extensions according to pattern, as
compared to the children in the Shape condition, t(30) =
3.58, p = .001 and the children in the Control condition,
t(30) = 2.42, p = .02. The children in the Shape and Control

2547

conditions did not differ in the percentage of patternextension, t(30) < 1. Note that the comparisons were not
made against .5, as children were not equally likely to
extend labels by shape and pattern without training. In fact,
at chance levels, children‟s percentage of pattern extension
is .27, as demonstrated in the Control condition.

Discussion
The present study examined whether 3 year-olds can acquire
a new bias in a word learning context. The results
demonstrate that the children can. After receiving rather
sparse evidence in a short training phase (about 10 minutes),
the children quickly made first-order and second-order
generalizations about how the objects were being labeled
and categorized. Using these generalizations, they extended
labels to novel objects by shape or pattern, depending on the
training condition that they were assigned to. Children in the
Pattern condition were significantly more likely to make
extensions of novel words according to pattern, as compared
to children in the Shape condition or the Control condition.
These results provide evidence that children are capable of
acquiring non-shape word learning biases from appropriate
regularities in the environment.
Furthermore, children performed similarly in the first and
second order generalization tasks after a short training
session, suggesting that they were collecting statistical
evidence at multiple levels simultaneously.
The effect of training in the Pattern condition appears to
be strong, as indicated in Figure 3. In the Control condition,
we measured children‟s percentage of pattern-extension at
baseline, without any exposure to training that consistently
organized and labeled objects by shape or pattern. The
children in the Control condition extended labels according
to pattern 27% of the time (i.e., by shape 73% of the time),
suggesting that our child participants had a pre-existing
shape bias, possibly acquired from the naming experiences
that they had in their learning environment. Yet, the
children in the Pattern condition were significantly more
likely to extend labels by pattern, demonstrating that the
pattern training had facilitated the emergence of a “pattern
bias” in a word learning context. Clearly, children do not
blindly attend to the shape of objects, and do not broadly
apply the same shape bias in extending labels for all objects.
Regrettably, our results do not rule out another plausible
explanation: instead of learning that the objects were labeled
according to pattern, the children in the Pattern condition
simply learnt that the objects were not labeled by shape.
Even if this alternative explanation was really the case, the
results still suggest that the Pattern training causes the
children‟s shape bias to be temporarily overridden, and also
interestingly induces a different sort of bias, albeit not the
one we expected. Future studies can rule out this alternative
explanation by using a third object in test trials.
The speedy induction of a non-shape word learning bias
with rather sparse evidence from the study‟s training phase
suggests the presence of a mechanism in children that
allows them to acquire word learning biases very rapidly

with few exemplars. The results support the overhypothesis
formation account, suggesting that children are rational
learners. By using the evidence that they observe, children
update their hypotheses at multiple levels simultaneously,
acquiring inductive constraints that in turn support their
learning. In our case, these constraints manifest as word
learning biases, aiding children in mapping labels accurately
to their referents.
Although the hierarchical Bayesian model that underlie
the overhypothesis formation account do not specify the
exact process of acquiring hypotheses, we can speculate that
comparison might be one way to account for how
hypotheses arise. When children compare objects, structural
alignment invites extraction of common structures, which
translates into the generation of new hypotheses (Christie &
Gentner, 2010). At present, Gentner and her colleagues have
focused on how comparison is applied to first-order
generalizations, limiting the application of analogical
learning models to the discussion of shape bias. The
contributions of these models will certainly be magnified
with future studies that examine the role of comparison on
higher order generalizations.
In principle, connectionist models that underline the
Attentional Learning Account (ALA) (Smith et al., 2002;
Smith & Samuelson, 2006; Colunga & Smith, 2005) can
also explain the results from the present study. Despite the
rapid speed of learning displayed by the children in the
Pattern condition, these results can be accounted by
connectionist models with the appropriate parameters.
However, we believe that this account is less likely, as
connectionist models tend to be slow and laborious,
requiring extensive amounts of evidence and long periods of
time for learning before making appropriate generalizations.
Future research into the points of divergence between
these connectionist models, which describe the ALA, and
the hierarchical Bayesian model, which describes the
overhypothesis formation account, will shed light on the
nature of inductive constraints that support children‟s early
learning.
One such point of divergence relates to the category
structure of stimuli presented during training sessions.
Connectionist models posit that first-order generalizations
are made before second-order generalizations, and thus
predicts that the strength of first-order generalizations
increases as number of exemplars per category increases.
Conversely, the hierarchical Bayesian model posits that the
levels of generalization are made simultaneously, thus the
strength of the learner‟s generalizations depends more
greatly on the number of categories presented (Kemp et al.,
2007).
Consequently, the hierarchical Bayesian model predicts
that the children‟s accuracy in the generalization tasks will
be higher if they were presented with the 4-category set of
stimuli than if they were presented with the 2-category set
of stimuli. However, no main effect was found for Category
Structure in the present study. A likely explanation for this
null result is that the difference between the 4-category and

2548

2-category set is too small to influence the children‟s
accuracy in the generalization task. Hence, future studies
can make this difference more extreme, e.g. 2 categories
with 8 members each, vs. 8 categories with 2 members each.
Our results provide strong support for the existence of an
inductive learning mechanism in children that requires little
data and training. Furthermore, this mechanism operates at
multiple levels of generalization and thus explains how
inductive biases can emerge rapidly early in development.
This mechanism is also most likely domain-general and
can be applied to both word learning and non-linguistic
tasks. Recent studies have demonstrated that children
display different biases for objects in different domains; for
example, they consider both shape and texture when
extending labels to novel animate objects (Booth, Waxman
& Huang, 2005). Overhypothesis formation can potentially
account for all these results, as it provides a framework in
which the child can use both conceptual and perceptual
knowledge as data to update their hypotheses about how
objects are labeled and categorized in their environment.
Finally, our results have implications for how other
cognitive biases appear early in development. As our results
indicate that children can quickly acquire a new word
learning bias, they counter intuitions that constraints
emerging early in development must be innate. Inductive
constraints can be acquired rapidly through a child‟s
interactions with his environment during his early years.
In summary, the present study attempts to address the
developmental origins of the shape bias. This study adds to
other training studies that have induced word learning biases
in children (Smith et al., 2002; Samuelson, 2002) and
extends these studies by documenting the acquisition of a
non-shape word learning bias. To our knowledge, the
present study is the first to use the pattern dimension to
induce a non-shape bias, and the results are encouraging.
These results strongly suggest that the shape bias is a learnt
constraint, acquired from children‟s observations of how
objects are consistently named and categorized in their
learning environment. In the process of collecting evidence
and making generalizations about an individual category,
children simultaneously make higher order generalizations,
facilitating the rapid emergence of an overhypothesis, which
manifests naturally in development as a shape bias.
However, this shape bias is not a static inductive constraint
– it can be overridden when other properties of objects are
more reliable cues to object category membership.

Acknowledgments
We thank the Infant Cognition and Language Lab for their
help in the experiment. We also thank the anonymous
reviewers for their insightful comments.

References

preschoolers‟ extension of novel words. Cognition, 84(1),
B11 - B22.
Booth, A. E., Waxman, S. R., & Huang, Y. T. (2005).
Conceptual information permeates word learning in
infancy. Developmental Psychology, 41(3), 491-505.
Carey, S. & Bartlett, E. (1978). Acquiring a single new
word. Proceedings of the Stanford Child Language
Conference, 15, 17-29.
Christie, S. & Gentner, D. (2010). Where hypotheses come
from: Learning new relations by structural alignment.
Journal of Cognition and Development, 11(3), 356 – 378.
Cimpian, A., & Markman, E. M. (2005). The absence of a
shape bias in children's word learning. Developmental
Psychology, 41(6), 1003-1019.
Colunga, E., & Smith, L. B. (2005). From the lexicon to
expectations about kinds: A role for associative
learning. Psychological Review, 112(2), 347-382.
Dewar, K., & Xu, F. (2007). Do 9-month-old infants expect
distinct words to refer to kinds? Developmental
Psychology, 43(5), 1227 - 1239.
Dewar, K., & Xu, F. (2010). Induction, Overhypothesis, and
the Origin of Abstract Knowledge: Evidence from 9month-old Infants. Psychological Science, 21, 1871-1877.
Goodman, N. (1955). Fact, Fiction and Forecast.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Kemp, C., Perfors, A., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2007).
Learning overhypotheses with hierarchical bayesian
models. Developmental Science, 10(3), 307-321.
Landau, B., Smith, L. B., & Jones, S. S. (1988). The
importance of shape in early lexical learning. Cognitive
Development, 3(3), 299-321.
Markman, E. (1989). Categorization and Naming in
Children. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Markson, L., Diesendruck, G., & Bloom, P. (2008). The
shape of thought. Developmental Science, 11(2), 204-208.
Quine, W. (1960). Words and Objects. Cambridge, MA:
The MIT Press.
Samuelson, L. K. (2002). Statistical regularities in
vocabulary guide language acquisition in connectionist
models
and
15-20-month-olds.
Developmental
Psychology, 38(6), 1016-1037.
Smith, L. B., Jones, S. S., Landau, B., Gershkoff-Stowe, L.,
& Samuelson, L. (2002). Object name learning provides
on-the-job training for attention. Psychological Science,
13(1), 13-19.
Ware, E. A., & Booth, A. E. (2010). Form follows function:
Learning about function helps children learn about shape.
Cognitive Development, 25(2), 124-137.
Xu, F., Dewar, K., & Perfors, A. (2009). Induction,
overhypotheses, and the shape bias: Some arguments and
evidence for rational constructivism. In B. M. Hood & L.
Santos (Eds.), The origins of object knowledge. New
York, NY: Oxford University Press.

Bloom, P. (2000). How children learn the meaning of
words. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Booth, A. E., & Waxman, S. R. (2002). Word learning is
„smart‟: Evidence that conceptual information affects

2549

