UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Adaptive Magnitude and Valence Biases in a Dynamic Memory Task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1vn5d8z7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Kachergis, George
Recchia, Gabriel
Shiffrin, Richard

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Adaptive Magnitude and Valence Biases in a Dynamic Memory Task
George Kachergis, Gabriel Recchia, and Richard M. Shiffrin
{gkacherg, grecchia, shiffrin}@indiana.edu
Department of Psychological & Brain Sciences, 1101 E. 10th St.
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
Abstract

influence its probability of correct retrieval. For example, in
studies of experience-based decision making, in which
participants must learn and maintain items associated with
particular payoffs (or a distribution of possible payoffs) in
memory, preferences are explained in terms of a value
function that is applied only after retrieval. Although recent
work has begun to explore memory’s role in the decision
process (Rakow & Newell, 2010; Hau, Pleskac & Hertwig,
2009; Lejarraga, 2010; Rakow & Rahim, 2009), the role of
memory is limited to frequency, recency, and the number of
sampled events that can be held in memory; the possibility
that high-magnitude items may hold a privileged place in
memory has not been investigated. Similarly, in instancebased learning theory (Gonzalez, Lerch, & Lebiere, 2003;
Lejarraja, Dutt, & Gonzalez, 2010), models of repeated
binary choice tasks include the probability of retrieval of
prior items from memory, but retrieval probabilities are only
influenced by item frequency and recency; the value of the
item affects eventual choice, but not retrieval.
Demonstration of a magnitude bias in memory would
require significant modification of such models. At test, we
utilize a novel decision-making game task that can elucidate
the dynamics of the decision process, potentially yielding
insight into the time-course for retrieval of magnitude
information.
Third, we investigate whether memory is stronger for
negative or positive items, which may help our
understanding of memory for emotionally-valent events, in
general. Negative events appear to command more attention
overall (Baumeister, Bratslavsky, Finkenauer, & Vohs,
2001; Rozin & Royzman, 2001) and are remembered more
accurately than positive events in some contexts, such as an
emotionally charged public event (Kensinger & Schacter,
2006). Rozin & Royzman (2001) presents various
theoretical accounts of the adaptive value of focusing on
negative events, most of which apply primarily to dire
threats; “in the extreme, negative events are more
threatening than are positive events beneficial” (p. 314). A
primary finding of the negative bias literature is that
negative entities command more attention than positive
ones, as they are more salient. Thus, our memory for
extreme negative events may be at least partially explained
by the fact that they command more attention. When we
restrict selective attention, memory for positive events may
dominate.
Finally, we go beyond investigation of a simple
magnitude bias, and also ask how the context—the values of
other items on a list—affects memory of particular items.

Given that human memory is fallible, it is likely adaptive for
people to preferentially encode, retain, and retrieve important
items better than insignificant ones. Using a dynamic
decision-making paradigm with a response deadline, we find
that humans demonstrate a bias to better remember 1) items
with positive rather than negative value, and 2) items with
high-magnitude values. Performance was greater when
participants were shown all item-value pairs simultaneously,
and were thus able to selectively attend to high-magnitude
values. The same magnitude bias is observed for sequentially
studied positive items, but not for negative items. Decision
trajectories show participants sometimes change their minds
during the course of a trial, choosing an item after first
moving toward the other. Changes of heart occurred more
often for trials with negative items. These findings suggest
that memory is sensitive to value, and that real-time game
paradigms can be used to reveal dynamic memory processes.
Keywords: adaptive memory, recognition, attention, loss
aversion, magnitude bias

Introduction
Availability of specific items in memory is sensitive to
frequency and recency, a principle codified in the rational
approach to memory as the importance of likely need
(Anderson & Milson, 1989; Anderson & Schooler, 1991;
Adelman, Brown, & Quesada 2006). This property of
memory is argued to be adaptive: items that are accessed
frequently or recently tend to have greater relevance and
utility, and thus having them highly available in memory
confers an evolutionary advantage. If memory resources are
preferentially allocated to high-utility items, one might
expect memory to exhibit a magnitude bias: When
participants must associate items with values, items
associated with particularly positive or negative values (high
magnitudes) should be more available in memory than those
associated with less extreme values (low magnitudes).
Given the considerable consequences of selecting a stimulus
item with an extreme reward or an extreme penalty, such
items are particularly important to remember in comparison
to items with middling values. Atkinson and Shiffrin (1968)
lays out a theory of control processes that emphasizes
selective control processes in short term memory, including
selective rehearsal strategies that could be used to explain
magnitude effects.
Although merely finding a magnitude bias might seem
unremarkable, there are several reasons to verify that such
an effect exists. First, it is of intrinsic interest whether or not
high-magnitude items are more readily retrieved; to our
knowledge, no such magnitude bias has been explicitly
demonstrated. Second, an underlying assumption of
decision-making models is that the value of an item does not

819

For example, a valence bias that exists when half of the
studied items are negative and half are positive may be
different when most items are negative, or when most are
positive. Such an effect would be reminiscent of a Von
Restorff distinctiveness effect.
With so many issues at stake, it is unlikely that they will
all be resolved with a single study. However, the lack of
foundational work establishing the effects of magnitude and
valence (reward or punishment) in memory motivated us to
take a first step by examining memory for item-value pairs
with respect to their valence and magnitude (i.e.,
extremeness vs. mildness of the reward/penalty) in three
valence contexts. To examine differences between selective
attention and selective rehearsal, some sets were
simultaneously and some were studied in sequential fashion.
In keeping with the previous discussion, we hypothesized
stronger memory for high-magnitude vs. low-magnitude
items, and stronger memory for high-magnitude negative
items than high-magnitude positive items. To differentially
impact attention and memory, item-value pairs were either
studied simultaneously or sequentially, for the same total
amount of time per pair. Selective attention may play a
larger role during simultaneous study, in which participants
may choose to study some pairs more than others, rather
than during sequential study, when each pair is shown for
the same amount of time. Effects in sequential study are
more likely to be due to memory processes such as selective
rehearsal. We believe our findings will be informative for
models of memory and decision-making, and will suggest
future manipulations. Moreover, we believe our novel
decision-making task could be of great utility in
understanding the dynamics of memory, learning, and
categorization, in general.

for the same amount of time. Effects in sequential study are
more likely to be due to memory control processes such as
selective rehearsal. Will sequential study nonetheless yield
magnitude effects and a valence bias?

Subjects
68 undergraduates at Indiana University participated to
receive course credit.

Stimuli
Each stimulus was a colored circle (50 pixels in diameter)
inscribed with a differently colored polygon. The stimuli for
each participant were chosen uniformly at random from 810
such stimuli (10 outer colors × 9 inner colors × 9 polygons).
For each participant, 16 items were randomly assigned to
each of the 16 blocks as targets and foils. Figure 1 shows an
example set of studied item-value pairs. Thus, although the
similarity of stimuli in any given set was arbitrary, and may
have at times been advantageous (e.g., grouping similarlyvalued objects) or disadvantageous (e.g., foils may be
similar to targets), each participant saw a randomly-selected
set, and saw no stimulus more than once.
In each condition, eight objects were studied: two each of
four unique values. Four value distributions of objects were
used: two were the same distribution, but shifted mostly
negative (-50, -30, -10, 10) or mostly positive (-10 , 10, 30,
50). The remaining two distributions were symmetric about
zero, but varied in magnitude: small (-20, -10, 10, 20) or
large (-100, -10, 10, 100).
During simultaneous study, participants were shown all
eight target stimuli with their values on one display (e.g.,
Figure 1) for 40 seconds. During sequential study, each of
the 8 item-value pairs was individually studied for five
seconds, in a randomized order.

Experiment
Traditional episodic memory experiments present a series of
individual items with no indication that any item is more
important than any other. In contrast, our experiment varies
both the arrangement of items at study (simultaneous or
sequential) and the value distribution of the studied items.
Two value distributions employed were evenly spaced, but
shifted to be mostly negative or mostly positive: will
participants focus more on the oddball positive (or negative,
resp.) stimuli in these conditions? The other two value
distributions were symmetric about zero, but the magnitude
of the most extreme values differed: will participants
remember extreme-valued items twice the value of the
middling items (e.g., 20 vs. 10) as well as when they are ten
times the value (e.g., 100 vs. 10)? Overall, will participants
better remember positive or negative items?
Item-value pairs were either studied simultaneously or
sequentially, for the same total amount of time per pair.
Selective attention may play a larger role during
simultaneous study, in which participants see the value
distribution and can choose to study some pairs more than
others (and may selectively encode salient item features),
rather than during sequential study, when each pair is shown

Figure 1. An example of 8 studied objects and their values.
During simultaneous study, participants were shown such a
display for 40 seconds.

Procedure
Participants were instructed that they would be playing a
game in which their goal would be to acquire points by

820

avoiding poisons and collecting foods (i.e., negatively- and
positively-valued objects, respectively). Participants were
told that after studying, they would choose between the
studied objects and new objects, which are always worth
zero points. After the 40-second study period (simultaneous
or sequential), participants were told that pairs of objects
would fall from the top of the screen, and that they would
need to choose the more valuable object to catch by moving
horizontally with the arrow keys. Moreover, they were told
that if they are positioned below an object and ready to
catch it, pressing the up arrow would shoot it down (see
Figure 2). They were reminded that unstudied objects are
neutral (worth 0 points), and thus should be chosen if the
available studied item is negative.
On each test trial, two items—one studied, and one
novel—appear, horizontally separated by a distance selected
uniformly at random from [70, 255] pixels, vertically
separated from the participant’s agent by a distance selected
uniformly at random from [270, 400] pixels, moving
downward at a constant rate.
The frame rate of the experiment is 88 frames per second
(12 ms/frame) on 15” CRT monitors with a resolution of
800x600 pixels. Objects drop at a rate of 1 pixel per frame,
and ‘bullets’ move at a rapid rate of 8 pixels per frame. The
participant-controlled agent, starting equidistant between the
objects with 0 velocity, accelerates .6 pixels/frame when the
left or right key is depressed: thus, the moving agent has
inertia, and cannot immediately reverse direction. However,
there is linear ‘friction’: if no key is pressed, the agent will
lose ten percent of its speed on every frame. A trial ends
when an object hits a bullet or the agent, at which time the
value of the chosen object is shown for 1300 ms (e.g., Fig.
2). If the object passes below the horizontal plane of the
agent, the participant is loses 30 points and is told to always
pick an object. Participants’ running score, tallied across all
conditions, is shown throughout testing in the upper left
corner of the screen.
Subjects participated in each of the eight unique study
conditions twice, for a total of 16 blocks, each with eight
trials. Condition order was counterbalanced across subjects.

Results
Six participants were excluded from analysis because their
overall performance was not significantly higher than
chance (.535 for 128 trials), where accuracy is both a
function of choosing old positive items, as well as the new
item when a negative item is shown. The remaining 62
participants were first analyzed in terms of their probability
of choosing the correct (i.e., non-negative) item. Note that
this corresponds to hits when the studied item on a trial is
positive, and correct rejections when the studied item is
negative. An analysis of variance on the study arrangement
(simultaneous or sequential), the valence of the old item
(positive or negative), the absolute value (i.e., magnitude) of
the old item (100, 50, 30, 20, or 10) nested by value
distribution shows significant main effects of study
arrangement (F(1,61) = 5.53, p < .05), valence (F(1,61) =
15.73, p < .001), and a main effect of absolute value
(F(4,61) = 2.31, p = .06). A few interactions fell just short of
significance: study arrangement by valence (F(1,61) = 2.46,
p = .12), study distribution by valence (F(3,183) = 1.58, p =
.19), and study arrangement by study distribution by
magnitude (F(2,122) = 1.62, p = .20). All other interactions
had F-values less than one.
Accuracy after simultaneous study was superior to
accuracy after sequential study (M = .68 and M = .64,
respectively), suggesting that participants benefit from being
able to allocate attention to items of their choosing during
study. Correct rejection of negative items was significantly
worse than hit rate of positively valued items (M = .62 and
M = .71, respectively), showing a bias for positive items that
was not dependent on selective attention during
simultaneous study. Finally, memory was better for large
magnitude items than for items with middling value. In
Figure 3, ceiling performance for negative values is 0, and
for positive values is 1. Thus, monotonically increasing
slopes indicate a magnitude bias. For simultaneously studied
items, a magnitude bias is seen for both negative and
positive items in every distribution, but only for the positive
sequentially studied items.
In the asymmetric distributions, in which the oddball is
worth either +10 or -10, there is a clear advantage of
simultaneous study over sequential study: the smallmagnitude oddballs get more attention when all other items
are seen to be of the opposite valence. In contrast, there was
little or no advantage of simultaneous study in asymmetric
distributions for the middle and extreme values (which
always were part of the majority). Thus, we found a
distinctiveness effect after simultaneous, but not sequential
study. Although selective attention yielded an overall
performance advantage beyond sequential study,
participants still showed magnitude and valence effects in
the sequential conditions. One possible explanation is that
participants selectively rehearsed the items with large
magnitude or positive values, yielding higher fidelity
memory traces for these items, and a stronger familiarity
signal at test.

Figure 2. Screenshot of a trial, in which the participant
moved the agent (bottom) to the left and ‘shot’ a studied,
poisonous item. Feedback appeared only after the decision
was made. Shooting the unstudied alternative would have
yielded ‘+0’ points (as on every trial).

821

this imply that for well-known items, the decision is made
by the time of first movement?
To address this question, we looked at whether
participants change their minds (i.e., crossed the mid-point
between the two items) after their first movement on a trial.
Indeed, on 9.1% of trials, participants changed their minds,
reversed directions and crossed the midline—a result that
could not be found in a traditional memory experiment. An
ANOVA on crossover rate shows no significant main
effects, although valence approached significance (F(1,61) =
2.34, p = .13). However, there were significant interactions
of study arrangement, value distribution, and valence
(F(3,183) = 2.97, p < .05); as well as study arrangement,
value distribution, and correctness. Figure 4 shows that
there are fewer changes of mind for positive items after
simultaneous study, whereas after sequential study,
crossover rates vary significantly within and between value
distributions. Fewer changes of mind for positive objects
after simultaneous study—which accuracy tells us
participants prefer to focus on—complements the story told
by time until first movement: participants are quickly
identifying the well-known positive item and moving
toward it, without going back.

Figure 3. Probability of choosing an old item by value
distribution, item value and study arrangement. For negative
items, ceiling performance is 0—the old item should never
be chosen. For positive items, ceiling is 1. Error bars: +/-SE.
To determine whether the magnitude sensitivity and
valence bias in accuracy extend to the time domain, we first
examine participants’ median time to make a first
movement. Time until first movement in our continuous
time paradigm may be equivalent to reaction time in
traditional experiments, although it is also bounded by the
drop speed of objects. Time pressure was not extreme: mean
trial duration was 1948 ms (SD = 218 ms). An ANOVA on
median time to make a first movement by study
arrangement, valence, absolute value, and correctness,
nested in value distribution finds significant main effects of
study arrangement (F(1,61) = 9.97, p < .01) and valence
(F(1,61) = 4.66, p < .05). We also find significant
interactions of valence and correctness (F(1,61) = 7.84, p <
.01), distribution and valence (F(3,183) = 3.39, p < .05), and
a marginal interaction of study arrangement and distribution
(F(3,183) = 2.16, p = .09). Participants were slower to
initiate movements on test trials of simultaneously studied
items (M = 1143 ms) than sequentially studied items (M =
1115 ms), and they were much slower on trials with a
negative item (M = 1173 ms) than trials with a positive item
(M = 1081 ms). For correct decisions, first movements were
faster for positive items (M = 1043 ms) than for negative
items (M = 1150), which were nearly the same as incorrect
choice initiation times on positive item trials (M = 1135
ms), and much faster than incorrect choice initiation times
on negative item trials (M = 1200 ms). Thus, time to first
movement shows an advantage for positive items, and
especially for correctly remembered positive items. Does

Figure 4. Crossovers (changes of mind) as a function of
value distribution, study arrangement, and item valence.
After simultaneous study, positive items had fewer
crossovers, reflecting participants’ greater certainty about
them after presumably preferentially studying them. After
sequential study, there is no clear pattern.
Figure 5 shows that after simultaneous study, there are
fewer crossovers for correct responses except for the
mostly-negative asymmetric distribution. However, after
sequential study, only the mostly-positive asymmetric
distribution shows fewer crossovers for correct responses.
The ambiguousness of crossover rates after sequential study
in both Figures 4 and 5 reflects the difficulty of sequential
rehearsal when the item and value distribution is unknown.

822

Baumeister et al., 2001). Faced with items of varying
magnitude and valence that will be tested against novel,
neutral objects, one can imagine several reasonable
strategies, including: 1) focus on the positive objects, and
avoid the unknown, 2) focus on and avoid the negative
objects, or 3) attempt to remember the extreme-valued items
of both positive and negative valence, at the risk of
confusing one for the other. Other strategies, mixtures of the
above, and nonstrategic differences are also possible.
We have presented the first evidence for a value-based
recognition memory bias. Participants showed significantly
better memory for positive items, as well as for items that
were of greater absolute value. These biases were present
when participants were shown all item-value pairs at once,
and were thus able to choose which to attend to, but were
also somewhat evident when study time for each item-value
pair was controlled by presenting them sequentially, for the
same total amount of time per pair. Thus, we suggest that
these valence and magnitude biases in memory are not
solely based on selective attention, but can also result from
encoding and retrieval processes. Although sequential study
does not preclude the possibility that participants simply
disregarded items they considered less important, or
selectively rehearsed more important items, the unknown
and sometimes asymmetric value distributions, randomized
order of item presentation, and roughly equal performance
for the same item values across conditions reduce the
likelihood that these are the sole explanations. Using item
value distributions asymmetric about zero (i.e., with a
preponderance of negative or positive items, and only two
low-magnitude oddballs) we found a list context effect:
under simultaneous study, participants were as sensitive to
the oddball items as to the highest-magnitude items. After
sequential study, participants showed only the same
sensitivity benefit for high-magnitude items, and no
advantage for the oddballs. Given limited memory for
confusable items, the bias that people exhibit for
remembering high magnitude items is adaptive. The
preference for positive items is more pervasive in our data.
We found further evidence of valence effects during
retrieval in our examination of time until first movement:
participants move sooner for positive items than negative
ones. This decisiveness for positive items was also reflected
in integrated distance. Finally, we found that participants
change their minds—crossing the midline well after their
initial movement—a significant proportion of the time. The
rate of preference reversals was affected by study
arrangement, value distribution, valence, and correctness of
the eventual response. After simultaneous study,
participants changed their minds fewer times for correct
responses than incorrect responses, and fewer times for
positive items than negative items. After sequential study,
the rates of crossovers were inconsistent, and beg further
teasing apart. Greater time pressure by increasing drop
speed, larger differences in value magnitude may reveal
more interpretable effects.

Figure 5. Crossovers as a function of value distribution,
study arrangement, and correctness. After simultaneous
study most conditions show fewer crossovers for correct
responses, but this pattern is not seen after sequential study.
Finally, we analyze the decision trajectories themselves by
finding the agent’s integrated distance from the midline over
time on each trial. For example, if a participant never
moves, or if the participant wavers back and forth on either
side of the midline the entire trial, the integral will be 0.
However, if a participant decisively moves toward one item
at the beginning of the trial, the integral (i.e., decisiveness)
will be large. Thus, the integral is partially a function of
both time until first movement (earlier movement yields a
larger integral) and crossovers (more crossovers will yield a
smaller integral). An ANOVA finds significant main effects
of valence (F(1,61) = 7.30, p < .01) and correctness (F(1,61)
= 7.31, p < .01), and a marginally significant interaction of
valence and correctness (F(1,61) = 2.78, p = .09).
Corroborating other measures, the integral is larger for
correct items, and particularly for positive items (correct:
positive M = 67,016, negative M = 57,400; incorrect:
positive M = 55,500, negative M = 54,680).

Discussion
Episodic memory tasks typically ask participants to simply
remember all studied memory items, with no explicit
indication that any items are more important than others.
However, given that human memory is far from perfect, it is
not unreasonable to expect that our memory system has
evolved to preferentially store, retain, and retrieve
information that is deemed to be important. Using point
values to indicate item importance, we set out to determine
whether participants selectively attend to and better retrieve
more important items. By including items with both positive
and negative values, we also aimed to abstractly test the
broad hypothesis that episodic memory is stronger for bad
events than for good events (Rozin & Royzman, 2001;

823

Consideration of changes of mind may be able to address
an important debate in the memory literature. It has been
suggested that decisions in both item recognition (Hintzman
& Curran, 1994) and associative recognition (Clark, 1992)
may involve two memory processes. Using a responsesignal recognition paradigm, Hintzman & Curran (1994)
found that participants faced with rejecting test items that
were quite similar to studied targets (plural vs. singular
nouns) showed biphasic false alarm curves, suggesting that
an early familiarity process is supported by a slower
recollection process that can better reject similar, unstudied
items. However, reanalysis, further empirical data, and
modeling have questioned the necessity of positing two
processes (Rotello & Heit 1999; Ratcliff, Van Zandt, &
McKoon, 1995). In an associative recognition paradigm,
Dosher (1984) found that participants initially accepted
pairs with semantically-related lures, and only later
correctly rejected them. Our task is somewhat like a
response-signal paradigm, but with a few advantages: 1)
because they see the falling items, participants can visually
judge how long they have to respond, alleviating
anticipatory uncertainty, 2) the response deadline is hard,
and times should thus be less variable, and 3) with only a
single deadline on a trial, we can observe how the response
trajectory changes over time, so it may be unnecessary to
include several signal intervals. Although it is not yet clear
whether our task should be treated as associative
recognition, or as attentionally-modulated single item
recognition, we believe our paradigm can provide unique
insight into this debate.
The potential to discover changing effects during retrieval
warrants the further use of dynamic decision-making tasks
such as the paradigm used here. We have demonstrated that
our point-based memory game can be utilized to find novel
recognition memory effects, measurable both by traditional
accuracy and response time variables, as well as new
dependent variables such as crossover rate and integrated
trajectory. We hope that other researchers will find our
paradigm useful for studying not only memory, but also
learning and categorization.

Anderson, J. R., & Schooler, L. J. (1991). Reflections of the
environment in memory. Psychological Science, 2, 396–
408.
Atkinson, R. C. & Shiffrin, R. M. (1968). Human memory:
A proposed system and its control processes. In K.W.
Spence and J. T. Spence (Eds.), The Psychology of
Learning and Motivation: Advances in Research and
Theory, Vol. 2, 89–195). New York: Academic Press.
Baumeister, R. F., Bratslavsky, E., Finkenauer, C., & Vohs,
K. D. (2001). Bad is stronger than good. Review of
General Psychology, 5, 323–370.
Clark, S. E. (1992). Word frequency effects in associative
and item recognition. Memory & Cognition, 20, 231–243.
Dosher, B. A. (1984). Discriminating pre-experimental
(semantic) information from learned (episodic) associations: A speed-accuracy study. Cog Psych., 16, 519–555.
Gonzalez, C., Lerch, J. F., & Lebiere, C. (2003). Instancebased learning in dynamic decision making. Cognitive
Science, 27, 591–635.
Hau, R., Pleskac, T. J., & Herwig, R. (2010). Decisions
from experience and statistical probabilities: Why they
trigger different choices than a priori probabilities.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 23, 48–68.
Hintzman, D. L., & Curran, T. (1994). Retrieval dynamics
of recognition and frequency judgments: Evidence for
separate processes of familiarity and recall. Journal of
Memory and Language, 33, 1–18.
Kensinger, E. A. & Schacter, D. L. (2006). When the Red
Sox shocked the Yankees: Comparing negative and
positive memories. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review,
13(5), pp. 757-763.
Lejarraga, T. (2010). When experience is better than
description: time delays and complexity. Journal of
Behavioral Decision Making, 23, 100–116.
Rakow, T. & Newell, B. R. (2010). Degrees of uncertainty:
An overview and framework for future research on
experience-based choice. Journal of Behavioral Decision
Making, 23, 1–14.
Rakow, T., & Rahim, S. B. (2009). Developmental insights
into experience-based decision making. Journal of
Behavioral Decision Making, 23, 69–82.
Ratcliff, R., Van Zandt, T., & McKoon, G. (1995). Process
dissociation, single process theories, and recognition
memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
124, 352–374.
Rotello, C. M. & Heit, E. (1999). Two-Process Models of
Recognition Memory: Evidence for Recall-to-Reject?
Journal of Memory and Language, 40, 432–453.
Rozin, P., & Royzman, E. (2001). Negativity bias,
negativity dominance, and contagion. Personality and
Social Psychology Review, 5, 296–320.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Gregory Cox, Christopher
Donkin, and Caitlin Fausey for helpful comments. We
would also like to thank Brennen Jenkins, Kyung Lee,
Colleen Monn, Kim Mullen, Gladys Raintama and Autumn
Salisbury for running participants. This research was funded
by an AFOSR grant to Richard Shiffrin.

References
Adelman, J. S., Brown, G. D. A., & Quesada, J. F. (2006).
Contextual diversity, not word frequency, determines
word-naming and lexical decision times. Psychological
Science, 17, 814–823.
Anderson, J.R., & Milson, R. (1989). Human memory: An
adaptive perspective. Psychological Review, 96, 703–719.

824

