UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Agency and Rhythmic Coordination: Are We Naught but Moving Dots?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6sg3c4fx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Coey, Charles
Varlet, Manuel
Schmidt, Richard
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Agency and Rhythmic Coordination:
Are We Naught but Moving Dots?
Charles Coey a, Manuel Varlet a, b, R. C. Schmidt c & Michael J. Richardson a
a

Center for Cognition, Action & Perception, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH
b
Movement to Health, EuroMov, Montpellier-1 University, Montpellier, France.
c
Department of Psychology, College of the Holy Cross, Worcester, MA.
rhythmic movement coordination (e.g., Kelso, 1995;
Kugler & Turvey, 1987; Schmidt & Richardson,
2008).
Dynamics of Rhythmic Coordination: Systems
of coupled oscillators (e.g., human limbs,
pendulums, etc.) generally exhibit similar
coordination dynamics regardless of the constitution
of the system in question. Early research (Haken et
al., 1985; Kelso, 1984; Schöner et al., 1986)
demonstrated that rhythmic movements of
oscillatory limbs belonging to the same individual
(e.g., fingers, arms, legs) exhibited two stable modes
of entrainment, namely inphase and antiphase
coordination. These two coordination modes are
captured by the collective variable relative phase
(Φ), with inphase and antiphase coordination
corresponding to Φ = 0° and Φ = 180°, respectively.
These two modes of coordination are intrinsically
stable (are produced without practice), although
antiphase coordination is less stable than inphase
coordination. This difference in the relative stability
of inphase and antiphase coordination is reflected by
the fact that the variability of antiphase coordination
is greater than the variability of inphase coordination
and that individual’s transition from antiphase to the
inphase coordination under certain movement
conditions (i.e., high movement frequencies).
More recent research has demonstrated the same
coordination dynamics constrain oscillatory
movements produced by separate individuals (e.g.,
Richardson et al., 2007; Schmidt et al., 1990;
Schmidt & O’Brien, 1997). Provided a visual
coupling, the coordination that occurs between the
movements of two individuals is constrained to
inphase and antiphase patterns of coordination
(without practice), with antiphase being less stable
than inphase coordination (e.g., Richardson, et al.,
2007; Schmidt et al., 1990). Research has further
demonstrated that similar coordination dynamics can
occur spontaneously (i.e., unintentionally), with the
rhythmic movements of two visually coupled
participants become coordinated even when they are

Abstract
There is contention in perceptual-motor research
concerning the degree to which observing biological
and non-biological movements have equivalent
effects on movement production. This issue results
from the proposal that action observation and
production share neural resources (i.e., mirror
neurons) particularly sensitive to actions performed
by other ‘agents’ (i.e., beings with goals/intentions).
In support of this claim, several discrete and rhythmic
action-observation studies found that action
production is only affected when participants
believed that observed actions were produced by an
agent. Here we present data from two experiments
investigating whether similar agency manipulations
also affect spontaneous movement synchrony.
Collectively, the results suggest that belief in the
‘agency’ of an observed movement does not affect
the emergence and stability of rhythmic movement
synchrony. These results question whether the actions
of other agents are truly privileged across all scales of
coordinated activity, particularly with respect to the
lawful dynamics underlying movement synchrony.
Introduction
In our everyday lives, we sustain complex states of
coordination. On our way to work we coordinate our
actions with our fellow commuters as we jostle for
position in rush hour traffic. At work we coordinate
our ideas with our colleagues as we develop a new
product, policy, or program. Once home for the
evening we coordinate with the clock to ensure we
are well-rested enough to do it all over again the
next day. Certainly, a complete account of
coordination should aim at an explanation of these
multi-scale, dynamic processes.
Rather than attempting to reduce the full
complexity of these phenomena to a sole, dominant
process, an alternative approach is to gain an
understanding of the nested processes that underlie
such coordinated activity. It is in this spirit that
researchers have investigated the lawful dynamics of
1
172

not instructed to do so (e.g., Oullier et al., 2008;
Richardson et al., 2005; Schmidt & O’Brien, 1997).
Whereas intentional movement synchrony produces
phase-locking, indicated by absolute concentration
of relative phase at the instructed mode (i.e., either at
0° or 180°), spontaneous coordination results in
intermittent or relative entrainment, which is
characterized by a tendency for relative phase
differences to cluster around 0° and 180°. Despite
this difference, however, states of relative synchrony
display similar coordination dynamics (e.g.,
individual’s exhibit less antiphase entrainment).
Interestingly, the same coordination dynamics
are evident in systems comprised of an individual
participant and a non-biological environmental
stimulus (e.g., Lopresti-Gooman et al., 2007;
Schmidt et al., 2007). As with inter-personal
movement synchrony, the entrainment between the
movements of a participant and an environmental
rhythmic stimulus can occur both intentionally and
unintentionally. Such entrainment exhibits the same
two modes of coordination with the same relative
stabilities. Thus, the phenomenon of visual rhythmic
movement synchrony suggests that these processes
are constrained by the same lawful coupled
oscillator dynamic, regardless of the nature of the
components comprising the system.
Agency Effects: Although the above results
indicate that the same coordination dynamics result
for all systems of coupled oscillators, there is some
question as to the degree to which coordination with
an environmental stimulus approximates the social
coordination that exists between two humans. This
question is justified given the discovery of mirror
neurons in Macaque monkeys, which do not
differentiate between produced and observed
actions, but only when the observed actions are
produced by another agent (see Rizzolatti et al.,
2004 for a review). The human ‘mirror neuron
system’ appears to have a similar preference, in that
the system does not appear to have an equivalent
response to agent and non-agent based action (e.g.,
Buccino et al., 2001; Fadiga et al., 1995).
Within the behavioral literature, there is also
evidence to suggest that the observation of agent and
non-agent based action can have a differential effect
on movement production (e.g., Castiello et al., 2002;
Brass et al., 2001). Press et al. (2005) had
participants produce either hand-opening or handclosing movements in response to stimuli that
depicted a compatible or incompatible action. In the

agent condition the stimuli were still images of a real
human hand, whereas in the non-agent condition the
stimuli were images of a robotic pincher. The results
revealed that participants were faster to respond and
made fewer errors when the observed actions were
compatible than when they were incompatible and
that this action facilitation/interference effect was
greatly reduced in the non-agent condition.
Similarly, research by Kilner et al., (2003) and
Stanley et al., (2007) has demonstrated how a
participants’ belief in the agency of an observed
movement can also influence the production of a
rhythmic limb movement. More specifically, these
studies have demonstrated that individuals exhibit
greater rhythmic movement variability when
observing a spatially incongruent movement
compared to a spatially congruent movement, but
that this effect depends on the perceived agency of
observed movements. That is, observing movements
produced by an agent, or believed to be produced by
an agent, resulted in greater rhythmic movement
variability than observing movements produced by a
non-agent (i.e., computer generated movement or the
movements of a robot).
Although these studies have supported the
existence of ‘agency effects’ in both discrete and
rhythmic movements, no research has been
conducted to investigate such effects in rhythmic
movement synchrony. That is, no studies have
investigated whether a participants’ belief in the
agency of an observed movement influences the
stability or emergence of rhythmic entrainment.
Here we present data from two experiments
specifically designed to examine this question.
Experiment 1
Participants were required to produce rhythmic
movements of the forearm while observing the
rhythmic movements of a dot stimulus on a large
projection screen. Participants were informed that
the movements they were observing were either
computer-generated movements, or pre-recorded
human movements, or the real-time movements of a
confederate positioned on the opposite side of the
screen. In all conditions the movements of the
stimulus were in fact computer-generated.
Method
Participants:
Twenty-five
undergraduate
students from the University of Cincinnati
participated for partial course credit. All participants
2
173

had normal or corrected-to-normal vision, had no
history of movement disorders, and were over 18
years of age.
Apparatus: A 1.25 x 1.7 m rear-projection
screen and an Epson Powerlite 53c projector (Epson
America, Long Beach, CA) displayed a red dot with
a 5 cm diameter oscillating horizontally. A
FASTRACK magnetic motion-tracking system
(Polhemus Ltd., VT) recorded the participants’
horizontal arm movements at a sample-rate of 60
Hz.
Design and Procedure: Following consent,
participants were instructed that the purpose of the
experiment was to investigate the effects of
irrelevant movement on symbolic processing. This
cover story was employed to keep participants from
discerning the true purpose of the experiment (i.e.,
rhythmic coordination). They were told their task
was to read single letters from the stimulus-display
and repeat them aloud as quickly as possible. They
were instructed that on each trial they were to
produce rhythmic movements of their right forearm
as a distraction to the symbolic processing task.
They were also instructed that on some trials the
letters would appear on a stationary stimulus and on
other trials the letters would appear on a moving
stimulus as an additional distraction. Finally,
embedded within task instructions, participants were
told that the movements of the stimulus displaying
the letters were either computer-generated (n = 9),
pre-recorded human movement (n = 9), or the realtime movements of confederate positioned on the
opposite side of the projection screen (n = 7).
On each trial, participants began to produce
rhythmic movements and then read letters from the
stimulus-display. The letters appeared on top of the
dot stimulus every 2 s with a random offset between
0 and 0.99ms. Participants completed six trials in
which the stimulus displaying the letters was
stationary (i.e., control condition). On these trials,
there was a hidden oscillating stimulus which
allowed for an assessment of chance-level
coordination. Participants also completed six trials in
which the stimulus displaying the letters oscillated
horizontally across the screen (i.e., experimental
condition). On these trials, displaying the letters on
the stimulus ensured that participants tracked its
movements. Each trial lasted 60 seconds. Upon
completion of the experiment participants underwent
a funnel debriefing procedure to assess whether

participants had discerned the true nature of the
experiment.
Data Analysis: The first 5 s of each trial were
discarded to eliminate any transient behavior. The
remaining 55 s of each trial were then normalized
around 0, and low-pass filtered with a 10 Hz
Butterworth filter. Distribution of relative phase
(DRP) was calculated to evaluate the coordination
between participant and stimulus movements. DRP
evaluates the concentration of relative phase angles
between two movement time-series across nine 20o
regions of relative phase (0-20 °, 21-40 °, 41-60 °, 6180 °, 81-100 °, 101-120 °, 121-140 °, 141-160 °, 161180 °). Entrainment is indicated by a high
concentration of relative phase angles near 0 °
(inphase) and 180 ° (antiphase), while an even
distribution indicates no phase-entrainment.
Results and Discussion
A 2 (condition) x 9 (phase region) x 3 (agency)
mixed ANOVA on DRP revealed a significant effect
of phase region [F (8, 15) = 5.59, p < .05] with a
concentration of phase angles around the 0°
(inphase) and 180° (antiphase) relative phase
regions. There was a significant interaction between
condition and phase region [F (8, 15) = 5.11, p <
.05] with concentration in the 0° and 180° regions
evident only in the experimental trials. There were
no significant effects of agency (see Figure 1).
30

Experimental

% Occurrence

25

20
15

10
5
0
0

30

50

Computer

70

90

110

Pre-recorded

30

130

150

180

Confederate

Control

% Occurrence

25
20
15
10
5

0
0

30

50

70

90

110

130

150

180

Phase Region

Figure 1. Distribution of relative phase as a function of
agency and condition (Experiment 1).

3
174

The results of this experiment suggested that
there were no effects of agency on the emergence or
stability of rhythmic coordination. The DRP profile
from the control condition revealed the pattern
expected for chance-level coordination, with similar
occurrence of relative phase angles in all regions.
The DRP profile from experimental trials revealed
the pattern expected for spontaneous, intermittent
coordination between a participant and rhythmic
stimulus movement (Schmidt et al., 2007; LoprestiGoodman et al., 2009). That is, there was a
concentration of relative phase angles around the 0°
(inphase) and 180° (antiphase) regions, with slightly
more occurrence around 0°. There were, however, no
differences in the DRP profiles as a function of
agency, indicating that the participants’ belief as to
the source of the observed stimulus movements did
not affect the pattern of coordination.
Although these data suggest that agency does
not influence the stability of rhythmic movement
coordination, there was another possibility for the
lack of agency effects in this experiment. As
demonstrated in prior research (Schmidt et al.,
2007), procedures that require participants to track
the stimulus movements result in a greater degree of
entrainment compared to conditions in which
participants do not track stimulus movements. Thus,
it was possible that employing the visual tracking
methodology in Experiment 1 increased the level of
observed coordination generally and that the strength
of the visual coupling may have eliminated the
potential for more subtle effects to be observed.

Apparatus & Procedure: The experimental
equipment was exactly the same as in Experiment 1.
The design and procedure was also the same as in
Experiment 1, with the sole exception that during
experimental trials letters appeared on a centered,
stationary stimulus, while the moving stimulus
appeared on a horizontal trajectory directly behind
the stationary stimulus. Thus, participants observed
but did not track the moving stimulus.
30

Experimental

% Occurrence

25

20
15

10
5

0
0

30

50

Computer

70

90

110

Pre-recorded

30

130

150

180

Confederate

Control

% Occurrence

25
20
15

10
5
0
0

30

50

70

90

110

130

150

180

Phase Region

Figure 2. Distribution of relative phase as a function of
agency and condition (Experiment 2).

Results
A 2 (condition) x 9 (phase region) x 3 (agency)
mixed ANOVA on DRP revealed a significant effect
of phase region [F (8, 17) = 4.33, p < .01] with a
concentration of phase angles in the 0° (inphase)
region. There was a significant interaction between
condition and phase region [F (8, 17) = 2.66, p <
.05] with the concentration in the 0° region evident
only in the experimental trials. There were no
significant effects of agency evident in the DRP (see
Figure 2).

Experiment 2
To determine whether the lack of an agency effect in
Experiment 1 was due to the strong visual coupling,
we conducted a second experiment in which the
participants did not track the movements of the
stimulus, resulting in weaker visual coupling
(Schmidt et al., 2007). If a participant’s belief in the
agency of stimulus movements has only subtle
effects on coordination then such effects might be
evident when the strength of the visual coupling was
reduced.

Discussion
As in Experiment 1, the results of the second
experiment also suggest that agency has no effect on
the emergence or stability of rhythmic coordination.
As before, the DRP profile for the control and the
experimental condition revealed the pattern expected
for chance-level and spontaneous entrainment,

Method
Participants: Twenty-seven undergraduate
students from the University of Cincinnati
participated for partial course credit. All participants
were over 18 years of age, had normal or correctedto-normal vision, and had no movement disorders.
4
175

respectively (Lopresti-Goodman et al., 2009;
Schmidt et al., 2007). In contrast to the results of
Experiment 1, there was only a concentration of
phase angles around the 0° relative phase region (i.e.,
not in the 180° region). This is likely a result of the
decrease in the general level of coordination
associated with the switch from a tracking to a nontracking procedure. The antiphase mode, being the
less stable of the two modes of coordination, is the
first of the two to disappear as the general level of
coordination is decreased (Richardson et al., 2005;
2007).

revealed that not a single participant suspected that
the stimulus movements were not as instructed.
Another alternative is that these results might be
explained by the nature of the stimulus movements.
The present experiments utilized only computergenerated, sinusoidal movements. Kilner et al.
(2007) have found evidence to suggest that agency
effects might only arise when the movements in the
human condition reflect real human movement.
Additionally, it is possible that, in manipulating
agency as a between-subjects variable, the present
obscured effects at the level of the individual
participant.
We
are
currently conducting
experiments to investigate these and similar issues.
It is equally likely, however, that these data
reflect the equivalence of the coordination that
occurs between two individuals and between an
individual and a non-biological environmental
stimulus. This latter conclusion supports the
contention that all systems of coupled oscillators are
governed by the same lawful processes and, whether
coupled biomechanically or via visual information,
will become entrained to one another given
sufficient coupling strength. This claim should
neither be taken to invalidate the results of prior
investigations that revealed ‘agency effects’ at the
neurological and behavioral levels, nor to suggest
that ‘agency’ is not a concept worth further
investigation. Instead this work is intended to further
establish the theoretical boundaries for ‘agency’ as
an explanatory concept. While our beliefs and
knowledge about the goals and intentions of other
agents are certainly an indispensible component to
an account of coordinated behavior in its full
complexity, it is a worthwhile consideration that
such refined aspects of human behavior have their
foundations in the deep, underlying support of
natural law.

General Discussion
Collectively, the results of the two experiments
presented above suggest that a participant’s belief in
the agency of an observed movement has no effect
on the emergence or stability of rhythmic movement
synchrony. Rhythmic entrainment consistently
emerged between the participants’ movements and
the stimulus’ movements, and the stability of
entrainment, as revealed by the DRP profiles, was as
expected. The participants’ beliefs concerning the
agency of the stimulus movements, however, had no
reliable effect on entrainment. Thus, these data
might be argued to support a general equivalence in
rhythmic entrainment between systems comprised of
agents and non-agents. There are, however, several
possible methodological and statistical alternatives
that must be resolved before such a conclusion is
merited.
First, it is possible that the failure to observe an
agency effect is in fact a lack of statistical power
resulting from a small sample size. The sample size
employed in the present experiments was standard
with respect to both number of participants and
number of trials (Kilner et al., 2007; Stanley et al.,
2007). Similarly, it is possible that the employed
statistical test was insufficient to capture any subtle
agency effects in the data. In addition to the
statistical analyses presented here, a range of other
methods, including comparing quadratic fits to DRP
profiles by individual participant and a meta-analysis
across both experiments, have all failed to reveal an
effect of agency.
Second, it is possible that the failure to observe
agency effects is a result of how agency was
manipulated in the present experiments. The primary
concern would be that participants might not have
believed that the observed movements reflected real
human movement. The funnel debriefing procedure

References
Brass, M., Bekkering, H., & Prinz, W. (2001).
Movement observation affects movement
execution in a simple response task. Acta
Psychologia, 106, 3-22.
Buccino, G., Binkofski, F., Fink, G. R., Fadiga, L.,
Fogassi, L., Gallese, V., Seitz, R. J., Zilles, K.,
Rizzolatti, G., & Freund, H. J. (2001). Action
observation activates premotor and parietal areas
in a somatotopic manner: an fMRI study.
European Journal of Neuroscience, 13, 400-404.
5
176

Castiello, U., Lusher, D., Mari, M., Edwars, M., &
Humphreys, G. W. Observing a human and a
robotic hand grasping an object: Differential
motor priming effets, in: W. Prinz, B. Hommel
(Eds.), Common Mechanism in Perception and
Action, Attention and Performance XIX, Oxford
University Press, New York, 2002.
Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., Pavesi, G., & Rizzolatti, G.
(1995). Motor facilitation during action
observation: A magnetic stimulation study.
Journal of Neurophysiology, 73, 2608-2611.
Haken, H., Kelso, J. A. S., Bunz, H. (1985). A
theoretical model of phase transitions in human
hand movements. Biological Cybernetics, 51,
347-356.
Kelso, J. A. S. (1984). Phase transitions and critical
behavior in human bimanual coordination.
American Journal of Physiology: Regulatory,
Integrative and Comparative, 246, R1000R1004.
Kelso, J. A. S. (1995). Dynamic patterns.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kilner, J. M., Hamilton, A. F. C., & Blakemore, S. J.
(2007). Interference effect of observed human
movement on action is due to velocity profile of
biological motion. Social Neuroscience, 2, 158166.
Kilner, J. M., Paulignan, Y., & Blakemore, S. J.
(2003). An interference effect of observed
biological movement on action. Current
Biology, 13, 522-525.
Kugler, P. N. & Turvey, M. T. (1987) Information,
natural law and the self-assembly of rhythmic
movement. Erlbaum, Hillsdale.
Lopresti-Goodman, S. M., Richardson, M. J., Silva,
P. L., & Schmidt, R. C. (2007). Period basin of
entrainment
for
unintentional
visual
coordination. Journal of Motor Behavior, 40, 3–
10.
Oullier, O., de Guzman, G. C., Jantzen, K. J.,
Lagrade, J., & Kelso, J. A. S., (2008). Social
coordination dynamics: Measuring human
bonding. Social Neuroscience, 3, 178-192.
Press, C., Bird, G., Flach, R., & Heyes, C. (2005).
Robotic movement elicits automatic imitation.
Cognitive Brain Research, 25, 632-640.
Richardson, M. J., Marsh, K. L., Isenhower, R.,
Goodman, J., & Schmidt, R. C. (2007). Rocking
together: Dynamics of intentional and
unintentional interpersonal coordination. Human
Movement Science, 26, 867-891.

Richardson, M. J., Marsh, K. L., & Schmidt, R. C.
(2005). Effects of visual and verbal interaction
on unintentional interpersonal coordination.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 31, 62-79.
Rizzolatti, G. & Craighero, L. (2004). The mirror
neuron system. Annual Review of Neuroscience,
27, 169-192.
Schmidt, R. C., Carello, C., & Turvey, M. T. (1990).
Phase transitions and critical fluctuations in the
visual coordination of rhythmic movements
between people. Journal of Experimental
Psychology:
Human
Perception
and
Performance, 16, 227-247.
Schmidt, R. C., & O’Brien, B. (1997). Evaluating
the dynamics of unintended interpersonal
coordination. Ecological Psychology, 9, 189206.
Schmidt, R. C., & Richardson, M. J. (2008).
Dynamics of Interpersonal Coordination. In A.
Fuchs & V. Jirsa (Eds.). Coordination: Neural,
Behavioral and Social Dynamics. (pp. 281-308).
Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag.
Schmidt, R. C., Richardson, M. J., Arsenault, C. A.,
& Galantucci, B. (2007). Visual tracking and
entrainment to an environmental rhythm.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 33, 860-870.
Schöner, G., Haken, H., & Kelso, J. A. S. (1986). A
stochastic theory of phase transitions in human
hand movement. Biological Cybernetics, 53,
247-257.
Stanley, J., Gowen, E., & Miall, R. C. (2007).
Effects of agency on movement interference
during observation of a moving dot stimulus.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human,
Perception, and Performance, 33, 915-926.

Authors note
This research was supported, in part, by the National
Science Foundation (NSF), awards BCS-0750190,
BCS-0750187 and BCS-0926662.

6
177

