UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Alleviating Anxiety about Spatial Ability in Elementary School Teachers

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7f1454cj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Ping, Raedy
Bradley, Claire
Gunderson, Elizabeth
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Alleviating Anxiety about Spatial Ability in Elementary School Teachers
Raedy M. Ping (rping@uchicago.edu)
Claire Bradley (cbradley1@uchicago.edu)
Elizabeth A. Gunderson (lizgunderson@uchicago.edu)
Gerardo Ramirez (ramirezg@uchicago.edu)
Sian L. Beilock (beilock@uchicago.edu)
Susan C. Levine (s-levine @uchicago.edu)
Department of Psychology, 5848 S. University Ave.
Chicago, IL 60637 USA
Abstract
We present data from a teacher professional development
intervention, a work circle where researchers (expert in the
domain of spatial reasoning) and teachers (expert in teaching
in a classroom) worked together to develop spatial tools,
based on lab evidence, which could be used in actual
classroom lessons. We found that, although spatial anxiety
was not directly addressed during work circle activities,
teachers experienced a decrease in spatial anxiety (but not
math or reading anxiety) over the course of the school year.
Possible reasons why this intervention was successful in
reducing teacher anxiety about spatial reasoning tasks are
discussed.
Keywords: anxiety; spatial reasoning; teacher education

Introduction
The importance of studying student anxiety in educational
settings has been well established, particularly within the
domain of mathematics. Studies of math-specific anxiety
find that math anxiety decreases performance in the moment
because worries of doing badly use up important working
memory resources that are necessary for doing difficult
math (e.g., Ashcraft & Krause, 2007). On a more lasting
level, math anxiety is associated with general avoidance of
math as indexed by decreased motivation with respect to
math as well as students’ educational and career choices
(Hembree, 1990). For example, students who experience
greater math anxiety are less likely to pursue careers in such
disciplines as science, technology, engineering and
mathematics, often referred to as the STEM disciplines
(Chipman, Krantz & Silver, 1992). Thus, alleviating
student math anxiety has important implications for both
short-term and long-term outcomes.
Domain-specific anxiety might be even more important to
study in teachers, since they have opportunities and
responsibilities to directly impact groups of students.
Moreover, elementary math majors have the highest average
math anxiety of any college major (Hembree, 1990). The
overwhelming majority of teachers in early elementary
school are female (National Education Association, 2003),
and women are more likely to experience math anxiety than
men (Hembree, 1990). This sex difference may be in part
due to women’s anxiety about confirming a stereotype that
women are just not good at math; this fear is known as
stereotype threat (e.g., Spencer, Steele & Quinn, 1999). For
example, a multitude of studies demonstrate that telling test-

takers that the test is diagnostic of their math
intelligence/ability results in increased anxiety and poorer
performance in women but not in men—men even
automatically experience a boost in performance when tests
are described as being diagnostic (see Walton & Cohen,
2003 for a meta-analysis).
Highlighting the importance of addressing teacher math
anxiety, a recent study showed that 1st and 2nd grade female
teachers’ math anxiety impacted their female students’ (but
not their male students’) learning of math over the school
year (Beilock, Gunderson, Ramirez & Levine, 2010).
Teachers’ math anxiety was directly related to girls’ math
performance at the end of the school year, but not at the
beginning. In contrast, boys’ math performance was not
related to teacher anxiety at either time point. Further,
teacher math anxiety was related to girls’ likelihood of
endorsing the stereotype that girls are good at reading and
boys are good at math at the end of the school year, but not
at the beginning, and was unrelated to boys’ likelihood of
endorsing the stereotype at either time point. A mediation
analysis showed that the effect of teacher math anxiety on
end-of-year performance was mediated by girls’
endorsement of the negative stereotype about girls and
math. All of these analyses controlled for teacher math
ability, making the importance of alleviating teacher anxiety
clear, especially in domains where stereotypes about ability
are common.
One such domain, intimately related to math, is spatial
reasoning. Compared to research in the domain of math,
little is known about the relationship between anxiety,
performance, and educational and career choices with
respect to spatial reasoning. Lawton (1994) developed a
self-report measure of spatial anxiety (or navigation anxiety
to be more precise) and found that women reported higher
levels of anxiety than did men. Moreover, spatial anxiety
was also negatively correlated with a preference for
choosing the most effective wayfinding strategy, one that
requires constructing an objective cognitive map of one’s
surroundings (as opposed to an easily-disrupted route
strategy that relies on memorizing a series of one’s own
moves). As with math, spatial anxiety is related to gender,
performance and preferences.
Given the finding that teacher math anxiety affects
student math performance, studying the relationship
between teacher spatial anxiety and student spatial

1942

performance is important. There is preliminary evidence to
suggest that teacher spatial anxiety negatively impacts
student spatial performance (Gunderson, Ramirez, Beilock
& Levine, in progress). First and 2nd grade students whose
teachers reported higher levels of spatial anxiety improved
less on a mental rotation task during the school year when
compared to students whose teachers reported lower levels
of spatial anxiety. These results are particularly striking
when considering that, as for math, females are especially
likely to be anxious about space and, as mentioned, also
comprise the majority of teachers in early elementary school
(reflecting this, 17 of 19 teachers in the Gunderson et al.
study were female).
It is also important to pay attention to students’ spatial
learning because early spatial ability is related to later
school performance as well as educational and career
choices regarding science and math (e.g., Wai, Lubinski &
Benbow, 2009). Later in life, women are underrepresented
in STEM careers (National Center for Education Statistics,
2001). Taken together, these facts highlight the importance
of finding methods of decreasing teacher spatial anxiety and
improving students’ spatial learning.
Here, we present data from a group of kindergarten
through 2nd grade teachers who participated in a work circle
with researchers focused on the domain of spatial reasoning.
The main goals of the work circle were: a) to familiarize
elementary school teachers with the domain of spatial
reasoning, b) to inform teachers about lab studies in the field
of spatial reasoning, focusing on research about using
spatial tools for teaching mathematical concepts, and c) to
bring together researchers (experts in spatial reasoning and
how it develops in early childhood) and teachers (experts in
educating young children within the classroom setting using
their particular curricula) to refine “Spatial Toolkit”
activities that were based on lab studies for use in the
classroom. Teachers implemented and augmented Toolkit
activities throughout the school year and reported back to
the work circle to discuss ideas for further refinement, ideas
for other content that could be taught spatially, and
questions that future lab research could address. Although
spatial anxiety was not directly addressed during the work
circle intervention, we hypothesized that participating in the
work circle might reduce teacher anxiety about spatial
reasoning, for several reasons.
First, the work circle intervention focused not on teaching
teachers in the spatial domain directly, but rather on
understanding how spatial abilities develop within children
and in creating spatial tools for teaching children (and why
lab research predicts that certain tools will work). Previous
research has shown that when math instruction for
preservice elementary school teachers focuses on how math
concepts should be taught to students, teachers’ math
anxiety decreases relative to math education classes that
focus on instructing the teachers in the domain of math
directly (Tooke & Lindstrom, 1998). In other words,
teacher education that focuses on how to teach a domain
reduces anxiety about that domain more than teacher

education that focuses on the content of the domain itself.
Focusing on how to teach spatially, and not focusing
directly on teaching teachers spatial skills, might have a
similar alleviating effect on their anxiety about spatial
reasoning.
Second, evidence from the stereotype threat literature
demonstrates that being told that the skill or ability being
tested is malleable (rather than fixed) eliminates negative
performance effects associated with stereotype threat
(Aronson, Fried & Good, 2002). Describing research about
how spatial reasoning abilities develop over time and how
those abilities can be both improved and used was a major
part of the work circle intervention. We reasoned that
informing female teachers about research demonstrating that
spatial skills are malleable (not fixed, as is commonly
believed) might thus decrease their spatial anxiety, if any of
that anxiety is due to stereotypes about gender and spatial
ability that favor men.
Third, additional evidence from the stereotype threat
literature shows that, if a member of a negativelystereotyped group is provided with examples of other
members from that group who are successful in the
stereotyped domain, negative effects of stereotype threat can
be alleviated (McIntyre, Paulson & Lord, 2003). We
reasoned that since the researchers involved in the work
circle were women, this aspect of the intervention might
decrease the spatial anxiety of the female teachers. Although
we did not test this by having male researchers work with a
group of teachers, a decrease in teacher spatial anxiety
would be consistent with this hypothesis and could lead to
systematic study of this question. For these reasons, we
hypothesized that teacher anxiety in the domain of spatial
reasoning—specifically—would be alleviated by our work
circle intervention.

Method
Participants
Fourteen teachers (12 female, 2 male) from 7 Chicago area
schools (5 public, 2 private) who taught either kindergarten,
1st or 2nd grade participated in the work circle. One teacher
was a science teacher who spent time in different 1st and 2nd
grade classrooms, and the other teachers taught in a single
classroom throughout the day. Four teachers had
participated in a pilot study the year before and agreed to
participate for another year. The other ten teachers
responded to flyers posted in the offices of their schools or
placed in mailboxes of kindergarten, 1st and 2nd grade
teachers at the schools of teachers who had participated in
the previous work circle. Teachers were paid hourly for the
time they spent in the week-long intervention at the end of
the summer vacation and also received a gift card at the end
of the following academic year.

Materials
The heart of the work circle intervention consisted of a full
week of intensive meetings between teachers and

1943

researchers that took place in August, toward the end of the
summer vacation. At the beginning of the week-long
intervention, teachers completed three self-report
questionnaires to assess the levels of their spatial, math, and
reading anxieties. Participants were asked to rate how
anxious they would feel in various situations on a scale from
1 (not at all anxious) to 5 (very anxious). Example questions
from the spatial anxiety questionnaire include how anxious
you would feel “trying a new route that you think will be a
shortcut without the benefit of a map” and “locating your
car in a very large parking lot” (SAQ; Lawton, 1994).
Example questions from the math anxiety questionnaire
include how anxious you would feel “taking the math
section of a standardized test” and “opening a math or
statistics book and seeing a page full of problems” (short
Mathematics Anxiety Rating Scale; Alexander & Martray,
1989; shortened version of 98-item MARS Suinn, 1972).
Example questions from the reading anxiety questionnaire
include how anxious you would feel “taking the verbal
section of a standardized test” and “opening an English
book and seeing a long story” (Zbornik & Wallbrown,
1991). Teachers also completed the anxiety measures at the
end of the school year.

Procedure
During the week of meetings before the school year,
teachers were introduced to the concept of spatial reasoning
and lab research about its importance in children’s thinking
and learning. A pilot study suggested that teachers were
largely unfamiliar with the domain of spatial reasoning
(Krakowski, Ratliff, Gomez & Levine, 2010). Thus, we
started out by demonstrating that spatial reasoning skills are
malleable and can be improved with practice or various
kinds of instruction. We then focused on presenting
evidence of how instruction that utilizes spatial language,
gesture, and spatial alignment can be used to teach topics
within a variety of content areas including measurement,
graphs, fractions and map reading. These presentations took
place over the first three days of the work circle.
Teachers were also presented with a Spatial Toolkit that
contained example activities of how to use evidence
supported spatial tools in the classroom. Researchers
developed the activities included in the Toolkit in
collaboration with the teachers who participated in the work
circle the previous year. The Toolkit was introduced to the
teachers and discussed during one day of the work circle.
Next, teachers broke into small groups to take these lesson
ideas and come up with concrete ways of applying them to
their curriculum. These small groups then presented their
activities to the larger group. The small group work took
place over three days and presentations of the teachers’
activities occurred on the last day of the week.
For example, researchers presented the results of a
training study that found that teaching students to measure
objects misaligned with the zero-point on a ruler by laying
discrete one-inch transparent plastic units on top of the ruler
improved students’ performance on this typically

challenging task (Levine, Kwon, Huttenlocher, Ratliff &
Dietz, 2009). This study was then turned into a Toolkit
activity, a worksheet where students would be instructed to
use unit-chips to help them measure items misaligned with
the zero-point on a ruler. During the work circle teachers
were asked to take the idea of using discrete units on a ruler
and transfer it to the number line, a tool that is used on a
daily basis in elementary school classrooms. Teachers then
presented their ideas to the large group. Some examples of
teacher-generated activities included using units of different
sizes on the number line to teach addition/subtraction and
multiplication/division.
During the school year, teachers were asked to fill out
daily checklists to keep track of the spatial activities they
were using. Teachers were instructed to describe any
activities they used that contained spatial content and in
which subjects (i.e., math, science, language arts, etc.) those
lessons would be included. Teachers were also asked to
record whether they used any Spatial Toolkit activities by
checking a box next to the listed activities. These checklists
were picked up from schools on a bi-weekly basis
throughout the year.
Teachers also attended a refresher meeting during the
winter, which served as an opportunity to ask questions and
discuss issues they had encountered during the first half of
the school year. One-on-one interviews were also conducted
during this meeting. During these interviews teachers were
asked about which activities they were using on a regular
basis, the particular subjects for which these activities were
useful, how students reacted to the spatial activities, and
whether they felt their teaching had changed as a result of
participating in the work circle. During these interviews,
teachers also described ways they had augmented the
Toolkit activities.
During the spring of the school year, teachers were
videotaped for about half of a school day. They were asked
to teach a lesson using the number line and a lesson using a
map, with the specifics of these lessons left up to the
teachers.
At the end of the school year teachers attended a wrap-up
meeting where they were given the post-intervention spatial,
math and reading anxiety measures. This also served as an
opportunity for a final discussion about the year.

Results
One male teacher dropped out of the study after the summer
intervention. In addition, two female teachers and the other
male teacher did not complete the anxiety questionnaires at
the end of the school year. Data from the ten remaining
teachers (all female) were analyzed.
Teacher measures of anxiety were entered into a repeatedmeasures ANOVA with Anxiety Type (3: spatial, math,
reading) and Time (2: pre-intervention, post-intervention) as
within-subjects variables. Results are presented in Figure 1.
We found a main effect of Anxiety Type (F(2, 18)=5.60,
p<0.05); planned contrasts showed that spatial anxiety
(M=2.98, SE=0.28) was on average higher than reading

1944

anxiety (M=2.00, SE=0.22) and that math anxiety (M=2.20,
SE=0.24) did not significantly differ from either of the other
types. There was a marginally significant main effect of
Time (F(1, 9)=3.81, p<0.09); on average, anxiety scores
marginally decreased from pre-intervention (M=2.52,
SE=0.19) to post-intervention (M=2.27, SE=0.18).
The research question under study here involves the
change in spatial anxiety from the beginning to the end of
the school year. We hypothesized that, since teachers were
participating in professional development focusing on
spatial reasoning, anxiety about spatial reasoning would
decrease from the beginning to the end of the school year,
while math and reading anxiety would not be affected by
our specialized intervention. The analysis of interest, then,
is the interaction between Anxiety Type and Time. This
interaction was significant, F(2, 18)=5.64, p<0.05. Paired
samples t-tests revealed that spatial anxiety decreased from
pre-intervention to post-intervention (pre M=3.34, SE=0.37;
post M=2.61, SE=0.25; t(9)=2.55, p<0.05) while reports of
math anxiety (pre M=2.10, SE=0.24; post M=2.31,
SE=0.26; t(9)=-1.29, ns) and reading anxiety (pre M=2.11,
SE=0.24; post M=1.88, SE=0.21; t(9)=1.75, ns) did not
change significantly over time.
*

Figure 1: Teacher reports of anxiety, pre-intervention (white
bars) and post-intervention (gray bars). There was a
significant interaction between Time and Anxiety Type.
Spatial anxiety decreased from pre to post, while math and
reading anxiety did not change. Error bars are SEM.
*p<0.05.

Discussion
Since teacher anxiety can impact student learning outcomes
(Beilock, et al., 2010; Gunderson, et al., in progress), the
importance of finding ways to decrease teacher anxiety is
clear. Participating in a work circle intervention in the
domain of spatial reasoning, which included an intensive
week-long intervention as well as follow-ups and
opportunities to use newly created spatial activities
throughout a school year, resulted in a decrease in
kindergarten through 2nd grade teachers’ spatial (but not
math or reading) anxiety.
This study represents a

preliminary step toward learning how to decrease teacher
anxiety in the domain of spatial reasoning. Our intervention
did not focus on decreasing anxiety—it focused on bringing
teachers and researchers together to discuss the field of
spatial reasoning and to design classroom interventions
using lab-tested spatial tools.
However, we do not yet know whether this particular
intervention had any effect on the students (that data is
currently being analyzed). Previous research does suggest
that teacher math anxiety is associated with a general
avoidance of math—teachers who are high in math anxiety,
for example, spend less time preparing for math lessons and
even use math instruction time for other subjects (Swetman,
Munday & Windham, 1993). Since spatial reasoning is not
even a part of the curriculum—there is no subject in school
called “spatial reasoning”—teacher avoidance of spatial
reasoning based on anxiety might be even more extreme. If
being in our intervention decreased teacher spatial anxiety
and, by extension, increased the amount of instructional
time spent on spatial activities, students spatial learning
should benefit.
It should be noted that the intervention we describe here
was lengthy. Although the bulk of the actual intervention
took place in a week of meetings before the school year
started, teacher anxiety was measured at the very beginning
of that the first week and again at the very end of the school
year. As such, the current study does not allow us to see the
time course of this phenomenon. Is it the case that simply
completing the week-long intervention (or even shorter)
would decrease spatial anxiety? Or, is it necessary for the
effects to build over time, perhaps because teachers gain
confidence in their spatial skills as they implement lessons
with spatial content? How long would such effects last?
This preliminary study cannot address questions of time
course such as these.
Indeed, we do not know which elements of our
intervention were responsible for the decrease in teacher
anxiety. There were two general components of the
intervention: the intensive week-long intervention, and the
opportunity to use that information throughout the year.
Even during the first week, we focused on many different
aspects of spatial reasoning. Within one week, teachers
were given a “crash-course” in research having to do with
spatial reasoning. Then, they were introduced to roughly a
dozen spatial tools for teaching different concepts. Then,
they focused on particular tools and worked together to
develop classroom activities based on those tools. They
then presented those activities to the work circle teachers
and researchers and received feedback. During the winter
interviews, teachers reported having used spatial tools in
their teaching, even in contexts that had never been
discussed during the work circle, such as teaching
handwriting or managing the classroom. They reported that
they used spatial tools most often during math and science
lessons, and they also frequently augmented the originally
designed spatial activities. Returning to the measurement
example described above, several teachers reported using

1945

unit-chips during activities with bar graphs and number
lines to help their students understand the importance of
counting intervals and understanding the concept of “unit”.
Because all of the teachers whose data we analyzed were
female, we cannot tell how much of the decrease in spatial
anxiety comes from alleviating anxiety that stems from
stereotype threat, or if our results are more generalizable. To
some degree, it does not really matter since over 90% of
early elementary school teachers are female (NEA, 2001).
On a positive note, we have learned that teacher’s anxiety
about the spatial domain can be decreased through the
approach we took, and that they also report increases in their
use of spatial activities in the classroom. Our future work
will focus on identifying the precise aspects of the
intervention that were critical in achieving these results, and
also examine the impact of this kind of intervention on
student learning, both in terms of their spatial reasoning and
in mathematics and science, where spatial skills have been
shown to play an important role in levels of achievement.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by a grant from the National
Science Foundation (Spatial Intelligence Learning Center
Grant SBE0541957).

References
Alexander, L. & Martray, C. (1989). The development of
an abbreviated version of the Mathematics Anxiety
Rating Scale. Measurement and Evaluation in
Counseling and Development, 22, 143-150.
Ashcraft, M. H. & Krause, J. A. (2007). Working memory,
math performance, and math anxiety. Psychonomic
Bulletin and Review, 14(2), 243-248.
Aronson, J., Fried, C. & Good, C. (2002). Reducing the
effects of stereotype threat on African American college
students by shaping theories of intelligence. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 113-125.
Beilock, S. L., Gunderson, E. A., Ramirez, G. & Levine, S.
C. (2010). Female teachers’ math anxiety affects girls’
math achievement. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, USA, 107(5), 1060-1063.
Chipman, S. F., Krantz, D. H. & Silver, R. (1992).
Mathematics anxiety and science careers among able
college women. Psychological Science, 3(5), 292-295.
Gunderson, E. A., Ramirez, G., Beilock, S. L. & Levine, S.
C. (in progress). Teachers’ spatial anxiety impacts
children’s mental rotation ability.
Hembree, R. (1990). The nature, effects, and relief of
mathematics anxiety.
Journal for Research in
Mathematics Education, 21(1), 33-46.
Krakowski, M., Ratliff, K., Gomez, L. & Levine, S. C.
(2010). Spatial intelligence and the research-practice
challenge. In Gomez, K., Lyons, L. & Radinsky, J. (Eds.)
Learning in the Disciplines: Proceedings of the 9th
International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS
2010)—Volume 1, Full Papers. International Society of
the Learning Sciences: Chicago, IL.

Lawton, C. A. (1994). Gender differences in way-finding
strategies: Relationship to spatial ability and spatial
anxiety. Sex Roles, 30, 765-779.
Levine, S. C., Kwon, M., Huttenlocher, J., Ratliff, K. &
Dietz, K. (2009). Children’s understanding of ruler
measurement and units of measure: A training study. In
Taatgen, N. A. & van Rijn, H. (Eds.), Proceedings of
the 31st Annual Conference in the Cognitive Science
Society. Cognitive Science Society.
McGlone, M. & Aronson, J. (2006). Social identity salience
and stereotype threat.
Journal of Applied
Developmental Psychology, 27, 486-493.
McIntyre, R. B., Paulson, R. & Lord, C. (2003). Alleviating
women’s mathematics stereotype threat through
salience of group achievements.
Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 39(1), 83-90.
National Center for Education Statistics (2001). Post
Secondary Institutions in the United States: Fall 2000
Degrees and Other Awards Conferred 1999-2000
(National Center for Education Statistics, Washington,
D. C.).
National Education Association (2001). Status of the
American Public School Teacher 2000-2001 (National
Education Association, Washington, D. C.).
Spencer, S. J., Steele, C. M. & Quinn, D. M. (1999).
Stereotype threat and women’s math performance.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 35(1), 428.
Suinn, R. M. (1972). Mathematics Anxiety Rating ScaleMARS. Fort Collins, CO: Rocky Mountain Behavioral
Sciences Institute.
Swetman, B., Munday, R. & Windham, R. (1993). Mathanxious teachers: Breaking the cycle. College Student
Journal, 22(4), 421-427.
Tooke D. J. & Lindstrom, L. C. (1998). Effectiveness of a
mathematics methods course in reducing math anxiety
of preservice elementary teachers. School Science and
Mathematics, 98(3), 136-139.
Wai, J., Lubinski, D. & Benbow, C. P. (2009). Spatial
ability for STEM domains: Aligning over fifty years of
cumulative psychological knowledge solidifies its
importance. Journal of Educational Psychology, 101,
817-835.
Walton, G. M. & Cohen, G. L. (2003). Stereotype lift.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 39, 456-467.
Zbornik, J. J. & Wallbrown, F. H. (1991). The development
and validation of a scale to measure reading anxiety.
Reading Improvement, 28(1), 2-13.

1946

