UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Apparent Paradoxes in Moral Reasoning; Or how you forced him to do it, even though he
wasn’t forced to do it.

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6q04z6jf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Phillips, Jonathan
Young, Liane

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Apparent Paradoxes in Moral Reasoning;
Or how you forced him to do it, even though he wasn’t forced to do it.
Jonathan Phillips (jonathan.phillips@yale.edu)
Department of Philosophy, Yale University
New Haven, CT 06511 USA

Liane Young (liane.young@bc.edu)
Department of Psychology, Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467 USA

Abstract

that the sailor really wasn’t forced to do so, despite the fact
that the situational constraint (the threat of capsizing) was
the same (Phillips & Knobe 2009). Thus, moral judgments
appear to alter judgments of situational constraint and force.
While this effect may be interesting, the influence of moral
judgments on force has turned out to be more complex.
In many moral situations, multiple agents may be
responsible for a single bad outcome. For example, if the
sailor was ordered by the captain of the ship to throw the
passengers overboard, then both the captain and the sailor
may be partially responsible for the death of the passengers.
The combination of the fact that moral judgments influence
judgments of situational constraint, and the fact that
multiple agents can be morally responsible for a single
outcome has the following consequence: shifting the
primary focus from one moral agent to another within a
single scenario leads observers to make contradicting
judgments of situational constraint (Young & Phillips
2011). When observers focus not on the ship captain but on
the sailor as the morally blameworthy agent, they judge that
the sailor freely threw the passengers overboard, and that he
was not truly forced by the ship captain. However, if
observers redirect their focus to the captain, then they are
more likely to agree that the captain did force the sailor to
throw the passengers overboard.
We refer to this contradictory response pattern (i.e. X
forced Y, but Y was not forced by X) as the paradox of
moral focus. Our current aims are (1) to illustrate this same
paradoxical pattern of responses in two new scenarios that
may actually occur in ordinary, everyday life, and (2) to
develop a model of the cognitive mechanisms that underlie
this effect.
Notably, this research may be independently important for
the recent debate on the nature of the influence of moral
cognition on non-moral cognition (Guglielmo, Monroe, &
Malle, in press; Machery, 2008; Mallon, 2008). This debate
hinges on whether this influence reflects a legitimate role
for morality in concepts such as force (Knobe, 2010; Pettit
& Knobe, 2009; Phelan & Sarkissian, 2008; Wright &
Bengson, 2009), or whether this influence merely reflects
motivated moral reasoning (Alicke, 2008; Nadelhoffer, in
press). Our contribution aims to help move this debate

The importance of situational constraint for moral evaluations
is widely accepted in philosophy, psychology, and the law.
However, recent work suggests that this relationship is
actually bidirectional: moral evaluations can also influence
our judgments of situational constraint. For example, if an
agent is thought to have acted immorally rather than morally,
that agent is often judged to have acted with greater freedom
and under less situational constraint. Moreover, when
considering interpersonal situations, we judge that an agent
who forces another to act immorally (versus morally) uses
more force. These two features can result in contradictory
response patterns in which participants judge both that (1) a
forcer forced a forcee to act and (2) the forcee was not forced
by the forcer to act. Here, we characterize potential
psychological mechanisms, in particular, “moral focus” and
counterfactual reasoning that account for this paradoxical
pattern of judgments.

Keywords: force; morality; counterfactual thinking;
focus
When evaluating moral agents, we consider whether the
agent acted freely or under situational constraint (Darley &
Shultz, 1990; Nichols & Knobe, 2007; Woolfolk, Doris, &
Darley, 2006). Both ordinary folk and legal scholars
consider this a crucial factor for moral judgment (Hart,
1968). Emerging research, however, suggests that moral
judgments in turn influence our evaluations of situational
constraint (Phillips & Knobe 2009). That is, given a fixed
level of situational constraint, people often judge that an
agent is not forced to perform a morally impermissible
action, though she is forced to perform a morally
permissible action.
Consider an example originally proposed by Aristotle,
featuring a sailor in the midst of a raging storm
(Nicomachean Ethics 1110a10-11). The sailor, knowing
that he must make his ship lighter to avoid capsizing, throws
his expensive cargo overboard. When presented with this
case, participants judge that the sailor was forced to throw
his cargo overboard. However, changing the moral valence
of the sailor’s action changes judgments of force. If the
sailor threw his wife overboard instead, participants judged

138

forward by positing a specific underlying cognitive
mechanism for the influence of morality on judgments of
force.
We will begin by outlining this model for the paradox of
moral focus and then present two studies that suggest (1)
such effects may occur in ordinary, everyday situations and
(2) that the mechanisms of moral focus and counterfactual
thinking play fundamental roles in generating the
paradoxical pattern of responses. We then discuss the past
and current studies in terms of the proposed account of the
underlying cognitive mechanisms. Specifically, we argue
that this account can explain the influence of morality on
putative non-moral judgments of force as well as the
paradox of moral focus.

therefore be consistent with participants‘ moral judgments
but, as a result, may reflect internal inconsistencies, as
observed in focusing bias more generally (Legrenzi, et al.,
1993). It is this process that we suggest leads to the paradox
of moral focus.

Study 1
Study 1 presents a new instance of the paradoxical force
judgments. However, the scenario used in this study, unlike
scenarios used in earlier studies, is realistic enough to
actually occur. If participants show the same inconsistent
pattern of results in this more realistic scenario, we would
have initial evidence that such paradoxical reasoning may
influence situations similar to situations that have actually
occurred.1
All participants read about a military commander who
ordered his subordinates to torture captured enemy soldiers
for military information:
There was a military unit commander who wanted to
help end a rebel uprising in his country. He decided
that the best way to do this was to capture some of the
rebel soldiers and obtain information about their future
plans. When the captured rebels refused to give away
their secrets, the unit commander ordered his soldiers
to brutally torture them until they confessed. At first
they were reluctant, but after being ordered several
times, the military soldiers brutally tortured the rebels
until they confessed.
Importantly, when considering the scenario above, one
could focus either on the commander or on the military
troops as the primary moral agent responsible for torturing
the rebel soldiers. Taking advantage of this feature, we
asked participants whether they agreed or disagreed either
with an active sentence, focused on the forcer, or a passive
form of the same sentence, focused on the forcee:
Forcee-focused: The military soldiers were forced to
brutally torture the rebels by the unit commander.
Forcer-focused: The unit commander forced his
soldiers to brutally torture the rebels.

Theoretical Model
Philosophers have long understood that to be ‘forced’
entails lacking the ability to do otherwise. Thus Aquinas
discussed ‘the necessity of coercion,’ by saying: ‘When
someone is forced by some agent…he is not able to do the
contrary’ (Summa Theologica I.II Q6 A6). This suggests
that to claim that an agent was ‘forced’ is at least in part to
say that the agent could not do anything other than what he
did. Moreover, to say that an agent was not forced is to say
he could have acted differently. If people’s intuitive
judgments of force reflect this principle, either consciously
or unconsciously, then their judgments of situational
constraint are partially determined by the extent to which
participants believe an agent could have acted differently.
Importantly, to imagine whether and how an agent could
have acted differently is to engage in counterfactual
reasoning. Past research has targeted the impact of moral
judgment on counterfactual reasoning. In one such study,
participants engaged in more counterfactual thinking for
“immoral” versus neutral causes of an outcome (N'gbala &
Branscombe, 1997). Thus, the influence of morality on
judgments of whether an agent was forced to act seems to
have a straightforward explanation: When participants are
faced with an immoral action, they focus on the agent who
performed the action and are more inclined to entertain
alternative actions that the agent could have performed.
This, in turn, leads participants to judge that the immoral
agent acted freely – given the salient alternative options they
perceive as available to the agent. Returning to the original
study (Phillips & Knobe 2009), the hypothesis is that
participants were more inclined to consider counterfactual
alternatives to the sailor’s action when he threw his wife
overboard than when he threw his expensive cargo
overboard.
Yet, in situations in which more than one agent is
responsible for a single immoral outcome, blame can be
shifted from one agent to the other. Moral evaluations of
different agents may motivate participants to focus on one
agent versus the other. Consequently, the shift in moral
focus may result in a corresponding shift in which
counterfactual actions are considered – that of the forcer
versus that of the forcee. This motivated reasoning should

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1	  For instance, consider the report of the torture of Isa Abdullah
Isa in Bahrain. ‘On the day of his arrest, Isa Isa was put in the
corner of a room at the CID compound where guards formed a
semi-circle around him, punching and kicking him. An officer of
superior rank came into the room and told the guards to stop. He
said to Isa, “Now, no one can help you. I will ask you one question
and if you don’t answer it this is your last day on earth. Where is
the weapon?” Isa responded, “What weapon?” The officer then
ordered the guards to continue hitting Isa. Isa said that after what
he estimated to be 10 minutes, he felt as if he was going to die and
confessed falsely to hiding a weapon in a cemetery in the village of
Sanabis’ (Human Rights Watch 2011). For the full report and
details of other similar cases, see:
http://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/bahrain0210webwco
ver_0.pdf

139

Note that while the focus is shifted from one agent to the
other, the two sentences share the same underlying logical
structure.
We hypothesized that when participants were focused on
the military soldiers (“the forcee”), they would judge that
they were not forced to torture the rebels because
participants would have considered counterfactual
alternatives for the military soldiers’ actions (e.g., they
could have resisted the commander’s orders). Yet, we also
hypothesized that, paradoxically, if participants were
focused instead on the unit commander (“the forcer”), they
would judge that he did force the military soldiers to torture
the rebels because they would have considered
counterfactual alternatives to the commander’s actions (e.g.,
he could have not ordered his soldiers to torture the rebels).
Thus, we hypothesized that participants‘ focus on either the
commander or the soldiers as the primary moral agent
would affect their consideration of counterfactual
alternatives, resulting in a paradoxical pattern of force
judgments.

Figure 1: Participants’ agreement ratings by focus
(Commander vs. Soldiers) for both statements
concerning force (left) and no other options (right) on a
scale from 1 ('Completely disagree') to 7 ('Completely
agree').
Judgments of force and judgments of whether the military
soldiers had no other options were themselves significantly
correlated such that those who agreed that the military
soldiers were forced also tended to agree that they had no
other option (r = .65, p < .001). Additionally, we conducted
a meditational analysis to test whether, as hypothesized,
judgments of having no other option mediated the effect of
moral focus (forcee-focused versus forcer-focused) on
judgments of force. When focus and no other option were
entered simultaneously, the regression coefficient measuring
the relationship between condition and option went from ß =
.30, p < .01 to ß = .01, p > .9. A Sobel test showed that this
reduction was significant, Z = 5.16, p < .001 (Fig. 2).

Methods
Eighty participants (mean: 34 years old; 52 females) were
recruited using Amazon Mechanical Turk. Participants were
randomly assigned to either the forcee-focused or the forcerfocused condition. After reading the same vignette about the
military commander and his soldiers, participants indicated
their agreement with either the forcee-focused or forcerfocused statements. Subsequently, participants indicated
their agreement with a statement to which indicated that the
military soldiers had ‘no other option.’ Participants reported
their agreement for both questions on a 7-point Likert Scale
anchored at 1 ('Completely disagree') and 7 ('Completely
agree').2

Results
As hypothesized, participants agreed that the unit
commander forced the soldiers to torture the rebels (M =
5.54) significantly more than they agreed that the soldiers
were forced by the unit commander to torture the rebels (M
= 4.53), t(77)=2.78, p=.007). Moreover, participants in the
forcee-focused versus forcer-focused conditions delivered
different judgments of whether the military soldiers had no
other option. Participants were less likely to agree the
soldiers had no other option when they were focused on the
soldiers (forcee-focused) (M = 3.4) than when they were
focused on the commander (forcer-focused) (M = 5.2),
t(77)=4.49, p<.001 (Fig. 1).

Figure 2: Standardized regression coefficients for the
relationship between moral focus on forcer vs. forcee
and whether the forcee was forced as mediated by
absence of alternative options for forcee.

Discussion
Participants’ responses replicated the paradoxical pattern of
results found in earlier studies. Here, participants were more
willing to agree that the military commander forced the
soldiers to torture the rebels than to agree that the soldiers
were forced by the military commander to torture the rebels.
Furthermore, when focused on the military commander,

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
2	  One participant was excluded from the analysis for failing a
control question that determined whether participants had read the
instructions. 	  

140

participants were more willing to agree that the military
soldiers didn’t have other alternative options. In contrast,
when participants focused on the military soldiers as the
relevant moral agent, they were more willing to agree that
the soldiers did have other alternative options. Participants’
ratings of whether the soldiers had no other options
mediated the effect of focus on force judgments. Thus,
focus influences the extent to which alternative options
available to an agent are considered, influencing judgments
of force in turn.
It remains possible that participants’ responses in this
first study were influenced either by the rigid hierarchy in
the military or by the severity of the immoral action of
brutal torture. Moreover, the difference between conditions
may have also been caused, not by the moral focus
specifically, but rather by some other difference between the
passive and active forms of the sentences. We address these
alternatives in Study 2.

Passive: Tim was forced to lie to the principal about
Sam by Ralph the bully.
Active: Ralph the bully forced Tim to lie to the
principal about Sam.
Clefted: It was by Ralph the bully that Tim was forced
to lie to the principal about Sam.
We hypothesized that agreement ratings with the passive
versus active sentence constructions would replicate the
previously observed paradoxical pattern: Participants
would agree more that Ralph the bully forced Tim to lie
to the principal but agree less that Tim was forced to lie to
the principal by Ralph the bully. Further, we hypothesized
that participants would agree with the clefted form of the
passive sentence, showing that this effect arises
specifically because of moral focus.

Methods
Seventy-five participants (mean: 38 years old; 49 females)
were recruited, as in Study 1. Participants were randomly
assigned to either the passive, active or clefted condition.
After reading the vignette, participants rated their agreement
on a scale from 1 ('Completely disagree') to 7 ('Completely
agree').

Study 2
Study 2 provides two contributions. First, to address the
possibility that the effects observed in Study 1 are specific
to severely immoral actions that take place in the context of
rigid hierarchies (e.g., the military), we presented
participants in Study 2 with a new vignette set at a middle
school. Second, in Study 1 the passive statement was always
focused on the forcee and the active statement was always
focused on the forcer; Study 2 unconfounded these
dimensions by introducing a new passive statement that
focused on the forcer.
All participants read the following vignette:

Results
The data were analyzed using a one-way ANOVA, which
revealed a main effect of condition (passive vs. active vs.
clefted) on judgments of force F(72)= 11.52, p < .001. Posthoc comparisons were then computed to assess differences
between the three conditions, with a Bonferroni correction
applied (α=.0167). At this level, there were significant
differences between both between passive (M = 4.08) and
active (M = 5.62), t(46) = 3.02, p < .01 and between passive
and clefted (M = 6.22), t(49) = 4.64, p < .001, but no
significant difference between active and clefted p > .15
(Fig. 3).

Ralph the bully is well known at his middle school for
getting what he wants by threatening the other students.
Recently, Ralph almost got kicked out of school after a
student named Sam told the principal that Ralph beat
him up. Now Ralph has come up with a plan to get
revenge by telling the principal that Sam has been
sneaking into the girls' locker room. The one problem
is that Ralph knows that the principal won't believe
him. So Ralph tells another student named Tim that if
he doesn't lie to the principal about Sam, he'll beat him
up, just like he beat up Sam. Tim knows that he
shouldn't lie to the principal and that Sam will
probably get kicked out of school, but he tells the
principal anyway because he doesn't want to get beaten
up. After the principal hears that Sam has been
sneaking into the girls' locker room, he expels Sam
from school.
To illustrate that the difference was not due merely to the
passive vs. active constructions of the sentence, we included
a third sentence which was clefted such that it was focused
on the forcer (Ralph the Bully) while remaining passive.
Thus after reading this vignette, participants rated their
agreement with one of these three logically equivalent
sentences:

Figure 3: Participants’ agreement ratings by condition
for statements concerning force on a scale from 1
('Completely disagree') to 7 ('Completely agree').

141

to do p' and systematically relied on a success reading for
statements of the form 'Y was forced to do p' but only for
immoral actions and despite the fact that the forcing was
always successful. Thus, the overall body of evidence
suggests that participants deliver inconsistent responses due
specifically to moral focus and counterfactual reasoning.
Such ‘errors’ in moral reasoning fit with the literature on
focusing bias more generally, which has shown that
focusing effects can lead to logical errors in reasoning and
decision-making across a number of contexts (Legrenzi, et
al., 1993). Of course, unlike logical reasoning, moral
reasoning may not generate ‘correct’ or ‘incorrect’ answers.
Nevertheless, participants’ paradoxical response pattern is
clearly internally inconsistent. This point should be
especially clear when one considers these results as only
two of a growing number of similarly structured studies,
which have elicited the same paradoxical pattern. For
example, participants in a previous study read about a chief
of surgery at a hospital who orders a subordinate doctor to
prescribe a drug that kills a patient. Participants judged that
the chief did force the doctor to prescribe a medicine (mean
judgment: 5.2 on a 1 to 7 Likert scale) but judged that the
doctor was not forced to do prescribe the medicine (mean
judgment: 3.8) (Young & Phillips 2011). Moreover, pilot
data suggest that the paradoxical pattern persists even in a
within-subject design.3
To what extent do such paradoxical responses occur? One
possibility is that such effects occur only within the context
of strict power hierarchies, e.g., military commanders and
subordinate soldiers, bullies and their peers. Another
possibility is that such effects are possible within a wide
range of social situations. As we were specifically interested
in judgments of force, we relied on situations in which there
is a background power hierarchy, which is especially
conducive for one person to force another. Future work
should explore a broader range of relationships and
situations.
Importantly, the present studies may be understood as part
of a broader research program, which has suggested that
moral judgments influence a whole host of other seemingly
non-moral judgments. Moral judgments have been shown to
influence judgments of causation (Hitchcock & Knobe,
2009; Knobe & Fraser, 2008), force (Phillips & Knobe,
2009), happiness (Phillips, Misenheimer & Knobe, 2011),
intent (Knobe, 2003), knowledge (Beebe & Buckwalter, in
press), and counterfactual thinking (Branscombe et al.,
1996). We suspect that similarly inconsistent results may
occur for these other types of non-moral judgments as well,
even outside of situations in which there is a power
hierarchy. For instance, consider a situation in which two

Discussion
The predicted paradoxical pattern of results again emerged.
Participants agreed significantly more that ‘Tim was forced
to lie to the principal about Sam by Ralph the bully,’ than
that ‘Ralph the bully forced Tim to lie to the principal about
Sam.’ Because this vignette did not depict an extraordinary
social interaction, Study 2 provides evidence that the
paradox of moral focus may actually occur in ordinary, dayto-day situations.
Moreover, despite not agreeing strongly with the
statement that ‘Tim was forced to lie to the principal by
Ralph the bully’, participants did agree that ‘It was by Ralph
the bully that Tim was forced to lie to the principal about
Sam.’ Finally, for the sentence constructions in which the
moral focus was on the bully (clefted and active), no
significant difference in agreement ratings was observed.
Taken together, these results suggest it is unlikely that the
observed effects are due merely to the difference between
passive versus active sentence constructions. Instead, the
results indicate that the mechanism underlying the
paradoxical pattern of results is moral focus.

General Discussion
Situations in which more than one agent is responsible
for a bad outcome allow for blame shifting – we can focus
on one blameworthy agent or another. This shift in moral
focus can result in a corresponding shift in the actions for
which we consider counterfactual alternatives (e.g., could
the forcer or the forcee have done something else to avoid
this bad outcome?). Counterfactual thinking might therefore
play an important role when people consider issues like
force and freedom in everyday moral situations. The
resulting judgments of situational constraint or force may
therefore be consistent with people’s moral judgments but
also reflect internal inconsistencies, as observed in the
paradoxical response patterns of Studies 1 and 2.
One alternative explanation for the pattern of results is
that participants may be interpreting ‘force’ not in the sense
“X successfully forced Y” but as “X was attempting to force
Y.” If this is right, then it may be the case that “X forces Y
to do p” does not simply entail that “Y is forced to do p”.
While ‘force’ may occasionally be interpreted in this way
(i.e. given a performative reading), it is unlikely that the
complete pattern of results can be explained on this
interpretation. First, note that in each scenario, X did
successfully force Y to do p. Second, previous research has
revealed that this paradoxical pattern disappears when the
action in question is morally neutral. Consider again the
case of the ship captain and the sailor. If the ship captain
orders the sailor to throw cargo (and not passengers)
overboard, participants simply agree both that the captain
forced the sailor to throw the cargo overboard and that the
sailor was forced to throw the cargo overboard. Thus,
alternative explanations that rely on the performative versus
success distinction are unlikely in that they must
assume that participants systematically relied on a
performative reading for statements of the form: 'X forced Y

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
3	  Participants judged that the captain forced the sailor to throw
the passengers overboard (mean: 4.84) more than they judged that
the sailor was forced to throw the passengers overboard (mean:
4.16; t(82)=-3.14 p=0.002). This difference, however, was driven
by a subset of the 83 participants: 29 subjects showed the predicted
difference. 	  

142

agents jointly cause a bad outcome. Whichever agent
receives more moral focus may be judged as more causally
responsible for the bad outcome. Furthermore, shifting the
moral focus from one agent to another may result in
internally inconsistent patterns of responses, e.g., X rather
than Y caused p versus Y rather than X caused p. These
predictions should be investigated in future research.
Recent research has also sought to target the nature and
boundaries of the impact of moral judgment on non-moral
cognition. Do effects such as this reflect a genuine role for
morality in concepts such as force (Knobe, 2010; Pettit &
Knobe, 2009; Phelan & Sarkissian, 2008; Wright &
Bengson, 2009)? Or do they provide evidence for another
instance of motivated moral reasoning (Adams & Steadman,
2004; Alicke, 2008; Nadelhoffer, in press)? While this may
be, at its core, a philosophical rather than empirical
question, the current study seeks to move this debate
forward by (1) revealing that moral evaluations can lead to
paradoxical patterns of judgments even in ordinary moral
situations and (2) suggesting a specific underlying
mechanism for the influence of moral judgment on nonmoral cognition. Focusing on immoral actions may lead
people to imagine counterfactual alternatives to those
specific actions and, as a result, change downstream
judgments such as whether or not an agent was ‘forced.’ We
leave the question of whether this same mechanism can also
explain the influence of morality on other non-moral
domains for future research.

Hart, H. L. A. (1968). Punishment and responsibility.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hitchcock, C., & Knobe, J. (2009). Cause and norm.
Journal of Philosophy, 11, 587-612.
Human Rights Watch. Torture redux: The revival of
physical coercion during interrogations in Bahrain. New
York. 2001
Knobe, J. (2003). Intentional action and side effects in
ordinary language. Analysis, 63, 190-193.
Knobe, J. (2010). Person as scientist, person as
moralist. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 33, 315-329.
Knobe, J., & Fraser, B. (2008). Causal judgment and moral
judgment: Two experiments. In W. Sinnott-Armstrong
(Ed.), Moral Psychology (pp. 441-444). Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Legrenzi, P., Girotto, V., & Johnson‐Laird, P. N. (1993).
Focussing in reasoning and decision making. Cognition,
49, 37‐66.
Machery, E. (2008). The folk concept of intentional action:
philosophical and experimental issues. Mind & Language,
23, 165-189.
Mallon, R. (2008). Knobe versus Machery: Testing the
trade-off hypothesis. Mind & Language, 23, 247-255.
N’gbala, A., & Branscombe, N. (1997). When does action
elicit more regret than inaction and is counterfactual
mutation the mediator of this effect? Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 33, 324– 343.
Nadelhoffer, T. (in press). Intentional action and intending:
Recent empirical studies. Philosophical Psychology.
Nichols, S., & Knobe, J. (2007). Moral responsibility and
determinism: The cognitive science of folk intuitions.
Noûs 41, 663–685.
Pettit, D., & Knobe, J. (2009). The pervasive impact of
moral judgment. Mind & Language, 24, 586-604.
Phelan, M., & Sarkissian, H. (2008). The folk strike back:
Or, why you didn’t do it intentionally, though it was bad
and you knew it. Philosophical Studies, 138, 291- 298.
Phillips, J., & Knobe, J. (2009). Moral judgments and
intuitions about freedom. Psychological Inquiry, 20, 3036.
Woolfolk, R. L., Doris, J. M., & Darley, J. M. (2006).
Identification, situational constraint, and social cognition:
Studies in the attribution of moral responsibility.
Cognition, 100, 283-301.
Wright, J., & Bengson, J. (2009). Asymmetries in
Judgments of Responsibility and Intentional Action. Mind
& Language, 24, 24-50.
Young, L., & Phillips, J. (2011). The paradox of moral
focus. Cognition, 119: 166-178.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Joshua Knobe and Zoltán Szabó for
their helpful discussion on a preliminary version this
research.

References
Adams, F., & Steadman, A. (2004). Intentional action and
moral considerations: Still pragmatic. Analysis, 64, 268‐2
76.
Alicke, M. (2008). Blaming badly. Journal of Cognition and
Culture, 8, 179-186.
Aquinas, T. (1273/1920). The Summa Theologica of St.
Thomas Aquinas, Second and revised edition. (Fathers of
the English Dominican Province, Trans.).
Aristotle. (2002). Nicomachean ethics. (S. Broadie & C.
Rowe, Trans.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Beebe, J., & Buckwalter, W. (2010). The epistemic sideeffect effect. Mind & Language, 25, 474-498.
Branscombe, N., Owen, S., Garstka, T., & Coleman, J.
(1996). Rape and accident counterfactuals: Who might
have done otherwise and would it have changed the
outcome? Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 26,
1042-1067.
Darley, J. M., & Shultz, T. R. (1990). Moral rules - Their
content and acquisition. Annual Review of Psychology,
41, 525-556.
Guglielmo, S., Monroe, A., & Malle, B. (in press). At the
heart of morality lies folk psychology. Inquiry.

143

