UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Beyond Outcomes: The Influence of Intentions and Deception

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2w92c4v9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Schaechtele, Simeon
Gerstenberg, Tobias
Lagnado, David

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Beyond Outcomes: The Influence of Intentions and Deception
Simeon Schächtele (simeon.schaechtele.09@ucl.ac.uk), Tobias Gerstenberg (t.gerstenberg@ucl.ac.uk),
David Lagnado (d.lagnado@ucl.ac.uk)
Department of Cognitive, Perceptual, and Brain Sciences
University College London, United Kingdom
Abstract
To what extent do people care about the intentions behind an
action? What if the intentions can be deceptive? We conducted two
experiments to complement previous evidence about the roles of
outcomes and intentions in economic games. The results of
Experiment 1 indicate that both outcomes and intentions affect
players’ responses. Moreover, unkind intentions are punished but
kind intentions are hardly rewarded. In Experiment 2, intentions
are stated as opposed to observed. Participants misstate their
intentions frequently, thereby undermining the credibility of the
statements. As a result, perceived honesty modulates players’
responses.
Keywords: Intentions; outcomes; preferences; deception;
punishment; reward; experimental game.

Introduction
To what extent do people care about the intention behind
the action of someone else? What if intentions can be
deceiving? In economic theory, the utility functions
constructed to describe revealed preferences (Samuelson,
1938) can incorporate anything, including perceived
intentions. In practice, models of utility tend to boil down to
a single element: one's own income. Guided by
experimental evidence and a rapprochement of economics
and psychology, some scholars constructed formal models
of social preferences that move beyond individual income
and incorporate preferences over monetary distributions
(Bolton & Ockenfels, 2000; Fehr & Schmidt, 1999).
Although these theories of fairness are different from pure
income-maximization models, they remain concerned with
outcomes, namely distributions of payoffs. A third
generation of models goes further still and adds perceived
intentions to the utility function (Charness & Rabin, 2002;
Dufwenberg & Kirchsteiger, 2004; Falk & Fischbacher,
2006). We investigated experimentally the role of intentions
and outcomes in two versions of a sequential 2-player game.
Previous studies on the role of intentions in economic
games have employed different experimental designs and
have reached different conclusions. A first group of studies
compares responses to intentional actions against the
responses to random events, whereby the intentional choices
and the random events have identical monetary
consequences. Falk, Fehr, and Fischbacher (2008) find that
rejection rates in an ultimatum game (Güth, Schmittberger,
& Schwarze, 1982) are significantly lower when the offers
are determined randomly by a computer, as opposed to set
intentionally by a person. In contrast, Stanca (2010) finds
that intentions are irrelevant in a within-subject comparison
between random and intentional first-moves of a giftexchange game. A second group of studies (e.g. Falk, Fehr,

& Fischbacher, 2003; McCabe, Rigdon, & Smith, 2003)
finds an effect of intentions by comparing responses to
identical actions that have been selected from different sets
of alternative actions. In an ultimatum game, for instance, a
disadvantageous offer is more likely to be rejected when the
alternative is an equal split, as opposed to an even less
advantageous offer. A third group of studies (Charness &
Levine, 2007; Cushman, Dreber, Wang, & Costa, 2009)
compares responses to identical outcomes that were reached
by different combinations of intentional choices and chance.
These studies can also be interpreted as modeling an
imperfect correlation between intentions and outcomes. In
many cases, intentions and consequences match, that is, the
consequences of an action are those that were intended. But
in our fundamentally noisy and complex environment, this
need not be the case, so intentions and outcomes can
sometimes diverge.
Both Cushman et al. (2009) and Charness and Levine
(2007) find an effect of intentions, but the relative
importance of intentions versus outcomes differs widely
between their studies. Cushman et al. conclude that
“accidental outcomes guide punishment” whereas Charness
and Levine report that “intention appears to be a stronger
force than distribution”. Our basic research design follows
the general approach of Charness and Levine and Cushman
et al. By combining what we see as the desirable features of
both studies, we gauge the robustness of their results. Like
Cushman et al., our design employs three levels of
intentions and outcomes, allowing us to compare negative
and positive reciprocity. Like Charness and Levine,
however, we abstain from using the strategy method (Selten,
1967) and add realism by making responses costly.
In practice, the role of intentions is affected by the fact
that we lack direct access to other people’s intentions. In
particular, statements of intention may be deceptive.
Consider an example from the legal domain. A murderer
may have a strong incentive to lie to the jury about her
intention to kill her victim. As a result, the jury has good
reason not to take the stated intention at face value. In
business, negotiation and other social interactions, deceptive
statements about intentions exist as well. It is reasonable to
assume that people are sensitive to the incentives for and the
presence of deception. We incorporate this feature in the
second of our experiments and assess how it influences the
effect of intentions in participants' responses. Could it be
that intentions matter more when they are not subject to the
possibility of deception? Notice that from the viewpoint of
outcome-based utility, the absence or presence of deception
should not matter because intentions are irrelevant.

1860

Experiment 1
The central building block of our experiments is a
sequential, probabilistic allocator-responder game with three
choice alternatives and three outcomes (cf. Figure 1, left
panel). First, the “selector” chooses one of three random
devices dubbed “wheels of fortune”. Then nature (alias the
computer) determines the outcome of the wheel of fortune.
Outcomes refer to divisions of 30 tokens (≈£1) between the
selector and the responder. The responder is informed about
the selector's choice and the wheel's outcome. Finally, the
responder can subtract or add between -15 and +15 from the
selector's payoff, whereby for 3 tokens added or subtracted
she has to give up one of her own tokens.1 The core idea of
this design is that the selector’s wheel choices signal her
intention towards the responder, who can reciprocate
intentions and/or adjust outcomes by adding or subtracting
tokens. The probabilities of the wheels and the monetary
divisions associated with the outcomes are summarized in
Table 1.
Table 1: Wheels of fortune: Probabilities and outcomes.
Probability
Outcome 1
Outcome 2
Outcome 3

Wheel 1
60%
30%
10%

Wheel 2
20%
60%
20%

Wheel 3
10%
30%
60%

Payoff
20 | 10
15 | 15
10 | 20

Note. Payoffs (Selector | Responder) in experimental tokens.

Each wheel choice can result in any of the three
outcomes, but the wheels differ in the probabilities of
yielding a particular outcome. Wheel 1 has a high
probability of allocating 20 tokens to the selector and 10
tokens to the responder. Wheel 2 has a high probability of
an equal split of the 30 tokens. Wheel 3 has a high
probability of allocating 10 tokens to the selector and 20 to
the responder. We follow Cushman et al. in labeling both
the outcomes and intentions “stingy”, “fair” or “generous”.
In the experimental instructions, however, we avoided such
terms and used neutral language.
The experiment consisted of two parts. In Part A, the
wheel of fortune game was played 16 times under a protocol
of random matching with anonymity. The roles of selectors
and responders were assigned randomly and remained fixed
throughout Part A. In Part B, all 16 participants of a session
acted as responders. Participants were asked to indicate their
responses to all nine possible combinations of intentions and
outcomes, which were presented in random order. This
resembles the strategy method in that responses are
collected for all possible first moves, while the sequential
presentation reduces cognitive demands.
Participants were informed that their responses in Part B
had no effect on actual payoffs. Part B allowed us to collect
1

The cost ratio of 1:3 for adding or subtracting tokens coincides
with the ratio used in experiments on altruistic punishment (Fehr &
Gächter, 2002) and is comparable in magnitude to the 1:4 ratio
employed in Charness and Levine (2007).

Figure 1: Sequence of events in both Experiments.
an equal number of observations for all nine combinations
of intentions and outcomes. We included it as an additional
check on the results from Part A, in which we had no
control over the number of observations per cell.

Method
Participants and materials The experimental session was
conducted at the Centre for Economic Learning and Social
Evolution (ELSE) of University College London. 16
participants (11 female) were recruited through the ELSE
subject pool. The median age was 22.5 years (SD = 2.88).
The experiment was programmed with the software package
z-Tree (Fischbacher, 2007).
Procedure Instructions for Part A were read aloud by the
experimenters and questions related to the instructions were
answered in private. After Part A, instructions for Part B
were read out aloud and questions answered in private.
Before each of the two parts, a comprehension check had to
be passed. At the end of the experiment, the participants'
earnings were paid out to them in private. Average earnings
were £10.91 (SD = 0.84), including a show-up fee of £5.
The experiment lasted 60 minutes.

Results
Selectors’ wheel choices and ex-post profitability The fair
wheel was the most common choice (n = 60), followed by
the stingy (n = 53) and the generous wheel (n = 15). Due to
responders’ adjustments, the stingy wheel earned less on

1861

Figure 2: Mean adjustments by intention and outcome
(Exp 1, Part A).

Figure 3: Mean adjustments by intention and outcome
(Exp 1, Part B).

average than the fair wheel (10.11 vs. 12.35 tokens), which
in turn earned a little less than the generous wheel (12.47).
Overall pattern of responses Despite the monetary
disincentive against adjustments, the average cost of
adjustments each responder incurred was significantly
different from zero (M = 1.48; Wilcoxon signed-rank test Z
= -2.37, p = .018). 7 out of 8 responders made at least one
adjustment in the game. In most cases (72/128), however,
responders left the selector's earnings unchanged. With a
ratio of negative to positive adjustments of 7:1 and a mean
adjustment of -3.91 (SD = 6.18), responses were skewed
towards subtraction. The costs incurred for adjustments did
not drop in later periods, indicating that adjustments were
not made strategically.
Analysis of responses: Outcomes versus intentions To
evaluate the effects of intentions and outcomes in the game
(Part A), we regressed responders' adjustments on dummycoded predictors for intentions and outcomes with “fair
intention-fair outcome" as the reference category, using
random intercepts for each subject (Table 2).3
With the present number of observations only the
predictor for stingy intentions is significant at the
conventional level (β = -3.96; t = -4.03; p = .000). Stingy
intentions seem to elicit a strong negative response, with an
estimated parameter that is considerably larger in absolute
terms than the parameter estimate for generous intentions
(2.17) and more than three times as large as the parameter
estimate for a stingy outcome (-1.17). The similarity
between mean adjustments in Part A and Part B (cf. Figures
2 and 3) suggests that the presence or absence of monetary
stakes had no discernible effect on participants' responses.
Interestingly, however, adjustments in Part B were
significantly more negative for participants who had been
responders in Part A (M = -4.67), as opposed to selectors (M
= 0.33; Mann-Whitney test Z = 4.47, p = .000). Consistent
with the regression results from Part A, a repeated-measures
ANOVA of Part B reveals significant main effects of
intention F(2, 30) = 11.72, p = .000 and of outcome F(2, 30)

= 17.35, p = .000, but no interactions F(4, 60) = 1.16, p =
.336. The more powerful analysis for Part B indicates that
on top of the effect of stingy versus fair intentions, there
were significant differences in the responses to stingy versus
fair outcomes F(1, 15) = 10.97, p = .005, as well as fair
versus generous outcomes F(1, 15) = 7.15, p = .017.

Discussion
Why is it that intentions mattered more in our experiment
than in Cushman et al. (2009), or in Stanca (2010), where
they had little or no effect on choices? We suggest that the
discrepancy could be due to a methodological difference in
the elicitation of responses. Whereas our study used the
more conventional direct-response method, both Cushman
et al. and Stanca (2010) relied on the strategy method, in
which participants make contingent decisions for all
possible situations that may occur in the interaction. This
method is advantageous in terms of data collection but may
alter cognition and behavior. Thinking hypothetically
through all possible situations may induce a different style
of thinking and elicit different responses than in an actually
experienced situation, especially if the behavior is related to
visceral and emotional responses. Although in some studies
the two methods do produce similar results, this seems not
to hold for decisions related to punishment (Brandts &
Charness, 2003), as in the present case. Moreover, the mere
fact that the game was played repeatedly, albeit with
different interaction partners, may have triggered a higher
evaluation of intentions.
A second noteworthy result from Experiment 1 is the
asymmetry in the responses to stingy and generous
Table 2: Regression results (Exp 1, Part A).

3

A fixed intercept model was rejected in favor of random
effects (χ²= 25.71; df = 1; p = .000, likelihood-ratio test).

Intercept
Stingy intention
Generous intention
Stingy outcome
Generous outcome
N = 128, R² =.259

1862

β
-2.48
-3.96
2.17
-1.17
1.32

t
-1.91
-4.03
1.48
-1.11
1.15

p
.056
.000
.140
.269
.251

intentions: stingy intentions were punished fairly heavily
but generous intentions were hardly rewarded. This
asymmetry was also found by Cushman et al. and fits with a
picture of negative reciprocity looming larger than positive
reciprocity (Offerman, 2002). Offerman notes that in his
study, asymmetric behavioural reciprocity correlated with
an asymmetry in reported positive and negative emotions.
Although both unintended and intended favorable outcomes
elicited positive emotions, intended unfavorable outcomes
provoked much stronger negative emotions than unintended
unfavorable outcomes. The relation between emotions and
responses to intentional actions is a subject for further study.

Table 3: Frequency and ex-post profitability of wheel
choices and statements (Exp 2, Part A).
Actual
wheel choice
Stingy
Stingy
Stingy
Fair
Fair
Fair
Generous
Generous
Generous

Experiment 2
The design of Experiment 2 was identical to Experiment 1
except for one feature: wheel choices were not directly
observed by responders (cf. Figure 1). Instead, selectors
communicated an intention after observing the outcome of
the wheel. So for example, a selector could choose the
stingy wheel and communicate a fair intention after having
observed the outcome, which by chance, could have been
generous. We expected selectors to make use of this
possibility of deception. Both selectors and responder knew
that the stated wheel choices needed not be the actual
choices. Responders were also asked to indicate which
wheel they believed had been actually chosen. As in
Experiment 1, participants first played the game for 16
times in Part A and then indicated their hypothetical
responses to all nine possible combinations of stated choices
and outcomes in Part B.
Participants and procedure The 16 participants of
Experiment 2 were recruited from the same subject pool as
for Experiment 1. 13 of them were female and the median
age was 22.5 years (SD = 2.88). Procedures were identical
to Experiment 1. Experiment 1 and 2 were conducted on the
same day in the same facilities. Average earnings were
£11.88 (SD = 1.20), including a show-up fee of £5.

Results
Selectors’ wheel choices and statements Table 3 shows
the frequencies of actual and stated wheel choices and the
mean profits associated with them. Unlike in Experiment 1,
selectors predominantly chose the stingy wheel (n = 104),
followed by the fair wheel (n = 21) and only three choices
of the generous wheel. These actual wheel choices contrast
with the statements selectors made. Only in 34 of 128 cases
did selectors state their true choice. In 90 cases they
overstated their intentions, that is, they stated a less benign
choice than they had actually made. There were 4 cases of
understatements. Only in 19 cases did selectors state a
stingy choice. Most of the time, they claimed to have chosen
the fair wheel (n = 86) or the generous wheel (n = 23). In
other words, selectors made use of the possibility to deceive
about their intentions. Selectors not only overstated their
intentions, but did so in a way that takes the credibility of
their statements into account. For example, a stated
generous wheel choice is more credible if the outcome of

Stated
wheel choice
Stingy
Fair
Generous
Stingy
Fair
Generous
Stingy
Fair
Generous

Mean Profit [tokens]

n

15.00
18.07
14.05
17.67
14.88
15.00
20.00
10.00

15
69
20
3
17
1
1
0
2

the stingy wheel is generous rather than stingy. Indeed, for
stingy wheel choices the proportion of stated generous
choices increased for a fair or generous outcome (χ²= 11.13;
df = 2; p = .004).
Stated and believed intentions Knowing about the
possibility of deception, we expected responders to treat
selectors’ statements with caution. In fact, according to their
indicated beliefs, responders did not believe the stated
intention in 62.5% of all cases. How good were responders
at estimating selectors' actual wheel choices? With 57.8%
correct beliefs, responders were more accurate than
expected by naive random guessing (expected hit rate of
1/3) and about as accurate as expected by always “going
with the outcome” (expected hit rate of 0.6). In fact,
responders' believed intention did concur with the outcome
in 57.0% of the cases. As it turns out, responders would
have had the highest rate of correct beliefs (81.3%) by
always assuming the stingy wheel was chosen. In summary,
although responders did not take stated intentions at face
value, they underestimated the proportion of stingy wheel
choices.
Overall pattern of responses The mean adjustment of 0.75 (SD = 3.30) was considerably smaller in absolute terms
than in Experiment 1 (Mann-Whitney test, Z = -3.86; p =
.000). As in Experiment 1, responders left the selector's
payoff unchanged in most cases (81/128), but a majority of
responders (6 of 8) did make an adjustment at least once
throughout the game. Also as in Experiment 1, adjustments
were negatively skewed (30 negative vs. 17 positive
adjustments) and there was no apparent drop in adjustment
costs incurred in later periods, indicating non-strategic use
of adjustments. There were also no clear temporal patterns
of choices, statements or beliefs.
Analysis of responses: Outcomes versus stated intentions
Figure 4 shows mean adjustments by outcome and stated
intention in Part A. Comparing with Experiment 1 (Figure
2), we note that overall less tokens were subtracted and the
effect of intentions seems to be different in the two
experiments. A 3-way ANOVA confirms that there is an
overall difference between experiments F(1, 246) = 7.60, p
= .006 and an interaction between intentions and experiment

1863

Figure 4: Mean adjustments by stated intention and outcome
(Exp 2, Part A).

Figure 5: Mean adjustments by stated intention and outcome
(Exp 2, Part B).

F(2, 246) = 4.14, p = .017. No difference in the effect of
outcomes is found between experiments F(2, 246) = 0.41, p
= .664. As for Experiment 1, we regressed adjustments on
dummy-coded predictors for stated intentions and outcomes,
with “stated fair intention-fair outcome” as the reference
category and random intercepts for each subject (Table 4).4
Compared to statements of fair intention, both stingy and
generous statements are estimated to lower adjustments by
about 2 tokens, a negative effect larger than the effect of a
stingy outcome (-1.28) but smaller than the effect of a
stingy intention in Experiment 1 (-3.96). Generous
outcomes have no significant effect on responses (p = .601).
Looking only at stingy outcomes, the response to a stingy
intention is less negative when the intention was stated as
opposed to observed (Mann-Whitney test, Z = -2.64; p =
.009). In contrast for generous outcomes, stated – unlike
observed – generous intentions are punished because such
statements are met with suspicion (the difference, however,
is not significant p = .126, Z = -1.81, Mann-Whitney test).
In summary, the two experiments differ in the overall level
of adjustments and the effect of intentions in Part A.
The diverging effect of intentions in the two experiments
becomes more pronounced in Part B (Figure 5). Unlike in
Experiment 1, the response patterns in Part B look different
from Part A. Curiously, the responses of (former) selectors
are significantly more negative (M = -3.25) than the
responses of former responders (M = - .67; Mann-Whitney Z
= -2.97, p = .003). As suggested by graphical comparison
and consistent with Part A, a mixed 3-way ANOVA
(Intention x Outcome x Experiment) reveals that the effect
of intention in Part B differs between the experiments F(2,
60) = 14.11, p = .000 but not the effect of outcome F(2,
60) = 1.54, p = .226. For stingy and fair outcomes, kinder
stated intentions lead to more subtractions, whereas kinder
observed intentions lead to less subtractions. With stated
intentions, even generous outcomes elicit subtractions. In
contrast, observed generous intentions were rewarded

when the outcome was generous. Once again we find that
intentions influence adjustments, but the direction of the
effect is overturned due to a lack of credibility of stated fair
or generous intentions.

Discussion
In the introduction, we stated our hypothesis that the
behavioural relevance of intentions might be affected by
uncertainty about intentions, and in particular, the
possibility of deceptive statements. Did intentions matter
less in Experiment 2, which involved stated as opposed to
observed intentions? Not quite. In fact, intentions again had
a larger effect than outcomes in the game. More specifically,
there appears to be a positive premium for (alleged) honesty
and a negative premium for (alleged) dishonesty. Stated
stingy intentions were punished less than observed stingy
intentions. In other words, responders seem to credit
selectors for “at least being honest" when going for the
stingy wheel. On the other hand, adjustments were less
positive for stated generous intentions than for observed
generous intentions. Given that these statements were seen
as largely implausible, we can interpret this difference as a
punishment for an attempt to deceive. This interpretation is
corroborated by the fact that in Part B, former selectors
subtracted more than former responders, arguably because
having overstated their intentions themselves in Part A, they
interpreted statements in Part B as deceptive. Note that
responders could never be certain that stated generous
intentions were actually a lie. Still, mean adjustments in
these cases were negative, suggesting that the desire to

4

A fixed intercept model was rejected in favor of random
effects (χ²= 8.91; df = 1; p = .003, likelihood-ratio test).

Table 4: Regression results (Exp 2, Part A).

I tercept
Stingy stated intention
Generous stated intention
Stingy outcome
Generous outcome
N = 128, R² = .109

1864

β
0.52
-1.95
-1.89
-1.28
0.59

t
1.07
-2.43
-2.37
-2.15
.52

p
.285
.015
.018
.032
.601

punish dishonesty overrode concerns to avoid potentially
unfair punishment (cf. Huck, 1999). The result is in line
with a previous study by Brandts and Charness (2003), who
found that participants punish deceptive messages about
intended play in a simultaneous two-player game with preplay messages. In contrast to our experiment, statements of
intended play were made before an action was taken, not
after, and deceptive statements were revealed by observable
choice. In our experiment, deception was never revealed but
could only be conjectured with uncertainty. How the
possibility of a deceptive statement being revealed affects
the credibility of statements as well as responses is an
interesting question for future research.

Conclusion
In addition to a concern for their own payoffs, participants
in our experiments expressed a concern for intentions and
honesty that was at least as large as their concern over
distributional outcomes. In Experiment 1, the punishment of
stingy intentions had a larger effect on adjustments than
either outcomes or generous intentions. In other words,
negative reciprocity loomed larger than positive reciprocity
and distributional preferences per se. An asymmetry in
negative and positive reciprocity has been observed before
and may be connected to an asymmetry in emotional
reactions. The general importance of intentions is in line
with a study by Charness and Levine (2007), somewhat
different from the low relevance of intentions found by
Cushman et al. (2009) and at odds with the irrelevance of
intentions found by Stanca (2010). To disentangle the
precise design factors that influence the role of intentions is
a task for future research. We suggest that the use of the
strategy method and the absence of repetition may decrease
the relevance of intentions.
In Experiment 2, when choices were no longer observed
but merely stated, the perceived honesty of statements
moderated the effect of intentions. Stated stingy intentions
were punished less than observed stingy intentions,
indicating an appreciation for “at least being honest”.
Conversely, stated generous intentions were punished,
indicating a dislike for conjectured attempts to deceive.
Indeed, selectors routinely overstated the kindness of their
intentions. Although responders did not take statements at
face value, they underestimated the frequency of stingy
choices. Having lied themselves, Part A selectors were
particularly negative in their responses to fair or generous
statements in Part B. Overall, stingy choices were more
common in Experiment 2 than in Experiment 1, indicating
that selectors understood the relevance of intentions and
took advantage of their non-observability. The differences
in response patterns between Experiment 1 and Experiment
2 underline the importance of non-outcome related factors
to participants' behavior.

Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge support by the ESRC Centre for
Economic Learning and Social Evolution. TG is the

beneficiary of a doctoral grant from the AXA research fund.
DL was supported by ESRC grant (RES-062-33-0004).

References
Bolton, G. E., & Ockenfels, A. (2000). ERC: A theory of
equity, reciprocity, and competition. American Economic
Review, 90, 166–193.
Brandts, J., & Charness, G. (2003). Truth or consequences:
An experiment. Management Science, 49, 116–130.
Charness, G., & Levine, D. I. (2007). Intention and
stochastic outcomes: An experimental study. Economic
Journal, 117, 1051–1072.
Charness, G., & Rabin, M. (2002). Understanding social
preferences with simple tests. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 117, 817–869.
Cushman, F., Dreber, A., Wang, Y., & Costa, J. (2009).
Accidental outcomes guide punishment in a "trembling
hand" game. PLOS One, 8, 1–7.
Dufwenberg, M., & Kirchsteiger, G. (2004). A theory of
sequential reciprocity. Games and Economic Behavior,
47, 268–298.
Falk, A., Fehr, E., & Fischbacher, U. (2003). On the nature
of fair behavior. Economic Inquiry, 41, 20–26.
Falk, A., Fehr, E., & Fischbacher, U. (2008). Testing
theories of fairness: Intentions matter. Games and
Economic Behavior, 62, 287–303.
Falk, A., & Fischbacher, U. (2006). A theory of reciprocity.
Games and Economic Behavior, 54, 293–315.
Fehr, E., & Gächter, S. (2002). Altruistic punishment in
humans. Nature, 415, 137–140.
Fehr, E., & Schmidt, K. (1999). A theory of fairness,
competition, and cooperation. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 114, 817–868.
Fischbacher, U. (2007). z-Tree: Zurich toolbox for readymade economic experiments. Experimental Economics,
10, 171–178.
Güth, W., Schmittberger, R., & Schwarze, B. (1982). An
experimental analysis of ultimatum bargaining. Journal of
Economic Behavior and Organization, 3, 367–388.
Huck, S. (1999). Responder behavior in ultimatum offer
games with incomplete information. Journal of Economic
Psychology, 20, 183–206.
McCabe, K., Rigdon, M., & Smith, V. (2003). Positive
reciprocity and intentions in trust games. Journal of
Economic Behavior and Organization, 52, 267–275.
Offerman, T. (2002). Hurting hurts more than helping helps.
European Economic Review, 46, 1423–1437.
Samuelson, P. A. (1938). A note on the pure theory of
consumer's behavior. Economica, 5, 61–71.
Selten, R. (1967). Die Strategiemethode zur Erforschung
des eingeschränkt rationalenVerhaltens im Rahmen eines
Oligopolexperiments. In H. Sauermann (Ed.), Beiträge
zur experimentellen Wirtschaftsforschung. Tübingen:
J.C.B. Mohr.
Stanca, L. (2010). How to be kind: Outcomes versus
intentions as determinants of fairness. Economic Letters,
106, 19–21.

1865

