UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Blame the Skilled

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7w56k8ft

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Gerstenberg, Tobias
Ejova, Anastasia
Lagnado, David

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Blame the Skilled
Tobias Gerstenberg (t.gerstenberg@ucl.ac.uk)1, Anastasia Ejova (anastasia.ejova@adelaide.edu.au)2,
David A. Lagnado (d.lagnado@ucl.ac.uk) 1
1
2
Department of Cognitive, Perceptual, and Brain Sciences
School of Psychology, University of Adelaide, Australia
University College London, United Kingdom
Abstract

is able to do something well in a reliable fashion. However,
as the well-known phenomenon of choking in sports
demonstrates, a player might fail to deliver because he
struggles with the external pressure imposed by high
expectations. Hence, high skill does not necessarily imply
good performance. Similarly, a low skilled person can
sometimes surprise with a very good performance. How do
considerations about skill and performance influence
people’s attributions of blame or credit and what cognitive
processes are likely to guide responsibility attributions in
these contexts?

This study investigates the influence of players’ performance
and level of skill on responsibility attributions in groups.
Participants act as external judges and evaluate the
performance of teams of differently skilled players who
compete in a darts game. The results show that both
performance and skill influence responsibility attributions.
Poor performance elicits high blame and low credit ratings
and vice versa for good performance. Responsibility
attributions to one player did not vary as a function of the
other player’s performance. The influence of skill on
responsibility attributions was asymmetric. While skilled
players were blamed more for losses than unskilled players,
credit ratings did not vary significantly as a function of skill.
This result is in line with people’s strong tendency to
spontaneously consider upwards counterfactual alternatives
for losses over downwards counterfactuals for wins.

Achievement Motivation: Ability and Effort
A rich literature in attribution research has been concerned
with analyzing the causal factors that are perceived to
influence an agent’s success or failure in achievement
related contexts (see e.g. Weiner, 1995). In one of the very
first studies, Weiner and Kukla (1970, Experiment 1)
presented scenarios in which they systematically varied the
ability and effort of hypothetical students paired with
different performance outcomes. For example, a student
could be described as having low ability, expended high
effort and achieved an excellent grade in their exam. Based
on this information, participants were asked to assign
reward or punishment to the students. Whether students
received punishment or reward was directly related to the
outcome of their exam whereby participants showed a
tendency to reward more than punish. Additionally,
participants’ responses were significantly influenced by
both ability and effort. Students who expended high effort
were rewarded more and punished less than students who
expended low effort. Furthermore, students with high ability
received more punishment and less reward compared to
students with low ability. Interestingly, whereas both able
and non-able students received the same reward for the best
possible outcome (an excellent exam), able students
received more punishment than non-able students for the
worst possible outcome (a clear failure in the exam).
Overall, however, reward and punishment were more
strongly influenced by differences in the expended effort
than ability of the students.
In order to explain this difference, controllability has been
identified as an important factor that dissociates effort from
ability (Weiner, 1995). In Alicke’s (2000) model of personal
control, a useful distinction is drawn between behavior
control and outcome control. Whereas how much effort we
expend is a behavior we have control over, we cannot
behaviorally control our ability at a given moment. How
much causal control a person has over an outcome,
however, depends to a large extent on the person’s ability

Keywords: responsibility attribution; counterfactual thinking;
control; skill.

Introduction
Consider you witness the following situation on a night out
in a pub. Three friends are playing darts and, to spice things
up, one of them offers the other two the following deal:
“Both of you throw at the same time. If one of you manages
to hit the dart in the center region, the next round of drinks
will be on me. However, if none of you hits the center,
you’ll have to pay for my next pint.”
You have seen from their previous play that one of the
players is very skilled. In fact, she managed to hit the center
region most of the time. The other player’s performance, in
contrast, was quite poor. He hardly ever managed to get the
dart in the center. How would you spread the blame if
neither of them managed to hit the center? Whom would
you credit more if both of them hit the center? This paper
investigates how people attribute responsibility between
multiple agents based on their underlying skill level and
actual performance.

Skill, Expectation and Control
The problem of how credit for a positive outcome or blame
for a negative outcome should be distributed across the
members of a group is encountered in many contexts – from
law, business and medicine, to heated dinner table debates
about team sports. Skill and performance are important
variables that potentially differentiate the individual agents
contributing to a joint effort and are hence likely to
influence credit and blame attributions. How skilled we
think a person is has a direct influence on what performance
we expect from her. Furthermore, skill is closely connected
to the notion of control. If a person is skilled it implies she

720

(as well as her effort). As mentioned above, a person’s
outcome control increases with her skill. In this paper we
will primarily be interested in the effects that perceived
outcome control has on a person’s responsibility. The
degree to which a person possesses outcome control not
only depends on her capacities but also on counterfactual
considerations about whether the outcome would have been
different had she acted differently (Wells & Gavanski,
1989).

performance can be evaluated differently depending on the
group task and the performance of the other players. Their
paper provided the first empirical test of a structural model
of responsibility attribution developed by Chockler and
Halpern (2004). At the core of this model is a relaxed notion
of counterfactual dependence, according to which an event
can still be identified as a cause even if changing it would
not have made a difference to the outcome in the actual
situation. In their model, an individual agent’s responsibility
for a group’s outcome equals 1/(N+1), whereby N denotes
the minimal number of changes from the actual situation
that would have been necessary to generate a situation in
which that agent’s contribution would have made a
difference to the outcome. If no change is needed, the agent
receives a responsibility of 1. The more changes would have
been necessary to make a person’s contribution critical, the
more her responsibility decreases.
Consider, for example, our initial darts scenario. In order
for the two friends to win the bet, at least one of them needs
to hit the center region. In a situation in which both players
hit the center, their win is overdetermined. That is, the
outcome does not depend on either of the players’ individual
action and hence, a simple but for counterfactual analysis
would not identify either of them as a cause for the positive
outcome. Each player’s contribution would only have made
a difference to the outcome, if the other player had not hit
the center. Expressed in terms of the structural model of
responsibility attribution each person required one change
from the actual situation to be critical and should hence
receive a responsibility of 1/2. Thus, the model predicts that
a player’s credit should be reduced if the other player hit the
center as well.

Counterfactual Thinking and Causal Inference
Counterfactual thoughts are thoughts about alternative
events in the past and the hypothetical future outcomes they
would have resulted in. For example, if a student failed their
exam she might think about what she could have done
differently (e.g. study instead of going to the beach) so that
she would have passed the exam. Counterfactual thoughts
can be distinguished by their directionality of contrast.
Upward counterfactuals are comparisons of the actual world
with a somewhat better world and downward
counterfactuals involve the supposition of a worse world.
Several studies have shown that people are more likely to
spontaneously engage in upward counterfactual thinking
(e.g. Sanna & Turley, 1996). Downward counterfactuals, in
contrast, are endorsed comparatively rarely. Accordingly, an
outcome’s valence – or, more specifically, the affective state
motivated by the valence – is one of the main determinants
for the activation of the counterfactual thinking process
(Roese, 1997). Apart from an outcome’s valence, the degree
to which the outcome was to be expected has been identified
as a promoter for spontaneous causal (Kanazawa, 1992) and
counterfactual thoughts (Kahneman & Miller, 1986; Sanna
& Turley, 1996). The less an outcome was expected the
more likely were people to engage in causal or
counterfactual thinking.

Experiment
In order to assess how people attribute blame and credit in a
group setting as a function of the players’ underlying skill
and actual performance, we used the context of a game
show environment in which players participated in a team
challenge whose outcome affected their individual payoff.
The game was similar to an ordinary darts game (see Figure
1). It consisted of two phases: First, there was a practice
phase in which each player was given 20 practice shots.
Second, there was the crucial team challenge in which two
players were put together randomly to form a team. The
team won their challenge if at least one of the two players
managed to hit the dart in the center region. Participants
were told that the players differed in terms of how skilled
they were in the task. The practice shot patterns were used
to manipulate the players’ skill levels (see Materials).
The participant’s task was to indicate to what extent each
player was responsible for the team’s result. Participants
attributed blame to each player if the team lost and credit if
it won. They were informed that their ratings would affect
the player’s payoff. The more blame a player received for
the team’s loss, the more his payoff was reduced. The more
credit a player received for her team’s win, the more her
payoff was increased.

Counterfactuals and Responsibility
Several researchers have argued for the close relationship
between counterfactuals, causation and responsibility
attribution (Hilton & Slugoski, 1986; Shaver, 1985). In law,
the but for rule is a standard criterion for identifying a
person’s action as the cause-in-fact, which is a precondition
for the person to be held responsible for the negative event.
Accordingly, a person can only be held liable if the negative
event would not have come about but for his action. Wells
and Gavanski (1989) have demonstrated that counterfactual
alternatives indeed influence people’s ratings of causality. A
person was rated more causal for a negative outcome, if the
outcome could have been prevented had he acted
differently, compared to a situation in which the outcome
would have occurred even if he had acted differently.
In situations in which there are multiple people involved,
a person’s control over the outcome is not exclusively
determined by their own skill but also by the other people’s
abilities as well as the way in which the individual
contributions are combined to determine the outcome.
Gerstenberg and Lagnado (2010) have shown that the same

721

outcome was overdetermined. Hence, a player should
receive less credit if the other player also hit the center as
compared to situations in which the other player missed.

Method
Participants 52 participants (31 female) were recruited
through the UCL subject pool and took part to receive
course credit points or for the chance of winning Amazon
vouchers worth £60 in total. The mean age was 23.9 (SD =
6.3).
Design The experiment employed a 3 (skill levels: both
players unskilled, both player skilled, one player skilled and
one player unskilled) x 9 (performance patterns: full
permutation of 32 possible shots (center, medium, outside
region) for pairs of players) within-subjects design (see
Figure 3). Given that the team wins if at least one of the
players hits the center region, this design resulted in 15
cases in which a team won and 12 cases in which they lost.
Materials Figure 2 shows an example for the practice shot
pattern of the unskilled player and the skilled player. A
prototype was generated for each skill level by sampling 20
data points from two centered independent Gaussian normal
distributions for the x-axis and y-axis. The skill was
manipulated by varying the variance of the distribution. For
the unskilled player pattern, 6 shots hit the center, 8 shots
the middle, and 6 shots the outside region. For the skilled
player, 15 shots hit the center, 4 shots the middle and 1 shot
the outside region. Hence, based on the practice pattern, the
unskilled player had a 30% chance and the skilled player
had a 75% chance of hitting the center. From the
prototypical skill patterns, we generated 27 patterns each by
independently rotating the individual shots around the
center. This procedure ensured that the practice patterns of
different players with the same skill level were matched
with respect to the most important characteristics. The
summed distance of the shots to the center as well as the
number of shots in the different regions was held constant.
Nevertheless, the practice patterns still looked different
between the players. The patterns of shots for the crucial
team challenge were created in a similar fashion. One
prototypical center, middle and outside ring shot was
created and randomly rotated for each pattern in the
experiment. Hence, the actual distance of a center, middle or

Figure 1. Screenshot of the game. Each player’s
performance in the practice is shown in the bottom
corners. The performance in the crucial team challenge
is shown in the center.
We hypothesized that both a player’s perceived outcome
control as well as the actual performance would influence
participants’ responsibility attributions. The control factor,
as manipulated through the player’s skill level, directly
influences the availability of counterfactual alternatives
(Girotto, Legrenzi & Rizzo 1991). If a skilled player missed
the center region, the alternative event in which she did hit
the center is highly available. Likewise, if an unskilled
player hits the center, the alternative event in which he
misses is readily available.
Given the prevalence of spontaneous upwards rather than
downwards counterfactuals, we expected the influence of
counterfactual alternatives to be stronger in the case of
outcomes with negative valence. Accordingly, the skilled
player would be blamed more for a loss than the unskilled
player. Since downward counterfactual thinking has rarely
been shown to occur spontaneously, we expected only a
small influence of the skill factor for outcomes with positive
valence.
Furthermore, we expected that participants’ blame and
credit ratings would vary as a function of actual
performance. Despite the fact that the rule of the game
employs a clear cut-off point in that it only matters whether
a player hits the center region or not, we expected that
blame ratings for losses would increase with an increased
distance of a shot from the center. For wins we expected
that players would receive most credit if they hit the center.
Furthermore, we expected that players would receive only
minimal credit if they did not hit the center and that credit
ratings would be higher the closer they were to the center.
Finally, taking the considerations of the structural model
of responsibility attribution into account, we expected that a
player’s responsibility rating would vary as a function of the
other player’s performance. More specifically, we expected
a player’s credit rating to be reduced for cases in which the

unskilled player

skilled player

Figure 2. Prototypical practice shot patterns for the
unskilled and skilled player.

722

Figure 3. Mean credit and blame attributions (±SE)for the 27 patterns used in the experiment. White bars =
unskilled player, black bars = skilled player; c = shot in the center region, m = middle region, o = outside region.
outside shot was identical in each of the combinations.
Procedure The study was carried out online.1 At the
beginning of the experiment, participants were instructed
that they would take the role of a judge in a game show and
that their task will be to evaluate players’ performances. The
nature of the practice trials and the rules for the team
challenge were described as explained above. Participants
were told that the players in the game show differed with
respect to how skilled they were. As a manipulation check,
we showed them 3 patterns of practice shots after initial
instructions and asked them to indicate how skillful each of
the players was in the task. Participants used a slider for
each skill pattern ranging from -10 (very unskilled) to +10
(very skilled). The mean ratings for the unskilled player
were M = -3.1 (SD = 3.2), for the medium skilled player M
= 1.4 (SD = 2.5) and for the skilled player M = 6.1 (SD = 3).
In the main part of the experiment, only the patterns of the
unskilled and skilled player were used.
After the skill manipulation check, participants did one
practice trial in which the different components of the
screen were explained. By clicking on an ‘Info’ button
which remained on the screen throughout the experiment,
participants could always remind themselves of the most
important aspects of the task. After the practice trial,
participants answered a series of 4 forced choice
comprehension check questions. On average, participants
answered 75% of the questions correctly. After having given
an answer, the correct solution was displayed. Participants
then proceeded to the main stage of the experiment, in
which they evaluated the performance of 27 teams of
different players. They always saw each player’s
performance in the practice trials first and then the result in
the team challenge was revealed. If one of the two players

hit the center region, the team won the challenge, otherwise
they lost. Participants were informed about the result of the
challenge at the top of the screen. To identify the different
players, their shots were colored differently. If the team won
the challenge, participants attributed credit to each player. If
the team lost the challenge, participants attributed blame.
The sliders ranged from 0 (‘none) to 10 (‘high’).
At the end of the experiment, participants saw the practice
patterns and shots in the team challenge for 4 individual
players sequentially. Two players were skilled and two
players were unskilled. For each of the skill levels, one of
the players hit the center and one of the players hit the
outside ring. For each of the 4 patterns, participants were
asked to indicate how much the following factors influenced
the player’s result on the final test shot. The factors were:
‘The player’s skill level’, ‘The player’s effort’, ‘The
pressure of the situation’, ‘Chance’ and ‘The intention to
perform this shot’. Participants made their ratings on
separate sliders ranging from 0 (‘not at all’) to 10 (‘very
much’). This final stage was used to gain insight into how
participants might explain the different results based on the
factors provided. Finally, participants were asked to provide
their age and gender.

Results
For all statistical tests, we have adopted a significance
criterion of p < .05. Blame ratings for losses and credit
ratings for wins were analyzed separately.
Figure 3 shows the mean credit and blame attributions for
the 27 different patterns used in the main stage of the
experiment. The first row shows situations in which both
players were unskilled, the second row in which they were
both skilled and the third row shows the results for the
mixed challenges. We analyze, in turn, the effects of actual
performance and underlying level of skill on responsibility
attributions.

1

A demo of the experiment can be accessed here:
http://www.ucl.ac.uk/lagnado-lab/research.html

723

Figure 4. Individual differences in the effect of skill on
blame/credit attributions. Positive values = skilled player
is favored, negative values = unskilled player is favored.

Figure 5. Mean ratings (±SE)	  indicating how much
different factors were seen as having contributed to a
shot. ns = non-skilled, s = skilled, c = center, o = outside.

The Influence of Performance First, we wanted to see
whether blame and credit ratings varied as a function of
performance. Indeed, credit ratings were significantly
influenced by performance, F(1,51) = 428.18, η = .894.
Players received most credit if they hit the center region (M
= 8.77, SD = 1.39). Furthermore, credit ratings for player
that did not hit the center (M = 2.09, SD = 1.81) were
significantly greater than 0, t(51) = 8.32. Players received
significantly more credit if they hit the middle ring (M =
2.58, SD = 2.04) compared to the outside ring (M = 1.59, SD
= 1.75), t(51) = 6.07. Similarly, blame ratings were
influenced by the performance of the player as well. A
player received more blame if she hit the outside (M = 6.53,
SD = 2.23) compared to the middle ring (M = 5.55, SD =
2.16), t(51) = -4.94.
To test how a player was evaluated depending on the
performance of the other player, we compared how much
credit a player received for a shot in the center region if the
other player also hit the center or not. A player’s credit for a
center shot if the other player also hit the center (M = 8.75,
SD = 1.67) was not significantly different from situations in
which the other player did not hit the center (M = 8.77, SD =
1.34).
The Influence of Skill Second, we wanted to see whether
the blame and credit ratings differed as a function of the
player’s skill levels. Overall, the skilled players received
more blame for the team’s loss (M = 6.4, SD = 2.23) than
the unskilled players (M = 5.69, SD = 2.29), t(51) = -2.87.
However, there was no significant difference between the
credit ratings for skilled players (M = 6.13, SD = 1.07) and
unskilled players (M = 6.05, SD = 0.98), t(51) = -0.88.
To look more closely at the effect that the skill level had
on people’s attributions, we compared the situations in
which both player’s performance was identical but their
skill differed. Table 1 shows that the proportions of
participants that either gave equal ratings to both players in
these cases or favored one player over the other differed
significantly, χ2(4, N = 52) = 16.83. The majority of
participants attributed credit equally when both players hit
the center. However, in situations in which the team lost and
both players either hit the middle or the outside ring, a

majority of participants assigned more blame to the skilled
compared to the unskilled player.
Figure 4 shows the effect of the skill manipulation for
each individual participant: Shown are the mean differences
in blame and credit attributions between skilled and
unskilled players. Positive differences mean that a
participant attributed more blame/credit to the higher skilled
player. For losses, 29 participants attributed more blame to
the skilled player, 19 participants less and 4 participants
gave equal blame. For wins, 17 participants attributed more
credit to the skilled player, 24 participants less and 11
participants gave equal credit. Participants’ blame and credit
attributions were negatively correlated as a function of skill,
r = -.34. Hence, the more blame a participant attributed to a
skilled player compared to an unskilled player, the more she
credited the unskilled player compared to the skilled player.
Figure 5 shows to what extent participants perceived
different factors to be important in explaining the players’
results for the 4 test cases at the end of the experiment. We
will only discuss the results descriptively. Participants
considered the ‘Skill’ factor to be most important for
explaining the shot in the center by the skilled player.
‘Effort’, ‘Pressure’ and ‘Intention’ varied as a function of
performance. For good performances, participants assumed
that the player put in high effort, resisted the pressure of the
situation and intended to bring about the outcome. The
reverse pattern was found for bad performances. The
‘Chance’ factor varied as a function of expectation. The
mean rating for the skilled person hitting the center was
lowest and the rating for the unskilled person hitting the
center highest.
Table 1. Proportions of participants that either gave
identical ratings in mixed-skill challenges with identical
performance, favored the unskilled or skilled player.
center
middle
outside

724

identical
34
17
18

unskilled
9
9
12

skilled
9
26
22

Discussion

experimental design, might have led some participants to
disregard the skill manipulation.
One of the features of our paradigm is that the effect of
different combination functions on people’s responsibility
attributions can be investigated. In our setup, only one of the
players needed to perform well in order for the team to win.
However, a situation in which both players’ good
performance is needed is more likely to make participants
view the players as a team and hence stronger effects of one
player’s skill and performance on the other player’s
evaluation are to be expected.

The results revealed that the quality of performance
influenced both blame ratings for losses and credit ratings
for wins. The worse a person performed the more blame he
received for the loss and the less credit for a win. Players
received marginal credit for the team’s win even if they did
not hit the center region. How a player’s performance was
evaluated did not vary as a function of the teammate’s
performance. The influence of skill on responsibility
attributions was asymmetric. Skilled players received more
blame than unskilled players for losses but credit
attributions for wins did not differ significantly as a function
of skill.

Acknowledgements

General Discussion

TG is the beneficiary of a doctoral grant from the AXA
research fund. AE was supported by an APA scholarship,
DL was supported by ESRC grant (RES-062-33-0004).

In a novel paradigm in which we systematically varied the
skill and performance of agents in a group task, we found
that both factors significantly influenced participants’
responsibility attributions.
While the finding that responsibility attributions vary as a
function of performance is quite intuitive, the fact that
attributions to an individual were not affected by their
teammate’s performance is surprising. In a different task,
Gerstenberg and Lagnado (2010) did find that participants
were sensitive to the performance of the other players and
the way in which individual contributions translated into the
group’s outcome. One important difference between the two
studies concerns the reward function. While in Gerstenberg
and Lagnado (2010) the team was rewarded as a whole,
participants in the current study were instructed that their
blame and credit ratings would affect the payoff of
individual players directly. This instruction might have
made participants consider the players independently and
hence no reduction of credit was observed if both players
performed well.
Another interesting finding concerns the asymmetric
effect of the skill manipulation on participants’
responsibility ratings. This partly replicates Weiner and
Kukla’s (1970) finding that reward did not vary as a
function of ability (at least for very good outcomes) but
punishment did. It is also in line with previous research in
the counterfactual literature that showed that counterfactual
thoughts are more likely to be spontaneously elicited for
outcomes with negative as opposed to positive valence. The
fact that the counterfactual alternative in which the skilled
player, who exerts more control over the outcome, hit the
center region is more easily available explains the increased
blame ratings in these situations. If violations of expectation
were the main driving force of attributions independent of
the valence of the outcome, one would have also expected
an increased credit rating for the unskilled player. However,
our asymmetric results rule out this explanation.
It is likely that the influence of the skill manipulation
would have been even stronger if we had chosen a sample
that was representative of the player’s skill levels for the
patterns of shots in the team challenges. The fact that skill
level in the practice and level of performance in the team
challenges were independent due to our balanced

References
Alicke, M. D. (2000). Culpable control and the psychology
of blame. Psychological Bulletin, 126 (4), 556-574.
Chockler, H., & Halpern, J. Y. (2004). Responsibility and
blame: A structural-model approach. Journal of
Artificial Intelligence Research, 22, 93–115.
Gerstenberg, T. & Lagnado, D. A. (2010). Spreading the
blame: The attribution of responsibility amongst
multiple agents. Cognition, 115, 166-171.
Girotto, V., Legrenzi, P., & Rizzo, A. (1991). Event
controllability in counterfactual thinking. Acta
Psychologica, 78, 111-133.
Hilton, D. J., & Slugoski, B. R. (1986). Knowledge-based
causal attribution: The abnormal conditions focus model.
Psychological Review, 93 (1), 75-88.
Kahneman, D., & Miller, D. T. (1986). Norm theory:
Comparing reality to its alternatives. Psychological
Review, 93 (2), 136-153.
Kanazawa, S. (1992). Outcome or expectancy? Antecedent
of spontaneous causal attribution. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 18 (6), 659-668.
Roese, N. J. (1997). Counterfactual thinking. Psychological
Bulletin, 121 (1), 133-148.
Sanna, L. J., & Turley, K. J. (1996). Antecedents to
spontaneous counterfactual thinking: Effects of
expectancy violation and outcome valence. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 22, 906-919.
Shaver, K. G. (1985). The Attribution of Blame: Causality,
Responsibility and Blameworthiness. New York:
Springer-Verlag.
Weiner, B. (1995). An attributional theory of achievement
motivation and emotion. Psychological Review, 92 (4),
548-573.
Weiner, B., and Kukla, A. (1970). An attributional analysis
of achievement motivation. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 15, 1–20.
Wells, G. L., & Gavanski, I. (1989). Mental simulation of
causality. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
56 (2), 161-169.

725

