UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Bodily Relativity: The body-specificity of language and thought

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/61k887fq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Author
Casasanto, Daniel

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Bodily Relativity:
The body-specificity of language and thought
Daniel Casasanto
(casasand@newschool.edu)
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, NL
Donders Center for Brain, Cognition, and Behavior, Nijmegen, NL
The New School for Social Research, New York, USA
Abstract
Do people with different kinds of bodies think differently?
According to the body-specificity hypothesis (Casasanto
2009), they should. In this paper, I review evidence that rightand left-handers, who perform actions in systematically different ways, use correspondingly different areas of the brain
for imagining actions and representing the meanings of action
verbs. Beyond the concrete domain of action, the way people
use their hands influences the way they represent abstract
ideas with positive and negative emotional valence like
“goodness,” “honesty,” and “intelligence,” and how they
communicate about them in spontaneous speech and gesture.
Changing how people use their right and left hands can cause
them to think differently, suggesting that handedness is not
merely correlated with cognitive differences. Body-specific
patterns of experience shape the way people think, feel,
communicate, and make decisions.
Keywords: Action; Concepts; EEG; Emotion; fMRI; Handedness; Language; Metaphor; rTMS

Introduction
To the extent that the content of the mind depends on the
structure of the body, people with different kinds of bodies
should think differently, in predictable ways. This is the
body-specificity hypothesis (Casasanto, 2009). When people
interact with the physical environment, their perceptions and
actions are constrained by their bodily attributes (e.g.,
Fischer, 2005; Linkenauger, et al., 2009). In this paper, I
review research exploring ways in which people’s words,
thoughts, feelings, and judgments are also shaped by the
particulars of their bodies.

Body-specificity of language and imagery
Initial tests of the body-specificity hypothesis used handedness as a testbed. Right- and left-handers perform the same
actions differently. When people throw a ball, write a letter,
or grasp a coffee mug they tend to use their dominant hand.
Do differences in how people perform actions influence the
way they imagine actions and process action language? To
find out, we used functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) to compare right- and left-handers’ cortical motor
activity during action imagery and action verb understanding.
Mental imagery of hand actions (but not other actions)
corresponded to different patterns of motor activity in rightand left-handers. Left-hemisphere motor areas were acti-

vated in right-handers, but right-hemisphere motor areas
were activated in left-handers (Willems, Toni, Hagoort, &
Casasanto, 2009).
A similar pattern was found when people read words for
actions they usually perform with their dominant hands
(scribble, toss) and actions they perform with other parts of
their bodies (kneel, giggle). When right-handers read words
for hand actions, they activated areas of left premotor cortex
used in planning actions with the right hand. Left-handers
showed the opposite pattern, activating right premotor areas
used for planning left-hand actions (Willems, Hagoort, &
Casasanto, 2010).
Further fMRI experiments confirmed that activation during word reading was not due to conscious imagery of actions (Willems, Toni, Hagoort, & Casasanto, 2010). Although fMRI data are correlational, experimental interventions using theta-burst TMS showed that activity in premotor hand areas contralateral to the dominant hand is not
epiphenomenal; rather, body-specific activation of the motor
system plays a functional role in processing language about
hand actions (Willems & Casasanto, 2011; Willems, Labruna, D’Esposito, Ivry, & Casasanto, 2011).

Body-specificity of emotion
Beyond the concrete domain of action, how might bodily
experience shape mental representation of more abstract
ideas like “good” and “bad,” “victory” and “loss,” “deceit”
and “honesty”? Like many abstract concepts, these notions
carry either positive or negative emotional valence. In language, good things are often associated with the top and bad
things with the bottom of an imaginary vertical spatial continuum (Lakoff & Johnson, 1980); this spatial mapping has
functional consequences for learning the meanings of valenced words (Casasanto & de Bruin, 2011) and for retrieving emotional memories (Casasanto & Dijkstra, 2010).
In addition to vertical metaphors, language also maps
good and bad things to horizontal space, (e.g., my right hand
man; two left feet). Implicitly, however, people’s mental
metaphors do not always reflect the good-is-right and badis-left conventions enshrined in language and culture.
Rather, people’s implicit mental metaphors are bodyspecific.
When asked to decide which of two products to buy,
which of two job applicants to hire, or which of two alien
creatures looks more trustworthy, right- and left-handers
respond differently. Right-handers tend to prefer the prod-

1258

uct, person, or creature presented on their right side but lefthanders tend to prefer the one on their left (Casasanto,
2009). This pattern persists even when people make judgments orally, without using their hands to respond. Children
as young as 5 years old already make evaluations according
to handedness and spatial location, judging animals shown
on their dominant side to be nicer and smarter than animals
on their nondominant side (Casasanto & Henetz, 2011).
Beyond the laboratory, the association of “good” with the
dominant side can be seen in left- and right-handers’ spontaneous speech and gestures. In the final debates of the 2004
and 2008 US presidential elections, positive speech was
more strongly associated with right-hand gestures and negative speech with left-hand gestures in the two right-handed
candidates (Bush, Kerry), but the opposite association was
found in the two left-handed candidates (McCain, Obama),
whose gestures linked “positive” with “left” (Casasanto &
Jasmin, 2010).
These patterns cannot be predicted or explained by conventions in language and culture, which consistently associate “good” with “right” and “bad” with “left”. We proposed
that, instead, implicit mental metaphors linking valence with
left-right space are created as people interact with their
physical environment. In general, greater motor fluency
leads to more positive feelings and evaluations (e.g., Ping,
Dhillon, & Beilock, 2009). Right-handers, who interact with
their environment more fluently on the right side of space
and less fluently on the left, come to implicitly associate
“good” with “right” and “bad” with “left”, whereas the opposite is true for left-handers (Casasanto, 2009).
This fluency-based explanation was validated in a study
testing people whose dominant hand was handicapped, either in the long-term due to hemiparesis following unilateral
stroke, or in the short-term due to motor training in the lab.
After a period of acting more fluently with the left hand than
the right, natural right-handers implicitly associated good
with left, like natural left-handers (Casasanto & Chrysikou,
2011).
Body-specific patterns of action correspond to different
emotion-related behaviors. Do they also lead to different
neural organization for emotion? In right-handers, the left
frontal lobe (which controls the dominant hand) is specialized for approach-motivational states, and the right frontal
lobe (which controls the nondominant hand) for avoidancemotivational states. If brain areas that support affective motivation are functionally related to areas that support approach- and avoidance-related motor actions, then hemispheric specialization for motivation should covary with
specialization for motor control. This prediction was supported in an electroencephalography (EEG) experiment
showing opposite patterns of alpha-band power asymmetries
in right- and left-handers. This anatomical covariation provides initial support for the functional link we proposed
between the neural substrates of affective motivation and
motor control (Brookshire & Casasanto, 2011).

Conclusions
The body is a ubiquitous part of the context in which people
use their minds. The studies reviewed here show that even
highly abstract thoughts depend, in part, on the ways people
interact with the physical environment using their particular
bodies. Like research on linguistic relativity and cultural
relativity, investigations of bodily relativity can elucidate
ways in which patterns of experience give rise to corresponding habits of thinking, feeling, communicating, and
making decisions.

References
Brookshire, G. & Casasanto, D. (2011). Motivation and Motor
Control: Hemispheric specialization for motivation reverses with
handedness. In L. Carlson, C. Hölscher, & T. Shipley (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Casasanto, D. (2009). Embodiment of Abstract Concepts: Good
and bad in right- and left-handers. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 138(3), 351-367.
Casasanto, D. & Chrysikou, E.G. (2011). When Left is “Right”:
Motor fluency shapes abstract concepts. Psychological Science,
22(4), 419-422.
Casasanto, D. & Dijkstra, K. (2010). Motor Action and Emotional
Memory. Cognition, 115(1), 179-185.
Casasanto, D. & de Bruin, A. (2011). Word Up! Directed motor
action improves word learning. In L. Carlson, C. Hölscher, & T.
Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Casasanto, D. & Henetz, T. (2011). Handedness shapes children’s
abstract concepts. Cognitive Science. In press.
Casasanto, D. & Jasmin, K. (2010). Good and Bad in the Hands of
Politicians. PLoS ONE, 5(7), e11805.
Fischer, M.H. (2005). Perceived reachability: the roles of handedness and hemifield. Experimental Brain Research, 160(3), 283289.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). The metaphorical structure of
the human conceptual system. Cognitive Science, 4, 195–208.
Linkenauger, S. A., Witt, J.K., Stefanucci, J.K., Bakdash, J.Z. &
Proffitt, D.R. (2009). The effect of Handedness and Reachability
on Perceived Distance. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 35(6), 1649-1660.
Ping, R. M., Dhillon, S. & Beilock, S. L. (2009). Reach for what
you like: The body’s role in shaping preferences. Emotion Review, 1, 140-150.
Willems, R.M., & Casasanto, D. (2011). Flexibility in embodied
language processing. Frontiers in Language Sciences. In press.
Willems, R.M., Hagoort, P., & Casasanto, D. (2010). BodySpecific Representations of Action Verbs: Neural evidence from
right- and left-handers. Psychological Science, 21(1), 67–74.
Willems, R.M., Labruna, L., D’Esposito, M., Ivry, R., &
Casasanto, D. (2011). A functional role for the motor system in
language understanding: Evidence from theta burst TMS. Psychological Science. In press.
Willems, R.M., Toni, I., Hagoort, P., & Casasanto, D. (2009).
Body-Specific Motor Imagery of Hand Actions: Neural evidence from right- and left-handers. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience. 3(39), 1-9.
Willems, R.M., Toni, I., Hagoort, P., & Casasanto, D. (2010). Neural dissociations between action verb understanding and motor
imagery. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 22:10, 2387-2400.

1259

