UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Can Sleep Enhance both Implicit and Explicit Processes?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/81x7h871

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Smyth, Andrea
Taya, Shuichiro
Hope, Chris
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Can Sleep Enhance both Implicit and Explicit Processes?
Andrea C. Smyth (andrea.smyth@gmail.com)
University of Winnipeg, 515 Portage Avenue
Winnipeg, MB R3B 2E9 Canada

Shuichiro Taya (s.taya@qmul.ac.uk)
Experimental Biology and Psychology Centre, Queen Mary University London
London, E14NS, UK
Chris Hope (c.hope@surrey.ac.uk)
Dept of Psychology, University of Surrey,
Guildford, GU2 7XH, UK

Magda Osman (m.osman@qmul.ac.uk)

Experimental Biology and Psychology Centre, Queen Mary University London
London, E14NS, UK
Abstract
This experiment examined the effects of sleep on learning,
while employing an experimental design that minimizes time of
day and fatigue effects. Using a modified two-phase contextual
cuing task, we show that sleep benefits consolidation and
offline learning minimally, and hindered subsequent conscious
awareness on an explicit memory test. These differential effects
of sleep on implicit learning and explicit memory can be taken
as evidence that these types of information are processed
differently and based on entirely distinct memory stores.
Keywords: Contextual cuing; offline learning; sleep

Introduction
Although there is a lack of consensus concerning the exact
function of sleep, recent empirical evidence substantiates
claims that a good night’s sleep is more than just a
biological necessity. Playing an important role in
homeostatic restoration, thermoregulation, tissue repair,
immune control, and memory processing (Walker, 2008),
sleep may just be Mother Nature’s version of a miracle drug.
A key issue of interest is whether sleep can also lead to
offline learning – that is, when sleep enhances learning such
that performance following a nights sleep is comparably
better than without a period of preceding sleep. Studies
using associative learning tasks have demonstrated that
indeed, sleep after learning shows offline consolidation of
knowledge acquired during training (Walker & Stickgold,
2004). Furthermore, it is speculated that consolidation
benefits are mediated by overnight neural reorganization of
memory resulting in more efficient storage of information,
affording improved next-day recall (Gais, Molle, Helms, &
Born, 2002). Sleep before learning also appears to be critical
for brain functioning. Specifically, one night of sleep
deprivation markedly impairs hippocampal function,
imposing a deficit in the ability to commit new experiences
to memory.
Despite the apparent benefits of sleep on both implicit and
explicit memory, recent evidence has suggested that many
of the demonstrations of offline learning in the above
studies are an artifact of the type of averaging methods used

to reveal sleep effects, or biased by time-of-day testing
(Keisler Ashe, & Willingham, 2007), and can often be
artificially enhanced as a result of the gradual build up of
amassed fatigue effects through repeated or concentrated
training periods (Rickard, Cai, Rieth, Jones, & Ard, 2008).
Rickard et al’s (2008) demonstration of these factors
involved training participants using a typical motor task in
which people typed out a sequence of 5 button presses (with
a reliably repeating sequence) across 12 training blocks and
2 test blocks. This research has serious implications,
particularly because the criticisms apply to techniques
commonly employed by many sleep studies (e.g., Gais et al,
2002; Robertson, Pasual-Leone, & Press, 2004; Wagner et
al, 2004; Walker & Stickgold, 2004).
One concern with Rickard et al’s (2008) study is that their
criticisms are based on evidence from a motor learning task,
in which fatigue effects are more likely to be generated, and
so may not generalize to visual search tasks, or tasks
involving explicit memory. Therefore the current study is
concerned with examining the issues raised by Richard et al
(2008), but using a task designed to examine both implicit
and explicit processing in learning: the spatial contextual
cueing paradigm (Chun & Jiang, 1998). Contextual cuing
refers to improved visual search performance with repeated
exposure to a configuration of stimuli. Participants are
shown displays containing a set of 12 letter stimuli and are
required to detect a target stimulus (a letter T) within the
subset of distracter stimuli (11 letter L’s). Crucially, the
location of the target in half of the displays appears
repeatedly with the same arrangement of the distracters
surrounding it. This learning is expressed through the
gradual development of search efficiency for these repeated
displays, indicating that repetitive exposure to these
distracter configurations results in the acquisition of a
mental representation that becomes relied upon to guide
search.
The benefits of employing the contextual cuing paradigm
in the study are that massed practice involves visual search
instead of motor processing and employs within-subjects
comparisons between learned and random trials, and so the

2329

generalization of fatigue effects as claimed by Rickard et al.
(2008) to other non-motor tasks can be examined.
Moreover, contextual cuing has not previously been used as
a task paradigm to examine offline learning in this manner
(but see, Mednick, Makovski, Cai, & Jiang, 2009), but
evokes the same insight into processes (implicit and explicit
memory, visual perceptual learning) that are common to
many tasks that have been used to study offline learning
effects (e.g. sequence learning tasks, Fisher et al., 2002;
word-pair memory tasks, Gais & Born, 2004; insight
problem solving task, Wagner et al., 2004).
Many researchers claim that contextual cuing relies
exclusively on implicit processing; therefore, participants
showing more efficient visual search during the detection
task should not show subsequent conscious access to this
information in a test of awareness (Chun & Jiang, 1998;
1999; 2003; Chun & Phelps, 1999; Manns & Squire, 2001;
Nabeta, Ono, & Kawahara, 2003; Pollman & Manginelli,
2009; Schankin & Schubo, 2009). However, this notion of a
distinct presence of awareness is consistent with our own
earlier findings (Smyth & Shanks, 2008), and other studies
have also provided evidence of awareness occurring in
contextual cuing (Brockmole & Henderson, 2006; Endo &
Takeda, 2005; Olson & Jiang, 2004; Olson, Jiang, & Moore,
2005; Ono, Jiang, & Kawahara, 2005; Preston & Gabrieli,
2008; Vaidya, Huger, Howard, & Howard, 2007). Greene,
Gross, Elsinger, and Rao (2007) confirmed that the
hippocampus was involved with contextual cuing, even
when recognition did not exceed chance (but see Preston &
Gabrieli, 2008). Greene et al. (2007) argued that activation
of the hippocampus during performance signals that the
processing involved with encoding the complex associative
relationships entailed in contextual cuing can only proceed
intentionally. Such a result also implies that a behavioral
dissociation between learning and awareness for a given
piece of information may not necessarily reflect its
possession of a unique implicit property, but instead may
indicate that this information is represented at a lower level
of quality or strength which makes it unable to support
performance on an explicit test (Shanks, 2005).
In this study contextual cuing will be assessed using the
original version of the detection task during a training
phase, then the magnitude of the learning effect will be
compared to contextual cuing ability 12 or 24 hours later. A
modified titrated version of the detection task will locate the
point at which participants are demonstrating learning at test
by tailoring the length of the detection task during the
testing phase for each participant according to the point at
which he exhibited the same level of contextual cuing as
occurred at the end of the training phase. After expressing
significant learning, participants progress onto the explicit
generation test. If unconsciously acquired contextual cuing
knowledge is exclusive to a distinct implicit memory store,
as proposed by the dual-systems theory, then we would
expect the onset of a learning effect in the testing phase not
to be accompanied by the ability to support conscious
retrieval as revealed in a generation task.

Method
Participants
Forty participants (22 women) were recruited from the
University of Surrey and University College London to take
part in the experiment. All participants were between the
ages of 19 and 34 years old (M = 23.97, SD = 4.16), and
naïve to the purpose of the experiment. All participants
received a baseline fee of £20 for attending both experiment
sessions, and an additional 10 pence for each correct
response during the generation task.
Participants were randomly assigned to one of four
experimental groups: a 10 AM training session followed by
a 10 PM testing session, 12 Hour No Sleep (n = 11); a 10
PM training session and a 10 AM testing session 12 hours
later, 12 Hour Sleep (n = 10); a 10 AM training session and
a10 AM testing session 24 hours later, 24 Hour AM (n =
10); or a 10 PM training session and a 10 PM testing session
24 hours later, 24 Hour PM (n = 9).

Design
The training session included a detection task which was a
2 x 2 x 30 (Time of Day x Repetition x Block) mixed
factorial design. Time of Day (Morning or Evening) was
manipulated between-subjects, and Repetition (Repeated
and Non-Repeated) and Block (1-30) were manipulated
within-subjects.
The testing session included a titrated-version of the
detection task and an explicit generation test. The number of
trials a participant received in the detection task was tailored
individually according to the onset of contextual cuing, but
all participants’ data included at least 1 block of detection
trials, and 30 blocks was the maximum they could complete.
Therefore, the titrated detection task was a 2 x 2 x 2 x
variable (Time of Day x Time Since Training x Repetition x
Block) mixed factorial design, with Time of Day (Morning
or Evening) and Time Since Training (12 hours or 24 hours)
manipulated between-subjects, and Repetition (Repeated
and Non-Repeated) and Block (varying from 1-29)
manipulated within-subjects. The generation test was a 2 x 2
x 2 x 4 (Time of Day x Time Since Training x Repetition x
Block) mixed factorial design.

Materials and Apparatus
The detection and generation tasks were modified versions
of the contextual cuing task described in Smyth and Shanks
(2008), and were conducted using Visual Basic software to
generate all stimuli and measure participant responses. On
each trial, the participant viewed a configuration of white 11
letter-L distracters and 1 rotated letter-T target against a grey
background, and was asked to identify the orientation of the
target letter (either left or right) in the display as quickly as
possible. A set of 12 Repeated configurations of letters was
presented in each block, while the remaining 12 trials in the
block contained new configurations that were shown only
once during the experiment (Non-Repeated configurations).
A unique set of 12 Repeated and 720 Non-Repeated
configurations was generated for each participant, and the

2330

order of presentation of Repeated and Non-Repeated
configurations was randomized in each block.
All letter stimuli appeared in 30 pt. Arial font at a visual
angle of 0.76° at a viewing distance of approximately 60
cm. The 21cm x 21cm screen was divided into an 8 x 8 grid
of possible locations, and subdivided into an invisible 4
quadrant matrix. The spatial locations of the target letter Ts
were evenly distributed across the four quadrants of the
screen within each block and configuration condition to
control for location probability effects. The locations of the
target letter T in the Non-Repeated configurations shown in
each block were always chosen from the same set of 12
counterbalanced spatial locations generated at the beginning
of the task. Each T was rotated 90° to the right or left, and
each L was shown at 0°, 90°, 180°, or 270°. The location of
all letters in each Repeated configuration were kept constant
with each presentation, with the exception of the varying
and unpredictable orientation of the letter T: the location,
but not the orientation, of the T was predictable from the
distracter configuration on Repeated trials.
The generation task was made up of 4 blocks of 24 trials
each. The format of a single block was identical to a block
in the detection task: 12 Repeated configurations and 12
Non-Repeated configurations shown in a random sequence
in each block. The Repeated configurations were carried
over from the detection task, while a new set of 48 NonRepeated configurations was created specifically for the
generation task. However, all of the configurations shown in
the generation task differed from the detection task stimuli
in that all T’s in the detection configurations were replaced
with L’s.

Procedure
The experiment began with instructions to participants about
the detection task. The instructions provided onscreen
examples of configuration stimuli and the 2 possible
orientations of the T, and asked participants to locate the
letter T within the configuration of Ls then respond by
indicating the direction it is pointing using the left and right
arrows on the keyboard. Participants were advised to
respond quickly and accurately, but they were not informed
that they should pay attention to any of the configurations
for patterns or repetitions. The main experiment began after
six practice trials to establish task familiarity. The
presentation of each configuration was preceded by an
orienting white dot (1 cm x 1 cm) for 1 sec in the centre of
the screen. Each configuration was displayed until a
response was made, then auditory feedback was provided to
the participant according to the accuracy of the response. A
high-pitched tone signified a correct answer, and a longer,
low-pitched tone signified an incorrect answer. Each
individual trial was separated by a further 700 ms inter-trialinterval. The blocks of detection trials were separated by a
break of at least 10 sec., after which participants could
either continue resting if necessary, or press the space bar to
progress to the next block. After the detection task, the
training session concluded and participants were asked to
return for a training session either 12 or 24 hours later.
The testing session included a detection task similar to
that used during training, except that the duration task was

contingent upon the participant’s performance. After each
block of trials, an independent samples t-test was used to
compare the difference (i.e., contextual cuing) between the
RTs of Repeated and Non-Repeated configurations at the
end of each block of trials to the difference between the RTs
of Repeated and Non-Repeated configurations in the last of
block of the detection task during the training session. If the
amount of contextual cuing during testing was statistically
larger than the amount of contextual cuing that occurred
during training this detection task ended, otherwise the
participant received another block of detection trials. When
participant showed little (< 5 msec) or no sign of contextual
cuing at the end of the training phase, the program
calibrated the length of the detection task using a pairedsamples t-test to compare the RTs of Repeated and NonRepeated configurations at the end of each block of trials. If
a participant’s detection performance in a given block was
statistically faster (p < .05) for Repeated configurations than
for Non-Repeated configurations, it was inferred that
contextual cuing had occurred. All participants received at
least 1 block, but no more than 29 blocks of detection trials.
An accuracy criterion of 20/24 correct responses was
imposed to ensure contextual cuing was not contaminated
by inaccurate search performance. After expressing
significant learning, the detection task ended, and
participants answered questions designed to assess their
awareness for the repeated configurations.
After completing the test detection task, participants
received instructions for the generation task; however, the
program terminated if a participant failed to show
contextual cuing during the titrated detection task after 30
blocks of trials. The instructions informed participants that a
repetition of certain configurations had occurred throughout
the detection task, and that the generation task would gauge
their knowledge of these repeated configurations. The task
requirements were presented as a slight variation of the
detection task, in that participants were told that they would
see a set of configurations similar to those seen previously,
but this time the T would be replaced with an L. The
instructions for the generation task prompted participants to
respond with the quadrant location of this substitute L using
the numeric keypad on the keyboard. It was emphasized
that responding as accurately as possible was a priority in
this phase of the experiment, and that it was more important
to concentrate on the correct answer, not the time taken to
respond.

Results
General Performance during Training Session
Two participants from the 24 hour AM and the 24 hour PM
conditions were excluded from all data analyses due to poor
response accuracy in the detection task of the training
session, i.e., their mean accuracy was more than 3 standard
deviations below the overall group mean of 98%. There
were no group differences in overall accuracy, F’s < 2.14,
p’s > .11, or in detection accuracy between Repeated and
Non-Repeated configuration responses in any group for the
detection task in the training or testing sessions, all t’s <
1.84, p’s > .10.

2331

The median RTs for correct responses for each set of
Repeated and Non-Repeated configurations were calculated
in each block of the detection task from the training session.
A repeated-measures ANOVA was conducted to analyze
whether a contextual cuing effect was present with Time of
Day (Morning or Evening) as a between-subjects variable,
and Repetition (Repeated versus Non-Repeated) and Block
(1-30) as within-subjects variables. A significant main effect
of Repetition, F(1, 29) = 9.73, p < .004, and a highly
significant Repetition x Block interaction, F(29, 1044) =
2.18, p < .001, demonstrated that reliable contextual cuing
was present, as characterized by faster detection of the
target in Repeated compared to Non-Repeated displays. A
main effect of Block also emerged from this analysis, F(29,
1044) = 35.65, p < .001, meaning that acclimation to the
task led to faster responding. Overall, there was no effect of
Time of Day, F’s < 1.32, p’s > .11, suggesting that whatever
stage training took place had no bearing on performance.
However, the contextual cuing effect (Non-Repeated RT –
Repeated RT) in the last block of the detection task was
numerically (though not statistically) larger in the Evening
group (M = 67 ms, SD = 119) in relation to the Morning
group (M = 31 ms, SD = 104), t(36) = 1.00, p > .30, which
gives some indication that performance may have been
confounded by time of day effects. Perhaps the design of
this study was not powerful enough (0.25) to detect this
difference in performance during the training phase (d = .
32)
These results are an illustration of the inconsistency of the
learning that takes place in a contextual cuing task (Smyth
& Shanks, 2008), and cause us to conclude that some signs
of contextual cuing, though neither substantial nor reliable,
were present in both the Evening and Morning participant
groups by the end of the training session.

affected performance, t(36) = 0.16, p > .8, and the time that
elapsed between training and test sessions also didn’t affect
performance, t(36) = 1.20, p > .2. However, participants
who did not sleep between training and testing sessions (12
Hour No Sleep participants) on average showed much less
contextual cuing during the testing session (M = 115 ms, SD
= 78 vs. M = 181 ms, SD = 116), but this effect was only
marginally significant, t(36) = 1.67, p = .10.
In summary, contextual cuing knowledge did persist
across training and testing sessions. While the length of time
interval between these sessions and the time of day of test
did not seem to affect later performance, there was some
evidence to suggest that sleeping between training and test
benefited overall performance during the testing session.

General Performance during Testing Session

Effects of Sleep (offline) on Implicit Learning

Given that the number of blocks differed between
participants, but all participants performed at least 1 block
of trials, we subject RTs from the last block of detection
trials in the testing session to a mixed-measures ANOVA
with Repetition a within-subjects variable, and Condition
(12 Hour No Sleep, 12 Hour Sleep, 24 Hour AM, or 24
Hour PM) as a between-subjects variable. There was a main
effect of Repetition, F(1, 34) = 94.55, p < .001, confirming
faster target detection for Repeated configurations by the
final block of testing. More importantly, this analysis also
suggests that in general the amount of contextual cuing that
occurred during the testing phase was high, since there was
neither a main effect of Condition, F < 1, nor Repetition x
Condition interaction, F < 2.05, p > .12.
Further planned comparisons of the amount of contextual
cuing (Non-Repeated –Repeated) in the last block of the
testing session by Time of Day, Sleep and Time Since
Training were also performed. If contextual cuing is
susceptible to time of day confounds, as implied by the
difference in detection performance of the Morning and
Evening groups in the last block of the training phase, then
we would expect this to carry over to the testing phase.
However, there was no indication that when people were
tested (the 24 Hour PM or 12 Hour No Sleep groups)

Figure 1: Mean contextual cuing scores (ms) in the final
block of the training and testing sessions.
Offline learning was quantified by taking the difference
between participants’ contextual cuing scores (Figure 1) in
the last block of trials between the training and the testing
sessions. If offline learning transpired, we would expect this
difference to be positive. Pairwise comparisons of
contextual cuing during training and testing sessions
confirmed that offline learning took place in all four
conditions, t’s > 2.28, p’s < .05. There appeared to be a
difference in the amount of offline learning shown, with the
most offline learning occurring in the 24 Hour AM
condition (M = 144 ms, SE = 57); the least in the 12 Hour
No Sleep condition (M = 66 ms, SE = 29); and a moderate
amount of improvement in the 24 Hour PM (M = 130 ms,
SE = 56) and 12 Hour Sleep conditions (M = 132 ms, SE =
50). However, there was no main effect of Condition in a
one-way ANOVA of these offline learning scores, F < 1, and
planned comparisons of offline learning by Time of Day,
Sleep and Time since Training also showed no sign of
learning differences, t’s < 1.26, p’s >.20.
Recall that the number of blocks in the detection task of
the testing session depended on how long it took
participants to meet their customized learning criterion. The
number of blocks participants received on average seemed
to vary between groups by the time that had elapsed

2332

between the training and testing sessions with shorter time
intervals leading to faster recovery of contextual cuing, (12
Hour, M = 5.70 blocks, SD = 8.34; 24 Hour, M = 9.72
blocks, SD = 11.37), but this difference was not reliable,
t(36) = 1.25, p > .20. There was no effect of Time of Day on
the length of the detection task in the testing session
(Morning, M = 8.65, SD = 10.30; Evening, M = 6.44, SD =
9.78), t(36) = 0.68. p > .50. However, it took longer on
average for the Sleep group to show contextual cuing (M =
8.9 blocks, SD = 10.7) in relation to the No Sleep group
average (M = 3.9 blocks, SD = 7.1), though, this difference
was not statistically significant, t(36) = 1.36, p > .17.

individual ANOVAs were used to look at the effects of Time
of Day and Time Since Training as between-subjects
variables, but the main effects of Repetition and Block and
all interactions with Time of Day and Time Since Training
were unreliable, F’s < 2.67, p’s > .11.
Table 1: Mean Generation Performance across Sleep and
Non-Sleep Conditions.

12 Hour No Sleep

Effects of Sleep on Explicit learning
Results from the generation test were analyzed using a
repeated-measures ANOVA with Repetition and Block (1-4)
as within-subjects variables and Condition as a betweensubjects variable. The main effect of Block and the Block x
Condition interaction were not significant, F‘s < 1.23, p > .
29, meaning that generation accuracy did not differ in any
single block. Despite a null main effect of Repetition and
Repetition x Block interaction, F’s < 2.13, p’s > .15, the
Repetition x Block x Condition interaction, F(9, 102) =
2.75, p < .006; and the Repetition x Condition interaction
was marginally significant, F(3, 34) = 2.33, p = .09. This
result suggests that generation accuracy was different across
blocks by participant group.
Pairwise comparisons of performance overall and blockby-block for Repeated and Non-Repeated displays were
performed by Condition to determine the source of the
aforementioned statistical interactions. Although overall
generation accuracy across the entire task was only
marginally better for Repeated vs. Non-Repeated displays in
the 12 Hour No Sleep condition, t(10) = 2.02, p = .07; it
bears mentioning that significant generation ability was also
present in this condition in both Blocks 2 and 3 of the task,
t’s > 2.78, p’s < .02, all other t’s < 1. The 24 Hour AM group
also showed marginal evidence of higher generation
accuracy for Repeated configurations overall in the task, t(8)
= 2.06, p = .07, and in Block 1 individually, t(8) = 3.04, p
< .02. However, higher accuracy for Repeated displays
overall or block-by-block did not result in the 24 Hour PM
and 12 Hour Sleep groups, t’s < 1.53, p’s > .17, and so we
can assume participants in the 24 Hour PM and 12 Hour
Sleep groups did not possess explicit awareness of their
contextual cuing knowledge.
An additional ANOVA of generation task data with Sleep
as a between-subject’s variable was used to examine
whether group differences in generation performance can be
accounted for by the presence or absence of sleep before the
testing session. This suspicion was confirmed by a
significant three-way Repetition x Block x Sleep interaction,
F(3, 108) = 7.79, p < .001; all other F’s < 2.57, p’s > .11.
Pairwise comparisons within each block showed that
response accuracy for Repeated trials only exceeded that of
Non-Repeated trials in Block 1 of the generation task in the
Sleep group, t(27) = 2.29, p < .03; all other t’s < 1.17, p > .
25, while the same analyses in the No Sleep group showed
that significantly higher generation for Repeated displays
occurred in Blocks 2 and 3, t’s > 2.88, p’s < .02. Separate

12 Hour Sleep
24 Hour Sleep AM
24 Hour Sleep PM

Repeated
Generation
Accuracy
M = 28.60%
SD =8.89%
M = 20.00%
SD = 10.81
M = 19.21%
SD = 12.45%
M = 18.75%
SD = 17.00%

Non-Repeated
Generation
Accuracy
M = 23.67%
SD =7.35%
M = 24.38%
SD = 10.58
M = 15.05%
SD = 9.25%
M = 14.84%
SD = 14.37%

A reasonable conclusion to draw from these analyses is
that the No Sleep group showed the most evidence of
explicit awareness of contextual cuing knowledge, while
this same conscious ability was not present to the same
degree (or at all) in the other participants.

Discussion
In sum, sleep does promote offline learning of contextual
cuing knowledge, despite the initial effects of time of day on
knowledge acquisition. However, the consolidation benefits
of sleep on offline learning in contextual cuing were at best
only marginally better than that which occurred after a
sleepless interval between training and testing sessions.
Explicit generation knowledge failed to show the benefits
afforded by the offline processing during sleep, and was
highly susceptible to temporal degradation intrinsic to this
two phase contextual cuing experiment. Given that it has
been established previously that a contextual cuing effect is
accompanied by an awareness effect when the design of the
generation task possesses adequate power and reliability and
immediately follows the detection task (Smyth & Shanks,
2008), we can assume that the smaller magnitude of the
awareness effect in the generation test shown in participants
in the Sleep condition was an indication that sleep does not
prevent degradation of the informational trace that supports
performance during the generation test.
The results of this experiment indicate that there may be a
point at which knowledge may be accessible only via
unconscious facilitation mechanisms after sleep, and
therefore not immediately available to conscious processing.
The different contributing influences on contextual cuing
and generation obtained also lend some credence to the
popular argument proposed by dual-systems perspective of
memory. However, it is still possible that when learning and
awareness are measured simultaneously, these abilities can
coincide (unconscious acquisition and conscious retrieval)
within the same task. Given the general problems with
measures of unconscious memories in the contextual cueing

2333

paradigm (Smyth & Shanks, 2008), further experimentation
with more participants and greater control over variables
pertaining to sleep is needed to cement claims that offline
learning differentially affects implicit and explicit memory
and learning processes.

Acknowledgments
This project was funded by a grant from the University of
Surrey Research Support Fund.

References
Brockmole, J. R. & Henderson, J. M. (2006). Using realworld scenes as contextual cues for search. Visual
Cognition, 13, 99-108.
Chun, M. M. & Jiang, Y. H. (1998). Contextual cueing:
Implicit learning and memory of visual context guides
spatial attention. Cognitive Psychology, 36, 28-71.
Chun, M. M. & Jiang, Y. H. (1999). Top-down attentional
guidance based on implicit learning of visual covariation.
Psychological Science, 10, 360-365.
Chun, M. M. & Jiang, Y. H. (2003). Implicit, long-term
spatial contextual memory. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 29,
224-234.
Chun, M. M. & Phelps, E. A. (1999). Memory deficits for
implicit contextual information in amnesic subjects with
hippocampal damage. Nature Neuroscience, 2, 844-847.
Endo, N. & Takeda, Y. (2005). Use of spatial context is
restricted by relative position in implicit learning.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12, 880-885.
Gais, S., Molle, M., Helms, K., & Born, J. (2002). Learningdependent increases in sleep spindle density. Journal of
Neuroscience, 22, 6830-6834.
Greene, A.J., Gross, W.L., Elsinger, C.L., & Rao, S.M.
(2007). Hippocampal differentiation without recognition:
An fMRI analysis of the contextual cueing task. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 14, 548-553.
Keisler, A., Ashe, J., & Willingham, D.T. (2007). Time of
day accounts for overnight improvement in sequence
learning. Learning and Memory, 14, 669-672.
Manns, J. R. & Squire, L. R. (2001). Perceptual learning,
awareness, and the hippocampus. Hippocampus, 11,
776-782.
Mednick, S.C., Makovski, T., Cai, D.J., & Jiang, Y.V.
(2009). Sleep andrest facilitate implicit memory in a
visual search task. Vision Research, 49, 2557-2565.
Nabeta, T., Ono, F., & Kawahara, J. (2003). Transfer of
spatial context from visual to haptic search. Perception,
32, 1351-1358.
Olson, I. R. & Jiang, Y. (2004). Visual short-term memory is
not improved by training. Memory & Cognition, 32,
1326-1332.
Olson, I. R., Jiang, Y., & Moore, K. S. (2005). Associative
learning improves visual working memory performance.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 31, 889-900.
Ono, F., Jiang, Y., & Kawahara, J. (2005). Intertrial
temporal contextual cuing: Association across successive

visual search trials guides spatial attention. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 31, 703-712.
Pollman, S. & Manginelli, A.A. (2009). Early implicit
contextual change detection in anterior prefrontal cortex.
Brain Research, 1263, 87-92.
Preston, A. R. & Gabrieli, J. D. E. (2008). Dissociation
between explicit memory and configural memory in the
human medial temporal lobe. Cerebral Cortex, 18,
2192-2207.
Rickard, T.C., Cai, D.J., Rieth, C.A., Jones, J., & Ard, M.C.
(2008). Sleep Does Not Enhance Motor Sequence
Learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 34, 834-842.
Robertson, E.M., Pascual-Leone, A., & Press, D.Z. (2004).
Awareness modifies the skill-learning benefits of sleep.
Current Biology, 14, 208-212.
Schankin, A. & Schubo, A. (2009). Cognitive processes
facilitated by contextual cueing: Evidence from eventrelated brain potentials. Psychophysiology, 46, 668-679.
Smyth, A. C., & Shanks, D. R. (2008). Awareness in
contextual cuing with extended and concurrent explicit
tests. Memory and Cognition, 36, 403-415.
Wagner, U., Gais, S., Haider, H., Verleger, R., & Born, J.
(2004). Sleep inspires insight. Nature, 427, 352-355.
Walker, M.P., & Stickgold, R. (2004). Sleep-dependent
learning and memory consolidation. Neuron, 44, 121-133.
Vaidya, C. J., Huger, M., Howard, D. V., & Howard, J. H.
(2007). Developmental differences in implicit learning of
spatial context. Neuropsychology, 21, 497-506.

2334

