UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Children's Understanding of the Link Between Sensory Perception and Knowledge

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/71s0h6c1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Schmidt, Ellyn
Pyers, Jennie

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Children’s Understanding of the Link Between Sensory Perception and Knowledge
Ellyn Schmidt (ellyn.schmidt@gmail.com)
Wellesley College, 21 Wellesley College Road Unit 4005
Wellesley, MA 02481 USA

Jennie Pyers (jpyers@wellesley.edu)
Department of Psychology, Wellesley College, 106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481 USA
Abstract
Over the preschool years, children develop an understanding
of the relationship between their senses and the kinds of
knowledge those senses acquire. This development may be
supported by sensory experiences or may be linked to theoryof-mind development. 64 preschoolers were asked to identify
which of 2 confederates knew the identity of a toy animal
when each had differential perceptual access to the animal. In
the “seeing” condition, one confederate looked at the animal
and one did not, and in the “hearing” condition, one
confederate listened to the animal’s sound and one did not. 4year-olds outperformed 3-year-olds in both conditions, and all
children performed equally well on both vision and hearing
trials suggesting that children come to understand the seeingknowing and hearing-knowing connections simultaneously.
Findings provide initial evidence that theory-of-mind rather
than experiential learning is most closely related to
developing an understanding of the link between sensory
perception and knowledge.
Keywords: cognitive development; experiential learning;
sensory perception; theory-of-mind

Introduction
Children learn by gathering information about the world
through their senses. Research on children’s understanding of
sensory modalities primarily focuses on the relationship
between seeing and knowing, with limited attention paid to
how children come to understand the four other senses as
sources of knowledge (O’Neill & Chong, 2001; O’Neill &
Gopnik, 1991; Melis, Call & Tomasello, 2010). The
objective of the current study is to investigate the
development of the link between hearing and knowing
alongside the development of seeing and knowing.
Although infants show an early sensitivity to others’ eye
gaze, and toddlers even modify their behavior when their
caregiver does not share the same visual access, it is not until
their preschool years that children develop a deeper
understanding of the link between perceptual information and
knowledge acquisition (Butler, Caron, & Brooks, 2000;
Doherty, 2006; P. Dunham, F. Dunham, & O’Keefe, 2000;
O’Neill, 1996). Through following eye gaze, eighteenmonth-olds demonstrate an understanding that people’s eyes
allow them to interact with objects in the world. However,
this behavior is not evidence that they grasp that looking
informs mental states. Doherty (2006) has suggested that 18month-olds are aware of the spatial relationship between

object and viewer but do not demonstrate an understanding
of the psychological nature of the relationship. In fact, their
understanding of eye gaze is equivalent to that of
chimpanzees, who follow eye gaze but do not modify
behavior based on what an experimenter is able to see or
where the experimenter’s gaze is directed (Doherty, 2006).
Infants like chimpanzees, then, understand that eye gaze is
linked to objects but fail to grasp the mentalistic nature of
this relationship.
Beginning at 12 months of age, children modify their
behavior based on the sensory access of another person. They
gesture more about the location of an object when a parent
did not see it fall of a table than when the parent did
(Liszkowski, Carpenter, & Tomasello, 2008). Similarly, by
the age of 2 years, children gesture more and use more
specific language in communicating with their mothers when
their mothers cannot see a hiding event than when they can
(P. Dunham, F. Dunham, & O’Keefe, 2000; O’Neill, 1996).
However, O’Neill (1996) has claimed that these young
children are not knowledgeable about the visual experience
of their mothers, but rather have a more basic understanding
that their mothers have disengaged from the task, thus
children’s increased gestures and language serve to update
their mothers on what they missed during their
disengagement. This argument is consistent with the
evidence that children cannot take the most basic visual
perspectives of others until beyond the age of 2 years
(Flavell, 2004).
Before the age of 3, children appear to believe that the
mind contains an exact copy of information from the world
that was deposited into the brain rather than taken in through
senses and processed cognitively (Chandler & Boyes, 1982;
Flavell, 1988). In contrast, older preschool children perform
well on seeing-knowing tasks in which they have to
determine that a confederate with visual access to an object
also knows the identity of the object (O’Neill, Astington &
Flavell, 1992; Pillow, 1989; Pratt & Bryant, 1990). Rather
than believing that people have an exact copy of the world in
their minds, these older preschoolers demonstrate an
understanding that one’s unique set of sensory experiences
determines one’s knowledge state. Younger preschoolers, on
the other hand, do not necessarily grasp the causal
relationship between seeing and knowing, as they do not
perform consistently on these tasks. In a different paradigm
in which either the child or a peer peeked inside a box, 3year-olds were unable to determine whether the peer knew

3016

the contents of a box, even though they were consistently
able to report whether they themselves knew the contents
(Wimmer, Hogrefe, & Perner, 1988). Furthermore, older
preschoolers who understand the relationship between seeing
and knowing overgeneralize this understanding, concluding
that a confederate who can only see part of an object knows
the full identity of the object (Chandler & Boyes, 1982;
Taylor, 1988). Thus the preschooler’s knowledge of the
connection between seeing and knowing is incomplete and
depends on the nature of the task.
While children seem to develop an understanding of seeing
and knowing over the course of the preschool years, we,
cannot generalize their understanding of this relationship to
that of their other senses. In a task focused on hearing and
knowing, 4- and 5-year-olds, but not 3-year-olds, understood
that being deprived of auditory input limits one’s
understanding of a videoclip (Mossler, Marvin, & Greenberg,
1976). In a different task, three-year-olds also could not
understand that only a confederate who felt an object knew
the texture of an object (O’Neill et al., 1992). These two
findings suggest that understanding the link between
perception and knowledge does not necessarily develop at the
same rate for all the senses. However, tasks that target senses
aside from vision have not followed a seeing-knowing
paradigm and may be more complex than the seeing-knowing
task, in that memory and language demands tend to be
greater and modality specific properties (e.g., texture) of
objects rather than object identities are investigated. Thus
firm conclusions based on previous research cannot be drawn
regarding the development of understanding that sensory
perception across modalities leads to knowledge.
Crucially, both older and younger preschoolers understand
the function of each of their five senses (Johnson &
Kendrick, 1984; O’Neill & Gopnik, 1991). Yet
understanding the causal relationship to knowledge formation
remains elusive for 3-year-olds. Understanding this
relationship may be closely related to either children’s
developing theory-of-mind or their increasing experience
using their senses to gain information about the world.
Theory-of-mind refers to an understanding of others’
mental states and is one area of cognitive development that
changes dramatically between the ages of 3 and 5 years
(Wellman, Cross, & Watson, 2001). An important part of
theory-of-mind is false-belief understanding, which involves
the understanding that other people can hold false beliefs
about the world. Passing a false-belief task is considered a
hallmark of theory-of-mind understanding, and is often the
only measure used to assess whether a child has a theory-ofmind (Wellman & Liu, 2004). However, in order to
understand how a belief can become false, children must first
understand how one forms a belief. Seeing-knowing tasks tap
this understanding, as children must make the connection
between visual access to an object and knowledge about the
object. In order for children to pass a seeing-knowing task,
they must understand that the knowledge states of other
people differ depending on what sensory information they
possess.

Wellman and Liu (2004) have argued that theory-of-mind
consists of a gradual progression of knowledge of mental
states rather than a stark shift leading to an understanding of
all types of theory-of-mind tasks. They created a scale of
theory-of-mind tasks and demonstrated that children
generally succeeded on these tasks in a set developmental
sequence, such that no subsequent task was passed before the
previous tasks in the sequence were mastered. One task in
their scale, the “knowledge access” task, resembles the
seeing-knowing task and in that it requires children to
determine whether a doll knows the contents of a drawer
before the doll looked inside the drawer. Importantly, the
knowledge access task was mastered immediately before
false-belief tasks and following success on an understanding
of contrastive desires and beliefs (Wellman & Liu, 2004).
Wellman and Liu’s scale situates seeing and knowing tasks
squarely in the domain of theory-of-mind reasoning.
However, because their knowledge access task targeted only
the sense of vision, we cannot rightly conclude that
knowledge access via all senses precedes false-belief
understanding.
Although an understanding of sensory access and
knowledge may depend on earlier developments in theory of
mind, an alternative possibility is that children come to
understand the link between perception and knowledge
through their interactions with objects in the world
independent of a broader understanding of mental states. This
explanation is consistent with Piaget’s belief in the
importance of experiential learning (Piaget, 1952).
Weinberger and Bushnell (1994) reported that 4-year-olds
were able to use vision to solve perceptual tasks and explain
how they used vision to solve problems, but struggled to do
the same for their other senses; they concluded children’s
earlier success with vision relative to their other senses stems
from the fact that visual information is the most salient and
consistent sensory information we receive. Specifically, they
argued that when children interact with an object by feeling,
hearing, tasting, or smelling it, they are almost always seeing
the object simultaneously. Indeed preschoolers seem to have
a weaker grasp on the connection between feeling or hearing
and knowledge relative to their understanding of seeing and
knowledge (Mossler et al., 1976; O’Neil et al., 1992).
The current study investigates children’s understanding of
hearing and seeing as sources of knowledge in order to
extend the literature on sensory perception and to test
whether an understanding of mental states or a greater degree
of sensory experience best explains the pattern of children’s
development in this domain. We tested children on analogous
tasks that targeted an understanding of hearing and seeing. If
children master the connection between seeing and knowing
before hearing and knowing, then we can infer that sensory
experience plays a greater role than theory–of-mind in this
development. However, if children perform equally well on
the seeing and hearing trials, then the theory-of-mind
explanation may be more accurate.

3017

Methods

right. Throughout all trials, children were not informed of
the identity of the hidden animal in order to avoid a
situation in which children could simply select the reliable
confederate (e.g., Jaswal & Neeley, 2006).
In the three hearing trials, one confederate wore a pair of
headphones and one covered her ears. After listening to the
animal through the headphones, the confederate slid the
headphones off her ears and left them around her neck to
serve as a reminder to the child of who had worn the
headphones. Otherwise the hearing trials followed the same
format as seeing trials. Condition, knowledgeable
confederate, and which confederate was asked the questions
first were counterbalanced across four random orders.

Participants
Sixty-four preschoolers (M = 4.0 years, range: 3.08-5.17
years, 34 females) from preschools in the Northeast region
of the United States participated in this study. The sample
consisted of thirty-three 3-year-olds (M = 3.47 years, range:
3.08-4.0 years) and thirty-one 4-year-olds (M = 4.57 years,
range: 4.08-5.17 years).

Materials
Materials for this task included a blue wooden box with two
large hinged doors on the top, and a small, hinged door at
the back, 8 stuffed toy animals that make their respective
sounds when squeezed, a set of pictures of the toy animals, a
set of headphones, and a blindfold.

Scoring
Separate scores for the seeing and hearing conditions were
computed. Within each condition we derived two scores,
one for the responses to the knowledge state of each
confederate, and one for the responses to identifying which
confederate held up the correct picture of the animal hidden
inside the box. The first score reflects a combination of the
child’s responses to the questions “Does she (confederate A)
know” and “Does she (confederate B) know.” A child who
correctly answered that the confederate who had sensory
access to the object also knew the identity of the object and
that the confederate who did not have access to the object
did not know the identity of the object earned 1 point for
this two-part question, for a maximum score of 3 for the
seeing condition and 3 for the hearing condition. For the
second score, a child earned one point for correctly
identifying the confederate who held up the correct object
for a maximum score of 3 for each condition.

Procedure
Familiarization Session Children completed a training
session to become familiar with the materials, the
confederates, and the actions of seeing and hearing. The
experimenter introduced the child to the two confederates
and showed the child the box, a toy cat, and a toy dog. The
experimenter presented the animals to the confederates, who
each told the child that they could see each animal and hear
each make its respective noise when squeezed. After seeing
and hearing each animal, each confederate identified the
animal, e.g. “It’s a cat. I see it” or, “It’s a dog. I hear it.”
The experimenter then hid one animal in the box, and one
confederate wore a blindfold while the other looked inside
the box. While looking in the box the confederate said, “I
see the dog/cat”. The experimenter then hid the other animal
in the box, and one confederate covered her ears while the
other confederate wore headphones and said, “I hear the
dog/cat.”

Results

Seeing And Hearing Conditions Our task was derived
from tasks used by Pratt and Bryant (1990) and O’Neill et
al. (1992). In the three seeing trials, one confederate wore a
blindfold and one did not. Two more toy animals, such as a
stuffed pig and horse, were shown to the child, and then one
was placed in the box without the confederates or the child
seeing. One confederate peered inside the box while the
other sat wearing a blindfold. After the confederate looked
in the box, the second confederate slid the blindfold off of
her eyes, but left it on her head to serve as a reminder to the
child of who had been blindfolded. Then the child was
asked whether each confederate knew what was inside the
box (e.g., “Remember there is a pig or a horse in the box.
Does confederate A know? Does confederate B know?”).
After the child responded, the experimenter asked the
confederates what was inside the box, and each confederate
held up a picture of one of the two animals. The confederate
who saw the toy animal held up the correct picture while the
confederate who did not see the animal held up the incorrect
one. The child was asked to choose which confederate was

Hearing four-year-olds (mean rank of 45.48) outperformed
three-year-olds (mean rank of 20.30) on hearing and seeing
trials when scores across the seeing and hearing conditions
were collapsed for the “Does she know?” question (Mann
Whitney U= 109, z = -5.62, p < .0001, r = .70). Four-yearolds (mean rank of 40.08) also outperformed three-year-olds
(mean rank of 25.38) when scores were collapsed across
seeing and hearing conditions for the “Who is right?”
question (Mann Whitney U = 276.50, z = -3.25, p = .001, r
= .41). When scores on hearing and seeing trials were
analyzed separately, a similar pattern emerged. Four-yearolds (mean rank of 44.06) had superior performance to
three-year-olds (mean rank of 21.64) on seeing trials for the
“Does she know?” question (Mann Whitney U = 153, z = 5.13, p <.0001, r = .64). Four-year-olds (mean rank of
39.39) also had superior performance to three-year-olds
(mean rank of 26.03) on seeing trials for the “Who is right?”
question (Mann Whitney U = 298, z = -3.05, p =.002, r =
.38). The difference between 4-year-olds’ (mean rank of
44.5) and 3-year-olds’ (mean rank of 21.23) performance on
the hearing trials was significant for the “Does she know?”
question (Mann Whitney U = 139.5, z = -5.43 p <.0001, r =
.68). The difference between 4-year olds’ (mean rank of

3018

Table 1: Number of children who earned maximum score of
3 on seeing and hearing trials.

Does she know?
3-year-olds
4-year-olds
Who is right?
3-year-olds
4-year-olds

Seeing

Hearing

3
19

5
20

5
17

6
19

37.5) and 3-year-olds’ (mean rank of 27.89) performance
was also significant following the “Who is right?” question
(Mann Whitney U = 359.5, z = -2.15, p = .03, r = .27).
Only 6 out of 33 three-year-olds showed mastery in the
hearing condition with a score of 3 following the “Who is
right?” question whereas 17 out of 31 four-year-olds
showed mastery (See Table 1). Similarly, only 5 out of 33
three-year-olds showed mastery in the seeing condition
following the “Who is right?” question whereas 17 out of 31
four-year-olds showed mastery. Thus, overall, the
comparison of 4-year-olds’ performance to 3-year-old’s
performance indicates that 4-year-olds have a strong grasp
of the connection between both hearing and knowing as well
as seeing and knowing while 3-year-olds lack this
understanding.
Additionally, there was no difference between
performance on the hearing and seeing trials within
participants, as children either performed well in both
conditions or poorly in both conditions in both age groups.
Specifically, Wilcoxon signed rank tests indicated that there
was no difference between the seeing and hearing scores for
3-year-olds (z = -.09, p = .93) or 4-year-olds (z = -.73, p =
.47) following the “Who is right?” question. Similarly,
Wilcoxon signed rank tests indicated that there was no
difference between the seeing and hearing scores for 3-yearolds (z = -.07, p = .94) or 4-year-olds (z = -1.14, p = .25)
following the “Does she know” question. Crucially, mastery
in one condition corresponded with mastery in the other. For
the “Does she know?” question, no children answered all
questions correctly in the seeing, but not the hearing
condition. Only 2 children answered all questions in the
hearing condition correctly but all questions in the seeing
condition incorrectly. Similarly, for the “Who is right?”
question, only 2 children answered all questions in the
seeing, but not hearing condition correctly. Only 2 children
answered all questions in the hearing condition correctly
and all questions in the seeing condition incorrectly. These
results indicate that across age groups, children have the
same understanding of the connection between hearing and
knowing as they do of seeing and knowing.

Discussion
The strong performance of 4-year-olds on all trials and
relatively poorer performance of 3-year-olds indicates that
children develop an understanding of both the seeingknowing relationship and the hearing-knowing relationship

between the ages of 3 and 4 years. This finding differs from
some previous studies reporting that 3-year-olds perform
well on seeing-knowing tasks (O’Neill et al., 1992; Pillow,
1989; Pratt & Bryant, 1990).
Some methodological differences may account for our
discrepant finding. First, the mean age of the 3-year-old
group in Pratt and Bryant’s (1990) study is higher than ours
(4.2 years vs. 3.5 years). Thus, younger but not older 3-yearolds may struggle to understand the relationship between
seeing and knowing.
Second, our study used adult confederates while other
studies used puppets or other children (O’Neill et al., 1992;
Pillow, 1989; Pratt & Bryant, 1990). It could be the case
that 3-year-olds overestimate the reliability of adult
informants (e.g., Jaswal, Croft, Setia, & Cole, 2010).
Indeed, the majority of 3-year-olds who failed the seeing
and hearing trials incorrectly reported that both confederates
knew the identity of the animal in the box. Our results, then,
could indicate that young 3-year-olds may struggle to
determine the knowledge states of trustworthy adults and
not that they struggle to understand the relationship between
seeing and knowing. This alternative explanation, however,
does not likely account for the difference we observed
between 3-year-olds and 4-year-olds: we never had a case
where a child reported that both confederates were right.
A third reason for the difference between our findings and
other studies is that in at least one other study children were
involved in the hiding process and had sensory access to the
hidden toy, which may have made the task easier for them
to pass (O’Neill, et al., 1992). Finally some hidden objects
used in previous studies had the same identity but were
different colors, and the experimenter reminded the of the
color difference, emphasizing that vision was the necessary
sense to determine the correct answer (Pillow, 1989).
Regardless, in our more difficult task, a clear developmental
trajectory can be observed: young 3-year- olds struggle to
understand the relationship between perception and
knowledge, whereas 4-year-olds do not.
We observed no difference in performance between the
seeing and hearing conditions, indicating that children come
to understand these two senses as sources of knowledge at
the same time. Researchers in this field have argued that
vision is the most salient sense and thus should be the
easiest for children to understand and explain (O’Neill et al.,
1992; Weinberger & Bushnell, 1994). However, previous
tasks that have targeted multiple senses have been more
complex than the paradigm used in this study, with greater
memory and language demands and with a focus on
modality-specific properties of objects rather than a focus
on object identities. Additionally, no study has created an
analogous seeing-knowing task for the sense of hearing. The
results of this study then, provide initial evidence that an
early understanding of the link between seeing and
knowledge formation and hearing and knowledge formation
develop simultaneously, and that the arguably more salient
experience with seeing, relative to hearing, does not lead to
children’s accelerated understanding of vision as a source of

3019

knowledge.
In order to determine how others use their senses to gain
information about the world, children must be able to
understand that different people can know different
information based on their experiences. Four-year-olds, who
typically pass an array of theory-of-mind tasks, performed
well on both seeing and hearing trials. However three-yearolds, who typically do not pass such tasks, performed poorly
on both seeing and hearing trials. The results of the present
study are compatible with Wellman and Liu’s (2004)
suggested scale of theory-of-mind tasks. Passing a falsebelief task, the classic theory-of-mind measure, requires
children to initially determine how others gain knowledge
based on their sensory access. While Wellman and Liu
(2004) have investigated only children’s understanding that
vision leads to knowledge, the present study suggests that
understanding how multiple senses lead to knowledge may
be a precursor to understanding how false beliefs are
formed, and as such, researchers should consider the ability
to recognize that sensory perception leads to knowledge as
an early form of theory-of-mind.
Although this study provides valuable preliminary support
for the relative importance of understanding mental states
over general experience with the senses in making the link
between perception and knowledge, a more direct approach
to test these alternatives is to test children who lack access
to one of their senses. Without complete access to auditory
information, deaf children may come to understand the
capabilities of the auditory sense differently. They may
make inaccurate assumptions regarding the capabilities of
audition. The literature has established that deaf children of
hearing parents are delayed in theory-of-mind
understanding, but research has almost exclusively focused
on false-belief tasks. While 5-year-old deaf children of deaf
parents succeed on false-belief tasks, 7-year-old deaf
children of hearing parents do not perform well on such
tasks (Courtin & Melot, 1998; de Villiers & Pyers, 2001;
Peterson & Siegal, 1995; Schick, P. de Villiers, J. de
Villiers, & R. Hoffmeister, 2007; c.f. Wellman, Fang, &
Peterson, 2011).
The performance of deaf children with hearing parents on
the hearing and knowing task would serve as an indicator of
whether sensory experience is necessary for understanding
the connection between perception and knowledge or
whether theory-of-mind is more closely related to this
understanding. That is, if sensory experience plays a greater
role we should see a dramatic dissociation between
performance in the seeing and hearing conditions.
Alternatively if an understanding of mental states plays a
greater role, then this population of deaf children should be
impaired on seeing and hearing trials.
Recent research has documented that deaf children are
delayed in understanding that seeing leads to knowing
(Wellman et al., 2011) and that they master the seeingknowing connection before they master false-belief tasks.
However, the language demands of the “knowledge access”
task targeting seeing were great, and the deaf children may

not have understood the task. Further, these children were
required to infer the knowledge state of a doll before the
doll interacted with an object. Inference is more difficult for
children than recognizing the senses as sources of
knowledge after witnessing another person’s sensory
interaction (O’Neill & Gopnik, 1991; Robinson, Haigh, &
Pendle, 2008). Additionally children in the Wellman et al.
(2011) study knew the object’s identity before predicting the
knowledge state of the doll. People often make more errors
in determining the knowledge states of others when they
themselves are knowledgeable about a given event (Birch &
Bloom, 2007). For these reasons, the results of the
Wellman et al. (2011) study may overestimate the delay in
deaf children. Furthermore, without testing deaf children’s
understanding of hearing as a source of knowledge,
conclusions cannot be firmly made regarding whether
understanding the perception-knowledge connection is
indeed one step to a mature theory-of-mind.
The consistent performance across modalities in
combination with the age difference in performance points
to the close relationship between theory-of-mind and the
understanding of the connection between sensory perception
and knowledge. Although young children learn much about
the world through their own experiences, understanding that
interacting with an object leads to knowledge about that
object may require a grasp of mental states of the self and of
others that 3-year-olds do not yet possess. Certainly these
two explanations—theory of mind and sensory
experience—are not mutually exclusive and likely work
together in development, but our study supports the
argument that sensory experience is insufficient on its own
to be the driving force behind children’s development of an
understanding that sensory experiences inform knowledge
states.
While our study highlights the importance of mastering
the basic mental-state process of knowledge formation,
preschool curriculum often focuses solely on the sensory
experience of young children with stimulating materials that
allow children to use all their senses. The current study
suggests that what is equally important is to talk to children
about what one learns from using the eyes, nose, ears, and
hands. These sorts of conversations about mental states,
especially when geared toward sensory perception, may
help children to develop an understanding of the causal
connection between perception and knowledge, which has
implications for their own cognitive development.

Acknowledgements
We thank Tracy Gleason, Sam Grossmith, Melissa Haley,
Catherine Jaramillo, Rachel Magid, West Resendes, Andrea
Takahesu Tabori, and Janet Yarboi for research assistance.
This research was funded by a Jerome A. Schiff Fellowship
and a grant from the Wellesley Psychology Department
(E.S.), and a fellowship from the Radcliffe Institute for
Advanced Study and a Brachman-Hoffman small grant
(J.E.P.). We extend our gratitude to the participants,
families and schools who made this research possible.

3020

References
Birch, S. J., & Bloom, P. (2007). The curse of knowledge in
reasoning about false beliefs. Psychological Science,
18(5), 382-386
Butler, S. C., Caron, A. J., & Brooks, R. (2000). Infant
understanding of the referential nature of looking. Journal
of Cognition and Development, 1(4), 359-377.
Chandler, M., & Boyes, M. (1982). Social cognitive
development. In B. B. Wolman (Ed.). Handbook of
developmental psychology (pp. 387-402). Englewood
Cliffs. NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Courtin, C., & Melot, A. (1998). Development of theories of
mind in deaf children. In M. Marschark, M. Clark, M.
Marschark, M. Clark (Eds.), Psychological perspectives
on deafness, Vol. 2 (pp. 79-102). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates Publishers.
de Villiers, P. A., & Pyers, J. (2001). Complementation and
false-belief representation. In M. Almgren, et al. (Eds.),
Research on child language acquisition (pp. 984-1005).
Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Doherty, M. J. (2006). The development of mentalistic gaze
understanding. Infant and Child Development, 15(2), 179186.
Dunham, P., Dunham, F., & O'Keefe, C. (2000). Two-yearolds' sensitivity to a parent's knowledge state: Mind
reading or contextual cues? British Journal of
Developmental Psychology, 18(4), 519-532.
Flavell, J. H. (1988). The development of children's
knowledge about the mind: From cognitive connections to
mental representations. In J. W. Astington, P. L. Harris,
D. R. Olson (Eds.), Developing theories of mind (pp. 244267). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Flavell, J. H. (2004). Development of knowledge about
vision. In D. T. Levin (Ed.), Thinking and seeing: Visual
metacognition in adults and children (pp. 13-36).
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Jaswal, V.K., Croft, A.C., Setia, A.R., & Cole, C.A. (2010).
Young children have a specific, highly robust bias to trust
testimony. Psychological Science, 21(10), 1541-1547.
Jaswal, V.K., & Neely, L.A. (2006), Adults don’t always
know best: Preschoolers use past reliability over age when
learning new words. Psychological Science, 17(9), 757758.
Johnson, C. N., & Kendrick, K. (1984). Body partonomy:
How children partition the human body. Developmental
Psychology, 20(5), 967-974.
Liszkowski, U., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2008).
Twelve-month-olds communicate helpfully and
appropriately for knowledgeable and ignorant partners.
Cognition, 108(3), 732-739.
Melis, A. P., Call, J., & Tomasello, M. (2010). 36-montholds conceal visual and auditory information from others.
Developmental Science, 13(3), 479-489.
Mossler, D. G., Marvin, R. S., & Greenberg, M. T. (1976).
Conceptual perspective taking in 2- to 6-year-old
children. Developmental Psychology, 12(1), 85-86.

Newport, E. L. & Meier, R. P. (1985) The acquisition of
American Sign Language. In D. Slobin (Ed.) The crosslinguistic study of language acquisition. Vol. 1: The data.
(pp. 881-938). Hillsdale, New Jersey: Erlbaum.
O'Neill, D. K. (1996). Two-year-old children's sensitivity to
a parent's knowledge state when making requests. Child
Development, 67(2), 659-677.
O'Neill, D. K., Astington, J. W., & Flavell, J. H. (1992).
Young children's understanding of the role that sensory
experiences play in knowledge acquisition. Child
Development, 63(2), 474-490.
O'Neill, D. K., & Chong, S. C. F. (2001). Preschool
children's difficulty understanding the types of
information obtained through the five senses. Child
Development, 72(3), 803-815.
O'Neill, D. K., & Gopnik, A. (1991). Young children's
ability to identify the sources of their beliefs.
Developmental Psychology, 27(3), 390-397.
Peterson, C. C., & Siegal, M. (1995). Deafness,
conversation and theory of mind. Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry, 36(3), 459-474.
Piaget, J. (1952). The Origin of Intelligence in Children.
New York: Int. University Press.
Pillow, B. H. (1989). Early understanding of perception as a
source of knowledge. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 47(1), 116-129.
Pratt, C., & Bryant, P. (1990). Young children understand
that looking leads to knowing (so long as they are looking
into a single barrel). Child Development, 61(4), 973-982.
Robinson, E. J., Haigh, S. N., & Pendle, J. E. C. (2008).
Children's working understanding of the knowledge
gained from seeing and feeling. Developmental Science,
11(2), 299-305.
Schick, B., de Villiers, P., de Villiers, J., & Hoffmeister, R.
(2007). Language and theory of mind: A study of deal
children. Child Development, 78(2), 376-396.
Taylor, M. (1988). The development of children's
understanding of the seeing-knowing distinction. In J. W.
Astington, P. L. Harris, & D. R. Olson (Eds.) Developing
Theories of Mind, (pp. 207-225). New York, NY:
Cambridge University Press.
Weinberger, N., & Bushnell, E. W. (1994). Young
children's knowledge about their senses: Perceptions and
misconceptions. Child Study Journal, 24(3), 209-235.
Wellman, H.M., Cross, D., Watson, J. (2001). Meta-analysis
of theory-of-mind development: The truth about false
belief. Child Development, 71(3), 655-684.
Wellman, H. M., Fang, F., & Peterson, C. C. (2011).
Sequential progressions in a theory-of-mind scale:
Longitudinal perspectives. Child Development, 82.
Wellman, H. M. & Liu, D. (2004). Scaling of theory-ofmind tasks. Child Development, 75(2), 523-541.
Wimmer, H., Hogrefe, G., & Perner, J. (1988). Children's
understanding of informational access as source of
knowledge. Child Development, 59(2), 386-396.

3021

