UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Children's comprehension and production of transitive sentences is sensitive to the causal
structure of events

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/87n947m1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Kline, Melissa
Snedeker, Jesse
Schulz, Laura

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Children’s comprehension and production of transitive sentences is sensitive to the
causal structure of events
Melissa E. Kline1 , Jesse Snedeker2 , & Laura E. Schulz3
(mekline@mit.edu, snedeker@wjh.harvard.edu, lschulz@mit.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences1,3
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
43 Vassar Street, Cambridge, MA 02139
Department of Psychology2
Harvard University
33 Kirkland Street,Cambridge, MA 02138
Abstract

such sentences are likely to describe events which have properties of physical causation: motion, contact, exertion of
force, and causation (Kako, 1998).

Young children learn about causal structure not only from observation, but also from the language they hear. Two novelverb studies show that preschoolers expect transitive sentences
like ‘Sarah broke the lamp’ to express relationships between
cause and effect. Previous work has conflated causation with
other semantic features, presenting children with coarse contrasts between scenes varying on multiple dimensions. The
current studies used minimal-pair scenes that varied on a single causally-relevant feature, the spatiotemporal contiguity between action and outcome. Preschoolers were more likely
to produce transitive descriptions (She wugged it) to describe
causal versions of events. They also reliably selected causal
versions when asked to find where she wugged [it]. Transitive
syntax thus provides children with a rich source of evidence
about the verbs they learn and the events they encounter in the
world.

Keywords: Language acquisition; Causality; Argument
structure

Introduction
Information about causal relationships is embedded in the
structure of the language that young children hear every day.
In addition to explicitly causal constructions like ‘The hammer made the lamp break’, children hear many transitive sentences like ‘Sarah broke the lamp.’ Although these sentences
are argued to express causation in adult grammars (in contrast to intransitive sentences like ‘The lamp broke’, Levin &
Rappaport-Hovav 2005), causal transitive sentences are syntactically identical to noncausal transitives like ‘Sarah sees
the lamp’ and ‘Sarah resembles her sister.’ Thus, transitive
syntax does not provide a deterministic cue to causal structure.
Despite this variation, there are several reasons to believe
that adults and children have a bias to interpret transitive sentences causally. First, across languages, verbs of direct external causation are consistently expressed with transitives,
whereas the encoding of noncausal verbs is more variable.
For instance, in Russian sentences like ‘The supervisor manages the department’ must be expressed in a non-transitive
sentence (‘The supervisor manages over the department’;
Levin & Rappaport-Hovav, 2005). Second, when adults are
asked to guess the meaning of ‘jabberwocky’ transitive sentences like ‘The glob blebbed the meemor,’ they report that

Critically, young children also show signs of this bias:
they make and accept transitive overregularizations (‘The rabbit disappeared’ → *‘The magician disappeared the rabbit’)
more readily with verbs that describe a (caused) change of
state or motion (Ambridge, Pine, Rowland & Young, 2008;
Pinker, 1989). Even children as young as 28 months prefer
to associate a new transitive sentence with an event involving
causation (e.g., break) rather than one that simply involves
contact (e.g., touch; Naigles, 1996). This suggests that there
may be early links between causal semantics and transitive
syntax.
In the present studies, we explore whether 3- and 4-yearold children’s expectations about novel transitive sentences
are specifically sensitive to causality. To do this, we control
other event features and vary only a single dimension that
is relevant to causal relationships, namely the presence or absence of a spatiotemporal gap between an agent’s action and a
physical outcome. In nonlinguistic tasks, we know that even
young infants are sensitive to spatiotemporal cues in distinguishing causal and noncausal events (Leslie & Keeble, 1987;
Muentener & Carey, 2010). These abilities allow children to
learn about the world and design effective interventions on
causal processes.
However, although children learn a great deal about the
world around them through the testimony of others (Harris
& Koenig, 2006), relatively little is known about how children map causal relationships into language. This is surprising, given that testimony about causal properties can make
a significant difference to children’s understanding of causal
events. Children shift from perceptually-based to causallybased categorization if causal language is used to describe
objects (Nazzi & Gopnik, 2000; Nazzi & Gopnik, 2001),
preschoolers explore perceptually identical objects with disparate causal properties more if the objects share a common
label (Schulz, Standing, & Bonawitz, 2008), and 2-year olds
who have learned that event A predicts event B only intervene on A to try to cause B if the events are described with

2538

causal language (Bonawitz, Ferranti, Saxe, Gopnik, Meltzoff,
Woodward, & Schulz, 2010.) Nonetheless, little is known
about the relationship between children’s perception of observed causal events and the specific linguistic structures used
to describe them. In particular, we do not yet know either whether children selectively produce transitive sentences
to describe scenes where agent and outcome subevents respect spatiotemporal contiguity. Conversely, we do not know
whether children selectively expect transitive verbs to refer to
causal events.
Children’s ability to produce novel verbs in new sentence
frames has often been considered the strongest form of evidence that they understand abstract syntactic representations
(Tomasello, 2000). However, few production studies have explored what it is that children know about the meanings of
these syntactic structures. Instead, they have focused on the
presence (or absence) of creative verb use at particular ages.
By and large, these studies have not explored the semantic
features that children expect with different sentence types,
simply providing event types that were sufficiently appropriate for the target generalization. Only two studies (Brooks
& Tomasello, 1999; Kline & Demuth, 2008) have looked
at how semantic content affects children’s syntactic generalization. However, these studies compared children’s production of novel sentences for events that differed in many ways
(e.g., a puppet dusting a toy boot versus poking it to make it
squeak), rather than systematically varying specific event features. These results thus point to semantic sensitivity in children’s representations, but cannot make strong claims about
the semantic content of these representations. This represents
a significant gap in the literature, because the specific generalizations that children make can provide unique insight into
how they license and restrict particular syntactic structures
based on the evidence they observe.
The preferential-looking methodology used in the Naigles
(1996) study has been a key paradigm used to reveal what
young children know about transitive syntax. In these studies, young children hear a novel verb in a particular construction (e.g., She wugged him) while looking at two contrasting
events. The children’s preference for one scene over another
is taken as evidence for (a) the presence of an abstract syntactic representation flexible enough to guide expectations about
a new verb and (b) a connection between the syntactic construction they hear and the type of scene that they choose.
However, these studies have pitted prototypically transitive
events (e.g., a girl making a boy bend at the waist) against
prototypically intransitive events (e.g., a boy and girl each
waving their own arms), giving children a coarse and multidimensional contrast between scenes. This line of work thus
cannot make strong claims about the semantic content of children’s expectations about transitive sentences, because causation has been systematically conflated with other semantic features such as whether the participants have differing
roles in the event. The experiments presented here take a
different approach, providing minimal-pair contrasts in or-

der to explore a specific semantic property, causation, which
may guide young children’s expectations about transitive sentences.
Experiment 1 looks at the production of transitive sentences. As Fisher (2002) and others have pointed out, children should not assume that all new verbs can appear in all
sentence frames, because in the adult grammar there are semantic restrictions on these constructions. The generalizations they do make can thus reveal the expectations that they
have about the semantics of particular constructions. Here we
ask whether children attend to causal structure (as indexed
by the spatiotemporal configuration of action and outcome
subevents) when making transitive generalizations. In this experiment, children saw one of two versions of several novel
events, which were described with an intransitive sentence
(e.g., The round thing is wugging.) In the causal versions of
the events, a puppet entered the scene and contacted an object
which immediately lit up or played a sound. The noncausal
‘gap’ events were identical except that the puppet stopped before reaching the object, there was a short pause, and then the
effect occurred (apparently spontaneously.) Children were
asked: What’s [the puppet] gonna do with that thing? If
children believe a transitive verb can be used to describe the
target scene, the prompt invites a transitive response:(She’s
gonna wug it!)
Experiment 2 examines the comprehension of transitive
structures, which is especially important for understanding
how children learn about events from others. Children were
shown two possible referents, a causal and noncausal version of events like those in Experiment 1. Each was initially
described with intransitive sentences. Children then heard
a transitive prompt (Find the movie where she wugged the
round thing or Find the movie where she didn’t wug the round
thing) and had to choose one of the two scenes. If preschoolers believe that transitive syntax is preferentially used to refer
to causal events, they should choose the appropriate picture
for each prompt.

Experiment 1
By comparing the use of transitive descriptions by children
who saw either the causal or noncausal version of a particular
event, we can learn whether they believe this difference to be
relevant for the syntactic privileges of a novel verb. Based
on previous studies, we expected 3- and 4-year-old children
would be able to use novel verbs creatively when prompted
to do so (e.g., What’s she gonna do with that thing?) This
prompt invites a transitive response (She’s gonna wug it) if
children understand the association between causal events
and transitive syntax, and believe that they are describing a
causal event.
Note that children have a number of other options for responding: they could simply repeat the verb exactly as they
had learned it (It’s gonna wug),they could use another noncausal description of the event (She’s gonna fly down and
touch it) or they could produce serial structure that leaves

2539

the causal relationship ambiguous (She’s gonna fly down and
then it’s gonna wug.) With discourse pressure, and other features of the event held constant, we predicted that children
would be more likely to generate transitive descriptions to describe spatiotemporally contiguous causal events than to describe closely matched ‘gap’ events. This pattern of results
would be consistent with patterns in adult language and with
children’s patterns of generalization with known verbs.

Methods
Participants Preschoolers were recruited from a local children’s museum (n=24, mean age: 3;11, range 3;0-4;10, 12
girls). The experimental procedure required children to make
multiple verbal responses during every trial, a task which was
challenging for shy children. Participants were replaced if
they failed to produce any sentences with novel verbs in response to test prompts (n=9). Seven additional children were
replaced due to failure to speak at all during the experiment,
and two for refusal to complete the test session. All children
received a sticker and award certificate for their participation
at the end of the session.

Results

Materials Four novel apparatuses were constructed to
show a variety of novel sound/light emission events. All
events were initiated by one of two agents, boy and girl puppets held by the experimenter. Causal and noncausal versions
(differing only in the spatiotemporal relationship between action and outcome subevents) were created for four different
novel events. This yielded a total of eight possible events.
The causal version of each event is described below. The noncausal meeking, wugging, and gorping events were identical
to the causal versions except for a roughly 10-15 cm gap and
1 second pause between the puppet’s final position and the
toy activating. In the noncausal version of the pilking event, a
wall on the ramp prevented the ball from reaching the target.
Meeking: Puppet reaches both hands out to touch blinking
fiber-optic wand.
Wugging: Puppet wiggles down to contact round globe,
which lights up and spins.
Gorping: Puppet hops over and lands on a toy which
squeaks.
Pilking: Puppet places ball on ramp, which rolls down to
hit a donut shape which ‘boings.’
Videos of all stimuli are available at http://web.mit.edu/
mekline/www/.
Procedure Children were introduced to ‘my friend Sarah’,
a puppet who liked to say silly words. Children were
prompted to repeat two novel words (zorb, gliffit) to prepare
them for the test session. They were then introduced to the
second puppet (Joey) in the same manner. Each participant
saw one version of each of the four events, with causal and
noncausal events alternating. Event version and order of presentation was counterbalanced across children. Children received the same linguistic and event exposure for each trial.
Children watched the action (enacted with Sarah as the agent)

three times, with the following description:
When this happens, that’s called wugging.
Let’s watch again, because the round thing is gonna wug.
Whoa, it’s wugging!
Now Sarah’s gonna have one more turn.
[Prompt 1]: Can you tell me what she’s gonna do with that
thing?
[Prompt 2]:What’s gonna happen?
If children didn’t respond to prompts 1-2, they were reminded of the name of the event and prompted again to describe the event:
[Prompt 3]: ‘When this happens it’s called wugging. So,
can you tell me what she’s gonna do with that thing?’
Finally, the second puppet was introduced and the entire
elicitation procedure (Now Joey’s gonna have a turn...) was
repeated.

The primary measure of interest was the rate at which children produced novel transitive sentences during causal versus noncausal event trials. We hypothesized that children
would be more likely to make transitive generalizations when
they heard a novel verb paired with a causal event than when
they saw the corresponding noncausal event. Sentences were
coded as transitive as long as they contained at least the verb
and a direct object (e.g., What’s Sarah gonna do with that
thing? Wug it.)
Children produced transitive sentences on significantly
more causal than noncausal trials (Wilcox signed rank test,
p = 0.0317; Mcausal = 1.2/2, Mnoncausal = 0.83/2). Moreover, children produced transitive sentences readily to describe the causal events, but often required all three prompts
in response to the noncausal events. Thus the difference between conditions is even more evident when transitive productions generated after the third and final prompt are excluded (Wilcox signed rank test, p = 0.0034; Mcausal =
0.83/2, Mnoncausal = 0.29/2).
The number of trials on which children produced any sentence (of at least two words) with the target verb was also significantly different between conditions (Wilcox signed rank
test, p = 0.039; Mcausal = 1.67/2, Mnoncausal = 1.38/2) Given
that the prompt (What’s she gonna do with that thing?) cued
the transitive, the fact that sentences were produced on fewer
noncausal trials may be due to the increased difficulty of generating an alternative response to the prompt if the child does
not believe a transitive sentence is possible in noncausal contexts.
Finally, there was a significant effect of age (3- vs. 4-yearolds, Fisher’s exact test, p = 0.041): 4 year olds produced
more transitive sentences than three year olds on both causal
(83% vs 50% producing at least one transitive sentence) and
noncausal trials (41% vs 8%).

Discussion
These results show that 3- and 4-year-old children are more
likely to generalize a novel verb from the intransitive (The

2540

round thing is wugging) to the transitive (She wugged the
round thing) when they are describing a causal event than
when they are describing a matched version of the same event
that changes the spatiotemporal contiguity and thus the causal
structure of the event. This indicates an adultlike restriction
on the types of scenes that can be described with transitive
sentences: a lamp can break in many ways, but it is only
proper to say that Sarah broke the lamp if she caused the effect.
In addition to influencing how children talk about different
events, biases about the meanings of syntactic structures can
guide language acquisition. If children believe that transitive
sentences express causal meaning, then just hearing a verb in
that context is significant: the syntactic information can influence how they interpret the meaning of that verb. Experiment
2 asks what expectations children have about events that are
referred to with transitive sentences.

Experiment 2
Toddlers as young as 20 months can show preferences about
what the verbs might mean based on the syntactic structure
of sentences they appear in (see Fisher, 2002, for a review.)
However, the relevant studies have provided children with
coarse contrasts between events differing on multiple dimensions (e.g., a girl making a boy bend at the waist vs. a boy and
girl each waving their own arms). Information about causal
relationships has thus been conflated with the many other differences between these scenes.
Experiment 2 presents a first attempt to investigate how
children’s scene preferences following a transitive sentence
are affected when only a single aspect of the event structure, spatiotemporal contiguity, is varied. As with Experiment 1, spatiotemporal contiguity between action and outcome subevents was taken as an index of causality. Previous
research has already established that children use spatiotemporal cues to distinguish causal and noncausal events beginning in infancy. What is at issue here is whether this distinction is relevant to how they interpret the meaning of transitive
constructions.
As in Experiment 1, the events in this study were minimal
pairs: scenes were identical to each other save for the spatiotemporal relationship between the agent’s action and the
physical outcome. If children expect transitive sentences to
refer to causal scenes in particular, then when they hear transitive sentences like ‘Sarah wugged the round thing’, they
should choose causal scenes over noncausal ‘gap’ variants.
However, if children have not yet converged on causality as
a preferred interpretation of the transitive (e.g., if they are
sensitive only to the coarser scene contrasts that have been
tested in previous studies), then children might choose between events randomly.
Finally, to control for the possibility that children might
select the causal events simply because they might be more
salient than the noncausal events, we also asked children to
identify scenes in which the puppet (didn’t wug the round

thing), with questions presented in random order.

Methods
Participants Preschoolers were recruited from a local children’s museum (n=24 mean age: 3;11, range 3;0-4;9, 12
girls). Participants were replaced if they were unable to reach
criteria on the pretest training (n=3.) Five additional children
were replaced due to refusal to participate or parental interference. All children received a sticker and award certificate
for their participation at the end of the session.
Materials Videotaped causal and noncausal versions of the
four events used in Experiment 1 were created. Slight alterations were made to the meek event because a few children
in Experiment 1 made comments suggesting they viewed the
noncausal event as causal; in the new version the puppet activated the toy by bending over and placing her head on the
box (noncausal: on the ground next to the box) rather than
reaching with both hands. Two new events were also created
(for a total of 6 base events), both involving a caused-motion
interaction:
Fooping: Puppet contacts balanced blue wedge, which tips
over and swings.
Zigging: Puppet slides over and makes white ‘accordion’
rectangle pop up.
Noncausal versions were identical but included a roughly
10-15 cm gap and 1 second pause between the puppet’s final
position and the activating toy. In all videos, the event was
played through three times, ending on a still shot showing
the result and the final position of the puppet. Videos varied
between 4.5 and 8 seconds in total length, with no more than a
1 second length difference between the causal and noncausal
version of the same event.
Video stimuli were presented on a 17-inch laptop, using
the Psychtoolbox extensions of Matlab (Brainard, 1997). An
additional apparatus was used during the introduction, consisting of an open-backed box with a toy helicopter on top
that could be covertly activated.
Procedure Each session consisted of an introduction/training, a pretest and the main test 1 . During the
introduction, children were (as in Experiment 1) introduced
to ‘my friend Sarah’, a puppet who liked to say silly words.
Children were prompted to repeat two novel words (zorb,
gliffit) to prepare them for the test session. After this the
experimenter showed them the helicopter apparatus, demonstrating that ‘Sometimes, Sarah puts her hand here [on top
of the box] and makes it go...But sometimes, it just happens
on its own, because there’s a battery inside.’ Children were
then prompted to activate the toy, and shown again that
1 Pilot

testing with 3- and 4-year-olds revealed that children had
difficulty picking out movies ‘where Sarah made it happen’ without training. This may be because of differences in their experience
for how events come about in real life versus television. In order
to ensure that children understood the videos used in this study, we
included a training/pretest using no novel verbs in which children
learned that sometimes Sarah touched and activated objects, and
sometimes they activated spontaneously.

2541

it could activate spontaneously. Then the experimenter
prepared children for the rest of the session by explaining
that in the movies they would see, ‘Sometimes, Sarah makes
something happen. Like this, when they’re touching. And
sometimes they don’t touch and it just happens on its own,
because there’s a battery inside.’ Note that children never
heard causal (or noncausal) events described with transitive
sentences such as ‘Sarah’s touching the box.’
In the pretest, children heard no novel verbs, but simply
had to identify both whether a puppet and an apparatus were
touching and whether Sarah made the event happen. This allowed us to determine if children understood the videos they
were seeing. Children saw both the noncausal and causal versions of one of the sound emission events (version and side
presentation counterbalanced.) During these videos, children
heard neutral language directing their attention to the video
(Look over here!...Whoa, look at that!) For each video, children were asked if ‘Sarah and that thing [are] touching?...So,
did Sarah make that happen or did it just happen on its own?’
After seeing both versions, children made two forcedchoice decisions, identifying where Sarah and the object were
touching, and where Sarah made the event happen. Positive and negative versions of these questions were counterbalanced. The pretest procedure was then repeated with the second sound-emission event. Children who could not provide
correct answers to 3 out of the 4 total forced-choice questions
in the pretest were not included in the analysis. Three children were replaced for this reason.
For the main test, children saw one trial for each of four
events (Wugging, Meeking, Fooping, and Zigging). In each
trial, children saw the causal version of the event on one side
of the screen, and the noncausal version on the other. The
trial order, as well as version and side presentation for each
trial, was randomized for each child.
With each version, children heard the same description, using the novel verb in intransitive sentences:
Look over here!
The tall thing is meeking, it’s meeking.
Whoa! Watch one more time, it’s gonna meek...Wow!
Children were reminded that ‘In one movie Sarah made it
happen, and in one movie she didn’t.’ They saw each event
a final time, and then the final freeze-frames for both movies
were presented. Children heard two test prompts (positiveCan you find the movie where she meeked the round thing?;
negative - Can you find the movie where she didn’t meek the
round thing?); with order randomized across trials. As a manipulation check children were finally asked to identify ‘the
movie where they’re touching.’

Results
The dependent measure of interest was how often children
chose the causal or noncausal version of each event in response to the prompt. We predicted that children would
choose the causal version of the event when asked to ‘find
where she wugged the round thing’ (a positive transitive
prompt.) Note that this kind of sentence should suggest a

causal referent only if children know that a transitive sentence is likely to refer to this kind of scene. Children saw
four trials; their performance was converted to a score between 0 and 4 reflecting the number of trials on which they
chose the causal scene. The distribution of these scores was
significantly above chance performance (Wilcox signed rank
test, p = 0.00014; 3.08/4 mean causal choices); no children
chose fewer than two causal scenes in response to a positive
prompt.
To show that these choices did not result simply from a
global preference for the causal movies, children’s responses
to negative prompts (Can you find the movie where she
didn’t wug the round thing?) were also analyzed. For these
prompts, children’s causal choice scores were significantly
below chance (Wilcox signed rank test, p = 0.00020, 0.88/4
mean causal choices); no children chose more than two causal
scenes in response to a negative prompt. There was no significant difference between the performances of 3 and 4 year
olds (Mann-Whitney U, Positive prompt: p = 0.11; Negative
prompt: p = 0.21).
A manipulation check confirmed that children were successfully identifying the scenes where the puppet and the object were touching; children identified the correct movie at
a rate significantly above chance (Wilcox signed rank test,
p = 0.0014; 3.04/4 mean correct choices.)

Discussion
3- and 4-year-olds identified the correct versions of matched
events in this study: ‘Sarah wugged the round thing’ led
to causal choices, while ‘Sarah didn’t wug the round thing’
led to noncausal choices, even though no transitive sentences
were previously modeled during the experiment. Note that
children could not simply attend to the words ‘Sarah’s not’ to
make this choice, because the puppet made the same motions
in both versions of each event. Children were just as successful with the positive prompt, indicating that they did not need
to rely on a simple lexical cue to correctly choose a scene.
Unlike previous studies of this kind, all properties of the
causal and noncausal videos (other than spatiotemporal contiguity) were matched: the participants, the action performed
by the agent, and the physical outcome were identical in both
versions. This work shows that children are sensitive to the
causal structure of events, and not only to coarser contrasts
between event types such as the number of active participants.

General Discussion
Across both a production and a comprehension task, 3- and
4-year-olds were found to be sensitive to causal structure in
deciding how to interpret and use novel verbs. In Experiment
1, they were more likely to produce a novel transitive sentence like Sarah wugged the round thing when they had seen
a causal scene versus a matched noncausal ‘gap’ event. In Experiment 2, they were more likely to choose the causal scene
when asked to ‘find the movie where Sarah wugged the round
thing’, and to choose the noncausal scene when asked to ‘find
where she didn’t wug the round thing.’ These results show

2542

that causal relationships, as indicated by spatiotemporal contiguity, are important for children’s expectations about transitive sentences. 3- and 4-year-olds understand that a scene
showing a causal relationship between action and outcome
subevents is more appropriately described with transitive syntax than a very similar one which does not show the same
causal relationship. This ability is critical both for constraining children’s creative language use and for guiding their understanding of the verbs they learn.
Extensive previous research has established that children
understand a great deal about causal relationships by the
time they are three years old. However, the present work is
novel in showing that beyond recognizing causal and noncausal scenes, children are able to map these different types
of events onto linguistic structures, producing and comprehending transitive syntax in a way that reflects a bias to associate them with causal scenes. From the perspective of children’s syntactic development, the present work moves away
from demonstrations that syntactic structure can influence
children’s choice between two scenes varying on multiple dimensions. Instead, these experiments target the semantic content of children’s representations: a single manipulation that
alters the causal structure of an event also alters preschoolers’
syntactic expectations about a verb describing that event.
In the present studies, causality was operationalized
by spatiotemporal contiguity between action and outcome
subevents. Future work will need to address whether children
also map transitive sentences to events with other causal cues,
such as the presence of an intentional agent or the conditional
dependence between the action and the outcome.
This work also provides a strong foundation for studying
how younger children learn to associate transitive structures
with particular types of events in the world. The forcedchoice comprehension study in particular parallels lookingtime studies run with children as young as 20 months old.
Thus this technique could be used to study how associations
between transitive sentences and causal events develop. In
addition, ongoing work will address whether young children
can use these expectations about transitive syntax to perform
syntactic bootstrapping (Gleitman, 1990), using the sentence
frame they hear to determine which of two distinct events
(with counterbalanced causal and noncausal versions) is the
more likely referent for a new verb.
Language is an important channel through which children
learn from others. Knowing when and how children expect
transitive syntax to describe causal events is critical for understanding both how they learn to use language in an adultlike way, and how they learn about causal relationships from
the people around them.

Acknowledgments

lection, as well as to the Schulz and Gibson labs at MIT and
the Snedeker lab at Harvard for discussion and feedback.

References
Ambridge, B., Pine, J. M., Rowland, C. F., & Young, C. R.
(2008). The effect of verb semantic class and verb frequency (entrenchment) on children’s and adults’ graded
judgements of argument-structure overgeneralization errors. Cognition, 106(1), 87–129.
Bonawitz, E. B., Ferranti, D., Saxe,R., Gopnik,A., Meltzoff,
A., Woodward, J., & Schulz, L. E. (2010). Just do it? Investigating the gap between prediction and action in toddlers’
causal inferences. Cognition, 115(1), 104–117.
Brainard, D. (1997). The Psychophysics Toolbox. Spatial
Vision, 10, 433–436.
Brooks, P. J., & Tomasello, M. (1999). How children constrain their argument structure constructions. Language,
75(4), 720–738.
Fisher, C. (2002). The role of abstract syntactic knowledge in
language acquisition: A reply to Tomasello (2000). Cognition, 82, 259–278.
Gleitman, L. R. (1990). The structural sources of verb meanings. Language Acquisition, 1, 3–55.
Harris, P. L., & Koenig, M. A. (2006). Trust in testimony:
How children learn about science and religion. Child Development, 77(3), 505–524.
Kako, E. T. (1998). The event semantics of syntactic structures. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of
Pennsylvania.
Kline, M., & Demuth, K. (2008). Syntactic generalization
with novel intransitive verbs: Who is pilking? Boston,
MA.
Leslie, A. M., & Keeble, S. (1987). Do six-month-old infants
perceive causality? Cognition, 25(3), 265–288.
Levin, B., & Hovav, M. R. (2005). Argument realization.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Muentener, P., & Carey, S. (2010). Infants’ causal representations of state change events. Cognitive Psychology, 61(2),
63–86.
Naigles, L. (1990). Children use syntax to learn verb meanings. Journal of Child Language, 17(02), 357.
Naigles, L. R. (1996). The use of multiple frames in verb
learning via syntactic bootstrapping. Cognition, 58, 221–
251.
Nazzi, T., & Gopnik, A. (2000). A shift in children’s use of
perceptual and causal cues to categorization. Developmental Science, 3(4), 389–396.
Nazzi, T., & Gopnik, A. (2001). Linguistic and cognitive
abilities in infancy: When does language become a tool for
categorization? Cognition, 80(3), B11–20.
Tomasello, M. (2000). Do young children have adult syntactic competence? Cognition, 74, 209–253.

We are grateful for funding from the James S. McDonnell
Foundation Causal Learning Collaborative, the NSF, and the
John Templeton Foundation. Thanks to Claire O’Connell and
Lucy Ji for assistance with stimuli construction and data col-

2543

