UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cloze but no cigar: The complex relationship between cloze, corpus, and subjective
probabilities in language processing

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/69s3541f

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Smith, Nathaniel
Levy, Roger

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cloze but no cigar: The complex relationship between cloze, corpus, and
subjective probabilities in language processing
Nathaniel J. Smith
njsmith@cogsci.ucsd.edu
UC San Diego Department of Cognitive Science
9500 Gilman Drive #515, La Jolla, CA 92093-0515 USA

Roger Levy
rlevy@ucsd.edu
UC San Diego Department of Linguistics
9500 Gilman Drive #108, La Jolla, CA 92093-0108 USA
a

Abstract
When performing online language comprehension, comprehenders probabilistically anticipate upcoming words. Psycholinguistic studies thus often depend on accurately estimating stimulus predictability, either to control it or to study it, and
this estimation is conventionally accomplished via the cloze
task. But we do not know how effectively — or even, strictly
speaking, whether — cloze probabilities reflect comprehender
predictions. This is both methodologically worrisome and an
obstacle to detailed understanding of online predictive mechanisms. Here, we demonstrate first that cloze probabilities vary
substantially and systematically from normative corpus statistics, and secondly that some portion of these deviations are also
reflected in online comprehension measures. Therefore, while
there is some reason to be concerned that cloze norming may
be distorting the results of psycholinguistic studies, these apparent distortions may instead reflect genuine errors in native
speakers’ probabilistic models of their language.
Keywords: Psychology; Linguistics; Prediction; Language
Understanding; Reading; Rationality

There’s currently a great deal of interest in how the brain
makes and uses predictions (Bar, 2009). Within psycholinguistics, this interest dates back 30 years, to the discovery
that the predictability of a word — its probability of occurrence given preceding context — has large and robust effects
on both reading times (Ehrlich & Rayner, 1981) and eventrelated brain potentials (Kutas & Hillyard, 1984). These early
studies, and innumerable others since, rely on the cloze task
(Taylor, 1953) to measure the predictability of their stimuli.
Many more studies use cloze to control for predictability in
order to isolate some other variable of interest. Yet despite
its ubiquitous use as an estimate of predictability, we know
almost nothing about what this task is actually measuring.
The cloze task consists of presenting a large group of par,
ticipants with sentence stems like In the winter and
and asking each to fill in the blank with some plausible continuation — some might write spring, others summer, and
so on. We then count up what proportion of participants responded with each word; this proportion is called the cloze
probability of that word in that context. Our goal is to get
some estimate of the subjective probability distribution over
continuations which skilled comprehenders compute implicitly during online comprehension; Fig. 1 summarizes the logical relationship between these subjective probability distributions, cloze probability distributions, and alternative corpus

b

c

True language
statistics "in
the world"

Individual
knowledge of
language

Predictions used
by individual in
comprehension

d

e

Corpus
text

Cloze
responses

f

Computational
language model
estimates

Figure 1: An informal illustration of the situation faced by
those who wish to study linguistic prediction. Language is
actually used in some particular ways in the real world (a);
some subset of these uses are recorded in corpora (e), and
may be used to train computational language models (f). A
different subset is experienced by human language users, who
use these experiences to create some internal model of the
statistics of their language (b). They then draw on this internal model to make predictions during online linguistic comprehension (c) and also, presumably, when responding in the
cloze task (d). But the actual relationship between the items
on the left side of the diagram remains obscure — do cloze
completions match online predictions? Do online predictions
match real-world statistics?
based measurements.
We know that the participants in a cloze task have some
knowledge of their language (Fig. 1b), which they presumably draw on when producing continuations. But isn’t clear
how they use this knowledge. If they generated their cloze
responses by sampling from their subjective probability distribution (‘probability matching’), then cloze probabilities
would be identical to subjective probabilities.1 But cloze
norming is an offline, untimed, and rather unnatural task,
which leaves ample room for conscious reflection and other
strategic effects to distort this process — if participants are
1 At

1637

least if we ignore inter-subject variation, as is conventional.

even probability matching in the first place. So our first question is: what distortions, if any, are introduced by the processes that produce d from b?
This question has important methodological implications,
because if there are systematic biases in cloze estimates, then
in the worst case attempts to measure or control for predictability might actually introduce confounds. For instance,
if there were some measure M that affected cloze but did not
affect reading times, then a reading time study that compared
cloze-matched high-M and low-M items might find a spurious effect of M on reading times, because at a fixed level
of cloze, variation in M would be confounded with variation
in true predictability. This result would indicate not that M
affected language processing, but only that it allowed us to
better estimate predictability by correcting the biased cloze
estimates.
The ideal solution to this problem would be to measure
subjective probabilities and cloze on the same items for comparison. Sadly, this is impossible, since we have no reliable
independent measure of subjective probabilities. Fortunately,
several extremely large corpora have recently become available, which allow us in Experiment 1 to compare cloze distributions to true distributions of continuations in large corpora
of real text (e).2 Logically, the relationship between cloze
and corpus distributions is determined by the arrows linking
them. If none of the processes denoted by a→e, a→b, or
b→d introduced distortions of any kind, then cloze and corpus distributions would be identical. Of course, it turns out
that we instead find large and systematic differences. So the
next question is where these distortions arise.
If they come from strategic task effects in the b→d link,
then that has important methodological implications, as discussed above. But another possibility is that they arise from
learning or processing biases in the a→b link — that is, biases in cloze responses might reflect actual errors or inefficiencies in language users’ predictions about upcoming material. Such errors would be of great theoretical interest, but
have not previously been possible to study, since you cannot
measure biases when your measuring tool has a matched set
of biases. And, of course, we must also consider the less interesting possibility that some portion of these differences are
simply caused by biases in the sampling process (a→e) used
to construct our corpus. In Experiment 2, we begin to distinguish these possibilities by directly comparing cloze and
corpus probability in their ability to explain self-paced read2 Note that this is quite different from comparing cloze probabilities to probabilities generated by the computational language models
(f) that are also sometimes used in research (Hale, 2001; McDonald
& Shillcock, 2003; Demberg & Keller, 2008; Levy, 2008; Smith &
Levy, 2008). Those models can use sophisticated mathematics (represented by the e→f link) to estimate predictabilities, but for computational reasons are still limited in considering a small fraction of
available context — usually just one to two words, or a parse tree
stripped of word identity — which makes them unrealistic models
of human performance. Here, we use materials constructed so that
our critical word always appears after just four words of context, and
then use a corpus so large that we can simply count how often that
word appears given the full context.

ing times. While more work remains to fully isolate these
effects, we find preliminary evidence to at least rule out the
possibility that strategic effects in the cloze task are the sole
source of these biases.

Experiment 1
Methods
Materials We selected 300 four-word sentence initial stems
from the Web 1T 5-gram corpus (Brants & Franz, 2006),
which was compiled from one trillion words of English web
text. (By ‘stem’ we mean nothing more or less than four
words which begin a sentence.) The messy nature of this corpus required a complex selection procedure; we summarize
the most important points: Our stems were required to have
occurred often enough to allow reasonable probability estimates (median count 1906, minimum count 250), to meet a
minimum perplexity threshold according to a separate trigram
model trained on the British National Corpus (The British National Corpus, version 3 (BNC XML Edition), 2007), to induce mostly open-class word continuations (≥ 90%), and to
vary substantially in the range of probability for their mostlikely and second-most-likely continuations. They were then
screened by hand to eliminate obvious spam (any phrase used
in a spam web page is repeated in many locations, which
causes it to be over-counted relative to its actual usage),
high-frequency stereotyped phrases (e.g., Designated trademarks and brands. . . ), excessively technical usages that we
judged participants were unlikely to have had much experience with (The study protocol was. . . ), or web-specific usages (on the web, If you leave the. . . is usually followed
by . . . field blank. . . , because web pages are very concerned
about explaining web forms). Finally, whenever two stems
were judged ‘too similar’ to each other (e.g., because they
differed from each other only in the gender of pronouns), one
of them was eliminated.
Procedure Participants performed a computerized sentence
continuation (cloze) task, in which they were given each stem
and asked to type one or more words which naturally continued the sentence. Spelling was corrected by hand, with computer assistance.
Participants 140 students from UC San Diego participated
for course credit. All were native English speakers. 114 participated via an online web form; of these, 6 were eliminated
for admitting in a post-test questionnaire that they had used
Google to find continuations. The remaining 26 participants
performed the identical task in a lab environment.

Results and Discussion
As the online and in-person participant groups performed
similarly in all analyses reported here, we present only pooled
data (N = 134).
When we started this project, the Web 1T corpus was the
only corpus available that was large enough for our purposes,
and so it was used to optimize the design of both this and

1638

He played a key. . .
role
94%
part 2.3%

42%
3.8%

After a cup of. . .
coffee 39.6%
tea 39.1%
hot
3.0%

28%
61%
—

When she began to. . .
speak 5.2%
cry 2.5%
work 2.2%

9.0%
19%
1.5%

The time needed to. . .
complete
41%
reply
3.2%
finish
0.3%

6.7%
—
10%

It usually takes the. . .
form
34%
shape
23%
following 2.7%
cake
—

1.5%
—
—
8.3%

In the winter and. . .
spring
66%
early
13%
summer
4.2%
fall
2.3%

40%
—
32%
19%

Table 1: Sample continuation distributions from Experiment
1. In each case, the left column is corpus probability, and
the right column is measured cloze probability. ‘—’ denotes
continuations that were never observed.
Books

Corpus probability
Corpus constraint (log10 )
Stem frequency (log10 )

0.79
−0.40
−0.23

0.79
−0.33
0.19

Familiarity
Concreteness
Imageability
Age of acquisition
Frequency (log10 )
Contextual diversity (log10 )
Length
Lexical prime probability

0.96
0.14
−0.14
0.28
0.20
0.72
0.00
4.37

0.78
0.03
0.07
0.24
0.16
0.31
−0.11
6.33

10−1
10−2

r = 0.59

the form

10−3

Cloze probability

r = 0.52

Books

Table 2: Estimated coefficients from a log-linear model regressing cloze responses against corpus probability and other
measures. Shaded cells are significant. Positive/green cells
indicate a response preference, while negative/red cells indicate a response dispreference; e.g., cloze participants use familiar words more than would be expected given corpus probability but may avoid long words. Corpus constraint and stem
frequency are entered as modulating the effect of corpus probability, rather than having an independent effect. Not much
should be read into the absolute magnitude of coefficients,
since different predictors are on different scales.

1

Web

Web

10−3

10−2

10−1

1

10−3

10−2

10−1

1

P(responsei j |stemi ) =

Corpus probability

Figure 2: Cloze versus corpus probability. Each point represents a single stem/continuation pair that appeared in the
corpus and was given by at least one cloze participant. (Regression analyses included responses that were given by zero
participants, but they can’t be shown on this log scale.)
Correlations are computed in log space. Red crosses mark
stem/continuation pairs that were selected for use as stimuli
Experiment 2.

the next experiment. However, a second large corpus has recently become available, derived from scanned books rather
than the raw web (Michel et al., 2011; we use the subset containing American English since 1960, consisting of ∼89 billion words). This corpus seems more representative of real
usage (i.e., it has no spam), but is smaller and our experimental design is not optimized to take full advantage of it;
therefore, we perform all analyses with both corpora.
Fig. 2 shows the overall relationship between cloze and
corpus probability; our first result is that their correlation is
only moderate. So the next question is, if corpus probability
does not determine cloze, then what does?
To find out, we fit cloze responses to a log-linear model of

1
(α +α center(StemProp1i )+··· )
× pi j 0 1
Zi
× exp(β1 WordProp1 j + · · · )

Here, pi j indicates the corpus probability of continuation j
given stem i, computed as the number of times we observed
this continuation following the stem divided by the total number of times that we observed the stem. α0 is a free parameter that measures the sensitivity of cloze to corpus probability. An α0 of 0 would indicate no sensitivity, and a value of
1 would indicate that cloze matches corpus probability perfectly (at least, until the word-specific parameters come in to
further influence matters). A value between 0 and 1 would indicate that cloze distributions are overall flatter (have higher
entropy) than the corresponding corpus distribution, while a
value greater than 1 would indicate that cloze distributions are
more peaked (have lower entropy), as might happen if participants preferred to provide the most-probable continuation
instead of probability matching. StemProp1, . . . are properties of the stem which might modulate the overall effect of
α0 . WordProp1, . . . are word properties that might cause participants to give particular responses more or less often than
predicted by corpus probability alone. And Zi is a normalizing constant (not a free parameter).
Stem predictors included the corpus constraint,
maxi P(continuationi |stem), the total number of times
that the stem was observed in the corpus (a proxy for
participants likely amount of experience with each particular

1639

stem). Word predictors included familiarity, concreteness,
imageability, and age of acquisition (from Wilson, 1988;
Stadthagen-Gonzalez & Davis, 2006; Nelson, McEvoy, &
Schreiber, 1998), word frequency and contextual diversity
(from Brysbaert & New, 2009), word length, and a measure
of interlexical priming from the stem to the target (‘lexical
prime probability’). This measure was computed by looking
up the probability pi that each word i in the stem would produce the continuation as a response in a free-association task
(Nelson et al., 1998), and then combining these probabilities
as 1 − ∏i (1 − pi ).
We analyzed the subset of the data for which all of these
norming values were available, for which the continuation
was recorded in the corpus, and, for the book corpus analysis, for which the continuation was observed in the corpus
with a stem frequency of >100. (This allowed the analysis of
5015 responses for the web data, and 4636 for the book data.)
The model was fit by maximum-likelihood, with all predictors entered simultaneously, and significance computed with
the likelihood ratio test and corrected for multiple comparisons by sequential Bonferroni. The results of this analysis
are shown in Table 2.
Reassuringly, the exponent α0 on corpus probability is
significantly greater than 0 (web: χ2 (1) = 992, p  0.001,
books: χ2 (1) = 784, p  0.001), indicating that cloze is sensitive to corpus probability, as expected. However, it is also
significantly smaller than 1 (web: χ2 (1) = 62, p  0.001,
books: χ2 (1) = 44, p  0.001), indicating that cloze distributions are systematically more variable (higher entropy,
more flattened) than corpus distributions. If we interpret
cloze task responses as reflecting participant predictions, then
this might suggest that our participants are substantially more
confused about upcoming linguistic material than would be
expected of an optimal rational agent (compare Griffiths &
Tenenbaum, 2006). This increase in entropy is more pronounced for contexts that are particularly constraining (web:
χ2 (1) = 36, p  0.001, books: χ2 (1) = 29, p  0.001).
The effect of high frequency stems is more complicated. In
the web corpus, these stems produce particularly high entropy
cloze distributions (χ2 (1) = 54, p  0.001); in the book corpus, they produce cloze distributions that are lower entropy
and closer to the normative corpus values (χ2 (1) = 8.6, p <
0.005). This may indicate that on the web, high frequency
phrases are ones that are contaminated by spam and other distributional oddities, but in print, high frequency phrases are
ones that participants genuinely have more experience with,
and that they are able to use this experience to make better
predictions.
For word properties, there is evidence that participants prefer to respond to words which are familiar, concrete, have
high contextual diversity, and are primed by words in the stem
(e.g., this may explain the winter and fall responses; in ordinary usage people would usually say fall and winter, which
makes fall an unlikely continuation according to the corpus;
but in any case fall is primed by winter). They may avoid

Context

Target

In the winter and fall the little town...
Critical region

Figure 3: Sample stimulus for Experiment 2.
words which are long — perhaps because they require more
effort to type — and also avoid words which are imageable or
are acquired early — perhaps because in the formal context
of an experiment they attempt to use more formal language.

Experiment 2
Having established that cloze and corpus probability vary in
substantial and systematic ways, our next question is whether
to attribute these effects to biases in the corpus sampling
(Fig. 1, a→e), to biases in language acquisition and processing (a→b), or to biases in cloze task performance (b→d). If
these effects were caused by the cloze task alone, then we
would expect corpus probabilities to be more closely correlated with online subjective probabilities than cloze probabilities are, and therefore corpus probabilities should outperform cloze probabilities in explaining performance in an online comprehension task. So in this experiment, we pit cloze
probabilities against corpus probabilities in explaining selfpaced reading times.

Methods
Materials Experiment 1 produced 2350 stem-pluscontinuation pairs for which we had both cloze and corpus
predictability measurements. From these we selected 179
four-word stems, then for each stem selected 2 target
continuations, producing a total of 358 five-word sentence
beginnings. We then completed each sentence and divided
them into two 179-sentence lists, so that no participant saw
any stem or any target more than once. These stems and
target continuations were selected to maximize our ability to
distinguish cloze and web corpus probability according to a
power analysis. No fillers were used.
Procedure Participants read sentences in random order in
a self-paced moving-window paradigm (Just, Carpenter, &
Woolley, 1982) with a comprehension question presented after each sentence.
Participants 38 students students from UC San Diego participated for course credit. All were monolingual English
speakers.

Results and Discussion
Comprehension questions All subjects performed significantly above chance on comprehension question accuracy
(minimum 77%, median 92%).
Reading times We analyzed the total reading time for a region consisting of the target word plus the following word
(to capture spillover; see Fig. 3). After removing sentences

1640

with incorrect comprehension question answers or outlier
reading times in the critical region (reading times <80 ms,
>1500 ms, or >4 sd above participant-specific means, 1.9%
of data removed), reading times were entered into a multilevel mixed-effects regression model using lme4 (Bates &
Maechler, 2010). Our first question was whether cloze or corpus probabilities better explained reading times, so both were
log-transformed (Smith & Levy, 2008 demonstrated that the
empirical relationship between word predictability and reading time is in fact log-linear) and entered into the regression.
In addition, for controls, we entered the log-frequency (from
Brysbaert & New, 2009), word length, log-frequency/wordlength interaction, and log-corpus probability for three different words: the word preceding the target, the target itself, and
the word following the target. Because our stimuli were not
optimized to produce corpus estimates of the probability of
the word following the target, this probability was estimated
using only a two-word context (i.e., an unsmoothed trigram
model). As random effects, we allowed the intercept to vary
by stem, and the intercept, slope of the cloze effect, and slope
of the target word corpus probability effect to vary by subject
(this structure selected by model comparison). Significance
was assessed by assuming calculated t values were distributed
as standard normal under the null hypothesis (Baayen, Davidson, & Bates, 2008).
We found that cloze was significant after controlling for
corpus probability and the other factors described (web: t =
−2.87, p < 0.005, books: t = −2.32, p < 0.03), but that after
controlling for cloze and these other factors, corpus probability was not significant (web: t = 1.83, n.s., books: t = 1.13,
n.s.; both trends in the wrong direction). This would suggest
that some of the the biases we observe in cloze probability are
also present in readers’ subjective probabilities — but before
we conclude this, there is another possible interpretation we
must consider. It might be that readers have accurate knowledge of word predictability, but that their reading times are
independently sensitive to some of the properties listed in Table 2. In that case, cloze might outperform corpus probability
simply because cloze is able to account for two factors that
affect reading times, while corpus probability can account for
only one.
To rule out this possibility, we re-ran the regression described above, this time adding the properties from Table 2
as additional controls; if cloze is only performing well because of its partial confounding with these other measures,
then including them directly should cancel out its effect.
On the contrary, however, our results were essentially unchanged in the web corpus — cloze remains significant (t =
−2.33, p < 0.02), while corpus probability remains insignificant (t = 1.75, n.s.). For the book corpus, cloze drops to
insignificance (t = −1.6, n.s.) while corpus probability remains insignificant (t = 0.59, n.s.). However, as the general
trend remains the same, we suspect this is simply a consequence of our reduced statistical power when working with
this corpus. We start out with corpus probability estimates for

only a fraction of our data (roughly 75%), and adding these
additional controls reduces our usable data still more, making
this a worst case for statistical analysis. However, further data
collection should resolve this issue in one way or the other.

Conclusion and Future Directions
Provisionally, at least, we can conclude that not only is cloze
systematically biased relative to corpus probability, but that at
least some portion of these biases are also reflected in comprehender’s subjective probability estimates (i.e., arise along
the a→e or a→b arrows in Fig. 1).
The next challenge for future work is to break down the
different biases we have observed, and further identify their
locus of effect. For instance, it could be the case that of the
effects observed in Experiment 1, the age of acquisition bias
arises from strategic effects in the cloze task (b→c), while
simultaneously the familiarity effect is caused by biases in
subjective probability estimation (a→b), and then in addition
corpus sampling problems (a→e) are making our corpus estimates more noisy across the board.
Fortunately, testing such hypotheses is possible with the
tools we have described. Our proposed strategy would be to
use the log-linear modeling approach from Experiment 1 to
estimate and then correct for different biases — that is, to estimate what cloze would look like if different biases didn’t
exist. In the situation described in the previous paragraph,
we would predict that removing the age of acquisition bias
should produce a measure that explains reading times even
better than cloze itself does, while removing the familiarity bias should reduce our ability to explain reading times.
Since these tests would be comparing cloze-based measures
against each other, they reduce the possibility of artifacts
caused by corpus sampling problems. However, if such problems do exist, we suspect that they should make the corpus
estimates more noisy but without producing any systematic
errors. Therefore, we can test for their presence by removing
all of the known, systematic biases from cloze, and testing
whether this ‘unbiased’ cloze continues to outperform corpus
probability.
Thus, while the differences between cloze and corpus probability continue to raise worrisome questions about current
methodology (it remains possible that many or most of the
biases we found are artifactual), the way is clear to not only
resolve this issue, but also shed new light onto the mechanisms underlying linguistic prediction in general.

Acknowledgments
We thank Erin Bennett, Tiffany Chiou, Megha Ram, Maria
Sokolov, and Daphne Tan for assistance in collecting data.
This research was partially supported by NIH Training Grant
T32-DC000041 to the Center for Research in Language at
UC San Diego to NJS, NSF grant 0953870 to RL, and funding from the Army Research Laboratory’s Cognition & Neuroergonomics Collaborative Technology Alliance.

1641

References
Baayen, R. H., Davidson, D. J., & Bates, D. M. (2008,
November). Mixed-effects modeling with crossed random
effects for subjects and items. Journal of Memory and Language, 59(4), 390–412.
Bar, M. (Ed.). (2009). Predictions in the brain: using our past
to prepare for the future [theme issue]. Phil. Trans. R. Soc.
B, 364.
Bates, D., & Maechler, M. (2010). lme4: Linear mixedeffects models using s4 classes [Computer software manual]. Available from http://CRAN.R-project.org/
package=lme4 (R package version 0.999375-37)
Brants, T., & Franz, A. (2006). Web 1T 5-gram version 1.1,
LDC2006T13. Philadelphia, PA: Linguistic Data Consortium.
The British National Corpus, version 3 (BNC XML edition). (2007). Available from http://www.natcorp.ox
.ac.uk/ (Distributed by Oxford University Computing
Services on behalf of the BNC Consortium)
Brysbaert, M., & New, B. (2009). Moving beyond Kuc̆era
and Francis: A critical evaluation of current word frequency norms and the introduction of a new and improved
word frequency measure for American English. Behavior
Research Methods, 41, 977–990.
Demberg, V., & Keller, F. (2008). Data from eye-tracking corpora as evidence for theories of syntactic processing complexity. Cognition, 109(2), 193–210.
Ehrlich, S. F., & Rayner, K. (1981). Contextual effects on
word perception and eye movements during reading. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 20(6), 641–
655.
Griffiths, T. L., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2006). Optimal predictions in everyday cognition. Psychological Science, 17(9),
767–773.
Hale, J. (2001). A probabilistic Earley parser as a psycholinguistic model. In Proceedings of NAACL-2001 (pp. 159–
166).
Just, M. A., Carpenter, P. A., & Woolley, J. D. (1982).
Paradigms and processes in reading comprehension. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 111(2), 228–
238.
Kutas, M., & Hillyard, S. A. (1984). Brain potentials reflect
word expectancy and semantic association during reading.
Nature, 307, 161–163.
Levy, R. (2008). Expectation-based syntactic comprehension. Cognition, 106, 1126–1177.
McDonald, S. A., & Shillcock, R. C. (2003). Low-level
predictive inference in reading: The influence of transitional probabilities on eye movements. Vision Research,
43, 1735–1751.
Michel, J., Shen, Y. K., Aiden, A. P., Veres, A., Gray, M. K.,
Team, T. G. B., et al. (2011, January). Quantitative analysis of culture using millions of digitized books. Science,
331(6014), 176–182.
Nelson, D. L., McEvoy, C. L., & Schreiber, T. A. (1998). The

University of South Florida word association, rhyme, and
word fragment norms. Available from http://www.usf
.edu/FreeAssociation/
Smith, N. J., & Levy, R. (2008). Optimal processing times
in reading: a formal model and empirical investigation. In
B. C. Love, K. McRae, & V. M. Sloutsky (Eds.), Proceedings of the thirtieth annual conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 595–600). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Stadthagen-Gonzalez, H., & Davis, C. J. (2006). The bristol
norms for age of acquisition, imageability and familiarity.
Behavior Research Methods, 68, 598–605.
Taylor, W. L. (1953). “Cloze procedure”: A new tool for
measuring readability. Journalism Quarterly, 30, 415–
433.
Wilson, M. D. (1988). The MRC psycholinguistic database:
Machine Readable Dictionary, version 2. Behavioural Research Methods, Instruments and Computers, 20(1), 6–11.

1642

