UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cognitive training promotes academic success: An analysis of focused meditative practices
on student quiz performance

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0jm1q3b3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Ramsburg, Jared
Youmas, Robert

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cognitive training promotes academic success: An analysis of focused
meditative practices on student quiz performance
Jared T. Ramsburg (jramsb2@uic.edu)
Robert J. Youmans (robert.youmans@csun.edu)
Psychology Department, 376 Sierra Hall
California State University, Northridge
18111 Nordhoff Street
Northridge, CA 91330-8255

Abstract

settings where self-regulation may be necessary for success.

The cognitive skills required for successful academic
performance includes self-regulatory functioning, an ability to
enact conscious control over thoughts, feelings, and actions.
The current studies examined the effects of brief periods of
meditation on the academic performance of students at
California State University, Northridge. Participants from four
different psychology classes (three lower division and one
upper division class) randomly received either brief
meditation training or rest, followed by a traditional class
lecture that ended with a quiz on that same lecture material.
Results from the three lower-division classes all indicated that
meditation improved quiz performance, but quiz scores in the
upper-division class were unchanged following meditation.
Our findings show that meditation may be an effective
method of improving academic performance. Limitations of
the studies and directions for future research are discussed.

Cognitive evidence for the benefits of cognitive
training via meditation

Keywords: learning; cognitive training; attention; meditation.

Introduction
One reason that students may struggle in school is because
excellence in academic performance requires a high degree
of self-regulatory functioning, the ability to enact conscious
control over thoughts, feelings, and actions toward the
attainment of a goal (Zimmerman, 2000). Self-regulation is
a mental resource that is susceptible to depletion (Muraven
& Baumeister, 2000), and that is important for optimal
performance in vigilance tasks (e.g., Smit, Eling, & Coenen,
2004), tasks that required the central executor (Baddley,
2003), and perhaps, in situations where a more heavily
practiced or heuristic behavior is suboptimal and therefore
should be avoided (e.g., Luchins, 1942; Youmans, 2011;
Youmans & Ohlsson, 2008). Successful academic
performance requires some of the same behaviors that have
been linked with self-regulatory functioning. Students often
struggle to remain vigilant to lectures, contemplate complex
concepts, or adapt to new educational challenges. The
present paper reviews literature on cognitive training via
meditation, and then reports the results of four experimental
studies that examined whether meditation would improve
students’ performance in the classroom. Based on the results
of these studies, we argue that meditation and other forms of
cognitive training may benefit students in educational

Researchers have reported that cognitive training,
meditation or other conscious attempts to regulate physical
and mental function, can promote self-regulatory
functioning, improve attention, raise awareness, enhance
decision-making, and increase memory retention (Brown,
Ryan, & Creswell, 2007; Chan & Woollacott, 2007; Lutz,
Slagter, Rawlings, Francis, Greischar et al., 2009;
Kozhevnikov, Louchakova, Josipovic, & Motes, 2009;
Srinivasan & Baijal, 2007; van Leeuwen, Müller, &
Melloni, 2009). In one such example, an extensive 3-month
cognitive training retreat where participants meditated for
10-12 hours a day showed reduced variability in attentional
processing and behavioral response to variability on a
dichotic listening task compared to participants in a novice
meditation group (Lutz et al., 2009). In another example, Ly
and Spezio (2009) found via fMRI that meditation might
improve decision-making by influencing neural circuits in
an enduring manner for recruitment during the selfregulation of social cognitive processes. In a third example,
Tang, Ma, Wang, Fan, Feng, et al. (2007) utilized an
experimental procedure whereby participants were
randomly assigned to either engage in a cognitive training
exercise called integrative body-mind training (IBMT) or
perform relaxation training. The experiment consisted of 20minutes of training a day across five days. Results revealed
that those in the IBMT showed greater improvement on the
Attention Network Test (ANT), a computer application
designed to measure the efficiency of attentional networks
(see Fan, McCandliss, Sommer, Raz, & Posner, 2002). Tang
et al., found that participants improved on measures of
executive attention, which involves both monitoring and
resolving conflict amongst thoughts, feelings, and
responses.
Less is known about the way in which self-regulatory
processes affect learning, but we postulate that
improvements in attention and memory due to cognitive
training might transfer to a classroom where students need
to attend to, encode, and then finally retrieve and apply

2105

information as evidence of knowledge gain. The present
series of four experimental studies examines the effects of a
simple form of meditation on classroom performance. Our
hypothesis is that cognitive training via meditation will
improve students’ cognitive functioning during a lecture,
and as a result, improve their performance on a quiz about
that lecture material.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, we examined whether brief meditation
training could improve student quiz performance. The
hypothesis was based upon the findings that meditation can
improve cognitive functioning under experimental
conditions (Tang, et al., 2007). Specifically, the first goal of
Experiment 1 was to demonstrate that applied cognitive
training via meditation could be randomly assigned to
students and delivered with sufficient quality in a classroom
setting. The second goal was to observe what effects, if any,
the meditation would have on students’ quiz performances
in relation to those students in the comparison condition.

Method
Participants
Participants in this study were 35 undergraduate psychology
students from California State University, Northridge
enrolled in an Introduction to Psychology course. The
participants were randomly assigned to either meditate (n =
18) or rest (n = 17).

Design & Procedure
The study was a between-participants, experimental design.
Participants were greeted at the start of an otherwise normal
Introduction to Psychology course and asked to participate
in an activity that would be related to that day’s lecture on
health and psychology. Participants received informed
consent forms, and were then provided with a small packet
consisting of paper that was folded over and stapled to hide
the contents inside. One side of the stapled packet listed a
mood questionnaire (the brief mood introspection scale;
BMIS; Mayer & Gaschke, 1988) that participants were
asked to answer. When all participants had answered the
mood questions, they were instructed to flip the packet to
the back side, and read one of two versions of instructions
printed on the back cover. The first version of the packet
contained directions for what was described as a self-test of
focused relaxation. These instructions read “Please remain
silent for the following activity, So that you do not disturb
others. I would like you to try for the following.
1) Please sit up straight. This is a self-test of focused
relaxation.
2) Hands can be on your lap in a comfortable position.
3) Breathing in and out through the nose, I want you to
count your breaths starting with “in, out, 1; in, out, 2;
etc. up to ten and back down to one. If you lose your

place, please go back to one. Repeat this cycle.
4) It is important to concentrate on your breathing, have
an upright posture, and to be as still as possible.
5) When the exercise begins, I encourage you to close
your eyes or keep them half opened, try not to look
around.
6) This exercise will last for only six minutes.
7) You will be instructed when to start.
8) Please remain silent for the duration of the activity; the
instructor will let you know when the activity has
finished. THANK YOU.
The second version of the packet described itself as a selftest of unfocused relaxation contained directions for resting.
If participants in either condition had any questions
concerning the directions they were to raise their hand and
an experimenter would help clarify (no such clarifications
were required). When all participants were ready to begin
the exercise, the experimenter asked them to begin and
started the timer (the training session lasted six minutes).
After six minutes, the experimenter asked the participants to
open their stapled packets and fill out the enclosed
questionnaire, which contained further mood (BMIS) and
relaxation questions (the behavioral relaxation scale; BRS;
Poppen, 1988). Next, forms were collected by the
experimenter and the students then received the regularly
scheduled 50-minute lecture on the topic of health and
psychology. Importantly, participants were informed that
they would be tested on the material, and as indicated, ,
participants received a quiz containing questions related to
the information covered during the class period at the end of
the lecture. After turning in the quiz and completing
demographics form, participants were debriefed.
Focused relaxation condition. This type of focused
relaxation is a standard first level form of meditation
training primarily designed to increase the participant’s
ability to concentrate.
Unfocused relaxation condition. Rest is a commonly used
control group when comparing meditation. Notably
however, there are also benefits associated with resting and
its ability to improve cognitive functioning, therefore, the
rest condition should be considered a comparison group,
whereby we are attempting to test two competing methods
for promoting cognitive functioning, which is arguably
more difficult than utilizing a true control condition.
Quiz. The quiz contained three types of questions, multiple
choice, true/false, and fill in the blank. The specific
questions asked were semantic knowledge questions related
directly to the content from the lecture, for example, “Being
able to adapt to stressful situations is called?”

Results
Our analysis of Experiment 1 focused on the participant’s
self-report ratings and quiz performance. Specifically, we
examined what condition led to better quiz performance and

2106

whether mood and behavioral relaxation were affected. The
results indicate that those in the meditation condition had a
better post training mood (F (1, 32) = 4.29, p < .05), higher
self-report for behavioral relaxation (F (1, 32) = 8.04, p <
.05) and performed better on the quiz than the rest condition
using a two-tailed t-test (t (33) = 1.84, p < .05).
Table 1: The means and (standard deviations) for mood,
relaxation, and quiz performance.
Mood
5.33
(3.65)
1.77
(6.28)

Meditation
Rest

Relaxation
4.72
(1.18)
3.65
(1.06)

Quiz Score
6.33
(0.69)
5.7
(1.05)

30) or rest (n = 26).

Design & Procedure
The same procedure as in Experiment 1 was used in
Experiment 2, including the same class lecture topic and the
same instructor, with the addition of one question asking
‘how interesting was the class lecture for the day’ on a fivepoint Likert scale (1 = not at all interesting, 5 = Very
interesting).

Results

Discussion of Experiment 1
The results revealed better quiz performance for those
participants who had randomly received meditation training,
suggesting that meditation training may be an effective
method for improving academic performance. However,
because we had no direct measure of ‘self-regulation’,
attention, or memory that we could positively identify as
increasing, the exact mechanism for the improvement was
unclear. A second, competing, hypothesis arose from the
fact that the lecture for the day was on the topic of Health
and Psychology, and that those students who had engaged in
meditation might have become more vested in the topic or
overall lecture than those students who had only rested. It
was therefore possible that an increase in interest in the
topic itself may have led to better quiz performance.
Moreover, those in the meditation condition reported having
a better mood and feeling more relaxed than the rest
condition, which may have also contributed to an improved
quiz performance.

Experiment 2
In order to determine whether the findings were a result of
increased interest in the lecture, or improved mood and
relaxation, we decided to replicate the experiment with one
additional variable. Specifically, at the end of the
replication, we asked participants how interesting they
thought the class lecture was for that day. We reasoned that
a replicated increase in quiz performance without reliable
differences in interest, mood, or relaxation would provide
evidence against those variables as the causes of improved
quiz performance.

Method
Participants
Participants in this study were 56 undergraduate psychology
students from California State University, Northridge
enrolled in an Introduction to Psychology course. The
participants were randomly assigned to either meditate (n =

Our analysis of Experiment 2 indicated that those in the
meditation condition did not significantly differ in mood (F
(1, 52) = 1.52, n.s.), behavioral relaxation (F (1, 52) = 0.04,
n.s.), nor class interest (t (53) = .32, n.s.), but the meditation
condition did perform better on the quiz than the rest
condition as indicated using a one-tailed t-test (t (54) = 2.12,
p < .05), replicating the crucial finding from Experiment 1.
Table 2: The means and (standard deviations) for mood,
relaxation, quiz performance, and class interest.

Meditation
Rest

Mood
2.84
(.37)
2.98
(.40)

Relaxation
4.3
(1.06)
4.24
(1.27)

Quiz Score
5.73
(1.17)
4.92
(1.67)

Class
Interest
4.24
(0.74)
4.31
(0.79)

Discussion of Experiment 2
The results of Experiment 2 indicated that meditating prior
to a classroom lecture may promote improved academic
performance, regardless of the level of interest for the class
lecture, and regardless of mood and relaxation. However,
while the correspondence between the lecture topic and
meditation might not have had a conscious impact on
student interest, perhaps there was some type of
unconscious ‘priming’ effect that might have affected
students in the meditation condition because of the
similarity between the classroom lecture on health and
psychology and meditation. In order to account for this
possible confound, we decided to conduct a third study that
tested the effects of meditation on a class receiving a lecture
on a topic unrelated to health or meditation.

Experiment 3
In order to determine whether the findings would replicate
with a different lecture and presentation method we used a
video lecture by Dr. Philip Zimbardo on Testing and
Intelligence from the Discovering Psychology video series.
The particular lecture was chosen in part because the
presentation was unrelated to the topic of meditation. The
video was 35 minutes in length.

2107

Method

Experiment 4

Participants
Participants in this study were 94 undergraduate psychology
students from California State University, Northridge
enrolled in an Introduction to Psychology course. The
participants were randomly assigned to either meditate (n =
46) or rest (n = 48).

Design & Procedure
With the exception of the video presentation, the same
procedure was utilized in Experiment 3 as was used in
Experiments 1 and 2. Additionally, the mood survey utilized
after the lecture was changed to the Positive Affect Negative
Affect Scale (PANAS; Watson, Clark, & Tellegen, 1988)
instead of the BMIS in order to determine if positive or
negative mood might be independently affected by the
training.

Results
Our analysis of Experiment 3 indicates that those in the
meditation condition did not significantly differ in either
negative (F (1, 88) = 0.07, n.s.) or positive mood (F (1, 88)
= 2.09, n.s.) as measured by the PANAS. Likewise,
behavioral relaxation (F (1, 88) = 0.001, n.s.), and class
interest ( t (80) = .80, n.s.) were unaffected by meditation.
However, the meditation condition again performed better
on the quiz than the rest condition, t(92) = 1.80, p < .05,
replicating Experiments 1 and 2.
Table 3: The means and (standard deviations) for mood,
relaxation, quiz performance, and class interest.

Meditation
Rest

Mood
Negative
13.09
(5.51)
13.34
(3.81)

Mood
Positive
23.33
(10.9)
26.36
(9.15)

Relaxation
3.89
(1.17)
3.89
(0.67)

Quiz
Score
3.9
(1.57)
3.33
(1.5)

Approximately 49% of all entering freshman succeed in
obtaining a bachelors degree at California State University,
Northridge where Experiments 1-3 were conducted. The
attrition rate suggested to us that only half of the student
population that enrolled in lower-division courses remained
at the university long enough to enroll in upper-division
(junior or senior level) classes. We reasoned, therefore, that
it might be true that those students who remained in upperdivision courses might have better self-regulatory functions
in comparison with the average lower-division student.
In an effort to investigate the effectiveness of meditation
on upper-division students, we had participants in a seniorlevel ‘capstone’ course on cognitive psychology listen to a
regular 50-minute lecture on cognitive psychology that was
unrelated to health or meditation, and with the same prelecture manipulation as in Experiments 1-3. Additionally,
participants were given no explicit mention that there would
be a quiz at the end of the lecture. These two changes were
made in an effort to examine how effective the meditation
training would be for upper division students in a normal
classroom environment.

Method
Participants
Participants in this study were 41 undergraduate psychology
students from California State University, Northridge
enrolled in an Introduction to Psychology course. The
participants were randomly assigned to either meditate (n =
17) or rest (n = 24).

Design & Procedure

Class
Interest
2.73
(1.0)
2.93
(1.19)

Discussion of Experiment 3
The findings of Experiments 1-3 suggested to us that the use
of meditation training at the start of a lecture may promote
retention of material that followed in lower-division classes
such as Introduction to Psychology. After collecting
evidence against mood, relaxation, or topic congruence as
potential reasons for the improved student performance, we
reasoned that enhancements in self-regulation as a result of
the meditation remained a potential mechanism for the
improved performance. Therefore, we next turned our
attention to test whether the findings would generalize to
other student populations that we reasoned might differ with
respect to self regulation in comparison with that of lowerdivision students.

The same procedure as in Experiments 1 and 2 were used
however; the lecture was given on a cognitive psychology
topic, which lasted 50 minutes.

Results
Our analysis of Experiment 4 indicates that those in the
meditation condition did not significantly differ in mood (F
(1, 37) = 1.56, n.s.), class interest (t (39) = .21, n.s.), or on
quiz score (t (39) = .38, n.s.), however, those in the rest
condition reported better behavioral relaxation (F (1, 37) =
6.39, p < .05). Experiment 4 failed to replicate the effect of
meditation on quiz scores reported in Experiments 1-3.

2108

Table 4: The means and (standard deviations) for mood,
relaxation, quiz performance, and class interest.

Meditation
Rest

Mood
5.53
(3.6)
3.78
(4.87)

Relaxation
3.35
(0.93)
4.17
(1.07)

Quiz
Score
7.88
(1.5)
8.08
(1.82)

Class Interest
4.3
(0.69)
4.25
(0.68)

General Discussion
A series of four experiments were administered in an
effort to test whether a brief form of cognitive training via
meditation could improve student quiz performance. The
results of the first three experiments, those administered to
lower-division students in three different Introduction to
Psychology classes resulted in better quiz performance
among meditators compared to the rest control condition.
There was no evidence that the improvements in quiz
performance were due to mood, relaxation, conscious
increases in student interest in the lecture topic, or
unconscious correspondence between the independent
variable (meditation) and the lecture topic. However,
participants in Experiment 4, upper-division students who
had elected to enroll in a challenging course on cognitive
psychology and did not know they would be quizzed on the
lecture, did not benefit from the brief meditation session
(see Figure 1).
Figure 1: Difference in quiz percentage with meditation
for Experiments 1-4.

Experiment 1 allowed for the first test of the hypothesis
that meditation would improve quiz performance;
additionally, it was also found that mood and relaxation
were improved. The first experiment did not answer whether
the meditation, mood, or the relationship between the
experimental condition and the class content was
responsible for better quiz performance. For those reasons, a
second experiment was conducted, but with the addition of a
question concerning students’ interest in the classroom
topic. The results from experiment 2 supported the original
hypothesis and dispelled the possible confounding factors
for mood, relaxation, and perceived class interest. To
evaluate the effectiveness of the cognitive training
irrespective of topic, a new lecture format was used for
experiment 3 that was unrelated to health or meditation.
Specifically, the presentation was in less compelling video
format as opposed to a live format, and was unrelated to the
Health and Psychology lecture. When comparing class

interest, those exposed to the video lecture in experiment 3
rated their interest to be lower than that of experiment 2 (t
(138) = 8.48, p < .001) and experiment 4 (t (126) = 8.21, p <
.001). Regardless of between experiment interest, the crucial
finding for improved quiz performance remained.
We cannot conclude from the null results of Experiment 4
any definitive conclusions about why the meditation was not
effective in this group. One possibility, the explanation that
is highest in context validity given past studies of self
regulation, is that the students with lower self-regulatory
functioning who drove the effect in Experiments 1-3 were
not represented in Experiment 4 because of university
attrition or self-selection against enrolling in challenging
courses. Students from lower-division courses likely
represent an overall less self-regulated population that may
be better able to benefit from the cognitive training.
Likewise, students in the upper-division class were already
highly self-regulated, and/or had better attention and
memory than lower-division students. Thus, a single session
of meditation training was not enough to bring about the
same degree of improvement seen with lower-division
students (although more extensive cognitive training has
been shown to promote further benefits even among those
already high in functioning, see Ericsson, Krampe, & TeschRomer, 1993). Still a third possibility includes the notion
that, by not informing the students of a pending quiz that
would follow the class lecture, students’ motivation for
utilizing their enhanced cognitive functioning was activated.
Importantly for educators who may be considering
adopting meditation in the classroom, the authors would like
to stress that the enhancements in quiz performance in
lower-division courses were somewhat modest, an increase
between 7-8%, and were untested over time. We note that
the predominant method of evaluation is through
comprehensive tests that follow a series of lectures, and it is
unclear whether meditation might improve performance
when there are delays between lectures and evaluations.
Further, although we have argued that a likely mechanism
for improvement on quizzes were improvements in the selfregulatory functions of students, the present series of studies
was unable to determine the underlying mechanisms
responsible for the improvement in quiz performance.
For these reasons, the authors suggest that more extensive
evaluations of meditation should control for levels of selfregulatory functioning, and manipulate knowledge of a
pending assessment, both of which would help to further
inform the present findings. Additionally, future research
should examine the underlying mechanisms responsible for
the enhancements, that is, what processes involved in
attention, learning, and memory are most affected by the
meditation training and whether other forms of cognitive
training might be even more effective than that which was
used in the present studies. For instance, cognitive reasoning
programs for adults have been successful in promoting
positive change even months after discontinuing the training
(Basak, Boot, Voss, & Kramer, 2008) perhaps cognitive
training via meditation might result in similar long-term

2109

benefits for students. The authors suggest that the use of
meditation training at the start of a classroom lecture may
promote student performance at least among lower division
students.

Acknowledgements
The authors wish to acknowledge support for this project
from the Research Infrastructure in Minority Institutions
Program, Dr. Carrie Saetermoe, Dr. Scott Plunkett, and
Chaya Greisman, MA.

References
Baddeley, A. (2003). Working Memory: Looking back and
looking forward. Neuroscience, 4, 829-839.
Basak, C., Boot, W. R., Voss, M. W., & Kramer, A. F.
(2008). Can training in a real-time strategy video game
attenuate cognitive decline in older adults? Psychology
and Aging, 23, 765-777.
Barch, D. M. (1999). Cognition: The anterior cingulated and
response conflict. American Journal of Psychiatry, 156,
1849.
Brown, K. W., Ryan, R. M., Creswell, J. D. (2007).
Mindfulness: Theoretical foundations and evidence for its
salutary effects. Psychological Inquiry, 18, 211-237.
Chan, D., & Woollacott, M. (2007). Effects of level of
meditation experience on attentional focus: Is the
efficiency of executive or orientation networks improved?
Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine, 13,
651-657.
Detailed Success & Progress Rate Tables. (2008) Retrieved
November 29, 2010 from
http://irqry.csun.edu:8080/csun/special_reports/Undergrad
Success.pdf
Ericsson, K. A., Krampe, R. T., & Tesch-Romer, C. (1993).
The role of deliberate practice in the acquisition of expert
performance. Psychological Review, 100, 363-403.
Fan, J., McCandliss, B.D., Sommer, T., Raz, A. & Posner,
M.I. (2002). Testing the efficiency and independence of
attentional networks. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
14, 340-347.
Kozhevnikov, M., Louchakova, O., Josipovic, Z., & Motes,
M. A. (2009). The enhancement of visuospatial
processing efficiency through Buddhist deity meditation,
Psychological Science, 20, 645-653.
Lutz, A., Slagter, H. A., Rawlings, N. B., Francis, A. D.,
Greischar, L. L., et al. (2009). Training enhances
attentional stability: Neural and behavioral evidence. The
Journal of Neuroscience, 29, 13418-13427.
Ly, M. & Spezio, M. L. (2009). The effect of meditation on
neural systems implicated in social judgments.
NeuroImage, 47, S194.
Luchins, A. S. (1942). Mechanization in problem solving:
The effect of einstellung, Psychological Monographs, 54,
1-17.
Mayer, J. D., & Gaschke, Y. N. (1988). The experience and
meta-experience of mood. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 55, 102–111.

Muraven, M.R., & Baumeister, R.F. (2000). Self-regulation
and depletion of limited resources: Does self-control
resemble a muscle? Psychological Bulletin, 126, 247-259.
Poppen, R. (1988). Behavioral relaxation training and
assessment. New York: Pergamon.
Smit, A. S., Eling, P. A. T. M., & Coenen, A. M. L. (2004).
Mental effort causes vigilance decrease due to resource
depletion. Acta Psychologica, 115, 35-42.
Srinivasan, N., & Baijal, S. (2007). Concentrative
meditation enhances preattentive processing: A mismatch
negativity study. NeuroReport, 0, 1-4.
Tang, Y., Ma, Y., Wang, J., Fan, Y., Feng, S., Lu, Q., et al.,
(2007). Short-term meditation training improves attention
and self-regulation. PNAS, 104, 17152-17156.
van Leeuwen, S., Müller, N. G., & Melloni, L. (2009). Age
effects on attentional blink performance in meditation.
Consciousness and Cognition, 18, 593-599.
Watson, D., Clark, L. A., & Tellegen, A. (1988).
Development and validation of brief measures of Positive
and Negative Affect: The PANAS Scales. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 1063-1070.
Youmans, R. J. (2011). The effects of physical prototyping
and group work on the reduction of design fixation.
Design Studies, 32, 115-138.
Youmans, R. J., & Ohlsson, S. (2008). How practice
procedures suboptimal heuristics that render backup
instruments ineffective. Ergonomics, 51, 441-475.
Zeidan, F., Johnson, S. K., Diamond, B. J., David, Z., &
Goolkasian, P. (2010). Mindfulness meditation improves
cognition. Evidence of brief mental training.
Consciousness & Cognition, 19, 597-605.
Zimmerman, B. J. (1990). Self-regulated learning and
academic achievement. Educational Psychologist, 25, 3–
17.
Zimmerman, B. J. (2000). Attaining self-regulation: A
social cognitive perspective. In M. Boekaerts, P. R.
Pintrich, & M. Zeidner (Eds.), Handbook of selfregulation (pp. 13- 39). San Diego: Academic Press.

2110

