UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cognitive processes underlying spatial belief revision

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7k17q80s

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Bucher, Leandra
Krumnack, Antje
Nejasmic, Jelica
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cognitive processes underlying spatial belief revision
Leandra Bucher (leandra.bucher@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Antje Krumnack (antje.krumnack@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Jelica #ejasmic (jelica.nejasmic@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Markus Knauff (markus.knauff@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Justus-Liebig University, Experimental Psychology and Cognitive Science, Otto-Behaghel-Str. 10F,
35394 Giessen, Germany

Abstract
New information sometimes contradicts what is believed
about certain states of the world. To integrate contradicting
information, reasoners have to revise existing beliefs. In the
course of belief revision they need to decide which beliefs to
retain and which ones to retract in order to regain consistency
within current belief states. What guides belief revision has
been studied in the non-spatial domain. Based upon previous
work on spatial reasoning, we develop hypotheses about the
cognitive processes of belief revision in spatial reasoning.
Spatial beliefs are considered to be based on spatial mental
models that are subject to variation during revision. We
provide empirical evidence that models are varied according
to information provided by inconsistent statements rather than
processes vital for construction of initial models. Furthermore
we show that revising spatial models follows dissociable
principles from constructing initial spatial models.
Keywords: Spatial reasoning; mental models; belief revision;
spatial cognition; relational reasoning; spatial relations

Introduction
Imagine the following situation. You look for an apartment
to buy when two friends of yours tell you about a nice place
offered by the local real estate agency.
A says: “There is parquet floor either in the lounge or in
the bed room, but not in both rooms.”
B says: “There is parquet floor in the bed room.”
As a matter of fact you get the information from the real
estate broker: “There is parquet floor in the lounge.”
Given the broker knows what he sells, either A´s or B´s
statement must be wrong. Which statement do you believe
is true – A´s or B´s? Whom do you believe – A or B?
Processes that guide this decision are subject to belief
revision research. Belief revision is an everyday task that
describes the process reasoners perform in order to regain
consistency when confronted with new information that is
inconsistent with existing beliefs. Generally, it requires
knowledge about the entities reasoned about, e.g. such that
two entities cannot reside within the same spatio-temporal
coordinates. Furthermore, belief revision might be affected
by numerous factors such as familiarity with the entities or
trustworthiness of speakers uttering the information (Wolf
& Knauff, 2008).

Here, we study belief revision in reasoning about objects
that are neutral regarding these factors. Specifically, we
look at factors that play a role in the initial construction of
spatial mental models and carefully examine their potential
role in processes during revision of these initially
constructed models.
The processes that guide belief revision in the spatial
context have not been investigated so far. Based on what is
known about reasoning with spatial mental models (De
Vooght & Vandierendonck, 1998; Klauer, 1998; Byrne,
1998; Schaeken, Girotto, & Johnson-Laird, 1998; Goodwin
& Johnson-Laird, 2005), we develop hypotheses about
cognitive processes that might be vital for belief revision in
spatial reasoning.
Empirical evidence culminates to the assumption that
spatial reasoning relies on the construction, inspection, and
variation of spatial mental models (Knauff, Rauh, &
Schlieder, 1995; Rauh, Schlieder & Knauff, 1997, Knauff
Rauh, Schlieder, & Strube, 1998). We briefly summarise
relevant work on spatial reasoning and come up with
hypotheses about belief revision in the spatial domain.
Subsequently, we report empirical evidence from two
experiments that tested these hypotheses and discuss
implications of the results.

Construction and inspection of spatial mental
models
Consider the following spatial description that determines
the linear arrangement of three objects:
(1)
(2)

The apple is left of the pear.
The mango is left of the apple.

Sentences of this kind are called premises, from which a
mental model can be incrementally constructed by
successively integrating information. Starting with the first
premise (1), the two objects are arranged according to the
relations and result in the following model (M1),
(M1)

apple – pear

Successively, the information from the second premise (2) is
integrated, resulting in the model (M2):

3477

(M2)

mango – apple – pear

By inspection of this model new information can be
inferred. Relational inference processes enable reasoners to
make decisions about whether the following statements are
true.
(3)
(4)

The mango is left of the pear.
The pear is left of the mango.

The sentences (3, 4) that have to be checked for validity are
usually referred to as conclusions. Conclusion (3) is valid,
i.e. it is consistent with the information provided by the
premises and the model (M2), while as a conclusion (4) is
invalid, i.e. it is inconsistent with the information of one of
the premises and the model.

Inconsistency detection
An inconsistency typically arises from a conflict between a
(valid) conclusion (e.g. “the mango is left of the pear.”) and
contradicting evidence (e.g. if you know that as a matter of
fact “the pear is left of the mango.”). Reasoners are able to
detect inconsistency by inspecting the mental model (e.g.
Knauff et al., 1996; Johnson-Laird, Legrenzi, & Girotto,
2004). Inconsistency detection is a prerequisite for belief
revision.

Cognitive processes underlying variation of spatial
mental models
The question is: what guides revision? Imagine a reasoner
realises that his or her conviction about the arrangements of
objects in space must be invalid. This problem is
presumably solved by varying the initially constructed
mental models (Rauh et al., 1997). Knauff et al. (1995),
Ragni, Knauff, and Nebel (2005), Rauh et al. (2005), and
Rauh et al. (1997) showed that reasoners deal with
increasing complexity induced by ambiguous spatial
descriptions that allow for more than one model to be
constructed by focusing on only a subset of possible models
and often just a single one. If reasoners are asked to create
an alternative model that also coheres with the description,
they use the following principle: Instead of abolishing the
initially constructed model and create a new one from the
scratch, alternative models that also cohere the description
are preferably created by minor variations of the initially
constructed model. We thus assume that mental model
revision is accordingly based on variation. Further, we
assume that initial models are varied just as much as
necessary to obtain a model that is consistent with all
propositions. Conserving as many information as possible is
in line with a “minimal change principle” (Harman, 1986;
Gärdenfors, 1984). In the present paper, we investigated
whether information that guide the construction of initial
mental models play a role during the variation of these
models.

There is evidence that verbatim information from the
premises describing a determinate arrangement (i.e.
allowing for only one model to be constructed) is not
reliably retrievable from memory (Mani & Johnson-Laird,
1982), bolstering the assumption that mental models rather
than sentences are stored in memory. That makes sense
when taken into account that storing the representation of
information in compact models is more parsimonious
compared to storing the original information from the
description. Thus, storing models facilitates manipulation in
memory. However, there is evidence that nevertheless not
only the “end product” of a construction process, i.e. an
integrated mental model is kept in memory but also vital
steps of its construction process (Payne, 1993; Payne &
Baguley, 2006). Payne (1993), Payne & Baguely (2006)
argue that memory retrieval of spatial arrangements is
primarily supported by an “episodic construction trace”. The
trace records the mental operations used during vital steps of
the construction process, such as the order of objects
inserted into the mental model. Subsequent to construction,
the inspection phase starts. A verisimilar assumption is that
the starting point for inspection is the object last inserted
into the model. This had been shown for spatial mental
models using Allen´s calculus (Knauff et al., 1998),
providing evidence that operations of construction influence
inspection. The question is whether these operations also
influence variation. In this case we would assume that
variation is based on the relocation of the object last inserted
into the model during the construction phase.
However, it is also possible that the revision is not
influenced by the construction process. Then the variation of
an initially constructed mental model would rely solely on
spatial information provided by an inconsistent fact. In each
spatial array the spatial information is represented in
relational terms. The binary spatial relations are defined as a
triplet (X, r, Y) in which X is called the “to-be-located
object” (LO) and Y the “reference object” (RO) (Miller &
Johnson-Laird, 1976). LO and RO are located relative to
relations “r” such as “left of”, “right of”, and “next to”. If
we assume that the revision process is guided by the
essential distinction between an LO and an RO stated in a
sentence that convey the inconsistent information, we would
expect that variation is based on the relocation of the LO
while the RO remains located at its initial position.
Experiment 1 was designed to test whether revisions are
accomplished by following either of the two principles:
1.
2.

Relocation of the object last inserted into the model
vs.
Relocation of the LO of the inconsistent fact

In this experiment, the objects´ arrangements described by
first and second premises were structured as follows: From
the description of the first premise, an arrangement of the
two objects and the relation “left of” (e.g. “apple left of
pear”) was constructed. The second premise yielded the
information to insert a third object into the model such that

3478

it was located to the leftmost side of the model (e.g. “kiwi
left of apple”, resulting in the model “kiwi – apple – pear”).
Thus, the location of the object last inserted into the mental
models constructed from the two premises was always in the
leftmost position of the arrangement. Consistent conclusive
facts (e. g. “kiwi left of pear”), presented in half of the items
confirmed the constructed mental models. Inconsistent
conclusive facts (e.g. “pear left of kiwi”) required
inconsistency detection followed by model revisions. The
facts´ structure resembled the premises´ structures. Facts
also described arrangements of two objects related to each
other by using the relation “left of”.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants. 23 participants (7 male; age: M = 22.57; SD =
2.92) with the exception of one all students (among them 6
students of psychology) from the University of Giessen, all
reporting normal or corrected-to normal visual acuity, gave
written informed consent to participation. Participants were
tested individually and were paid at a rate of 8 Euro per
hour.
Materials, procedure, and design. 32 items were
presented randomly. The items followed a tripartite
structure as follows.
Model construction:. Two premises (presented sequentially
in a self-paced manner) described a one-dimensional (linear)
order of three (small, equal-sized, disyllabic-termed)
objects, belonging to either one out of four categories (tools,
stationery, vegetables, and fruits). Subsequently to premise
presentation, participants were instructed to choose the
correct order from two alternative orders (correct order and
correct order mirrored) that were presented on the left and
right side of the computer screen, indicating their choice by
pressing a left or right response button with the left or right
hand, accordingly. Left and right locations for correct and
incorrect orders were counterbalanced across the
experiment. Number of correct decisions and corresponding
decision times were recorded.
Example:
1st premise: “The apple is to the left of the pear”
2nd premise: “The kiwi is to the left of the apple”
spatial mental model: Kiwi – apple – pear
Inconsistency detection: Subsequently to the participant´s
decision, a conclusive fact1 (font colour red to contrast the
fact with the premises) that was either consistent (in half of
the items) or inconsistent (in the other half of the items)
with the information provided by the premises, (hence with
the order of objects) was presented. In all premises and
conclusive facts, we used only the relation “left of”.
1

Facts conveyed implicit information not directly provided by
the premises (e.g. “Kiwi left of pear” (consistent) or “Pear left of
apple” (inconsistent) with the premises: “Apple left of pear” and
“Kiwi left of apple”.

Participants were instructed to decide whether the
conclusive fact was consistent or inconsistent with the order
of objects, indicating their decision by pressing the
respective response button (“yes” or “no”) with the left or
right hand, accordingly. Successful inconsistency detection
and corresponding detection times were recorded.
Example:
Consistent fact: “The kiwi is to the left of the pear.”
 requires confirmation of the model as correct answer
Inconsistent fact: “The pear is to the left of the kiwi.”
 requires inconsistency detection as prerequisite for
belief revision
Belief Revision: If a participant´s decision was “no” (i.e.
decision that the fact was inconsistent with the information
yielded by the premises), he or she was subsequently
instructed to indicate how the initial order of the objects
would have to be revised in order to be consistent with the
inconsistent fact. Participants chose a preferred revised
order from two orders presented on the left and right side of
the computer monitor by pressing the respective response
button. Presentation locations of the two models were
counterbalanced across the experiment. In fact, both orders
were equally consistent with the information yielded by the
conclusive fact and one of the premises (either the initially
presented 1st or 2nd premise) while contradicting the
respective other premise, complementary. However, they
were revised according to different revision strategies. One
order resulted from a variation by relocating the object that
was last inserted during the construction phase, referred to
as “relocation of last object” in the following. The
alternative order was obtained by variation of the initial
model according to the inconsistent fact, more precisely by
relocation of the inconsistent fact´s LO into the direction
indicated by the fact´s relation (“left of”). This revision
principle is referred to as “relocation of LO” in the
following. Models chosen according to the respective
revision principle and corresponding revision times were
recorded.
Examples of revised orders:
Apple – pear – kiwi (“relocation of last object”) vs.
Pear – kiwi – apple (“relocation of LO”)
Four practise trials (not analysed) preceded the experimental
trials. All stimuli were generated and presented using
Superlab 4.0 (Cedrus Corporation, San Pedro, CA, 1999)
with an RB-530 response pad running on a standard
personal computer with a 19’’-monitor.

Results and discussion
Based on the information provided by the premises
participants chose the correct order of objects in 98.64%
(SD = 2.27) of the trials within 1.97s (SD = 0.75). Erroneous
trials were excluded from further analysis.

3479

Inconsistency detection was successful in 91.75% (SD =
13.80) of the trials and took 1.09s (SD = 0.36) on average.
Erroneous trials were excluded from further analysis.
Percentages of revised orders based on “relocation of last
object” vs. “relocation of the LO”, respectively and
corresponding revision times were compared calculating
separate ANOVAs. Level of significance was 5 %.
ANOVAs revealed a significant difference for
percentages of revision strategies applied [F(1, 22) =
158.71; p < .001; ƞ2 = .88] and revision time [F(1, 14) =
6.73; p < .05; ƞ2 = 33]. Revision was significantly more
often based on “relocation of the LO” (M = 87.78 % SD =
14.38) as compared to “relocation of the last object” (M =
12.22 %; SD = 14.38; t(22) = 12.60; p < .001). Accordingly,
“relocation of the LO” (M = 4.82 s; SD = 2.01) was
significantly faster than “relocation of the last object” (M =
9.56 s; SD = 8.25; t(14) = -2.59; p < .05). Results indicate
that compared to models based on “relocation of the last
object”, models based on “relocation of the LO” were
clearly preferably and faster created (see figure 1).
This suggests that revision processes operate on fully
integrated mental models of the spatial arrangements and
are varied in accordance with the inconsistent information.

Figure 1. In experiment 1, revision was mainly based on the
relocation of inconsistent facts´ LOs. Error bars show
standard errors.
However, from experiment 1 we cannot rule out that
revision was based on an order effect thus that the object
first mentioned in the sentence that conveyed the critical
spatial information for the revision task at hand (i.e. the
inconsistent fact) guided the variation of the mental model.
In order to test for order effects we conducted experiment 2.
Here, we varied the sentence structure of premises and facts
in that way that the first mentioned object was not
necessarily the LO of a sentence. This experiment actually
aims to investigate decisive factors of spatial belief revision.
For that purpose it will be reported in detail elsewhere
(Bucher, Krumnack, Nejasmic, & Knauff, submitted). Here,
we report a detailed analysis that tested for order effects
during the construction part compared to the revision part of
the experiment. This analysis was done specifically for the

present context in order to compare principles applied
during construction and revision, respectively.

Order effects during construction and variation of
spatial mental models
We investigated whether construction and/or variation of
objects would follow the order of objects as they appear in
the sentences conveying the relevant spatial information for
the task at hand (i.e. 1st premises for construction and
inconsistent facts for revision).
Participants´ task was to physically construct spatial
arrangements based on verbal descriptions and subsequently
modify these arrangements after receiving inconsistent
information. The physical arrangements allowed us to
observe the principles participants applied during
construction as compared to revision when manipulating
objects within spatial arrangements.

Experiment 2
Method
Participants. 22 participants (5 male; age: M = 22.59; SD =
3.16) all students (among them 5 students of psychology)
from the University of Giessen, all reporting normal or
corrected-to normal visual acuity, all but two (one lefthanded, one ambidexter) were right-handed, gave written
informed consent to participation. Participants were tested
individually and were paid at a rate of 8 Euro per hour.
Materials, Procedure, and Design. 32 items were
presented, each consisting of two premises and an
inconsistent fact on a 19``-computer screen, using Microsoft
PowerPoint (Version 2007) running in the windows
environment XP on a standard personal computer.
PowerPoint slides were presented by the experimenter in a
sequentially and individually adapted manner according to
participants´ performance.
In 8 items, the two premises and the contradictory fact
(presented in red) had the surface structure (referred to as
sentence structure 1) as follows: First mentioned object (and
LO) - relation (either “left of” or “right of”) –Second
mentioned object (and RO).
Example: “Yellow is to the left of red”.
In 8 items, the two premises and the contradictory fact had
the sentence structure (referred to as sentence structure 2):
Relation – First mentioned object (and RO) – Second
mentioned object (and LO).
Example: “To the right of yellow is red”.
In 8 items the two premises followed sentence structure 1
while the fact followed sentence structure 2. In 8 items the
premises followed sentence structure 2 while the fact
followed sentence structure 1. The relations “left of” and
“right of” were used in the premises and in the facts, with
the orders as depicted in table 1 below.

3480

Table 1. Relations used in the premises and facts presented
in experiment 2
1st premise

Relations „left of“ and „right of” in the premises
and facts in items of experiment 2
left of
left of
right of
right of

2nd premise

left of

right of

left of

right of

Fact
(inconsistent)

left of /
right of

left of /
right of

left of /
right of

left of /
right of

Participants were provided with wooden square blocks
(size: 2.5 x 2.5 x 2.5 cm), red, green, yellow, and blue
coloured on a plate in front of them. They were instructed to
pick up the coloured blocks, one at a time using one hand,
and arrange them according to the information provided by
the premises into a linear one-dimensional order. The
premises informed about the determinate order of the
coloured blocks with the blocks represented by the
respective colours (red, green, yellow, and blue).
Example:
1st premise:
“To the right of red is blue”
2nd premise: “Green is to the right of blue”
Spatial arrangement: Red – blue – green
All items were constructed such that the third object of an
arrangement (whose location was described in the 2nd
premise) was located on the rightmost side of an
arrangement. However, based on the description of the 1st
premise there were two possibilities for constructing the
arrangements:
1.

2.

Starting on the left side and continue to the right,
e.g. (consider the 1st premise from the above
example) putting down the red block first and
placing the blue block to the red one´s right side
Starting on the right side and continue to the left,
e.g. putting down the blue block first and placing
the red block to the blue one´s left side

The resulting orders are describable as 1 – 2 – 3 and 2 – 1 –
3, with the numbers indicating the order by which objects
had been put down; e.g. red first – blue second – green third
(order 1 – 2 – 3) and red second – blue first – green third
(order 2 – 1 – 3).
Subsequently after participants had constructed the order
of three coloured blocks, they were asked to revise their
order according to an inconsistent fact (e.g. green is to the
left of red). Participants were free with the revision of their
initially constructed arrangements. The question was
whether there would be order effects when constructing or
revising the arrangements. If there were, construction would
follow the order of the objects as mentioned in the
1st premise. The object mentioned first would be put down
first, followed by the second mentioned object. During

variation, the object of relocation would be the first object
mentioned in the inconsistent fact.
Four practise trials (neither recorded nor analysed)
preceded the experimental trials. After each trial, the
wooden blocks were put back onto the plate by the
experimenter. Performance was recorded online on a video
tape by the experimenter and analysed offline after the
experimental session.

Results and discussion
Model construction: Mean percentage rate of correctly
constructed models was 97.16 % (SD = 3.47). Erroneous
trials were excluded from further analysis. Participants
constructed order 1 – 2 – 3 (M = 50.89 %; SD = 4.25)
comparably often as order 2 – 1 – 3 (M = 49.11 %; SD =
4.25) [F(1, 21) = .96; p = .34; ƞ2 = .04).
To test whether the construction order was contingent on
the objects as mentioned in the 1st premise we conducted an
ANOVA with the factor First mentioned object. The
ANOVA revealed a significant main effect [F (1,21) =
82.84; p < .001]. Orders were constructed by putting the
first mentioned object of the 1st premise (M = 83.28%; SD =
17.15) before the second mentioned object (M = 16.72%;
SD = 17.15).
This clearly shows that the principle applied during
construction of an initial arrangement was based on the
order of objects as mentioned in the 1st premise.
Belief revision: Mean percentage rate of correctly revised
orders was 98.42 % (SD = 3.18). Erroneous trials were
excluded from further analysis.
We tested whether an order effect was also present in the
variation phase. If it was the first mentioned object of the
relevant information (i.e. the inconsistent fact) would be
subject to relocation during variation.
However, first mentioned objects of inconsistent facts
were relocated comparably often (M = 51.26 %; SD = 7.77)
as second mentioned objects (M = 48.74 % SD = 7.77; [F(1,
21) = .58 p = .46; ƞ2 = .03).
Dissimilar to the construction phase, processes of
variation did not rely on order effects, implying that
different principles were applied for revision as compared to
construction. Figure 2 depicts the results of the construction
and the revision phase.
Indeed – consistent with results of experiment 1 – we
found the principle of revision to be based on the relocation
of the inconsistent fact´s LO (M = 89.52 %; SD = 11.30).
Details are reported in Bucher et al. (submitted).

3481

Figure 2. First mentioned objects of relevant spatial
information were manipulated first during construction,
reflecting an order effect. This order effect was not present
during revision. Error bars show standard errors.

Conclusion
We investigated what processes guide belief revision in
reasoning with spatial mental models. We focused on the
question whether revision of initial models is guided by
vital steps remembered from the construction phase or
whether they solely rely on spatial information provided by
inconsistent facts. Further, we examined principles applied
during the construction of spatial mental models as
compared to the variation of these models.
Our results suggest that when forced to revise initial
beliefs about the arrangement of objects in space in the light
of contradicting facts, reasoners integrate new pieces of
information by modifying fully integrated initial mental
models. Variation processes are not influenced by
information used during the construction phase. This is in
accordance with the notion of informational economy and
provides evidence that manipulating mental models is more
parsimonious than storing initial descriptions and vital steps
used to construct these models (Exp. 1). Construction
processes followed the order of objects as they were
mentioned in the relevant spatial description, i.e. there was a
clear order effect. This order effect did not occur during
variation. This implies that different principles are applied
during the construction and the variation phase,
respectively, suggesting distinct underlying cognitive
mechanisms, accordingly (Exp. 2).

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a grant of the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) to M. Knauff und B. Nebel
(KN 465/6-1). We thank Anja Gatzsche, Isabell Tapia-Leon,
Lilly Fehr, and Susann Rieger for assistance with the
experiments.

References
Byrne, R. M. J. (1998). Spatial mental models in
counterfactual thinking about what might have been.
Kognitionswissenschaft, 7, 19–26.

DeVooght, G., & Vandierendonck, A. (1998). Spatial
mental
models
in
linear
reasoning.
Kognitionswissenschaft, 7, 5–10.
Gärdenfors, P. (1984) Epistemic importance and minimal
changes of belief. Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 62,
136-157.
Goodwin, G. and Johnson-Laird, P.N. (2005) Reasoning
about relations. Psychological Review, 112, 468-493.
Harman, G. (1986). Change in view: Principles of
reasoning. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., Legrenzi, P., & Girotto, V. (2004).
How we detect logical inconsistencies. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 13, 41–45.
Klauer, K. C. (1998). Visuelle und räumliche Interferenzen
beim Schlussfolgern. Kognitionswissenschaft, 7, 11–18.
Knauff, M., Rauh, R., & Schlieder, C. (1995). Preferred
mental models in qualitative spatial reasoning: A
cognitive assessment of Allen's calculus. Proceedings of
the Seventeenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 200-205). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Knauff, M., Rauh, R., Schlieder, C., & Strube, G. (1998).
Continuity Effect and Figural Bias in Spatial Relational
Inference. In Proceedings of the Twentieth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 573578). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Mani, K., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1982). The mental
representation of spatial descriptions. Memory &
Cognition, 10, 181–187.
Miller, G.A. & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1976). Language and
Perception. Cambridge: Havard University Press.
Payne, S. J., & Baguley, T. (2006). Memory for the process
of constructing an integrated mental model. Memory &
Cognition, 34, 817–825.
Payne, S. J. (1993). Memory for mental models of spatial
descriptions: An episodic construction trace account.
Memory & Cognition, 21, 591–603.
Ragni, M., Knauff, M., & Nebel, B. (2005). A
computational model for spatial reasoning with mental
models. In: B. Bara, B. Barsalou, and M. Bucciarelli
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 27th Annual Cognitive Science
Conference (pp. 1064-1070). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Rauh, R., Schlieder, C., & Knauff, M. (1997). Präferierte
mentale Modelle beim räumlich-relationalen Schließen:
Empirie
und
kognitive
Modellierung.
Kognitionswissenschaft, 6, 21–34.
Schaeken, W., Girotto, V., & Johnson Laird, P. N. (1998).
The effect of an irrelevant premise on temporal and
spatial reasoning. Kognitionswissenschaft, 7, 27–32.
Wolf, A. G. & Knauff, M. (2008). The strategy behind
belief revision: A matter of judging probability or the use
of mental models? In B. C. Love, K. McRae, & V. M.
Sloutsky (Eds.), Proceedings of the 30th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 831836). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.

3482

