UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cognitive Bubbles and Firewalls: Epistemic Immunizations in Human Reasoning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/60f049qw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Magnani, Lorenzo
Bertolotti, Tommaso

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cognitive Bubbles and Firewalls: Epistemic Immunizations in Human Reasoning
Lorenzo Magnani (lmagnani@unipv.it)
Department of Philosophy, University of Pavia,
Piazza Botta 6, 27100 Pavia, ITALY

Tommaso Bertolotti (tommaso.bertolotti@unipv.it)
Department of Philosophy, University of Pavia,
Piazza Botta 6, 27100 Pavia, ITALY
Abstract
John Woods defined the epistemic bubble as the inescapable
state of first-person human rationality. In this paper we will
propose, at a seminal level, how the fertility of such approach
can be expanded beyond the logical-epistemic dimension: the
emotional sphere as well seems to be deeply affected by selfimmunization dynamics so that the cognitive bubble – rather
than just epistemic – could define a characteristic framework
of human cognition.
Keywords: Cognitive bubbles; immunization; doubt; emotions; religion; abduction.

Introduction
Different fields of human reasoning are characterized by what
could be roughly indicated as epistemic or cognitive immunizations. A recent monograph has surveyed the areas, mostly
pathologic, in which a decoupling between effective knowledge and the feeling of knowing takes place (Burton, 2008):
our intent is to extend the investigation of such kind of decoupling to other, more common aspects of human cognition, and
point to a logical, epistemic and cognitive theoretic modeling
of how it functions.
We will analyze cognitive immunizations making use of
the Epistemic Bubble Thesis as suggested by Woods (Woods,
2005), expanded into a Cognitive Bubble thesis (section 1).
We will test the extendability of the cognitive bubbles to a
shared dimension instead of concentrating on the individual
level (section 2), then try to apply our conceptualization to
fields of human cognition in which immunization processes
seem frequent: the first presented case deals with moral reasoning (section 3), while the second with religion and belief
in supernatural agents (section 4).

The Epistemic Bubble
American philosopher Charles Sanders Peirce had pointed
out how belief formation rests on an emotional factor which
cannot be ignored: the irritation of doubt. Such irritation occurs whenever we are in need of knowing something we don’t
know, or trying to make sense of some new unexplained signs,
and so on. The basic concept of doubt can be considered as a
red line connecting the most primitive kind of pragmatic perplexities with the highest intellectual and philosophical attitudes. The cognitive irritation coming from doubt is the state
of cognition that prompts us to advance hypotheses and believe them in a wide range of situations: it happens when an
agent wonders about who or what produced that crackle she

just heard in the bush behind her, but also when she thinks
about how to improve the reception of the cellphone she just
bought, or when she keeps coming back to guessing what
caused the bruises on her neighbor’s forehead.1
In Peirce’s account, thought is an inferential activity, that
operates upon signs, whose output – belief – has the main
purpose of placating an irritated cognition: “[t]he action of
thought is excited by the irritation of doubt, and ceases when
belief is attained; so that the production of belief is the sole
function of thought” (Peirce, 1987, p. 261).
The Peircean perspective was further developed by logicians John Woods and Dov Gabbay, promoters of the agentbased approach to logics: what human reasoning is mostly
about is achieving cognitive targets, which are marked by
cognitive irritation. No matter the entity or complexity of
the target, human cognition is essentially a more or less advanced problem-solving activity: examples of cognitive targets are knowing whether it is a bear or a boar hiding in the
cave, or what powerful entity could have shaped that ridge
so that it looks like a human face, or which combination of
buttons, if pressed, can get our computer to run faster, but
higher theoretical targets can be considered as well. A belief
is what satisfies a cognitive target. The central issue is that
a cognitive agent is very likely to take any kind of belief for
knowledge: furthermore, Woods argues that belief can only
coincide with a first-person attribution of knowledge (Woods,
2005).
(Belief as knowledge ascription). Whenever it is true for
Y to say of X that X believes that P, it is also true that X
takes himself as knowing that P (Woods, 2005, p. 738).
Of course the basic philosophical assumption is that knowledge and belief do not share the same epistemic status: even
a true belief is different from knowledge insofar as knowledge presupposes the possibility of providing the statement
with sufficient, relevant reasons. That is, “[o]ne knows that P
only if one has at one’s disposal a case of requisite strength
to make for P”(Woods, 2005, p. 735).
Such distinction, that seems perfectly clear from a thirdperson perspective, is immaterial from the agent’s first-person
1 It is commonly debated whether Peirce’s definition of doubt
comprises only mundane matters or can be extended to higher theoretical fields. The authors of this paper endorse the second possibility.

3370

perspective. If we agree with Peirce’s intuition about the nature of thought, if follows that knowledge is by no means
required to placate cognitive irritation. The ideal model of
target-attainment would require one and only one epistemic
state to satisfy the cognitive target. Actually, from the realagent’s perspective, a poorer epistemic state can be embraced
as long as it fosters the feeling of having attained the target
by simply discharging (or placating) the original irritation.
Woods, by introducing the concept of epistemic bubble,
points out how, even though the satisfaction of the cognitive
quest is met by a positive final emotional appraisal (i.e. relief
from irritation), such a positive appraisal is hardly a symptomatic sign of the proper attainment of the target:
(Fugitivity of truth). [From a first person perspective]
truth is a fugitive property. That is, one can never attain
it without thinking that one has done so; but thinking
that one has attained it is not attaining it (Woods, 2005,
p. 746).
It is significant to observe how this fallacious inference
routinely performed by our cognitive systems is actually an
innate kind of abduction (Magnani, 2009), which could be
modeled as follows:

Cognitive-Epistemic Bubble Thesis and eventually investigate some of its social implications?
The Cognitive Bubble is clearly a consequence of our cognitive systems dealing with bounded information, lack of
time and limited computational capacity: still, another consequence of such limitations is Simon’s concept of docility, that
is “[...] the tendency to depend on suggestions, recommendations, persuasion, and information obtained through social
channels as a major basis for choice”. Thanks to docility,
humans can cope with their bound rationality and finite potentials by reducing the importance of first hand experience,
on the basis that “(a) social influences will generally give us
advice that is for our own good and (b) the information on
which this advice is based is far better than the information
we could gather independently”, thus relying on a more distributed concept of experience (Simon, 1993, p. 156).
Peirce considered three main strategies aimed at the fixation of belief: the method of tenacity, that of authority and
the method of science. Let us focus on the two first ones:
needless to say that the method of authority relies on a social
basis, but it can be argued that the method of tenacity as well
may benefit of a social ground, as we mean to show.
The instinctive dislike of an undecided state of mind, exaggerated into a vague dread of doubt, makes men cling
spasmodically to the views they already take. The man
feels that, if he only holds to his belief without wavering, it will be entirely satisfactory. Nor can it be denied
that a steady and immovable faith yields great peace of
mind. It may, indeed, give rise to inconveniences, as if a
man should resolutely continue to believe that fire would
not burn him, or that he would be eternally damned if he
received his ingesta otherwise than through a stomachpump. But then the man who adopts this method will
not allow that its inconveniences are greater than its advantages (Peirce, 1877).

• Premise 1: If I know target P then My irritation about P is
relieved;
• Premise 2: My irritation about P is relieved;
• Conclusion: I know target P
For an agent-like-us, knowing and thinking of knowing can
hardly be told one from the other, but they are clearly not the
same thing. This leads to the formulation of the Epistemic
Bubble Thesis:
When in an epistemic bubble, cognitive agents always
resolve the tension between their thinking that they
know P and their knowing P in favour of knowing that
P (p. 738) [. . . ] A cognitive agent X occupies and epistemic bubble precisely when he is unable to command
the distinction between his thinking that he knows P and
his knowing P (Woods, 2005, p. 740).
Woods is careful at stressing how this is a constitutive constraint of human beings, and not a matter of being more or
less intelligent or cognitively unfit. Such disposition can be
recognized theoretically and only in a hindsight dimension,
but an awareness of the Bubble Thesis can never be operationalized with the scope of avoiding further embubblements.
Considering the semi-transparency of the Bubble Thesis, and
the inherence of its object to every aspect of human inferential
activity, we shall from now on refer to it as cognitive bubble.

Cognitive Bubbles, the Fixation of Belief and its
Intersubjective Dimension
Woods’ account of our cognitive constraints concentrates on
individual, isolated agents: could it be possible to enrich the

Tenacity could be seen as strictly related to Woods’ embubblement. Our constitutive eagerness to take as true something that, in spite of being implausible, is able to calm our
cognitive irritation as something true would, results in our reluctancy to easily discard such a belief. It can be suggested
that not only this is what happens a from cognitive perspective: we also like and need this to happen, because no one
would be comfortable about spending her life deeply wondering about everything, in a state of perennial indecision.
According to this perspective, the Bubble Thesis can be
understood not necessarily as an impairment but rather as a
neuron-cognitive architecture benefitting our cognitive welfare. Some cases of pathological indecision may show the
impossibility of proper activation of an epistemic bubble: in
an evolutionary perspective, Haig speculatively connects the
presence of apories within human decision-making systems
with the different development (and fitness-related behavior)
of genes inherited from one’s mother or from one’s father,
so that as for certain matters, “[some effects] of maternal

3371

genes would be opposed by adaptations of paternal genes to
increase the suasive power of conscience” (Haig, 2005, p. 2122). On a different note, van Randenborgh, de Jong-Meyer,
and Hüffmeier bring experimental results suggesting how in
particular psychological states (such as dysphoria) processes
of rumination – “a phenomenon at the intersection of cognitive and affective processes” (p. 230) – may foster severe
indecision and less confidence in one’s hardly-reached decisions, triggering states of deeper depression (van Randenborgh et al., 2010): such results seem to avail the necessary
nature of the epistemic bubble as a protective mechanism in
human cognition.
The obstinacy-defense we just sketched out seems corroborated by the fact that, notwithstanding discrete difference in
individuals’ abilities, human cognitive systems are structured
and endowed in a roughly similar way. It is then possible to
notice how embubblement, in spite of being a characteristic
trait of individuals, can display mechanisms of mutual positive feedback favored by the social background: every agent’s
cognitive bubble is different and exclusive, but many bubbles
can show similar traits, and such similarities are reinforced
by their very presence.
Such a possibility of a common embubblement might help
shedding light upon a characteristic of many kinds of arguments, such as the religious ones. Philosopher Jennifer Faust
examined to what extent they manage to be persuasive (Faust,
2008). The problem with arguments about the existence, or
the non existence of supernatural beings, but also about differences between cults and confessions, or between political
ideologies, is that they often fail to persuade, that is to say,
the fail in being recognized as good arguments by the other
party.2
We can propose Faust’s account using Woods’ logical
modeling. If we consider parties X and Y:

• According to our initial definition, an agent knows P if and
only if he can provide a case of requisite strength to make
for P.
– From group X’s defining epistemic bubble B1, any case
supporting B2 cannot be accepted as endowed with the
requisite strength to sustain P2.
– From group Y’s defining epistemic bubble B2, any case
supporting B1 cannot be accepted as endowed with the
requisite strength to sustain P1.
Within each group, every agent is locked in his first-person
perspective and unaware of his occupying an epistemic bubble, but he can readily individuate the very same condition as
far as members of an opponent group are concerned, assessing it by a third-person perspective.
According to Faust, this is not the case of question-begging
theses: they do not assume what they aim at demonstrating as
an hypothesis, but rather they “beg the doxastic question”.
An argument is accepted as sound with respect to its conclusions only inasmuch one already believes the very conclusions: instead of persuading the opposite party (that is, those
who do not already believe in the conclusion), dialectic confrontation between differently configured cognitive bubbles
produces escalating irritation.
One has little difficulty to imagine such a situation if she
considers religious, ethical or political issues. Nevertheless,
particular fields of scientific research, often with a high social
impact, seem to be however prone to develop mechanisms
akin to religion, such as “begging the doxastic question”,
or displaying incommunicability between opposing opinions:
for instance nuclear energy, animal research and experimentation, genetically modified organisms.

Moral Bubbles and Their Collective
Implementation in Ideologies

• Agent x and his peers occupy an epistemic bubble B1 with
respect to matter P.
– Within the epistemic bubble, Agent x knows that P1, as
his feeling of knowing is activated by belief p1.
– Agent x is unable to command the distinction between
his knowing that P1 and his thinking of knowing that
P1.
• Agent y and his peers occupy an epistemic bubble B2 with
respect to matter P.
– Within the epistemic bubble, Agent y knows that P2, as
his feeling of knowing is activated by belief p2.
– Agent y is unable to command the distinction between
his knowing that P2 and his thinking of knowing that
P2.

In the precedent sections we spelled out the Bubble Thesis
and some of the cognitive dynamics to which this modeling
can be applied. We shall now attempt, more specifically, to
extend the application of Bubble Thesis to one of the most
characteristic fields of human cognition, that is moral reasoning, and apply the definition of a Moral Bubble introduced in
(Magnani, 2011).
The moral embubblement would in fact be homomorphic
to the epistemic one: it is the result of impossibility of knowledge as relevant case-making and the result of a strategic cognitive need to reduce doubt and uncertainty as much as possible. Its very structure reflects the self-immunization postulated in Woods’ Bubble Thesis.

2 Epistemological and folk-epistemological considerations about
an agent’s appraisal of her own knowledge cannot be fully separated from the argumentative and rhetorical sphere (Hardy-Vallée &
Dubreuil, 2010).

3372

(Immunization) Although a cognitive agent may well be
aware of the Bubble Thesis and may accept it as true,
the phenomenological structure of cognitive states precludes such awareness as a concomitant feature of our
general cognitive awareness (Woods, 2005, p. 742).

Being constitutively and easily unaware of our errors is
very often bound with the self-conviction that we are not at all
aggressive in our performed argumentations. Unawareness of
our error is often accompanied by unawareness of the deceptive/aggressive character of our speeches (and behaviors).
It is important to notice how our Moral Bubble hypothesis would provide a cognitive account, and not yet another
moral one, to the problem of moral violence and its opaqueness, and particularly to a person’s self-immunization to her
own moral violence (Magnani, 2011). Within the moral bubble, the moral agent perceives his own moral principles as a
given, just as much as a cognitive agents takes his beliefs as
positive, genuine truth. We think we know the genuineness of
our beliefs but actually we believe them just out of tenacity,
customs and authority. An attack on our religious, moral or
political beliefs triggers an immediate violent response, but
not only of a dialectical kind: an overly zealous questioning
of beliefs may hit on the hollow foundation on which they
stand, thus threatening to pop the bubble. Cognitive bubbles
are strategically vital to beings-like-us: a threat to our embubbled and embubbling beliefs is a direct, major threat to
our state of cognitive quiet.
In our moral bubble hypothesis, the agent is minimally
aware of his violence only as far as the dialectic level is concerned and she agrees to strike back on the same argument:
this can happen in a polite and controlled way, but it is only
the tip of the iceberg. The majority of the violent response
is not a defense of the content of the questioned beliefs, but
of the cognitive tranquillity that those beliefs allow, within
the moral embubblement. As stated by Peirce “the instinctive dislike of an undecided state of mind, exaggerated into
a vague dread of doubt, makes men cling spasmodically to
the views they already take”(Peirce, 1877). Once a moral belief has been corrupted by doubt, the deployment of a vast
amount of cognitive and emotional resources is required: the
purpose is to individuate another fitting belief that can restore
the previous state of mental welfare.3 Such violent outburst
is not perceived by the agent who performs it, because it is
obliterated by the unquestioned conviction of the righteousness of her own principles. That is why we are extremely
aware of other agents’ violence (because they clash with our
own bubble) but we are virtually immunized to our own. Furthermore, such description applies to “relativists” or, in a religious framework, to more or less “militant” atheists: willynilly, positions like relativism and tolerance presume as vast
an assumption of beliefs as that of any positive credo. And
the reason for this is that any moral position, as any theological one, is necessarily “doxastic”: no relevant case can
be provided to sustain the belief in God’s existence, just as
no case of the same nature can be presented to prove God’s
3 Coherently

with the view we are putting forward, Woods suggests that a revision of one’s epistemic bubble is de facto impossible:
one could only change her bubble with another, without actually
performing a belief revision: that is possible only for institutional
agents (i.e. science) which able to transcend the individual embubbled perspective (Woods, 2005).

non-existence. Similarly, any moral of tolerance, or even an
amoral position, is ultimately as moral as any other positive
one, thus prone to the dynamics of embubblement and selfimmunization to one’s own violent response to contrasting
positions, with the scope of reducing as much as possible the
agent’s distress caused by epidemic doubt and irritation.
Within the moral bubble, the moral agent can only perceive
his own moral principles as a given, just as much as a cognitive agents takes his beliefs as positive, genuine truth. Ideologies project a clear coalition level, in which each embubbled
individual assures and corroborates the beliefs of his fellows.
The whole ideology-projected group becomes blind to their
own violence and are able to respond to instances of doubt
with the synchronism of one organism and the power of several.
In extremis, should it be impossible to suppress the corrupting belief, the solution rests in the (often physical but sometimes metaphorical) suppression of the corrupted believer: if
violence perpetrated outside of the group does not succeed in
its scope, it can target one of weakest members of the group
itself, labelled as a deviant or a traitor, as contended by Bandura (1999).
As a matter of fact, it is interesting to remember how the
epistemic bubble is already a cognitive structure aimed at
the reduction of irritation caused by doubt: consequently,
any willing or unintentional behavior that clashes with one
agent’s bubble originates a negative emotional appraisal, that
can sublimate in the denial of factual evidence4 contrasting
with the bubble. Over and above that, when the embubblement concerns several individuals united in a single group,
the effect of any behavior, perceived as attempting to intrusively pop the bubble, can spark in human agents a particularly violent reaction, that can go beyond a cognitive and
dialectical violence.
It is worth noticing how such violent consequences of common embubblement can be easily spotted in dynamics like religion, or politics, and less in science: this is not to say that
in science they are totally absent, but the possibility of casemaking, of displaying knowledge provided with better epistemic strength and factual experiences to sustain it, reduces
the need for a heavy cognitive bubble; conversely, whenever
cornered, religion and politics have to recur to the ultimate
weapon of morals, as the strategy of case-making is out of
their reach: in fact, requiring believers to provide cases, reasons for their beliefs is usually perceived by the very believers
as morally evil.
It can be argued that, even if we accept that religious belief display an intrinsically cognitive-perceptional origin and
not a moral one (Bertolotti & Magnani, 2010), their unquestionable moral relevance for beings-like-us allows us to label it as a “moral bubble”. Religious beliefs most often
enclose more or less explicit moral prescriptions, templates
4 Denial can attend a perceptive and hence, unconscious level.
Against, it’s not necessarily the case of short-mindedness or stubborn obstinacy.

3373

(Magnani, 2007) or guidelines according to which a believer
should behave. Those moral beliefs, shared by the majority
of members of the community, can seldom benefit of any relevant epistemic foundation, but on the other hand they seem
perfectly sound to those who practice them, and appear to regulate the life of the community: such positive emotional appraisal subtly persuades agents about the truthfulness of their
beliefs.
Consider ideology: it is something available “out there”,
stored in external devices and supports (other people, books,
media, etc.) of a given social collective. People readily pick
up external ideological “tools” of this kind, then re-represent
them internally. The signaling consisting in swastikas, red
stars, parades, styles of speech and even clothing fashions
does not only posses a propagandistic meaning, but it mostly
enforces and empowers those who already believe in it. The
historical topos about the difference between an army and an
armed mob should be clarifying: it is the army ideology that
allows its superiority. It can be argued that even the military
training is only afforded by the presence of a distributed ideology embedded in signs, flags, words, hierarchies and, last
but not least, uniforms: the very term uniform is significative.
The uniform is the same for everyone, making every subject
feel similar, both exteriorly and psychologically equal to the
others (Bollas, 1993).
That stated, we can further analyze this dimension that
characterizes the moral bubble: ideologies rely on the distributed dimension of moral bubbles and on the mutual reinforcement of moral beliefs. Uniformed individuals (the oxymoron is not intentional but very significative), each in their
own individual moral bubble, act together and combine their
roughly similar moral belief into a collective moral bubble,
which dramatically empowers its ordinary mechanisms. This
collective bubble aims at defusing systematically all potential
doubts, adding the action of one individual upon the other to
the self-immunization with respect to violence, typical of the
moral bubble. To sum it up quite briefly, it could be suggested
that external (and therefore distributed) socio-cognitive structures are in fact nothing but a mirroring distribution of cognitive structures such as the embubblements we have been dealing with so far: could ideologies, and many other collective
phenomena, be indicated as eco-cognitive embubblements?

The Relationship between Cognitive Bubbles
and Cognitive Firewalls: the Case of Religion
In this final section of our paper, we mean to explore whether
the Bubble Thesis can be applied to another typical dimension of human cognition: its propensity to hold and maintain
beliefs in supernatural agency. Our contention is that such an
application is possible insofar as religion seems characterized
by a selective switching of certain beliefs with the varying of
their application field.
Considering religion, we can witness how magic supernatural concepts – once they become part of the cultural patrimony of a group – come to constitute its religion by crystal-

lizing into a set of more or less fixed narratives (Bertolotti &
Magnani, 2010). These narratives play a role in the society
as far as they support norms and commitments, which partially explains the persistent success of religion (Boyer, 2001)
(Wilson, 2002) (Atran, 2005) (Bulbulia, 2009).
For religion to be effective, though, believers are expected
to sincerely believe and commit themselves to the positive ontological and moral core of their credo. The problem is that
a positive commitment to ontological oddities such as supernatural beings, in spite of the social advantages, can be rather
dangerous. Atran stresses how this commitment to counterfactual entities should have proved particularly maladaptive
for mankind: “[. . . ] to take what is materially false to be true
(e.g. people think and laugh and cry and hurt and have sex
after they die and their body disintegrate) and to take what
is materially true to be false (e.g., people just die and disintegrate and that’s that) does not appear to be a reasonable
evolutionary strategy” (Atran, 2005, chapter 1). The key to
solve this issue seems to be that humans usually know when
to believe (and behave) as if counterfactual entities really belonged to their ecologies and when to suspend this belief. As
for this matter, Bulbulia claims that religious beliefs are characterized by a mental R IMAGINE marker, thus illustrated:
R IMAGINE [Zugroo is

Lord Creator]

practical inference: NOT TRUE [Zugroo is Lord Creator]
workspace inference: CERTAINLY TRUE [Zugroo is
Lord Creator] (Bulbulia, 2009, p. 63).
The IMAGINE marker allows us to introduce a further kind
of cognitive embubblement, that is the Religious Bubble. If
the simple cognitive bubble had an illusional dimension, the
religious bubble has a necessary self-deceptive dimension,
which acts to reinforce the ontological commitment onto the
belief itself, but simultaneously it defuses the practical inferences about our ecology, enhancing the moral ones.
Further studies should be carried on about this subject, still
we mean to suggest that the solution to this conflict could
have been coupled with the confinement of the supernatural to the dimension of the holy. Thus religion maximized
the benefits (for the group) of (individual) commitment to supernatural agents reducing the ecological risks caused by an
adoption of magical thinking as a strong cognitive bubble.
The relegation of what is holy to a well-defined dimension of
social life, a delineation that is conveyed through education
as well, is reflected in the rise of specific cognitive firewalls5
that prevent magical-supernatural concepts and inferences to
5 The notion of “cognitive firewall” belongs to a computational
representation of the mind: Cosmides and Tooby define them as
“computational methods for managing the threat posed by false, unreliable, obsolete, out-of-context, deceptive, or scope-violating representations. Cognitive firewalls - systems of representational quarantine and error correction - have evolved for this purpose. They are,
no doubt, far from perfect. But without them, our form of mentality
would not be possible” (Cosmides & Tooby, 2000, p. 105).

3374

flood the areas of our mind-brain system dedicated to ecological survival.
Objects of belief in supernatural display an inferential richness, i.e. they “invite individual and collective elaboration”
(Barrett & Lanman, 2008, p. 115), so they can be easily
shared within a community. The community cannot warrant for the religious bubble as much as it does for the moral
bubble: moral bubbles rest entirely on a group dimension,
while the cognitive firewalls preventing the overflow of religious beliefs seem to evolve differently on an individual base.
As a matter of fact, people display different strength as for
cognitive firewalls, and even present-day religious believers
may belong to a magic dimension - that is, deprived of any
cognitive firewall. It must be pointed out that, even if such
individuals remain in an ancestral magic dimension as for
themselves, for the whole religious group they act as a further costly commitment (Atran, 2005), further enforcing the
beliefs of the rest of the groups, but without affecting their
individual way of coping with ecological material reality.

Conclusion
In this paper we have analyzed a series of rational domains
in which cognitive and epistemic immunizations are fundamental. We challenged the original definition of Epistemic
Bubble, in an attempt to shape a broader concept that we
defined Cognitive Bubble, to highlight its fundamental presence in most kinds of human cognitive processes. We described how, consistently with other claims about constraints
displayed by human rationality, the cognitive bubble is not a
phenomenon concerning only isolated individuals but can instead be augmented by mechanisms of positive feedback so
to form a kind of collective embubblement, which clearly appears in the rhetorical dimension characterizing social interactions. Such a theoretical apparatus could be applied to other
dimensions of human reasoning in which immunizations and
selective switching of acquired knowledge seem to play a crucial role: moral reasoning and religion. As for the former, the
Moral Bubble hypotheses provides cognitive and emotional
arguments for the (hard to perceive yet irrefutable) doxastic
nature of moral stances, and for the opacity of those violent
behaviors that moral beliefs trigger so easily; whereas, as for
the latter, the presence of a Religious Bubble can be hypothesized to provide an account of the undying presence of counterfactual – and yet relatively harmless – beliefs concerning
supernatural agents.

References
Atran, S. (2005). In Gods We Trust: The Evolutionary Landscape of Religion. Cambridge: Oxford University Press.
Bandura, A. (1999). Moral disengagement in the perpetration of inhumanities. Personality and Social Psychology
Review, 3, 193–209.
Barrett, J. L., & Lanman, J. A. (2008). The science of religious beliefs. Religion, 38, 109–124.
Bertolotti, T., & Magnani, L. (2010). The role of agency
detection in the invention of supernatural beings: an ab-

ductive approach. In L. Magnani, W. Carnielli, & C. Pizzi
(Eds.), Model-Based Reasoning in Science and Technology.
Abduction, Logic, and Computational Discovery (pp. 195–
213). Heidelberg/Berlin: Springer.
Bollas, C. (1993). Being a Character. Psychoanalysis and
Self Experience [1992]. London: Routledge.
Boyer, P. (2001). Religion Explained. London: Vintage U.K.
Random House.
Bulbulia, J. (2009). Religiosity as mental time-travel. In
J. Schloss & M. J. Murray (Eds.), The Believing Primate
(pp. 44–75). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Burton, R. A. (2008). On Being Certain. New York: St.
Martin’s Press.
Cosmides, L., & Tooby, J. (2000). Consider the source: the
evolution of adaptations for decoupling and metarepresentation. In D. Sperber (Ed.), Metarepresentations: A Multidisciplinary Perspective (pp. 53–115). Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Faust, J. (2008). Can religious arguments persuade? International Journal for Philosophy of Religion, 63, 71–86.
Haig, D. (2005). Intrapersonal conflict. In M. Jones &
A. C. Fabiam (Eds.), Conflict (pp. 8–22). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Hardy-Vallée, B., & Dubreuil, B. (2010). Folk Epistemology
as Normative Social Cognition. Review of Philosophy and
Psychology, 1, 483–498.
Magnani, L. (2007). Morality in a Technological World.
Knowledge as Duty. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Magnani, L. (2009). Abductive Cognition: The Epistemological and Eco-Cognitive Dimensions of Hypothetical Reasoning. Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer.
Magnani, L. (2011). Understanding Violence. Morality, Religion, and Violence Intertwined: a Philosophical Stance.
Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer. (Forthcoming)
Peirce, C. S. (1877). The fixation of belief. Popular Science
Monthly, 12, 1–15.
Peirce, C. S. (1987). Historical Perspectives on Peirce’s
Logic of Science: a History of Science. Berlin: Mouton.
(vols. I-II, edited by C. Eisele.)
Simon, H. (1993). Altruism and economics. The American
Economic Review, 83(2), 156–161.
van Randenborgh, A., de Jong-Meyer, R., & Hüffmeier, J.
(2010). Rumination fosters indecision in dysphoria. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 66(3), 229–248.
Wilson, D. S. (2002). Darwin’s Cathedral. Chicago and
London: Chicago University Press.
Woods, J. (2005). Epistemic bubbles. In S. Artemov, H. Barringer, A. Garcez, L. Lamb, & J. Woods (Eds.), We Will
Show Them: Essays in Honour of Dov Gabbay (Volume II)
(pp. 731–774). London: College Publications.

3375

