UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cognitive processes underlying the continuity effect in spatial reasoning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3743f7gc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Nejasmic, Jelica
Krumnack, Antje
Bucher, Leandra
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cognitive processes underlying the continuity effect in spatial reasoning
Jelica Nejasmic (jelica.nejasmic@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Antje Krumnack (antje.krumnack@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Leandra Bucher (leandra.bucher@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Markus Knauff (markus.knauff@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Justus-Liebig University, Experimental Psychology and Cognitive Science, Otto-Behaghel-Str. 10F,
35394 Giessen, Germany

Abstract
It is assumed that spatial reasoning about previously obtained
information that describe relations between two or more
objects is based on the construction and inspection of mental
models. The paper mainly focuses on the question how
humans integrate spatial information that initially appeared
not to be linked. Two experiments investigated the
construction processes of spatial mental models and the
integration of additional information into existing models.
The results show that combining information that are initially
not related to one another takes longer and leads to more
errors. Then moreover, information presented in a continuous
and a semi-continuous order was integrated sequentially,
whereas information presented in a discontinuous order was
first integrated sequentially into one temporary model and if
necessary subsequently revised.
Keywords: Spatial reasoning; mental models; belief revision;
spatial cognition; spatial relations

Introduction
Imagine the following situation: a new member of staff joins
the company and colleague A tells him: “my office is to the
right of Leo´s office”, and colleague B tells him: “my office
is to the left of Bill´s office”. At first sight, it looks like
these two statements have nothing to do with one another.
And then he gets to know colleague C who tells him: “Bill´s
office is to the left of Leo´s office”. With this additional
information it is possible to arrange the offices. Reasoning
with non-spatial and spatial relations is an important
everyday task. The processes underlying these abilities are
not fully understood. In the following we review some
crucial aspects of the theoretical assumptions concerning
spatial reasoning and present empirical evidence how
humans integrate successively presented spatial information
into coherent spatial representations.

use the meaning of assertions and general knowledge to
construct single models of possibilities compatible with
these assertions (Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991; Polk &
Newell, 1995; Goodwin & Johnson-Laird, 2005;). This
means that people use the linguistic description of a
situation for constructing an integrated representation by
translating the given information into a mental model. These
integrated representations constitute models in the strict
logical sense and represent in “small scale” how “reality”
could be (Craik, 1943).
According to the mental model theory spatial reasoning
relies on the construction and inspection of mental models
(e.g. Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991; Knauff, Rauh, &
Schlieder 1995; Vandierendonck & de Vooght, 1997;
Knauff, Rauh, Schlieder, & Strube, 1998; Schaeken,
Girotto, & Johnson-Laird, 1998; Ragni, Knauff, & Nebel,
2005; Rauh, Hagen, Kuss, Knauff, Schlieder, & Strube,
2005).
Knauff et al. (1998) have specified three distinct phases
for this special case of reasoning: A construction phase,
during that reasoners construct a mental model, reflecting
the information of the premises, an inspection phase, during
which the model is inspected for implicit information of the
premises, and a variation phase, during which alternative
models are constructed and investigated concerning their
compatibility with the information given by the premises. If
necessary the third phase results into falsification of the
preliminary mental model, constructed during the first
phase. The following is intended to clarify some details
about the construction processes of integrated spatial mental
models.

Construction processes of integrated spatial mental
models
Consider the following spatial description:

Theoretical approaches of spatial reasoning

1.

The apple is to the left of the peach.

Studies have shown that spatial reasoning most likely
relies on spatial representations which reasoners construct in
some cognitive space. This is best accounted for by the
mental model theory (MMT) which postulates that reasoners

2.

The peach is to the left of the kiwi.

3.

The kiwi is to the left of the mango.

1127

These statements are called premises and such a
determinate description, using a transitive spatial relation,
allows us to create a linear order of the objects named in the
premises like apple – peach – kiwi – mango. With such a
linear order we can also draw conclusions consisting of
information not explicitly given in the premises.
Like in our example, also known as a four-term series
problem (4ts-problem), three premises A r1 B, B r2 C and C
r3 D are given with a spatial relation r, like “left of” or
“right of”. The premises can be presented in a continuous (A
r1 B, B r2 C, C r3 D), a semi-continuous (B r2 C, C r3 D, A r1
B) and a discontinuous order (C r3 D, A r1 B, B r2 C) (Knauff
et al., 1998). The first two premises presented in a
continuous as well as in a semi-continuous order are linked
by a middle term which means that one object from the first
premise appears in the second premise and so it is possible
to integrate the information sequentially. Only the third
premise differentiates between these conditions. In a
continuous order one object in the third premise appears
from the second premise, whereby in a semi-continuous
order the third premise is linked to the first premise. In
contrast, the second premise presented in a discontinuous
order is quite independent of the first premise. Only with the
information from the third premise it is possible to integrate
all given information.
The outcome of processing these premises are integrated
representations in the sense of a mental model and it is
easier to construct such a mental model with premises
presented in continuous or semi-continuous orders, than in a
discontinuous order (Ehrlich & Johnson-Laird, 1982;
Knauff et al., 1998). This is also known as the continuity
effect, which describes that individuals make more correct
inferences, recall the premises better, draw more correct
diagrams, are faster when reading the descriptions and
drawing inferences when the information are presented in a
continuous or semi-continuous order rather than when
presented in a discontinuous order (Evans, Newstead, &
Byrne, 1993). So in the case of model construction
complexity is modulated by the order in which the premises
are presented, and the question is how humans deal with
information presented in a discontinuous order which cannot
be integrated sequentially (Evans, Newstead, & Byrne,
1993).
To explain the continuity effect it is generally assumed
that a reasoner, given such a determinate 4ts-problem in a
discontinuous order, will create a model from the first
premise, another model from the second premise and then
integrate those two models into a single model. This implies
that reasoners keep these two models separately in working
memory and need more time and cognitive effort to create
an integrated model. In contrast, in the continuous and semicontinuous order it is possible to integrate the information
of the first two premises continuously from the beginning,
because of the direct link between premise one and premise
two (Ehrlich & Johnson-Laird, 1982; Knauff et al., 1998).
On the other hand, in cases of indeterminate descriptions,
i.e. when more than one model can be constructed from the

information given by the description, Knauff et al. (1995),
Rauh, Schlieder, & Knauff (1997), Ragni et al. (2005), and
Rauh et al. (2005) provided evidence that reasoners deal
with ambiguous descriptions, by focusing on only a subset
of possible models and often just a single one.
Given this tendency to construct a single model that does
not comprise all the possible settings it seems plausible that
human reasoners would try to create a single model in other
situations as well even if the situation cannot be condensed
in a single valid model. This could happen during the
construction phase of a discontinuous problem, if the
information of the second premise is integrated into the
model constructed from the first premise. Before we look at
this special case of spatial model construction, we first want
to investigate the continuity effect.
As said above, there are some evidences that a
construction of a mental model is much slower and less
reliable when based on premises presented in a
discontinuous premise order compared to premises
presented in a continuous or semi-continuous order (Ehrlich
& Johnson-Laird, 1982; Knauff et al., 1998). In a pre-study
we focus mainly on the continuity effect and expect to
replicate these results known from previous studies. In the
main experiment we want to go a step further and we want
to focus more strongly on the construction process based on
descriptions with two partial mental models.

Pre-Study
Method
Participants.
25 participants (4 male; age: M = 22.2; SD = 2.5) all
students (among them 4 students of psychology) from the
University of Giessen, served as paid participants and gave
written informed consent to participation. The data from
five participants were excluded from the analysis due an
extreme number of errors (n = 2) or extremely long reading
times (n = 3). Subjects were tested individually and were
paid at a rate of 8 Euro per hour. The experiment took
approximately 30 – 45 min.
Materials, Procedure, and Design.
72 determinate 4ts-problems using only the relation “left of”
were presented randomly either in a continuous, semicontinuous, or discontinuous order. Three premises
(presented sequentially in a self-paced manner) described a
one-dimensional linear order of four (small, equal-sized,
disyllabic-termed) objects, belonging to either one out of
three categories (tools, fruits or vegetables) using the
relations. Participants were introduced to imagine the
arrangement of the objects named in the premises.
Subsequently to premise presentation participants were
instructed to define the correct arrangement by typing the
initial letters of the presented objects using the computer
keyboard. After the last letter has been entered the trial
finished automatically and the next trial started manually by

1128

pressing the enter-button. Premise reading times (respective
time taken from text onset to button press calling up the
next premise) as well as response times (time from request
onset to entering the last letter) and the numbers of correct
responses were recorded.
Four practise trials (not analysed) preceded the
experimental trials. All stimuli were generated and
presented using Superlab 4.0 (Cedrus Corporation, San
Pedro, CA, 1999) on a standard personal computer with a
19`` monitor.

Results
To examine whether reading times of the first, second and
third premises are contingent upon different premise orders
(“continuous order” vs. “semi-continuous order” vs.
“discontinuous order”), an ANOVA with the factors
premise number (first premise, second premise, third
premise) and premise order (continuous order, semicontinuous order, discontinuous order), was conducted.
Level of significance was 5%.
ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of premise
number [F(2, 38) = 9.99; p < .01; ƞ2 = .34], a significant
main effect of premise order [F(2, 38) = 13.44; p < .01; ƞ2 =
.41] and a significant interaction premise number × premise
order [F(4, 76) = 10.73; p < .01; ƞ2 = .36]. Based on results
known from previous studies we expect to replicate the
continuity effect, which is described above, and so we are
mainly interested in the significant interaction at this point.
(Ehrlich & Johnson-Laird, 1982; Knauff et al., 1998).
Premise reading times depending on the premise order
were compared, using t-tests. Participants needed significant
more time for reading second premises presented in a
discontinuous order (M = 4.20 s; SD = 1.46) compared to
second premises presented in continuous (M = 2.99s; SD =
0.91; t(19) = -4.26; p < .001) or semi-continuous orders (M
= 3.03s; SD = 1.64; t(19) = -2.99; p < .01). There was no
difference between the “continuous” and “semi-continuous”
premise orders (t(19) = -.16; p = .876).
By comparison of reading times of the third premises
results show that participants needed significant more time
for reading third premises presented in a discontinuous
order (M = 8.50 s; SD = 6.15) than for premises presented in
a in a continuous order (M = 3.76 s; SD = 1.25; t(19) = 3.75; p < .01) as well as for premises presented in a semicontinuous order (M = 4.60s; SD = 1.67; t(19) = -3.26; p <
.01). Equally there was a significant difference of reading
times of third premises presented in a semi-continuous order
compared to premises presented in a continuous order (t(19)
= -3.13; p < .01) (see Fig. 1). There was no difference
between reading times of first premises (all ps > .05).

Figure 1. Mean reading times for the three premises
depending on the premise order.
Percentages of correct responses and respective response
times depending on the premise order were compared
calculating separate ANOVAs. Level of significance was
5%. ANOVAs revealed a significant difference for
percentages of correct responses [F(2, 38) = 9.9; p < .001;
ƞ2 = .34] and response times [F(2, 30) = 8.42; p < .01; ƞ2 =
.36].
Participants defined the correct arrangement of objects in
58.5% (SD = 37.3) when the premises were presented in
discontinuous orders. Compared to the other premise orders
these results differ significantly (continuous order: M = 91.7
%; SD = 6.5; t(19) = 3.99; p < .01; semi-continuous order:
M = 79.2 %; SD = 28.4; t(19) = 2.8; p < .05). In contrast to
this, percentages of correct responses based on the
continuous and semi-continuous order did not differ
significantly (t(19) = 1.83; p = .082).
Responses depending on the premise order “semicontinuous” (M = 1.01 s; SD = 0.31) took significantly less
time compared to responses depending on the premise
orders “continuous” (M = 1.17 s; SD = 0.48; t(17) = 2.84; p
< .05) and the premise orders “discontinuous” (M = 1.24s;
SD = 0,44; t(15) = -3.87; p < .01). Response times based on
continuous order compared to discontinuous order did not
differ significantly (t(17) = -1.45; p = .17).

Hypotheses about construction processes for spatial
mental models
Results from the pre-study support the assumption from
previous studies (Ehrlich & Johnson-Laird, 1982; Knauff et
al., 1998) that processing information which are not related
to one another takes longer and leads to more errors.
Nevertheless it is not clear how humans process such
descriptions and whether they hold the information

1129

separately e.g. in two separate models or in one temporary
model. To investigate this construction process we
conducted the main experiment and present two possibilities
how models could be constructed:
1.

Information of the first two premises is held
separately (and integrated into one model by
information provided by the third premise).

2.

Information is integrated into one temporary model
(that is revised according to the information provided
by the third premise, if necessary).

To test which principle (1 or 2) is applied, we presented
two types of similar problems based on either discontinuous
(C r3 D, A r1 B, B r2 C) or quasi-discontinuous (C r3 D, A r1
B, D r2 A) premise orders. A discontinuous premise order as
well as a quasi-discontinuous premise order implicates that
the first two premises are not linked by a middle term.
Up to this point a problem presented in a quasidiscontinuous order is similar to a problem presented in a
discontinuous order. The difference between these two
conditions becomes evident in the third premise. In contrast
to the discontinuous premise order the third premise
presented in a quasi-discontinuous order consists of the last
term of the first premise and the first term of the second
premise. In contrast, the third premise presented in a
discontinuous order consists of the last term of the second
premise and the first term of the first premise. Thus, both
spatial descriptions result in different arrangements (C – D –
A – B for the quasi-discontinuous order and A – B – C – D
for the discontinuous order).
As already mentioned before, it is assumed that humans
keep two models separately in working memory when
information are not related to one another and create an
integrated model afterwards (Ehrlich & Johnson-Laird,
1982; Knauff et al., 1998). However, there are also
indications that reasoners deal with ambiguous descriptions
by focusing on only a subset of possible models and often
just a single one (Knauff et al.,1995; Rauh et al., 1997;
Ragni et al., 2005; Rauh et al., 2005). For the case that
reasoners tend to construct one temporary model based on
discontinuous descriptions, it is not clear in which way the
information of the second premise will be integrated into the
model constructed from the first premise. But since the
reasoner does not have any information where to integrate
the new information, he will have to guess. For example, the
information from the second premise could be integrated
either to the left or to the right of the partial model
constructed from the first premise.
For the construction process there is evidence that
relations are integrated either into a vertical or horizontal
linear order (De Soto, London, & Handel, 1965;
Huttenlocher, 1968) and that the left end of this linear
spatial representation is the preferred starting point resulting
in a working direction from left to right, reflecting the
cultural bias to work in the same direction as reading and

writing (Chan & Bergen, 2005; Spalek & Hammad, 2005).
This would suggest, that reasoners would preferably
construct C – D – A – B as a temporary model for both
discontinuous and quasi-discontinuous problems. For quasidiscontinuous problems this model can be confirmed when
reading the third premise while for discontinuous problems
it needs to be revised.
So we expect different results based on the principles
applied, regarding reading times for the third premises and
the frequency of mistakes:
- If a reasoner pursues principle (1) the model
construction for discontinuous and quasidiscontinuous problems should take the same time
and additionally there should be no difference
regarding the frequency of mistakes.
- If a reasoner pursues principle (2) when reading the
third premise he can then either confirm the
temporary constructed order, in case of trials of the
quasi-discontinuous condition, or he has to revise
the temporary model (as it is the case with
discontinuous premise orders). This implies that
quasi-discontinuous trials, will take considerably
less time than discontinuous trials.

Main experiment
Method
Participants.
21 participants (3 male; age: M = 23.9; SD = 2.8) all
students (among them 6 students of psychology) from the
University of Giessen, served as paid participants and gave
written informed consent to participation. The data from
four participants were excluded from the analysis due an
extreme number of errors. Subjects were tested individually
and were paid at a rate of 8 Euro per hour. The experiment
took approximately 30 – 45 min.
Materials, Procedure, and Design.
32 determinate 4ts-problems were presented randomly in a
quasi-discontinuous or discontinuous order. Three premises
(presented sequentially in a self-paced manner) described a
one-dimensional linear order of four (small, equal-sized,
disyllabic-termed) objects, belonging to either one out of
three categories (tools, fruits or vegetables) using the
relations “left of” and “right of”. Participants were
introduced to imagine the arrangement of the objects named
in the premises.
Subsequently to premise presentation participants were
instructed to define the correct arrangement by typing the
initial letters of the presented objects using the computer
keyboard. After the last letter has been entered the trial
finished automatically and the next trial started manually by
pressing the enter-button. Premise reading times (respective
time taken from text onset to button press calling up the
next premise) as well as response times (time from request

1130

onset to entering the last letter) and the numbers of correct
responses were recorded.
Four practise trials (not analysed) preceded the
experimental trials. All stimuli were generated and
presented using Superlab 4.0 (Cedrus Corporation, San
Pedro, CA, 1999) on a standard personal computer with a
19`` monitor.

Results
To examine whether reading times of the first, second and
third premises are contingent upon different premise orders
(“quasi- discontinuous order” vs. “discontinuous order”), an
ANOVA with the factors premise number (first premise,
second premise, third premise) and premise order (quasidiscontinuous, discontinuous) was conducted. Level of
significance was 5%.
ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of premise
number [F(2, 40) = 26.5; p < .001; ƞ2 = .57], a significant
interaction premise number × premise order [F(2, 40) =
17.3; p < .001; ƞ2 = .46], and no significant difference
between premise orders [F(1, 20) = 3.5; p = .076 ƞ2 = .15].
Premise reading times depending on the premise number
and premise order were compared, using t-tests. Participants
needed more time for reading third premises presented in
discontinuous order (M = 9.20 s; SD = 3.44) compared to
third premises presented in quasi-discontinuous order (M =
7.24 s; SD = 2.61; t(20) = -3.76; p < .01) (see Fig 2.). There
was no difference neither of reading times of first premises
nor of reading times of second premises depending on the
premise orders (all ps > .07).
Regardless of the premise order participants needed more
time for reading third premises (M = 8.22 s; SD = 3.17) than
for reading first premises (M = 5.18 s; SD = 1.73; t(41) = 6.5; p < .001) as well as for reading second premises (M =
4.98s; SD = 1.92; t(41) = -6.84; p < .001). There was no
difference of reading times of first premises compared to
reading times of second premises (t(41) = 0.9; p = .38).

Figure 2. Mean reading times for the three premises
depending on the premise order.

Percentages of correct responses depending on the
premise orders and respective response times were
compared calculating separate ANOVAs. Level of
significance was 5%. In contrast to response times ANOVA
for percentages of correct responses revealed a significant
difference [F(1, 20) = 6.2; p < .05; ƞ2 = .24]. Based on the
information provided by the premises presented in quasidiscontinuous orders participants defined the correct
arrangement of objects in 76.8% (SD = 25.3). In contrast to
this, participants defined the correct arrangement of objects
in 63.7% (SD = 30.1) when the premises were presented in
discontinuous orders.

General discussion
Construction of spatial mental models from premises is
influenced by various factors. Our study focused mainly on
the question how spatial mental models are created
especially with respect to discontinuous information. In the
pre-study we support previous findings regarding the
continuity effect. The results of our experiment add to the
body of evidence that dealing with information presented in
a discontinuous order is more difficult than dealing with
information presented in a continuous or semi-continuous
order. So far it was hypothesised that the reason for these
differences lies in the two partial models which have to be
held separately in memory and could not be integrated
before the third premise was presented. To test this we
conducted a subsequent experiment and we developed
contrasting hypotheses which set a construction process
based on two partial models against a construction process
based on one temporary model.
The results from the main experiment suggest that
different processes are involved when constructing mental
models from discontinuous and quasi-discontinuous
problems and that mental models are easier to construct
from
quasi-discontinuous
problems
than
from
discontinuous.
Considering the assumption that humans deal with
discontinuous information by creating two independent
partial models it is reasonable to assume that it would be
easier to process the third premise of the discontinuous
order compared to the third premise of the quasidiscontinuous order which consists of the last term of the
first premise and the first term of the second premise. In the
case of the discontinuous order the third premise consists of
the last term of the second premise and the first term of the
first premise and so the object of interest is already focused
and there is no need for a focus shift, so that the new
information could be immediately integrated (Hörnig,
Oberauer, & Weidenfeld, 2005). This suggests that the
differences between discontinuous and quasi-discontinuous
orders result from other cognitive processes rather than only
from premise processing and integration processes.
The results support the hypothesis that in both cases a
single model is formed from the first two premises which
then has to be checked for consistency in the light of the
third premise. It seems that humans process discontinuous

1131

information by creating one temporary mental model rather
than by creating two partial models. This implies that the
construction of spatial mental models based on
discontinuous information is similar to the construction
based on continuous as well as semi-continuous
information. In the case of the discontinuous problem the
model is inconsistent (C-D-A-B) and has to be revised to fit
the information of all the premises (A-B-C-D).
However, the question is whether these results can also be
explained by the construction of two partial models that are
structurally independent but specified in terms of their
spatial relation. Assuming that humans construct spatial
mental models in a horizontal linear order with the
preferring starting point at the left side (De Soto, London, &
Handel, 1965; Huttenlocher, 1968) it would mean that the
first partial model (C-D) is to the left of the second partial
model (A-B) and that there is no need for modifying the
arrangement for quasi-discontinuous premise orders.
Nevertheless, in both cases the two partial models have to
be integrated into one model and in this case the differences
in processing would result from the more difficult
modification required by discontinuous premises. At this
point the question arises whether there are differences
between the postulated temporary mental model and two
partial models that are structurally independent but specified
in terms of their spatial relation.
Taken together, these experiments offer a new point of
view to the understanding of the construction processes of
spatial mental models.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a grant of the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) to M. Knauff und B. Nebel
(KN 465/6-1). We thank Anja Gatzsche, Isabell Tapia-Leon,
Lilly Fehr, and Susann Rieger for assistance with the
experiments.

References
Chan, T. T., & Bergen, B. (2005). Writing direction
influences spatial cognition. In Proceedings of the 27th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
412-417). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Craik, K. J. W. (1943). The Nature of Explanation.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
De Soto, C. B., London, M., & Handel, S. (1965). Social
reasoning and spatial paralogic. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 2, 513-521.
Ehrlich, K., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1982). Spatial
descriptions and referential continuity. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 21, 296-306.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Newstead, S. E., & Byrne, R. M. J.
(1993). Human reasoning. The psychology of deduction.
Hove (UK): Lawrence Erlbaum.
Goodwin, G. P., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2005). Reasoning
with relations. Psychological Review, 112, 468–493.

Huttenlocher, J. (1968). Constructing spatial images: A
strategy in reasoning. Psychological Review, 75, 550-560.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. (1991). Deduction. Hove,
UK: Erlbaum.
Hörnig, R., Oberauer, K., & Weidenfeld, A. (2005). Two
principles of premise integration in spatial reasoning.
Memory & Cognition, 33, 131-139.
Knauff, M., Rauh, R., & Schlieder, C. (1995). Preferred
mental models in qualitative spatial reasoning: A
cognitive assessment of Allen's calculus. In Proceedings
of the 17th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 200-205). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Knauff, M., Rauh, R., Schlieder, C., & Strube, G. (1998).
Continuity Effect and Figural Bias in Spatial Relational
Inference. In Proceedings of the 20th Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 573-578). Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Polk, T. A., & Newell, A. (1995). Deduction as verbal
reasoning. Psychological Review, 102, 533–566.
Ragni, M., Knauff, M., & Nebel, B. (2005). A
Computational Model for Spatial Reasoning with Mental
Models. In Proceedings of the 27th Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society, (pp. 1797-1802). Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Rauh, R., Hagen, C., Kuss, T., Knauff, M., Schlieder, C., &
Strube, G. (2005). Preferred and alternative mental
models in spatial reasoning. Spatial Cognition and
Computation, 5(2&3), 239–269.
Rauh, R., Schlieder, C., & Knauff, M. (1997). Präferierte
mentale Modelle beim räumlich-relationalen Schließen:
Empirie
und
kognitive
Modellierung.
Kognitionswissenschaft, 6, 21–34.
Schaeken, W., Girotto, V., & Johnson Laird, P. N. (1998).
The effect of an irrelevant premise on temporal and
spatial reasoning. Kognitionswissenschaft, 7, 27–32.
Spalek, T. M., & Hammad, S. (2005). The left-to-right bias
in inhibition of return is due to the direction of reading.
Psychological Science, 16, 15-18
Vandierendonck, A., & deVooght, G. (1997). Working
memory constraints on linear reasoning with spatial and
temporal contents. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 50A(4), 803–820.

1132

