UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Conceptual Combination versus Critical Combination:Devising Creative Solutions using the
Sequential Application of Crowds

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8bw693k7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Tanaka, Yuko
Sakamoto, Yasuaki
Kusumi, Takashi

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Conceptual Combination versus Critical Combination:
Devising Creative Solutions using the Sequential Application of Crowds
Yuko Tanaka (Yuko.Tanaka@stevens.edu)
Howe School of Technology Management, Stevens Institute of Technology
Castle Point on Hudson, Hoboken, NJ 07030 USA

Yasuaki Sakamoto (Yasuaki.Sakamoto@stevens.edu)
Howe School of Technology Management, Stevens Institute of Technology
Castle Point on Hudson, Hoboken, NJ 07030 USA

Takashi Kusumi (kusumi@educ.kyoto-u.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Education, Kyoto University,
Yoshida Hon-machi, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8511 JAPAN
Abstract
The purpose of this study was to examine the steps involved
in the sequential application of crowds to produce creative
solutions for social problems. 127 university students
generated, criticized, modified, and evaluated text solutions
for reducing misinformation on the Internet. One crowd
generated solutions based on two ideas randomly paired from
previous crowds’ ideas. The other crowd came up with
solutions based on one idea and a criticism for this idea
generated by previous crowds. Whereas solutions based on
two ideas were on average rated more creative than those
based on an idea and criticisms, the five most creative
solutions that addressed criticisms were rated significantly
more creative than the five most creative ideas that combined
two ideas. We conclude that a critical crowd can be useful if
the goal is to collect a small number of highly creative ideas
using the sequential application of crowds.
Keywords: Creativity; wisdom
intelligence; critical thinking

of

crowds;

collective

Introduction
Advances in communications technologies have changed
the way people collaborate. In many websites, crowds work
in isolation for the most part, and their ideas are aggregated
later. For example, users may rate news stories posted on a
website, and the website may show the aggregate rating for
each story. There are many web services for collaborative
tagging and filtering, online auctions, and prediction
markets, which allow users from afar to collaborate
efficiently without knowing the others.
The current work examines how crowds can be used to
collect creative ideas. In particular, we examine the steps
involved in the sequential application of crowds to design
solutions for social problems. We think the use of crowds
has a great potential for solving many difficult problems.
Although online crowds work for free or for nominal fees,
collective solutions of crowds can be as useful as those of a
few experts (Surowiecki, 2004). Aggregation cancels out
individual errors and highlights “correct” solutions (cf.
Estes & Maddox, 2005; Galton, 1907), leading to the
wisdom of crowds. Moreover, the idea of crowds generating

goods and services has been regarded as a viable alternative
to firms and markets (Benkler, 2006; Howe, 2006).
In our past work (Nickerson & Sakamoto, 2010), we have
examined one way of using crowds to design creative ideas.
The basic procedure was to ask the first crowd to generate a
set of ideas, akin to divergent thinking, in which diverse
ideas are generated. The second crowd combined two ideas
from the first crowd, akin to convergent thinking, in which
ideas are filtered and integrated. Then the third crowd
combined two ideas from the second crowd, in the hopes of
further improving the creativity of the ideas.
Letting crowds combine ideas is a reasonable approach
for improving the creativity of the variants. Cognitive
scientists have proposed that creativity depends on
conceptual combination, in which separate ideas or concepts
are merged (e.g., Ward, 2004). According to Rothenberg
(1979), creative accomplishments, such as original arts and
scientific discoveries are the results of synthesizing two
opposing ideas. Thagard and Stewart (2011) propose that
novel combinations of mental representations underlie many
kinds of creativity.
In crowd creativity, the results from the past work are
mixed. For some tasks, such as designing children’s chairs
in drawings, letting crowds combine previous designs
resulted in more creative designs (Yu & Nickerson, 2011).
For other tasks, such as generating solutions for oil-spill
problems in texts, there was little if any improvement in
creativity of ideas generated by later crowds (Bao &
Sakamoto, in preparation). Perhaps combining two text
ideas for solving social problems is difficult, especially
when the two ideas are non-alignable and there is no easy
way to integrate elements from different ideas (cf. Markman
et al., 2009). Such situations are common with text ideas for
solving social problems such as dealing with oil spills, but
less common with designs of chairs.
An alternative to combining ideas is to let the crowds
address criticisms of ideas. A critical crowd can find a
problem of an idea, and the next crowd can address the
problem. Defining a problem, which is an important
component of critical thinking (Ennis, 1987), interacts with

3116

generating ideas in creative problem-solving (Treffinger, et.
al., 1994). In this way, critical thinking is related to
creativity (Brookfield, 1987; Moon, 2008). By addressing
criticisms, the crowd will refine and elaborate on an idea,
which will improve the quality of the idea (Runco &
Pritzker, 1999). Thus, we hypothesize that including a
crowd, which concentrates on finding problems into crowds
will contribute to generating creative ideas.
Like the past work, the first crowd generates a set of
ideas. Instead of combining two ideas from the first crowd,
the second crowd generates criticisms for given ideas. The
third crowd generates a new set of ideas based on an idea
from the first crowd and its criticism from the second
crowd. By addressing the criticism of the idea, the third
crowd will refine and elaborate on the given idea. Here we
compare this sequence involving a critical crowd, which we
call the idea-criticism condition, with the sequence from the
past work involving only combination crowds, which we
call the idea-idea condition.
One theoretical contribution of our work is that we apply
work in critical thinking and conceptual combination to
crowd. In practical terms, by better understanding the
processes of crowd creativity, we can help design socialcomputational systems that are tailored to the goals of the
systems. In terms of societal impacts, if the use of crowds in
generating creative solutions works, we may be able to find
creative solutions for many challenging social problems.

Method
Participants
In total, 127 Japanese undergraduate and graduate students
(60 men, 67 women) at Kyoto University participated in
four crowds, with the mean age of 22 (SD = 3). Each
participant was in only one crowd. Each participant received
a bookstore gift card in the amount of 500 Japanese yen
(about $6) after completing the task.

Apparatus and Materials
Data were collected using Excel spreadsheets on a 15-inch
monitor in a laboratory. The following social problem was
used: “There is diverse information on the Internet,
including wrong information, deceptive information, and
information that is not based on fact. What can we do to
avoid or reduce the negative influences of misinformation
on Internet users?”

Design and Procedure
Table 1 summarizes the design of the current study. There
were four crowds. Crowd 1 generated 30 ideas. In the ideaidea condition, Crowd 2 generated another set of 30 ideas,
and Crowd 3 generated 90 ideas based on 30 pairs of an idea
by Crowd 1 and an idea by Crowd 2. In the idea-criticism
condition, Crowd 2 generated 30 criticisms, one criticism
for each of 30 ideas, and Crowd 3 generated 90 ideas based
on 30 pairs of an idea by Crowd 1 and a criticism by Crowd

2. Crowd 4 evaluated 180 ideas by Crowd 3 on novelty and
practicality, which are two important components of
creativity (Runco & Pritzker, 1999), and are often used in
measuring creativity (cf. Dean, 2006; Finke et al., 1992). In
crowd 2 and crowd 3, participants were randomly assigned
to either the idea-idea or idea-criticism condition.
Table 1: The design of the current study
Crowd
1
(n=10)

2
(n=10, 10)

3
(n=30, 31)

4
(n=36)

Idea-idea

Idea-criticism

Generated 30 ideas
Generated 30 ideas

Generated 30 criticisms
of 30 corresponding
ideas by Crowd 1

Generated 90 ideas
based on 30 pairs
of an idea by
Crowd 1 and an
idea by Crowd 2

Generated 90 ideas
based on 30 pairs of an
idea by Crowd 1 and
its criticism by Crowd
2

Evaluated 180 ideas by Crowd 3
on novelty and practicality

Crowd 1 Each participant was asked to generate three ideas.
For each idea, the participant filled in the three blanks: “One
way to avoid or reduce the negative influences of
misinformation on Internet users is to [blank]. An example
is to [blank]. The advantage of this is that [blank].”
Participants typed their answers into an Excel spreadsheet.
In total, Crowd 1 generated 30 ideas.
Crowd 2 In the idea-idea condition, each of 10 participants
was asked to generate three ideas in the same fashion as
those in Crowd 1, resulting in 30 new ideas.
In the idea-criticism condition, each of the other 10
participant was shown three ideas generated by Crowd 1,
one at a time, and asked to point out a problem of each idea
by filling in the blank: “The problem of this idea is that
[blank]. Therefore, it is difficult to avoid or reduce the
negative influences of misinformation on Internet users.”
This resulted in 30 problems associated with 30 ideas by
Crowd 1, one problem for each idea. Participants were also
asked to explain the reasons behind their responses.
Crowd 3 In the idea-idea condition, each idea by Crowd 1
was paired with a randomly selected idea from Crowd 2 of
the idea-idea condition. Each of 30 participants was asked to
generate a new idea based on one of the 30 pairs. This
procedure was repeated three times for each participant.
In the idea-criticism condition, each idea by Crowd 1 and
its criticism by Crowd 2 of the idea-criticism condition were
presented together. Each of 31 participants was asked to
generate a new idea based on one of the 30 pairs. This
procedure was repeated three times for each participant.
The two conditions shared the 30 ideas by Crowd 1. In
both conditions, participants typed their answers on the
Excel spreadsheet. In total, removing unfinished responses
in time, 90 ideas were generated in each condition.

3117

In Crowds 1–3, each participant was asked to generate
three ideas or criticisms in 30 minutes. Excepting ideacriticism condition in Crowd 2, participants were
encouraged to generate creative ideas. The instructions
stated that the more novel and practical an idea was, the
more creative it would be considered.
Crowd 4 The 180 ideas by Crowd 3 were randomly
numbered from 1 to 180. Each participant was given a 30 ×
30 matrix on an Excel spreadsheet. The vertical axis was
labeled novelty, and the horizontal axis was labeled
practicality. Both axes ranged from 1 (low) to 30 (high).
In the center of the matrix (novelty = 15, practicality =
15), the identification number of the following idea, which
was randomly selected from the 180 ideas, was shown as a
reference: “[#138] Educate students so that they develop an
awareness that wrong information, deceptive information,
and information that does not based on fact exist on the
Internet, the ability to check the truth of such information,
and the skill to judge and criticize whether the information
is useful for solving the problem at hand.” Participants
evaluated the other 179 ideas, putting each idea’s number in
the matrix to indicate how novel and practical they thought
the idea was. Only one number was allowed in each cell.
They were asked to evaluate all ideas within 40 minutes.
Our main interest was comparing the novelty and
practicality values of 90 ideas from the idea-idea condition
with 90 ideas from the idea-criticism condition.

Results
Of 36 participants in Crowd 4, one participant who did not
complete the evaluation task within the time limit was
excluded from the analyses.

Relationship Between Novelty and Practicality
We first examined the relationship between novelty and
practicality. Novelty was negatively correlated with
practicality, r = -0.47, p < .001: The more novel an idea
was, the less practical it became.
Participants were more willing to provide extreme values
on the practicality dimension than on the novelty
dimensions. Table 2 shows the maximum and minimum
values participants used for novelty and practicality in each
condition, and Table 3 shows the average based on each
idea’s standard deviation value. A parent type (idea-idea vs.
idea-criticism) by creativity (novelty vs. practicality)
analysis of variance (ANOVA) was conducted, with each
idea’s difference between maximum and minimum values
(range) as a dependent variable. The range of novelty was
significantly smaller than that of practicality, F (1, 34) =
11.22, p < .005. The main effect of parent type and the
parent type by creativity interaction were not significant, F
< 1 for both. Further, a Ryan’ multiple comparison analysis
showed that the standard deviation was higher for
practicality than for novelty in both conditions. In the
Discussion section, we speculate why practicality results in
more extreme values than novelty.

Based on these results, we decided not to integrate
novelty and practicality scores into a single creativity
measure. Instead, we analyzed novelty and practicality
separately.
Table 2: Means, standard deviations, maxima, and minima
for novelty and practicality in the two conditions.
Idea-idea (n=35)
Idea-criticism (n=35)
Practicality
Practicality
Novelty
Novelty
Mean
15.38
14.87
14.94
14.07
(SD)
(2.35)
(2.57)
(2.27)
(2.42)
Max
20.71
21.54
23.46
22.40
Min
9.00
5.14
8.03
1.77
Note. Ranged from 1 (low) to 30 (high)
Table 3: Means of standard deviations for novelty and
practicality in the two conditions.

Novelty
Practicality

Idea-idea
(n=90)
6.49
7.23

Idea-criticism
(n=90)
6.71
7.23

Idea-Idea vs. Idea-Criticism
Our main interest was whether the idea-idea or ideacriticism condition resulted in more creative ideas.
All Ideas First, we compared all 90 ideas from the ideaidea condition with all 90 ideas from the idea-criticism
condition. Surprisingly to us, the idea-idea condition
generated more novel and practical ideas than the ideacriticism condition, F (1, 34) = 30.48, p < .001 (see left four
bars in Figure 1). The main effect of creativity and the
parent type by creativity interaction did not reach
significance, F (1, 34) = 1.31, p = 0.26, and F (1, 34) = 2.32,
p = 0.14, respectively.
Top 5 Ideas Based on the average novelty and
practicality scores of 35 participants, we selected top five
ideas out of 90 ideas in the idea-idea condition with respect
to each creativity dimension. We selected top five ideas of
the idea-criticism condition in the same manner. Then, we
calculated each participant’s average score for the top five
ideas, resulting in 35 mean values for each category
dimension in each condition.
Interestingly to us, the idea-criticism condition generated
more novel and practical ideas than the idea-idea condition
when we compared the top 5 ideas, F (1, 34) = 4.22, p < .05
(see right four bars in Figure 1). This pattern of results is the
opposite of that for all ideas. The main effect of creativity
and the parent type by creativity interaction was not
significant, F < 1 for both.
We further analyzed the top 5 ideas from each condition
and found that the most novel idea of all 180 ideas was
generated under the idea-criticism condition. This is the
summary of the most novel idea: “[#175] Build an Internet
police into every computer during the manufacturing

3118

process. The Internet police has knowledge of experts in
every field and is aware of current information in common
use around the world.” Its novelty score was 23.46 (the
practicality score was 6.83). Further, the three most novel
ideas from the idea-criticism condition were also the three
most novel of all 180 ideas.
The pattern was similar for the analysis of practicality.
The most practical idea of all 180 ideas came from the ideacriticism condition. This is the summary of the most
practical idea: “[#007] Set up a comment column on a
website where visitors can leave their comments and
opinions. Visitors can grade opinions posted on the website
according to five scales. They describe the reason for the
grading, post suggestions for improving the site, and so on.”
Its practicality score was 22.40 (the novelty score was
11.06).

Figure 1: The analysis of all ideas revealed that Crowd 4
rated the ideas from the idea-idea condition more novel and
practical than the ideas from the idea-critical condition. This
pattern was reversed in the analysis of top 5 ideas. Each bar
shows the mean of 35 participants. Error bars represent
standard errors.
Top 10 and 20 Ideas Top 10 and 20 ideas were selected
in the same fashion as the top 5 ideas. There was no
significant difference between the idea-idea condition and
the idea-criticism condition, F (1, 34) = 2.13, p = 0.15, for
top 10 and F < 1 for top 20. All the other effects were not
significant, F < 1 for all.
Of 10 most novel ideas out of all 180 ideas, five ideas
were generated under the idea-criticism condition. Of 10
most practical ideas out of all 180 ideas, seven ideas came
from the idea-criticism condition. Coupled together, our
results show that the idea-criticism condition generated a
small number of highest quality ideas.

Discussion
The present study investigated two ways of generating
creative ideas for problem solving using crowds; asking a
crowd to generate a new idea based on two ideas or on a
pair of an idea and a corresponding problem by the previous

crowds. The former idea-idea approach is essentially
conceptual combination in crowds. The latter idea-criticism
method can be seen as critical thinking in crowds. We
compared the idea-idea method with idea-criticism method
by asking crowds to generate ideas sequentially.

Comparing Idea-Idea with Idea-Criticism
We found an overall tendency that the idea-idea method
generates both more novel and more practical ideas than the
idea-criticism method. One advantage of the idea-idea
method is that two ideas can provide much more diverse
information. What Crowd 2 in the idea-idea condition did
was to generate new ideas independently of ideas by Crowd
1. On the other hand, Crowd 2 in the idea-criticism
condition pointed out a problem for each idea generated by
Crowd 1, and did not have to generate new idea nor an
alternative idea to overcome the problem. In other words,
whereas 20 participants generated initial ideas in the ideaidea condition, only 10 participants generated the initial
ideas in the idea-criticism condition: The idea-idea
condition had twice as many initial ideas as the other
condition. In this way, the idea-idea method focuses the
crowds to integrate a more diverse set of ideas.
When we examined the five most novel ideas, we found
the opposite pattern of results: The idea-criticism method
generated more novel ideas than the idea-idea method. This
was also the case for the five most practical ideas. It is
interesting to note that although the idea-idea condition had
twice as many initial ideas as the idea-criticism condition,
the three most novel ideas out of all 180 ideas came from
the idea-criticism condition.
It makes sense that the idea-criticism method results in
highly practical ideas because one crowd was designed to
address the problems associated with the initial ideas. Here
is an example of a participant addressing a criticism:
A participant from Crowd 1 said: “Judge whether
the information acquired on the Internet is
accurate or not by using something other than the
Internet, such as books, papers, or interviews.”
A participant from Crowd 2 pointed out: “The
problem of this idea is that the advantage of the
Internet that we can acquire information easily is
lost.”
An idea generated in Crowd 3 based on these two
inputs was: “Open highly reliable text media,
papers, and the like on the Internet.”
In this example, the participant from Crowd 2 evaluated the
initial idea generated by a participant in Crowd 1, and the
participant from Crowd 3 refined the initial idea by
addressing the identified problem. This overcoming process
makes Crowd 3’ ideas more realistic and practical.

3119

Interestingly, this overcoming process can also be
effective on novelty. Here is the process by which the most
novel idea was generated:
The initial idea was: “Develop something like an
Internet police by outsourcing companies.”
Its criticism was: “The problem of this idea is that
adequate knowledge is needed to judge whether
information is wrong or not. Who can judge if
information is right or wrong? What criteria are
used? In addition, there are a large number of
websites on the Internet. It seems difficult to
examine every content of the websites one by one.”
The final variant was: “Build an Internet police
into every computer during the manufacturing
process. The Internet police has knowledge of
experts in every field and is aware of current
information in common use around the world.”
In this example, although the final variant owes its novelty
to the initial idea of an Internet police, its novelty is
improved by addressing the criticism, which resulted in the
removal of the idea of entrusting companies, and the
addition of the new idea to put AI-like systems into
computers during the manufacturing process. In this way,
the idea-criticism method can result in highly novel and
practical ideas.
However, we did not find any difference between the
idea-idea and idea-criticism conditions in the top 10 and top
20 ideas. Thus, the idea-criticism method can generate high
quality ideas, but only a small number of them.

Novelty and Practicality
Although novelty and practicality scales are often used to
measure creativity (Dean et al., 2006), how people use these
scales are not studied well. In the current work, a more
novel idea tended to be less practical. In fact, the most novel
idea in the idea-idea condition was ranked the second worst
in practicality. Thus, there is a trade-off between novelty
and practicality.
An interesting finding with respect to novelty and
practicality was that the novelty scores resulted in lower
variance than the practicality scores. Participants avoided
the use of maximum and minimum values when evaluating
novelty, compared to when evaluating practicality. This is,
we think, related to each participant’s confidence in
judgment on novelty and practicality. Judging whether an
idea is 100% novel is more difficult than judging whether an
idea is 100% practical. A 100% practical idea can mean an
idea that can definitely be put into practice without
problems. Imagining a 100% novel idea is hard because
novelty is a boundless concept. Even when we think an idea
is very novel, there is still a possibility of a more novel idea.
Thus, it is difficult for evaluators to give an idea a very high
or very low point in novelty.

Conceptual Combination
In the idea-idea method in the current work, two ideas were
randomly paired, and the crowd was asked to generate a
new idea based on the two ideas. Work on conceptual
combination in creativity suggests that trying to combine
dissimilar or even opposing ideas can lead to more creative
ideas (Estes & Ward, 2002; Kunda et al., 1990). Applying
this finding to crowds, we should test a crowd that evaluates
the similarity of ideas, so that the next crowd can combine
pairs of ideas that are dissimilar.
Past work on conceptual combination also suggests that
how one instructs participants is important (Mumford et al.,
1997). When two ideas to be combined involve related
concepts, focusing on shared attributes can result in creative
solutions. In contrast, when two ideas are dissimilar,
focusing on abstract representations can result in creative
solutions. This idea of priming abstract representations may
be effective for combining two text ideas that lack any
similarity on surface.

Critical Thinking
In the idea-criticism method in the current work, the process
consists of two crowds generating new ideas and a crowd
defining problems. Considering problems is an important
characteristic of critical thinker (Zechmeister & Johnson,
1992), thus, this process is regarded as a division of labor
process that includes crowds concentrating on creative
thinking and a crowd on critical thinking. Avoiding trying to
think both creatively and critical at the same time seems to
make the whole process more effective One way for it is
switching perspectives in an individual using a tool such as
Green Hat and Black Hat in Six Thinking Hat (Bono,
1985). The other way is each crowd takes responsibility for
one aspect of thinking like the current work. An advantage
of the latter way is a load of thinking on each participant is
light because it not necessary to switch thinking or to think
from several perspectives.

Crowd Creativity and Brainstorming
The use of novelty and practicality in creativity evaluation
implies that creativity results from generation of diverse
ideas and subsequent pruning of these ideas. Also, cognitive
theories of creativity focus on generation of many candidate
ideas and exploration and modification of these ideas (Finke
et al., 1992; Ward et al., 1997). Generation and exploration
are similar to divergent thinking and convergent thinking
often seen in brainstorming (Osborn, 1957).
In a brainstorming session, the facilitator collects many
different ideas from a group before people in the group have
the chance to evaluate these ideas. Then, the ideas are
evaluated, filtered, and integrated by the group. One
difference between brainstorming and the sequential
application of crowds in our study is that whereas our
crowds are not co-present, the participants in a
brainstorming session are. The presence of others can hinder
creativity by preventing self-conscious individuals to
contribute ideas, and vocal members can sway the opinion

3120

of the group (Mullen et al., 1991). Moreover, we can recruit
more people from diverse background in crowds than in a
brainstorming environment. Consequently, we can collect
numerous ideas in a short time using crowds. We think
these advantages make the use of crowds to solve problems
highly attractive and promising.

Limitation and Future Research
One limitation of the current work was that a crowd, not
experts, judged the creativity of the ideas. The crowd may
not have appropriate knowledge for evaluating the potential
solutions. This leads to another direction for future research:
The effects of quality of a crowd. Perhaps the effects vary as
a function of the topic of the problem to solve and/or the
purpose of collecting creative ideas.
A natural next step is to integrate the idea-idea and ideacriticism methods: One crowd generates ideas, the next
crowd combines two ideas, the next crowd addresses the
problems, the next crowd generates ideas from pairs of an
idea and a problem, and these steps can continue until the
ideas are refined that identifying problems become difficult.
The ordering of the crowds might become important.

Conclusions
Generating creative ideas through the sequential application
of crowds seems promising. Based on our results from
comparing two ways of generating creative solutions with
crowds, we make three conclusions: 1) combining two ideas
is suitable for generating many ideas that are moderately
novel or practical; 2) addressing a criticism of an idea is
suitable for generating a small number of ideas that are
notably novel or practical; 3) thus, if the purpose of using
crowds is to collect a few remarkable ideas, pairing an idea
with its criticism is more effective than pairing two ideas.
Finally, our work integrates work in critical thinking,
creativity, and crowd. Believing that integrating separate
ideas is a key to many kinds of creativity, we hope that the
present work will soon result in scientific discovery and
technological innovation.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported by the National Science
Foundation, grant IIS-0968561.

References
Bao, J., & Sakamoto, Y. (in preparation). Crowd creativity:
Combining ideas using human-based genetic algorithm.
Benkler, Y. (2006). Wealth of Networks. New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press.
Brookfield, S. D. (1987). Developing critical thinkers.
Jossey-Bass Publishers.
De Bono, E. (1985). Six Thinking Hats. Little, Brown and
Company, Boston.
Dean, D. L., Hender, J. M., Rodgers, T. L., & Santanen, E. L.
(2006). Identifying quality, novel, and creative Ideas:

Constructs and scales for idea evaluation. Journal of the
Association for Information Systems, 7(10), 646-698.
Ennis, R. H. (1987). A taxonomy of critical thinking
dispositions and abilities. In J. B. Baron & R. J. Sternberg
(Eds.), (pp. 9-26). W. H. Freeman & Co.
Estes, W. K., & Maddox, W. T. (2005). Risks of drawing
inferences about cognitive processes from model fits to
individual versus average performance. Psychonomic
Bulletin and Review, 12, 403-408.
Estes, Z. C., & Ward, T. B. (2002). The emergence of novel
attributes in concept modification. Creativity Research
Journal, 14, 149-156.
Finke, R. A., Ward, T. B., & Smith, S. M. (1992). Creative
Cognition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Galton, F. (1907). Vox Populi, Nature, 75, 450-451.
Howe, J. (2006). The Rise of Crowdsourcing. Wired.
Kunda, Z., Miller, D. T., & Claire, T. (1990). Combining
social concepts: the role of causal reasoning. Cognitive
Science, 14, 551-577.
Markman, A. B., Wood, K. L., Linsey, J. S., Murphy, J. T.,
& Laux, J. (2009). Supporting innovation by promoting
analogical reasoning. In A. B. Markman & K. L. Wood
(Eds.), Tools for Innovation (pp. 85-103). New York:
Oxford University Press.
Moon, J. A. (2008). Critical Thinking. RoutledgeFalmer.
Mullen, B., Johnson C., & Salas E. (1991). Productivity loss
in brainstorming groups: A meta-analytic integration.
Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 72, 3-23.
Mumford, M. D., Baughman, W. A., Maher, M. A.,
Costanza, D. P., & Supinski, E. P. (1997). Process-based
measures of creative problem-solving skills: IV. Category
combination. Creativity Research Journal, 10, 59-71.
Nickerson, J. V., & Sakamoto, Y. (2010). Crowdsourcing
creativity: Combining ideas in networks. Workshop on
Information in Networks. New York, NY.
Osborn, A. F. (1957). Applied Imagination. New York:
Scribner.
Runco, M. A., & Pritzker, S. R. (1999). Encyclopedia of
Creativity. San Diego: Academic Press.
Surowiecki, J. (2004). The wisdom of crowds. New York:
Random House.
Thagard, P., & Stewart, T. C. (2011), The AHA!
experience: Creativity through emergent binding in neural
networks. Cognitive Science, 35, 1-33.
Treffinger, D. J., Isaksen, S. G., & Dorval, K. B. (1994).
Creative Problem Solving: An Overview. In M. A. Runco
(Ed.), Problem finding, problem solving, and creativity
(pp. 223-236). Ablex Publishing Corporation.
Ward, T. B., Smith, S. M., & Vaid, J. (1997). Creative
Thought: An Investigation of Conceptual Structures and
Processes. Washington, DC: APA Books.
Yu, L., & Nickerson, J. V. (2011). Cooks or cobblers?
Crowd creativity through combination, CHI 2011, ACM
Press.
Zechmeister, E. B., & Johnson, J. E. (1992). Critical
thinking: A functional approach. Thomson Brooks/Cole
Publishing Co.

3121

