UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Conflict Resolution in Remote Collaborative Problem Solving: A Comparison of Different
Computer Mediated Communication Methods

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6v79g19v

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Dong, Wei
Fu, Wai-Tat

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Conflict Resolution in Remote Collaborative Problem Solving:
A Comparison of Different Computer Mediated Communication Methods
Wei Dong (wdong@illinois.edu) & Wai-Tat Fu (wfu@illinoi.edu)
Applied Cognitive Science Lab, Human Factors Division and Beckman Institute
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 405 N Mathews Avenue, Urbana, IL, 61801, USA
grounds and set up a solution space for both parties; during
negotiation, collaborators need to decide on a solution that
balances the needs and constraints of both parties so that a
solution can be selected from the solution space. Our
analysis will focus on how different CMC methods impact
each stage, and eventually influence final outcomes.

Abstract
We compared the effects of text-, audio- and video-based
communication methods on how people performed an
appointment-scheduling task that involved both a cooperative
and a conflict resolution component. The results showed that
video-based communication method was more supportive of
cooperative tasks when the task difficulty was high, and when
there were more inherent conflicts in the task, in which more
negotiation was required to resolve the conflicts. As a result,
performance difference of the dyad was smaller in video
communication. Different patterns of task completion time,
problem space visitations and conversation dynamics further
supported the effect of communication methods. Results of
this study have important implications in understanding the
process of collaborative problem solving and conflict
resolution when different communication channels were used
for remote collaborators.

Establishing Common Ground

Keywords: Problem solving; conflict resolution; negotiation;
collaboration; computer mediated communication.

Introduction
One common reason for collaborators to communicate is
to come up with solutions or methods that are acceptable to
both parties. More often than not, conflicts arise. It is critical
for collaborators to communicate their needs and constraints
to resolve these conflicts, requiring collaborators to engage
in negotiation and to obtain a mutual agreement, which may
or may not be the best possible solution to both parties. In
other words, one party may need to compromise and accept
a non-preferred solution that may be perceived to be optimal
to both parties. Given that the process of conflict resolution
often hinges on the effectiveness of the communication, one
may expect that the communication channel will play a
pivotal role in influencing the final outcome of the conflict
resolution. Recent advances in technologies that support
computer-mediated communication (CMC), such as various
forms of text, audio, and video conferencing, have made
remote collaborative work less costly and more feasible.
Although intuitive and important, relatively few studies
have examined the effectiveness of different CMC methods
in supporting the process of conflict resolution during
remote collaborative works. (for exceptions, see Cooper &
Taleb-Bendiab, 2004; Foroughi, 1998).
The goal of the current study is to compare the effects of
three commonly used CMC methods (text, audio and video
chatting) on a conflict resolution task. The task aims at
testing two major components of remote conflict resolution:
During information exchange, collaborators need to
exchange their needs and constraints to establish common

A prerequisite of conflict resolution is to establish a
mutual agreement of the possible solution space (i.e.,
grounding) (Clark & Brennan, 1991; Newell & Simon,
1972) so that the potential cost-benefit comparison can be
made among each solution by each of the collaborators.
Therefore, the process through which mutual ground was
established during information exchange could have an
impact on subsequent negotiation and conflict resolution.
Communication methods may influence this process as cost
of information exchange may impact how likely people will
exchange their needs and constraints. For example,
establishing mutual ground might be more difficult in textbased communication due to the higher costs, and
collaborators might not be willing to fully examine the
problem space to identify and compare possible solutions.
As a consequence, negotiation can be less efficient based on
an incomplete solution space.
The strategies used to communicate information might
also influence how potential solutions are discussed. As a
result, the communication method may influence how either
party will select and propose potential solutions to the other
party to consider, or how they will interpret whether the
other party may consider a solution to be acceptable or not.
In other words, the communication method may also
directly impact the negotiation process, which may lead to
suboptimal outcomes for the one or both parties.

Effects of CMC Methods
Studies comparing the effectiveness of CMC methods on
collaborative work to the traditional method of face-to-face
interaction yielded mixed results (Doherty-Sneddon et al.,
1997; Firm, Sellen, & Wilbur, 1997; Fussell & Krauss,
1992; Straus & McGrath, 1994). Collaborators using the
video conferencing tend to perform at a similar level as
collocated collaborators. However, bandwidth and quality of
video/audio streams play a crucial role in how video
conferencing can be helpful in supporting collaborative
work. Audio-only communication was found to be less
effective compared to video conferencing, mainly due to its
lack of nonverbal cues such as facial expressions, gesture

2142

and focus of visual attention. Text-based communication is
reported to be least effective due to the fact that a large
amount of non-textual information in both visual and
acoustic format (e.g., speech tones and emotion, etc) cannot
be directly conveyed through text-based communication.
Relatively few studies have directly investigated the
effects of CMC methods on how collaborators resolve
conflicts in remote work environments. Inferences can be
made from the nature of conflict resolution tasks and
existing evidences of the different features among different
communication methods. Conflict resolution is usually a
demanding task for several reasons. First, all parties
involved in the conflict need to establish mutual ground
(Clark & Brennan, 1991; Cramton, 2001; Fussell & Krauss,
1992) such that they are all aware of the solution space
involved in the conflict and the potential tradeoffs of each
solution to each party. Second, several rounds of
conversation exchanges are usually necessary during the
negotiation process before a consensus can be reached.
Third, non-textural information can be critical in the process
of negotiation by providing cues that can be used to make
inferences of other parties’ preferences and characteristics
(e.g., personality, mood, willingness to compromise, etc.)
and to make adjustments to strategies of negotiation so that
other parties will be persuaded to compromise, thus
maximizing individual and group performance.

The Current Study
We were interested in the effects of different CMC
methods on the process of information exchange and
negotiation during conflict resolution. We chose the task of
appointment scheduling in this study for two reasons. First,
it is a very common subtask in most remote collaboration
that people encounter in their daily lives, and they often play
a pivotal role in the success of collaboration. Second, this
task involves two stages that are typically found in many
remote collaboration tasks: the information exchange stage
in which the collaborators need to collectively find one or
more time slot(s) that both parties are available; and, after
mutual ground is established and a potential solution space
is obtained, a negotiation stage, in which potential solutions
are proposed, rejected or accepted, and preferences are
expressed and perceived until one solution is eventually
accepted by both parties. Although in actual situations these
two stages could be intertwined, the two components are
essential for successful conflict resolution, and could be
subject to changes at different levels of task difficulty (how
easily the solution space can be defined) and different levels
of conflicts (the amount of overlap between the needs and
constraints of the two parties). Thus, we introduced these
two independent variables (task difficulty and level of
conflict) to systematically examine the effects of CMC
methods on the conflict resolution processes. Based on
previous findings, we would expect that communication
methods with a higher bandwidth would probably be more
supportive for participants performing the task in the current
study.

Method
A 2 by 2 by 3 mixed design was employed in the current
study. Participants were asked to work in pairs, each of
which was given a 10-week calendar. Their task was to
schedule 2 appointments for each week by communicating
with each other via one of the three commonly used CMC
tools (text, audio or video chatting). A scoring system was
introduced to encourage participants to maximize personal
scores by scheduling appointments on preferred time slots.
We manipulated the level of difficulty (easy vs. hard) for
each week by putting different score combinations in the
solution space. A level of conflict (low vs. high) was also
introduced to further examine the process of negotiation.

Participants
One hundred and four people participated in the current
study. One pair of participants’ responses in the text
condition and one pair in the audio condition were excluded
from the analysis due to technical problems, yielding the
final sample size of 100 participants, 17, 16 and 17 pairs in
text, audio and video condition, respectively. Participants in
the three conditions were similar in age (M = 23.90, 22.97
and 24.13 years, SD = 4.45, 3.25 and 5.15 for text, audio
and video condition, respectively, F(2, 97) = .64, p > .05),
gender (16, 13 and 15 males and 18, 19 and 19 females in
text, audio and video condition, respectively), education
level (college or higher), and their experience of using CMC
tools in their everyday life as measured in a questionnaire.

Materials
Forty pairs of weekly calendars were prepared. Each
week contained a problem space of 40 hours (MondayFriday, 9AM-5PM). Appointments can only be scheduled
on whole hours. A scoring system was introduced in a way
that participants could earn 0 to 3 points for each
appointment depending on when it was scheduled. To help
participants better comprehend the scoring the system, time
slots with higher points were explained as more desired for
scheduling appointments in real life situations (see Table 1).
Color coding was also introduced when visualizing the
calendars using Google Calendar (See Figure 1).
Table 1. Scoring system.
Time slot
Color
Available, preferred
Available, not preferred
Not available, event in this slot can be
rescheduled with effort
Not available, event in this slot cannot
be rescheduled

Points

White
Green

3
2

Blue

1

Red

0

Level of Difficulty. Each week had a 12-hour solution
space, within which each scheduled appointment would
give both sides of the pair a non-zero score. The rest 28
hours were considered non-solutions since at least one side
of the pair would get 0 points if an appointment was
scheduled in those time slots. The level of difficulty for each

2143

week was manipulated by varying the number of preferred
time slots within the solution space (see Table 2). Thus, the
20 easy weeks contained more time slots with higher points,
whereas the 20 hard weeks contained more time slots with
lower points.
Table 2. Solution space for easy vs. hard weeks.
# of hours
Solution space
Point Combination
Easy
Hard
(calendar 1 – calendar 2)
1
2
Low
1-1, 1-2, 2-1
1
1
Medium
2-2, 1-3, 3-1
2
1
High
3-3, 3-2, 2-3

Figure 1. Example calendar of one week.

Level of Conflict. In order to get participants more
engaged and to increase the diversity of possible solutions,
several bonus point conditions were introduced (e.g.,
earning an extra point by avoiding particular hours). After
taking all bonus points into account, solutions that would
yield the highest total score of the pair were identified. As a
result of the introduction of bonus points, the 40 weeks
could also be grouped into two groups. In low-conflict
weeks, only one solution that yielded the highest total score
could be identified, thus once such solution was found,
neither side of the pair need to compromise. In high-conflict
weeks, more than one solution that yielded the highest total
score could be identified, and each side was able to earn
different scores depending on which solution was chosen,
thus a process of negotiation was necessary for each side to
optimized his/her personal scores.
The level of conflict was not directly manipulated, but
identified during the process of examining the solution
space of each week. However, the level of conflict was
independent of the manipulated level of difficulty since
roughly half of the easy weeks (12) and the hard weeks (11)
were grouped into low-conflict weeks, and the rest into
high-conflict weeks.

Procedure
Participants were seated at computers in different rooms
or separated by large barriers that prevented them from
seeing each other. Each pair of participants received a 10week calendar of 5 easy weeks and 5 hard weeks randomly
chosen from the calendar pool, in random order. Their task
was to schedule two 1-hour appointments on two different
days for each week, thus 20 appointments in total. It was
emphasized to the participants that their goal was to get
their individual score as high as possible, and the three who
got the highest individual total scores among all participants
would receive an extra $10 as a reward.
Participants communicated with each other using Google
talk through text, audio or video chatting and marked their
scheduled appointments on a given answer sheet. Chat
histories in the text group were saved. Participants in the
audio and video groups were asked not to type in the chat
box, and their conversations were recorded by screen
activity recording software named SnapzProX.

Measures
Performance. Participants’ answer sheets were scored
based on the scoring system in Table 1. A participant could
earn up to 8 points for one week. Participants’ overall
performance was measured by the sum of the scores of the
pair averaged across 10 weeks. Although it was possible
that two participants earned the same score, we did not get
any tied pairs in this experiment. Therefore, for all pairs in
this experiment, there was always one person getting a
higher total score than the other. We divided each pair into
high- vs. low-performance side. A difference score was
calculated by subtracting the score of low-performance
person from the high-performance person for each week.
This difference in performance within each dyad was used
not only due to the interdependence in performance within
each dyad, but also because this difference score would be
more meaningful in measuring the result of negotiation than
using individual scores.
Task completion time. The time each pair spent in
scheduling appointments for each week was measured. In
the cases that they went back to a particular week, the total
time spent on that week was calculated. In the cases that
they digressed from working on the current scheduling task,
the time of digression was deducted. The average time each
pair spent on each of the four week types were calculated.
Problem Space. For each week, the number of 1-hour
slots participants visited/mentioned during the scheduling
process was counted as an indicator of the size of the
actually visited problem space. The number of 1-hour time
slots participants visited/mentioned for more than once was
counted as a rough indicator of the size of the negotiation
space since revisiting a particular time slot was typically
associated with comparison of different potential solutions.
Negotiation. Participants’ conversations were recorded
for text condition and transcribed into text for audio and
video conditions. Four native English speakers read the
conversations carefully and judged whether each sentence
involved negotiation. When a sentence was devoted to
evaluating or comparing potential points that could be
earned by either or both sides of the dyad, or discussing the
possibility that either side of the pair would (or would not)
compromise by taking a less favored time slot, this sentence
was categorized into the negotiation category. Coders went

2144

through the training session, during which they were given
feedback to ensure similar understanding of coding scheme
(inter-coder agreement was above 95% for all pairs of
coders). Each coder coded a quarter of the conversations
independently. Number of sentences involving negotiation
was counted within each week.

Results
Performance

We can clearly see from Figure 2b that, as the bandwidth
of CMC methods went higher from text to audio and from
audio to video chatting, the difference score between dyads
became smaller and smaller, probably due to the fact that
they were more and more likely to get engaged in
negotiation and conflict resolutions when they need to. To
further unpack the impact of CMC methods, we examined
the participants’ time allocation on different week types and
their patterns of exploration in the problem space.

The overall performance did not differ among the three
CMC groups (M = 13.58, 13.80 and 13.91, SD = .85, .41
and .49 for text, audio and video conditions, respectively,
F(2,47)=1.30, p>.05). To further understand whether a well
balanced solution was reached as a result of negotiation, the
difference score between each dyad was used as the
dependent variable in the following analyses.
Level of Difficulty. Mixed-design analysis of variance
(ANOVA) with difficulty as a repeated measure and CMC
methods as between-subject variable yielded a significant
interactive effect (F(2,47) = 4.78, p < .05) on the difference
scores of dyads, suggesting that different CMC groups
performed differently on easy vs. hard weeks. As illustrated
in Figure 2a, the difference in participants’ performances
was comparable among three CMC groups for easy weeks
(F(2,47) =1.20, p > .05). In contrast, difference in participants’
performances on hard weeks differed for the three CMC
groups (F(2,47) = 3.60, p < .05). Fisher’s least significant
difference (LSD) post-hoc comparison suggested that the
difference in performance was higher for text and audio
groups than video groups (ps < .05).
The results suggested that different CMC groups probably
were engaged differently at different stages during the
problem solving process. Text and audio groups probably
were still placing most effort in collaboratively finding the
solution space. As a result, they were less likely to move to
the next stage of resolving conflicts if there was any. In
contrast, participants in the video condition were able to
reach a decision that better balanced the two sides’ task
performance, as reflected in a smaller difference score,
suggesting that they probably were able to move into the
conflict resolution stage on hard weeks.
Level of Conflict. Also taking participants’ difference in
performance as dependent variable, mixed-design ANOVA
with level of conflict as a repeated measure and CMC
methods as between-subject variable yielded a significant 2way interactive effect (F(2,47) = 5.92, p < .01), suggesting
that different CMC groups also performed differently on
weeks with low vs. high levels of potential conflict.
As shown in Figure 2b, for low-conflict weeks, CMC
methods had a marginal effect on dyads’ difference in
performance (F(2,47) = 2.42, p = .10). The effect of CMC
methods was significant for high conflict weeks (F(2,47) =
4.40, p < .05). Fisher’s LSD post-hoc comparison suggested
that the difference in performance was lowest for the video
condition, which was lower than text condition (p < .01),
and marginally lower than audio condition (p < .10).

Figure 2. Difference score for easy vs. hard weeks (a) and for lowvs. high-conflict weeks (b) in text, audio and video groups

Task Completion Time
Level of Difficulty. Mixed-design ANOVA yielded a
marginally significant 2-way interactive effect between
difficulty and CMC methods (F(2,47) = 2.87, p = .07) and
significant main effects of difficulty (F(1,47) = 14.31, p <.001)
and CMC methods (F(2,47) = 36.16, p <.001). As we can see
in Figure 3a, not surprisingly, participants spent more time
scheduling hard than easy weeks, and text condition was
more time consuming than audio and video conditions
(Fisher’s LSD, ps < .001). We were interested in whether
participants using different CMC methods allocated time
differently for easy vs. hard weeks. Further comparisons
with paired-sample t-tests showed that participants in text
(t(16)=2.77, p<.05) and audio conditions (t(15)=3.17, p<.01)
spent more time on hard weeks than on easy weeks.
Participants in the video condition spent similar amount of
time on easy vs. hard weeks (t(16)=1.45, p>.05).
Level of Conflict. According to mix-design ANOVA, the
interactive effect between conflict level and CMC methods
was not significant (F(2,47)=.63, p>.05). The main effects of
conflict level (F(1,47) = 5.30, p <.05) and CMC methods
(F(2,47) = 32.83, p <.001) were significant. A similar pattern
can be observed in Figure 3b that participants spent more
time on high- than low-conflict weeks and texting was more
time consuming than audio and video chatting (Fisher’s
LSD, ps <.001). We also conducted further analysis with
paired-sample t-tests and found that time difference between
high- and low-conflict weeks did not reach significance for
text (t(16)=1.32, p > .05) or audio (t(15) = .91, p > .05) groups.
Participants in video condition spent more time discussing
high-conflict weeks than the low-conflict ones (t(16) = 3.49,
p<.01). However, interpretation of these t-test results should
use caution due to the non-significant interaction between
conflict level and CMC methods.

2145

The results suggested that participants in different CMC
conditions probably allocated time differently depending on
task difficulty and level of conflict. Participants using text
and audio chatting had a tendency of spending more time
when it was harder to find solution candidates, whereas
participants in video condition were more likely to spend
more time when more conflicts need to be resolved.

Figure 4. Number of hours mentioned per week for easy vs.
hard weeks (a) and for weeks of different conflict levels (b).

Figure 3. Task completion time for easy vs. hard weeks (a) and for
low- vs. high-conflict weeks (b) in text, audio and video groups

Problem Space
To further understand the problem solving process that
result in the performance and task completion time patterns
discovered above, we examined the size of the problem
space participants visited. We also paid special attention to
the problem space they revisited, which indicated evaluation
of solution options and negotiation.
Visited Problem Space. We compared the problem space
visited by each pair for different week types. Mixed-design
ANOVA with difficulty as a repeated measure and CMC
methods as a between-subject variable yielded a marginally
significant two-way interactive effect on the size of visited
problem space (F(2,47) = 2.92, p=.06, see Figure 4a). Further
comparison with paired-sample t-tests indicated participants
visited a larger problem space on hard weeks than easy
weeks in text (t(16) = 2.75, p<.05) and audio (t(15) = 4.31,
p<.001) conditions, but not in video condition (t(16) = .51,
p>.05). Conflict level and CMC methods had a marginally
significant interactive effect on the size of visited problem
space (F(2,47) = 3.09, p=.055, see Figure 4b). Paired-sample
t-tests showed that only the video group had a tendency of
exploring more of the problem space in high-conflict weeks
compared to low-conflict ones (t(16) = 2.04, p=.06).
This pattern of the extent to which participants explored
the problem space was consistent with their time allocation
in the four week types. That is, when tasks became harder,
participants in text and audio conditions visited a larger
proportion of the problem space, which might result in
longer time spent on hard weeks. In contrast, participants in
video condition were more sensitive to the change in the
level of potential conflict. When more negotiation was
required for high-conflict weeks, they demonstrated a
tendency of visiting more of the problem space and
spending more time. This pattern of behavioral difference
became even more evident when we analyzed the part of
problem space participants visited for more than once.

Negotiation Space (Revisited Problem Space). Only a
main effect of difficulty emerged from mixed-design
ANOVA with difficulty as a repeated measure and CMC
methods as a between-subject variable on the size of the
negotiation space (F(1,47) = 6.23, p<.05, see Figure 5a). A
significant 2-way interaction emerged between conflict level
and CMC method when mixed-design ANOVA was used to
analyze their effect on the size of the negotiation space
(F(2,47) = 4.96, p<.05, see Figure 5b). Further comparison
using paired-sample t-tests suggested that participants in
video condition revisited significantly more hours in highconflict weeks than in low conflict weeks (t(16)=3.74, p<.01),
probably as a result of more engagement in negotiation. In
contrast, text and audio groups did not demonstrate such a
behavioral pattern.

Figure 5. Number of hours revisited per week for easy vs. hard
weeks (a) and for weeks of different conflict levels (b).

Negotiation
To control for the influence of overall talkativeness on
participants’ involvement in negotiation, we divided the
number of sentences participants actually said (typed) on
evaluation of points and negotiation for each week by the
average number of sentences said per week by the CMC
group this dyad was from and used this proportional score to
represent participants’ involvement in negotiation.
Mixed-design ANOVA did not find a significant
interactive effect between difficulty and CMC methods on
the extent to which participants involved in negotiation
(F(2,47) = .35, p >.10, see Figure 6a). A main effect of week
types (F(1,47) = 16.18, p<.01) suggested that hard weeks
elicited more negotiations than easy weeks. The main effect
of CMC methods was not significant (F(2,47) = 1.65, p >.10).
In contrast, conflict level and CMC methods had a
significant two-way interactive effect on involvement in

2146

negotiation (F(2,47) = 3.76, p < .05, see Figure 6b). Pairedsample t-tests comparing low- vs. high-conflict weeks
suggested that the number of sentences devoted to
negotiation was similar for text condition (t(16) = .03, p
>.05), marginally different for audio condition (t(15) = 1.88,
p =.08), and significantly different for video condition (t(16)
= 5.21, p <.001). Thus, participants were more likely to
negotiate and resolve conflict for weeks involving higher
levels of potential conflict in video condition.

Figure 6. Involvement in negotiation for easy vs. hard weeks (a)
and low- vs. high conflict weeks (b) in different CMC methods.

Discussion
In the current study, we examined the effect of text-based
audio-based and video-based CMC methods on how people
resolved conflicts and reached agreement in an appointment
scheduling task. Two within-subject variables (difficulty,
level of conflict) were introduced to further decompose the
dynamics of interaction within participant pairs throughout
the conflict resolution process. In particular, we focused on
the difference in performance between each participant dyad
because this difference was a good indicator of how well
conflicts were resolved, and reflected the effectiveness of
communication and negotiation in each CMC method.
In general, our results were supportive of the idea that
higher bandwidth would help conflict resolution. First,
participants who used the video-based communication
method would more likely agree on solutions that were
equally good to both parties, especially in difficult and high
conflict weeks, than participants who used the text-based
and audio-based methods. Second, task completion time and
the proportion of visited problem space increased along with
task difficulty for text and audio groups, but along with
level of conflict for video group. Third, direct examination
of the extent to which participant dyads engaged in
negotiation also indicated that only participants in the video
condition were more likely to be involved in negotiation by
revisiting more of the problem space and by devoting more
of the conversations to evaluation of different solution
options and negotiation as a result of increased conflict
level. Our further observation on the conversation dynamics
suggested that participants using different CMC methods
probably employed different strategies when exchanging
time information and exploring the problem space, which in
turn might have an impact on the outcomes of the following
conflict resolution stage. Detailed analyses are needed on
the conversation dynamics to further reveal the mechanisms

of how different CMC methods were supportive of conflict
resolution in tasks of similar type.
The results of the current study provided insights on how
the dynamics of interpersonal interaction induced by
different CMC methods could influence the negotiation and
conflict resolution processes. We believe that one important
metric for successful conflict resolution is whether both
parties can agree on a solution that is equally good for them.
A high difference in performance or earned benefits in
remote conflict resolution tasks can bring long-term
detrimental effects on how collaborators judge the overall
value of the collaboration, as well as their mutual trust. In
the long run, the trust and willingness to collaboration might
diminish if either party perceives that there is imbalance of
benefits or costs in the collaboration, which apparently
would result in less efficient long-term effectiveness in the
collaborative work. Therefore, special attention need to the
paid to whether the interfaces of CMC tools could facilitate
a feeling of “fairness” among remote collaborators when
they need to resolve conflicts by remote communication.
The process of conflict resolution could become even
more complicated when other factors (e.g., personality
traits, cultural backgrounds and other features from the
interface) are also taken into consideration in the dynamic
process, or when different performance goals are introduced
(e.g., individual vs. group oriented). This may imply that
there is no single best CMC method for all remote
collaborative works. Perhaps it is more reasonable to choose
different methods depending on the nature of the remote
task, the individuals performing the task, and the individual
and/or collective goals of the team. Future research should
be focused on the complex interactions of these factors
during remote collaborative work.

References
Clark, H. H., & Brennan, S. A. (1991). Grounding in communication. In L.
B. Resnick, J. M. Levine & S. D. Teasley (Eds.), Perspectives on
socially shared cognition Washington: APA Books.
Cooper, S., & Taleb-Bendiab, A. (2004). CONCENSUS: multi-party
negotiation support for conflict resolution in concurrent engineering
design Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing, 9(2), 155-159.
Cramton, C. D. (2001). The Mutual Knowledge Problem and Its
Consequences for Dispersed Collaboration. Organization Science,
12(3), 346-371.
Doherty-Sneddon, G., Anderson, A., O'Malley, C., Langton, S., Garrod, S.,
& Bruce, V. (1997). Face-to-face and video-mediated
communication: A comparison of dialogue structure and task
performance. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 3(2),
105-125.
Firm, K., Sellen, A., & Wilbur, S. (1997). Video-mediated communication.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Foroughi, A. (1998). Minimizing Negotiation Process Losses with
Computerized Negotiation Support. Journal of Applied Business
Research, 14(4), 15-26.
Fussell, S. R., & Krauss, R. M. (1992). Coordination of Knowledge in
Communication: Effects of Speakers' Assumptions About What
Others Know. Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 62(3),
378-391.
Newell, A., & Simon, H. A. (1972). Human Problem Solving: PrenticeHall, Inc.
Straus, S. G., & McGrath, J. E. (1994). Does the Medium Matter? The
Interaction of Task Type and Technology on Group Performance and
Member Reactions. Journal of Applied Psychology, 79(1), 87-97.

2147

