UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Creative Choices in Choreography: A New Qualitative Methodology

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6pt710ht

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Author
Saura, Dafne Muntanyola

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Creative Choice in Dance Rehearsals: A New Qualitative Methodology
Dafne Muntanyola Saura (dafne.muntanyola@uam.es)
Department of Sociology, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid
Campus Cantoblanco, Spain
Keywords: Creative Choice, Cognitive Ethnography, Social
Networks Analysis, Distributed Cognition, Simmelian Ties

Creative choice is an individual act. Nonetheless, a
longitudinal cognitive ethnography of a prestigious London
dance company puts forward how dance rehearsals are made
of social relationships of production ((Kirsh et al, 2009,
Muntanyola & Kirsh, 2010). The products of creativity are
also minute but crucial modifications of transitory stages of
development (Feyerabend, 1987, Bourdieu, 1998, Faulkner
& Becker, 2009). Our hypothesis is that the dancers’
patterns interactions shape individual creative choices in
movement production.

Distribution & Modality
We collected data on the dancers’ instruction following,
distinguishing perceptually based interactions (looking at
each other), from those mainly verbal (asking for advice or
corrections), or affective in nature (friendships and intimate
relationships). The application of Social Network Analysis
(SNA) to the collected behavioral data provided a reticular
representation of creative choice (see figure 1). We
determined the degree of social interaction according to
centrality measures and simmelian ties. There was a high
density of interrelations around a central node, the most
experienced dancer in the company, which acted as an
information filter.

Figure 1. The dancers’ verbal interactions
Dancers create movement following the choreographer’s
instructions. In order to obtain new movements, the
choreographer as an expert engages in an objectifying
relationship with the dancer (Rannou & Roarik, 2006). Her
body becomes an instrument for exploration of the
choreographer’s imagery. His creative choices include
deciding on the amount and type of information provided in
rehearsal. Through interviews and observation, we defined
the instructions’ modalities. Verbal instructions were scarce.
The degree of body awareness experienced by the dancers

increased when the choreographer was more specific in
explaining a task and its relation to the piece as a whole. In
order to attribute conceptual meaning to their own
movements, they were dependent on the tasks’ degree of
verbalization.

Conclusion
Observation of the actum in rehearsal time showed how
instructions are necessarily interactive. Social Network
Analysis allowed us to understand rehearsals as a distributed
cognitive system (Hollan et al, 2000). Interactions among
dancers were frequent and mostly verbal, and included a
surrogate figure, which acted as an information hub.
Nevertheless, the dancers depend on the instruction’s
modality, specifically on the amount of verbal information
coming from the choreographer. Further analysis will
measure the amount and modality of information
transmitted both vertically and horizontally, in order to see
if verbal interaction among dancers compensates effectively
for the lack of verbal feedback from the choreographer.

Acknowledgements
The Fulbright Commission, the University of California,
San Diego (UCSD) and the Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid (UAM) funded this research.

References
Bourdieu, P. (1998). Les regles de l’art. Paris: Seuil.
Faulkner, R. & Becker, H. (2009). Do You Know...?" The
Jazz Repertoire in Action. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Feyerabend, P. (1987) “Creativity - A Dangerous Myth”,
Critical Inquiry, 13,4: 700-711.
Hollan, J, Hutchins, E. & Kirsh, D. (2000). “Distributed
Cognition: Towards a New Foundation for HumanComputer Interaction Research.” ACM Transactions On
Computer-Human Interaction, 7, 2, 174- 196.
Kirsh, D. Muntanyola, D., Lew, A., Jao, J. & Sugihara, M.
(2009). “Choreographic methods for creating novel, high
quality dance”, Design and Semantics of Form and
Movement 2009 Conference Proceedings, 188-195.
Muntanyola, D. & Kirsh, D. (2010): “Marking as Physical
Thinking: A Cognitive Ethnography of Dance”,
Proceedings of the IWCogSc-10 ILCLI International
Workshop on Cognitive Science, Donosti.
Rannou, J. & Roharik, I. (2006). Les Danseurs: Un métier
d’engagement. Paris: La Documentation française.
Simmel, G. (1908). “Sociologie” in Levine, Donald (1971).
Georg Simmel on Individuality and Social Forms. Chicago:
University Chicago UP.

1859

