UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Distinguishing Levels of Grounding that Underlie Transfer of Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2hq226xg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Byrge, Lisa
Goldstone, Robert

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Distinguishing Levels of Grounding that Underlie Transfer of Learning
Lisa A. Byrge (lbyrge@indiana.edu)

Department of Psychology, 1101 E. 10th Street
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

Robert L. Goldstone (rgoldsto@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1101 E. 10th Street
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

Abstract
We find that transfer of learning from a perceptually concrete
simulation to an isomorphic but superficially dissimilar textbased problem is sensitive to the congruence between the
force dynamics common to both systems and the kinesthetic
schema induced via action in the first, perceptually concrete,
simulation. Counterintuitively, incompatibility between the
force dynamics and the kinesthetic schema has a beneficial
effect on transfer, relative to compatibility as well as an
unrelated control. We suggest that this incompatibility
between action and system dynamics may make the system’s
relational structure more salient, leading to a more flexible
conceptualization that ultimately benefits transfer. In addition,
we suggest that too much “action concreteness” in hands-on
learning may actually limit transfer, by fostering an
understanding that is tied to that action and therefore less
available for transfer in situations where that action is no
longer relevant.
Keywords: Transfer; Action; Education; Embodiment;
Analogy.

Introduction
Proliferating evidence from embodied cognitive science
indicates that people regularly transfer understanding from
visceral, body-based, experience to more “abstract”
domains, such as from physical movement to
conceptualization of time (Boroditsky & Ramscar, 2002)
and from zygomaticus (smiling) muscle contraction to
assessment of humor (Strack, Martin, & Stepper, 1988). A
different kind of transfer of understanding – as traditionally
conceptualized – is of crucial importance in education.
Much of our educational system is based on the hope that
prior learning can be transferred to novel situations.
Unfortunately, research has shown that people often have
great difficulties in transferring knowledge to new contexts
(Gick & Holyoak, 1980). Much of the literature on transfer
has focused on transfer of abstract problem-solving skills,
such as applying a previously-learned mathematical
equation to a novel type of problem. However, recent work
has demonstrated an implicit form of transfer from a
simulated concrete physical system to a superficially
dissimilar textual problem with an analogous goal (Day &
Goldstone, in press). In this work, the perceptual and spatial
concreteness of the simulation, along with its dynamic
nature, are thought to facilitate the development of a mental
model that can then be deployed for interpreting and solving

the less intuitive transfer task. This transfer was
demonstrated for simulations controlled with a neutral
action (a mouse click) or with no action (passive
observation), suggesting that the transfer occurs at the level
of the force dynamics that both systems have in common.
However, the above finding of implicit, spontaneous
transfer from physical experience raises an interesting
question. Would some form of “action concreteness” in the
training simulation – parallel to the perceptual and spatial
concreteness found to be beneficial – enhance this transfer
still further? Adding action that is compatible with the force
dynamics of the system might foster a more powerful
representation of the force dynamics, by inducing a
“kinesthetic schema” that echoes the conceptual force
dynamics of the system. Such an enhanced, visceral
understanding may then be more readily accessed and
transferred. There is a growing literature on “action
compatibility” effects in domains ranging from sentence
comprehension (Glenberg & Kaschak, 2002) to insight
problem solving (Thomas & Lleras, 2009; Catrambone et al,
2006), documenting facilitation when there is congruence
between an action and a more abstract but related process.
The idea that action compatibility is beneficial is also
prominent in education, where researchers often assume that
for difficult concepts, increased physical support leads to
better learning and transfer.
However, work on contextualization suggests an
alternative perspective -- too much concreteness can have a
detrimental effect on transfer, causing what is learned to be
“bound” to the learning context and less able to applied in
novel situations (Goldstone & Son, 2009). On this view,
action compatibility may actually harm transfer. The
purpose of the current studies is therefore to determine
whether action compatibility acts as a scaffold for learning
and transfer, or as an obstacle to generalization.

Experiments
To investigate the effect of action compatibility on transfer,
we operationalized action compatibility as the congruence
between the conceptual force schema of the system being
learned and the kinesthetic schema induced by the actions
used to control the simulation of the system. We used the
training and transfer task from Day and Goldstone (in
press), with which positive transfer was demonstrated when
the goals – and therefore both solution procedures and

2818

conceptual force schemas – of the training and transfer tasks
were the same.
In the current studies, we manipulate the compatibility of
the kinesthetic schema with the conceptual force schema
during the training simulation, while holding constant the
compatibility between the conceptual force schemas in the
training and transfer tasks. If the facilitative effects of action
compatibility include supporting learning and transfer,
performance on the transfer task in the Compatible
condition should be superior to the Incompatible condition.
Alternatively, if action compatibility acts to tie the learned
knowledge to specific actions that are relevant for the
training but not transfer scenario – thus interfering with
generalization -- then the Compatible condition should
perform worse on the transfer task.

leftward hand movement for activating the fan is exactly
opposite the direction of the ball and fan. This results in the
kinesthetic experience of “opposing forces.” In both
conditions, the conceptual force schema for the system is
the same -- the fan boosts the ball. In the Compatible
condition, the conceptual and kinesthetic force schemas are
congruent -- the hand boosts the ball and the fan boosts the
ball. But in the Incompatible condition, the conceptual and
kinesthetic force schemas are incongruent -- the hand
opposes the ball while the fan boosts the ball.

Experiment 1
Participants 48 Indiana University undergraduates
participated in this study for partial course credit. 3
participants were excluded from analysis for failure to
follow the instructions.
Materials and Design The materials in this study were
based on the materials used in Day and Goldstone (in press).
The training simulation in that original study depicted a
horizontally oscillating ball suspended between elastic
bands, and a rightward-pointing fan that could supply a
constant horizontal force. The simulation included neither
gravity nor friction, so the system yielded perpetual
oscillatory motion of the ball when the fan was not being
used. Participants clicked on the fan to get the ball to a
particular position, such as “maximizing” the ball’s position
by getting it to the far endpoint. Consistently applying the
fan only when the ball is moving to the right resulted in
gradually increasing the amplitude of the ball’s oscillation
(because the rightward fan force augments, or boosts, the
rightward acceleration of the ball). Consistently applying
the fan only when the ball is moving to the left resulted in
gradually decreasing amplitude of the ball’s oscillation
(because the rightward fan force cancels out, or opposes, the
leftward acceleration of the ball). Therefore applying the fan
all the time resulted in no net change in the ball’s amplitude.
In the current studies, we added a “slider” controller for
the fan that is activated using a pronounced hand movement
to the right or to the left, depending on condition.
Successfully “maximizing” the ball requires applying the
fan only when the ball moves rightward, which gradually
increases the amplitude of the ball’s oscillation until it hits
the far endpoint. Therefore in the condition with the
rightward slider (“Compatible condition”; Fig. 1a), the
rightward movement required to activate the fan is coupled
to the rightward movement of the ball. This coupling
between the ball and hand provides the kinesthetic
experience of “moving in sync.” With the added visual
information of the ball moving further and further
rightward, participants report that their experience is of
“boosting forces.” Conversely, in the condition with the
leftward slider (“Incompatible condition,” Fig. 1b), the

Figure 1a & 1b: Compatible (top) and Incompatible
(bottom) conditions.
Video of these simulations is available at
http://cognitrn.psych.indiana.edu/complexsims/slider/max/
During the training phase, participants were guided
through the ball simulation for six timed blocks. In Block 1,
participants were asked to simply watch the system, with no
interaction. With no interaction, there was no activation of
the fan, so the ball simply oscillated regularly until the
block ended. In Block 2, participants were asked to activate
the fan and observe the differences between the ball’s
motion with and without the fan. Condition-specific
instructions on how to activate the fan by controlling the
slider with either rightward or leftward motion were
provided (and repeated for every subsequent block). During
Blocks 3-6, participants were instructed to observe the effect
of using the fan in a specific way: “Try activating the fan
ONLY WHEN THE BALL IS MOVING RIGHTWARD
(away from the fan), and NOT when the ball is moving to
the left.” These instructions correspond to the correct
solution procedure for getting the ball to reach the far
endpoint (“maximizing” the ball). A participant who
perfectly followed the instructions would therefore observe
the “maximizing” of the ball’s position four times. During
all six blocks, the participants’ task was to follow the

2819

instructions and observe the outcome; they were not asked
to achieve any goal for ball’s position. Although the far
endpoint was highlighted with an orange triangle,
participants were given no instructions pertaining to
“maximizing” the ball or moving it to an endpoint. After
completing Block 6, participants were instructed to ask the
experimenter to start the second, ostensibly unrelated,
experiment.
This second task was a strictly textual population
dynamics problem identical to the transfer task used by Day
and Goldstone (Fig. 2). Participants were presented with
instructions describing a city that can comfortably hold
500,000 people; with less people, the city is more appealing
due to low congestion; with more people, the city is less
appealing due to crowding. All participants were given the
task of getting the population to reach 1,000,000.
Participants controlled the task by choosing whether to add
media advertising, which increased the “appeal” of the city
for one time step. This task proceeded in discrete time steps;
at each time step, participants decided whether to click the
“add media” button or the “no media” button. The value of
the population, the appeal, and the change in appeal at each
time step were displayed in a scrolling format, so that
participants could also see the values for the previous five
time steps. Participants could re-read the instructions at any
time, and the goal (“get the population above a million”)
remained on-screen for the entire task. Participants were
required to solve the task 3 times before completing the
experiment.

Figure 2: Population task.
Though seemingly unrelated in both subject matter and
appearance, the two tasks are governed by the same
dynamics: “population” is analogous to ball position,
“appeal” to ball velocity, and “media advertising” to the fan.
The behavior of both systems was thus governed by the
same equations, with the population’s value (or ball’s
position) oscillating around a numerical (or spatial)

“midpoint.” Just like turning on the fan in the ball
simulation when the ball was moving rightward, adding
media advertisement during the rise of the population
increased the amplitude of the population’s oscillation;
adding media advertising during the fall of the population
dampened the population’s oscillation; and adding media
advertising all the time caused no net change in the
population’s oscillation. Therefore, procedures for
“maximizing” were also the same for the both systems, with
participants intervening by adding media advertising (or fan
force) to boost the population (or ball’s position) only when
it is already heading in the direction of the maximum.
The dependent variable in this study is the number of time
steps needed to solve the population task on each of the
three trials. We predicted that the different kinesthetic force
schemas in the ball simulation would differentially affect
transfer to the population task. If action compatibility
facilitates transfer, the population task performance of the
Compatible condition will be superior to that of the
Incompatible condition. If action compatibility instead acts
to bind what is learned to the specific actions, then
population task performance of the Compatible condition
will be worse than the Incompatible condition.
Results and discussion Most participants completed both
simulations within the one-hour time limit. However, three
participants from the Incompatible condition who failed to
complete the population task within the time allotted were
excluded from subsequent analysis.
There was no difference between the Incompatible and
Compatible conditions in the average time steps required to
complete the population task: 245.95 vs. 314.06 time steps
(t(327)=1.14, p=0.26). However, a 3 × 2 (trial number ×
condition) mixed ANOVA revealed not only a significant
main effect of trial (F(2, 74)=5.30, p=0.0070) representing
improvement over time, but a significant interaction
between trial and condition (F(2,74)=4.156, p=0.019). The
interaction reflects an increasing advantage of the
Incompatible condition over the Compatible condition as
population trials increased from one to three (Fig. 3).
Multiple comparisons were conducted using Bonferroniadjusted alpha levels of 0.0167 (0.5/3) per test. Results
indicated that there was no reliable difference between the
Incompatible and Compatible conditions on time to
complete Trial 1 (456 vs. 330 time steps; t(37)=1.055,
p=0.30, n.s.) or on Trial 2 (167 vs. 288 time steps; t(37)=
-1.87, p=0.070, n.s.). However, the Incompatible condition
significantly outperformed the Compatible condition on
Trial 3: (117 vs. 324 time steps (t(37)=-2.53, p=0.0157).
Paired t-tests (Bonferroni-adjusted to alpha levels of
0.025) revealed that the time steps to complete the
population task significantly decreased between the first and
last trials of the population task in the Incompatible
condition (a decrease of 339 time steps, t(20)=3.40,
p=0.002), but not in the Compatible condition, which
decreased by only 6 time steps. Because the Compatible
condition’s performance in the first trial was far from
optimal – 330 time steps, while the shortest possible

2820

solution time is 39 time steps – the lack of improvement in
that condition is striking.

Finally, in the ball task, the Incompatible condition had a
significantly lower proportion of trials where the
“maximize” event was observed (0.51 vs. 0.75, t(37)=-2.20,
p=0.034), indicating that the Incompatible condition had
more difficulty in learning to move the slider according to
the instructions. Apparently, the unintuitive actions required
in the Incompatible condition slowed learning of the
original ball scenario, but facilitated its transfer to the
population task.

Experiment 2

Figure 3: Population task performance. Participants who
experienced the Incompatible training condition show more
learning during an analogous population task than those in
an action-compatible training condition. On this and all
other graphs, error bars represent standard error of the mean.
Analysis of participants’ strategy use in the population
task provides converging evidence of a benefit for the
Incompatible action training. We measured how often
participants used the correct solution strategies, which
meant adding media when the population is lower than
500,000 and increasing, and ceasing to add media
immediately before (or, as soon as) the population was
higher than 500,000 and decreasing. A 3 × 2 (trial number ×
condition) mixed ANOVA measuring total correct strategy
usage revealed a significant main effect of trial
(F(2,74)=8.94, p=0.00033) as well as a significant main
effect of condition (F(1,37)=4.83, p=0.034) that reflected
higher correct strategy use in the Incompatible condition
(29% vs. 18%). Additionally, correct strategy use
significantly increased between the first and last trials for
the Incompatible condition (mean difference of 24%;
t(20)=3.24, p=0.0041), but not for the Compatible condition
(mean difference of 7.5%; t(17)=1.49, p=0.15, n.s.). A
different strategy – adding media at every time step – was
favored by both conditions initially, perhaps because it
encapsulates the common-sense strategy of “if you want a
large population, advertise your city as much as possible.” A
3 × 2 (trial number × condition) mixed ANOVA revealed a
significant main effect of condition (F(1,37)=5.13,
p=0.0295) in usage of this intuitive, but incorrect, strategy,
reflecting lower usage in the Incompatible condition (33%
vs. 46%).

Experiment 1 provides evidence that action compatibility in
one task affects performance on an analogous transfer task.
The relative transfer advantage of the Incompatible
condition occurred in the absence of a problem-solving goal
in the training task, showing that action compatibility
matters even for non-goal-directed learning. However, the
action-centered instructions in Experiment 1 may have led
to a focus on the action itself, rather than the consequences
of the actions. The positive transfer Day and Goldstone
reported was primarily based on goal-directed learning of
the ball task. Goal-directed learning is more likely to foster
a functional perspective on the ball simulation, with a focus
on the causal structure and the consequences of actions,
rather than the actions themselves. If the action
compatibility effect was a result of focus on the action at the
expense of the system, then population task performance in
the Compatible and Incompatible conditions should not
differ after goal-directed learning of the ball simulation.
However, if action compatibility genuinely affects
conceptualization of the ball simulation, then differences
should remain.
Additionally, Experiment 1 provides evidence of relative
transfer differences between compatible and incompatible
actions, but not that there is an absolute transfer advantage
for either condition when compared to an unrelated training
task. To address this, Experiment 2 also adds a control
condition.
Participants 88 Indiana University undergraduates
participated for partial course credit. 3 participants were
excluded from analysis due to technical problems.
Materials and Design This experiment was nearly identical
to Experiment 1, with the following important differences.
A control condition was added, to assess whether the
relative transfer advantage of the incompatible kinesthetic
force schema was a genuine transfer benefit, relative to
experience with an unrelated simulation. Participants in the
control condition first performed a task involving repeatedly
guiding a spacecraft to its home planet while being attracted
to other fixed objects. We ensured that the spacecraft task
required approximately the same time as the ball simulation.
In the ball simulation, we added a goal: “maximizing” the
ball. Participants received the same instructions on the
operation of the slider as in Experiment 1, but the remaining
procedural instructions were replaced with “Your goal in
this task is: Make the ball reach the post opposite the fan, on
the right side of the screen.” To mitigate the effects of any

2821

initial difficulty in learning to control the Incompatible
condition’s slider, we also doubled the number of trials in
which participants controlled the ball simulation. Therefore
participants were required to solve the ball simulation 10
times before they were allowed to proceed to the population
task. All participants, including the control condition, solved
the same population task from Experiment 1.
Results and Discussion
As in Experiment 1, most
participants completed both simulations within the one-hour
time limit. However, 5 participants who failed to complete
the population task within the allotted time were excluded
from subsequent analysis.
The Incompatible and Control conditions had
significantly different average solution time steps in the
population task, demonstrating a benefit for the
Incompatible condition over the unrelated control (136.55
vs. 238.032; t(51)=2.34, p=0.023). A 3 × 3 (trial number ×
condition) mixed ANOVA revealed a reliable main effect of
trial number (F(2,154)=8.79, p<0.001), with an effect of
condition that approaches significance (F(2,77)=2.69,
p=0.075) (Fig. 4). The population task performance exhibits
the same trend as seen in Experiment 1, of an advantage of
the Incompatible condition relative to the Compatible
condition that emerges only after the first trial, although
here the differences between those two conditions did not
reach statistical significance.

Figure 4: Population task performance following a
version of the ball simulation or a control task, both with
goals. The Incompatible condition results in better
population performance than the control.
Comparison of population task strategy usage between the
Incompatible and Compatible conditions echoes the strategy
differences found in Experiment 1. A 3 × 2 (trial number ×
condition) mixed ANOVA for usage of one correct strategy
-- adding media when the population is lower than 500,000

and increasing, and ceasing to add media immediately
before the population was higher than 500,000 and
decreasing (only this strategy is reported here because use of
the other correct strategy did not differ) -- revealed a
reliable main effect of condition (F(1,47)=4.51, p=0.039),
demonstrating higher usage in the Incompatible condition
(9% vs. 5%).

General Discussion
These two studies provide evidence of action compatibility
differentially influencing transfer from a simulated physical
system to an analogous but dissimilar task. The relatively
better performance and strategy use in the Incompatible
condition, compared to the Compatible or control
conditions, support the notion that compatible actions are
closely tied to what is learned such that when the functional
force schema reappears in a transfer situation with different
actions, there is a failure to transfer. In other words, action
compatibility can act as an obstacle to generalization.
Additionally, the superior transfer performance of the
Incompatible condition relative to an unrelated control
training task establishes that the incompatibility of the
kinesthetic force schema and conceptual force schema offers
genuine benefits for solving a transfer task with an
analogous force schema.
Interestingly, despite worse performance on the
population task, participants in the Compatible condition
demonstrated better learning on the ball simulation in
Experiment 1, as measured by their higher rate of
successfully controlling the slider according to the
instructions. This discrepancy between what participants
find easy to do and what actually helps them is suggestive
of the literature on “desirable difficulties.” The conditions
that facilitate immediate learning do not necessarily promote
long-term learning (Bjork, 1994). On this view, the relative
difficulty of controlling the Incompatible version of the ball
simulation may have prompted deeper cognitive processing
of the task and of the system as a whole.
While we believe that “desirable difficulties” contributes
to the benefit of the Incompatible condition, it also leaves
one aspect of this benefit unpredicted. If participants in the
Incompatible condition simply acquired deeper, more
transfer-relevant knowledge during the training task, then
we might have expected initial differences between the
conditions during the first transfer trials. And we might
expect those initial differences to get smaller as time
progresses, because the participants in the other conditions
have had time to figure out a solution. Instead, we find the
opposite pattern. All participants perform similarly initially,
with differences appearing after the first trial.
The pattern of performance across trials can be interpreted
under the framework of “preparation for future learning”
(Bransford & Schwartz, 1999). On this view, the
Incompatible ball simulation better prepares participants to
learn to do the population task. Our prediction was in terms
of a transfer disadvantage due to the unhelpful tying of
learning to intuitive actions for the Compatible condition,

2822

but it is also instructive to ask what aspects of the
Incompatible condition may be beneficial in itself.
One answer, we believe, is suggested by “conservative
induction” (Medin & Ross, 1989). On this view,
generalization emerges as a side effect of the use of specific
examples, and the resulting generalized representation
retains details of those specific examples. In the Compatible
training condition, fan direction and hand motion were
coupled together, controlling the ball that also moved in that
same direction. It is conceivable, then, that the
representation acquired in that condition was something like
“things moving in sync.” Generalization to the population
task may have then had the character of “acting in sync”
with the oscillating population, or “apply media all the
time.” In fact, this is precisely the “intuitive” and incorrect
strategy the Compatible condition tended to use persistently
throughout the population task. On the other hand, in the
Incompatible training condition, the coupling between
action and system dynamics is broken. The hand moves left
while the fan is blowing right, which has the effect of
moving the ball to the right. This decoupled version of the
simulation was more difficult to learn to control. However,
it may also have resulted in the acquisition of a
representation that was more flexible, a representation that
differentiated between the effect of the action for
controlling the fan and the effect of the action of the fan.
And by “teasing apart” – rather than “blurring together” -the motoric and system-level actions, this more
diagnostically structured representation contained the
elements truly useful for connecting with, and solving, the
population task.
Achieving transfer is difficult, but transfer is crucial to
our educational system. These studies contribute to our
understanding of a promising new form of transfer from
concrete simulations, and demonstrate that while action
compatibility can stand in the way of an educator’s goals,
action incompatibility may sometimes help, by effectively
isolating the relational structure from specific actions.

Catrambone, R., Craig, D. L., & Nersessian, N. J. (2006).
The role of perceptually represented structure in
analogical problem solving. Memory & Cognition, 34(5),
1126-1132.
Day, S., & Goldstone, R. L. (in press). Analogical transfer
from a simulated physical system. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition.
Gick, M. L. & Holyoak, K. J. (1980). Analogical problem
solving. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 306–355.
Glenberg, A. M., & Kaschak, M. P. (2002). Grounding
language in action. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9,
558-565.
Medin, D. L., & Ross, B. H. (1989). The Specific Character
of Abstract Thought: Categorization, Problem Solving,
and Induction. In R. S. Sternberg (Ed.), Advances in the
psychology of human intelligence. Vol. 5. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Son, J. Y., & Goldstone, R. L. (2009). Contextualization in
Perspective. Cognition and Instruction, 27(1), 51-89.
Strack, F., Martin, L. L., & Stepper, S. (1988). Inhibiting
and facilitating conditions of the human smile: A
nonobtrusive test of the facial feedback hypothesis.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 768–
777.
Thomas, L. E., & Lleras, A. (2009). Swinging into thought:
directed movement guides insight in problem solving.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 16(4), 719-23.

Acknowledgments
We thank Sam Day, Drew Hendrickson, and Paulo Carvalho
for their helpful comments. We also acknowledge the
support of National Science Foundation REESE grant
0910218.

References
Bjork, R. A. (1994). Memory and metamemory
considerations in the training of human beings. In J.
Metcalfe & A. Shimamura (Eds.), Metacognition:
Knowing about knowing. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Boroditsky, L., & Ramscar, M. (2002). The Roles of Body
and Mind in Abstract Thought. Psychological Science,
13(2), 185-189.
Bransford, J. D., & Schwartz, D. L. (1999). Rethinking
Transfer: A Simple Proposal With Multiple Implications.
Review of Research in Education, 24(1), 61-100.

2823

