UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Distal prosody influences lexical interpretation in online sentence processing

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0d48j8d8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Brown, Meredith
Salverda, Anne Pier
Dilley, Laura C.
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Distal prosody influences lexical interpretation in online sentence processing
Meredith Brown (mbrown@bcs.rochester.edu)
Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester
Meliora Hall, Box 270268, Rochester, NY 14627-0268

Anne Pier Salverda (asalverda@bcs.rochester.edu)
Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester
Meliora Hall, Box 270268, Rochester, NY 14627-0268

Laura C. Dilley (ldilley@msu.edu)
Department of Communicative Sciences & Disorders, Michigan State University
116 Oyer, East Lansing, MI 48824

Michael K. Tanenhaus (mtan@bcs.rochester.edu)
Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester
Meliora Hall, Box 270268, Rochester, NY 14627-0268
Abstract
Previous work examining prosodic cues in online spoken
word recognition has focused primarily on local cues to
word identity. However, recent studies have suggested
that sentence-level prosodic patterns can also influence the
downstream interpretation of lexically ambiguous syllables
(Dilley & McAuley, 2008; Dilley, Mattys, & Vinke, 2010).
To test the hypothesis that these distal prosody effects are
based on expectations about the organization of upcoming
material, we conducted a visual world experiment using
fixations to competing alternatives such as pan and panda,
which differ in the presence or absence of a prosodic boundary
after pan(-). As predicted, the acoustic properties of distal
sentence material affected the proportion of fixations to the
monosyllabic competitor beginning 200 ms after the onset of
the target word. These findings support the hypothesis that
expectations based on perceived prosodic patterns in the distal
context influence lexical segmentation and recognition.
Keywords: Prosody; spoken word recognition; lexical
competition; perceptual organization; visual world paradigm

Introduction
Expectation and prediction are increasingly playing a major
role in models of language processing (e.g., Levy, 2008; Jurafsky, 1996; Hale, 2001), and effects of expectations based
on lexical and structural properties of sentences are well documented (reviewed in Kamide, 2008). However, another possible source of expectations that may be useful in language
processing are global prosodic patterns, including prosodic
phenomena that are distal to (i.e., several syllables removed
from) the locus of processing. Such patterns may also influence the interpretation of proximal sentence material by
contributing to listeners’ expectations about the lexical structure of upcoming material. Most work at the interface of
prosody and spoken word recognition to date has focused on
the effects of local prosodic cues to word identity, such as
stress, duration, and the strength of local prosodic boundaries (Cutler & van Donselaar, 2001; Salverda, Dahan, &

McQueen, 2003; Christophe, Peperkamp, Pallier, Block, &
Mehler, 2004). In this paper, we provide evidence that distal prosody generates expectations based on perceived global
prosodic patterns, and that these expectations constrain word
segmentation and recognition.

Background
Previous work using non-linguistic auditory stimuli ranging
from simple tone sequences to musical passages has shown
that listeners detect pitch, temporal, and/or amplitude patterning in distal (i.e., non-local) auditory context. Such patterning influences the metrical and grouping structures that
listeners perceive downstream (reviewed in Handel, 1989;
Huron, 2006). For example, listeners tend to perceptually
organize a continuous stream of tones of equal duration, temporal separation and amplitude that differ only in terms of
pitch height (as high or low pitched) into repeating sequences
of either high-low or low-high perceived groups, with the
first element in each group perceived as accented (Woodrow,
1911; Thomassen, 1982). Although high tones are more frequently perceived as more prominent than low tones, the perceived relative prominence of high and low tones within each
bitonal group depends on the context. To describe such perceptual proclivities in the domain of music processing, Lerdahl and Jackendoff (1983) proposed parallelism preference
rules, which state that when a musical passage contains segments that are perceived as similar or repetitive, parallel parts
of segments will be construed as having similar metrical and
grouping structure. These studies suggest that distal regularities in the acoustic characteristics of auditory stimuli can
influence the processing of proximal material.
Reports from linguistics suggest that prosodic context often exhibits regularities in pitch, duration, and/or amplitude. In particular, speech intonation and rhythm often show
characteristics that listeners perceive as patterning (Couper-

1631

Kuhlen, 1993; Dainora, 2001; Pierrehumbert, 2000). For example, listeners tend to hear stressed syllables as perceptually isochronous, i.e., as occurring at regular intervals (e.g.,
Lehiste, 1977), and speakers tend to use similar intonation
patterns on accented syllables within an intonational phrase
(Couper-Kuhlen, 1993; Crystal, 1969; Dainora, 2001; Pierrehumbert, 2000).

of lists of words lacking grammatical structure. Thus, it is
important to evaluate whether listeners are sensitive to distal
prosodic patterns in more ecologically valid contexts, such as
in the processing of sentences.

Experiment overview

Based on these observations, Dilley and McAuley (2008)
proposed that regularities in distal prosodic patterning might
generate structural expectations in the domain of speech processing similar to the effects that have been observed in nonspeech processing. According to the perceptual grouping
hypothesis, distal prosodic patterns influence language processing by inducing periodic expectations about the organization of upcoming material, including the locations of major
prosodic boundaries relative to upcoming syllables within a
continuous speech stream. These prosodic expectations are in
turn predicted to constrain the lexical candidates considered
by listeners to words that are consistent with the anticipated
prosodic structure.
In support of the perceptual grouping hypothesis, Dilley and McAuley (2008) showed that the segmentation of
a sequence of lexically ambiguous syllables is sensitive to
prosodic patterns across words distal to the ambiguous syllables. For example, in the sequence channel dizzy foot-notebook-worm, the final four syllables have lexically ambiguous
structure. Manipulating the prosody of the first five syllables,
i.e., channel dizzy foot(-), influenced listeners’ perception of
the final three syllables in the sequence, i.e., note-book-worm.
When asked to report the final word they heard in each sequence, participants reported more two-syllable compound
words (i.e., bookworm) when the prosody across the distal
context encouraged a grouping of the ambiguous syllables
into two-syllable units. Likewise, participants given an incidental memory task after exposure to all sequences recognized a relatively high proportion of two-syllable words when
the distal context predicted a two-syllable segmentation.

The present study uses the visual world paradigm
(Tanenhaus, Spivey-Knowlton, Eberhard, & Sedivy, 1995) to
assess the effect of distal prosody on listeners’ online comprehension of words such as panda, which are temporarily
ambiguous due to the presence of an onset-embedded word
(i.e., pan). In this experiment, the acoustic characteristics of
sentence material distal to the target word are manipulated,
while the acoustic characteristics of material proximal to the
target word are held constant. If distal prosody influences
listeners’ expectations concerning the prosodic organization
of upcoming lexical material, the prosodic context should
affect listeners’ perception of prosodic boundaries in the
earliest moments of processing the target word. It should
therefore be possible to observe greater or lesser lexical
activation of the embedded competitor word (as indexed by
fixations to the competitor image), depending on whether the
distal prosodic context biases the listener to expect a major
phrasal boundary after the embedded word.

Methods
Participants
Forty-three participants from the University of Rochester and
the surrounding community consented to participate in the
visual world experiment. All participants were native English
speakers with normal hearing and corrected visual acuity.

Materials

These findings have since been replicated and extended by
Dilley, Mattys, and Vinke (2010), who used stimuli consisting
of strings of lexical items ending in potentially end-embedded
words (e.g., turnip vs. nip). They showed that distal prosody
is a quite robust cue to lexical organization, even when semantic context or proximal acoustic cues suggested a different structure. Moreover, using a cross-modal identity priming paradigm, Dilley et al. (2010) showed that distal prosody
affected the reaction time and accuracy of lexical decisions.
These findings provide initial evidence of distal prosodic effects on early lexical processing consistent with the predictions of the perceptual grouping hypothesis, but several questions remain. One question concerns the time course of the
observed distal prosody effects: If it is the case that the effects
of distal prosodic patterns are indeed mediated by listeners’
expectations, these effects would be expected to emerge in the
earliest moments of processing. In addition, distal prosody
effects have so far been demonstrated only in the processing

The 20 speech stimuli used in the experiment were grammatical declarative sentences containing a target word with an
onset-embedded competitor word (e.g., panda). Target words
were chosen such that both the word itself and the embedded
competitor word were highly imageable. The distal context
preceding the target word in each stimulus consisted of two
disyllabic words with initial primary stress, followed by one
monosyllabic word (e.g., Heidi sometimes saw). Likewise,
the proximal context preceding the target word consisted of
an additional monosyllabic word (e.g., that) followed by the
target word itself (e.g., panda). The sentence material following the target word consisted of a 3-5 syllable continuation.
An example stimulus is shown in Figure 1.
To reduce the probability of participants noticing a tendency for target words to be the longer of two phonologically related words, 20 filler items were included in which
the target word was the shorter of two phonologically related
words corresponding to items in the visual display. In addition, 20 filler items were included in which two pictures with
phonologically related labels appeared in the display, but the
target word did not overlap phonologically with either word.

1632

(a) LH-grouping condition

(b) HL-grouping condition
TARGET

TARGET

waveform

waveform

Heidi
Heidi

sometimes

saw that

panda

in the

city

sometimes

saw that

panda

in the

city

zoo

expected
syllable
grouping

sometimes

saw

that

Heidi

sometimes

saaaw

that

heidi

sometimes

panda
panda

in the

city

in the

city

in the

city

zoo

time

zoo

F0 (Hz)

F0 (Hz)
expected
perceptual
grouping

heidi

zoo

(L

Heidi
H)

(Heidi)

sometimes saw that
panda
in the
city
(L
H) (L
H) (L
H) (L H) …
(sometimes) (saw that)

(panda)

zoo

(in the) …

expected
perceptual
grouping
expected
syllable
grouping

(H

L)

(Heidi)

(H

L)

(H

saw

that

L) (H

panda

L) (H

L) (H …

zoo

( sometimes) (saaaw) (that pan) (da in) …

Figure 1: Explanation of the resynthesis methods performed to generate stimuli in (a) the LH-grouping condition, and (b) the
HL-grouping condition. The fundamental frequency (F0) of the first five syllables and the duration of the fifth syllable were
manipulated to encourage or discourage the perception of a phonological phrase boundary following the embedded word pan.
The acoustic properties of the stimuli were held constant from the onset of the sixth syllable through the end of the sentence.
The structure
the distalsaw
context
heidi of
sometimes
that within
panda the
in thefiller
cityitems
zoo(e.g.,
the number of syllables) was varied to reduce the information
available to participants about the likely sentence position of
the target word in upcoming experimental items.
heidi
sometimes
saw
that
panda
city
The first
author
recorded
all
items
asin the
WAV
fileszoousing
a Marantz PMD 660 digital recorder in a sound-attenuated
booth. The sentences were produced with minimal F0 excursions and slight F0 declination across each utterance.
The pitch synchronous overlap-and-add (PSOLA) algorithm
(Moulines & Charpentier, 1990) was then used in Praat
(Boersma & Weenink, 2010) to create two resynthesized versions of each recording. Resynthesizing the stimuli allowed
us to create auditory materials that were relatively naturalsounding, yet carefully controlled.
The distal F0 manipulation involved shifting all pitch
points within the vocalic portion of each context syllable up
by 35 Hz (for high syllables) or down by 25 Hz (for low syllables). This manipulation allowed us to maintain the natural pitch declination of the original recording while imposing periodic alternations onto the F0 contour. The F0 contours across the non-vocalic portions of the speech were determined by monotonic interpolation between the F0 value at
the end of the previous vocalic region and the F0 value at the
start of the subsequent vocalic region.
In the low-high (LH) grouping condition, phonological
phrase boundaries in the distal context were temporally
aligned with the edges of roughly isochronous sequences of
low and high syllables (Figure 1a). This timing was achieved
by modifying the duration of the fifth rime such that the fifth
intervocalic interval (i.e., the interval between vowel onsets in
the fifth and sixth syllables) was equivalent to the mean durations of the sixth and seventh intervocalic intervals (cf. Dilley
& McAuley, 2008; Dilley et al., 2010). The LH-grouping
distal context was predicted to facilitate the perception of
prosodic boundaries preceding and following the target word,
consistent with either a pan or a panda segmentation.
In the high-low (HL) grouping condition, on the other
hand, prosodic boundaries in the distal context were aligned

with the edges of sequences of high and low tones (Figure 1b). In this condition, the duration of the fifth syllable
was lengthened in Praat such that the total duration of the
fifth intervocalic interval was equivalent to the mean value
of the sum of the first two intervocalic intervals and the sum
of the third and fourth intervocalic intervals. This duration
manipulation enabled the fifth syllable to be paired with two
F0 levels instead of one while maintaining the approximately
isochronous timing of each high-low F0 sequence. The HLgrouping distal context was predicted to bias listeners to perceive the target word as two prosodic units – e.g., pan)(da
– with a boundary following pan. This perceived prosodic
boundary was expected to increase the relative activation of
the embedded word, and consequently the proportion of fixations to the competitor image.
Importantly, the acoustic characteristics of the sentence
were held constant across both conditions from the start of
the syllable preceding the target word (i.e., the start of the
proximal context) through the end of the sentence (Figure 1).
In both the LH- and HL-grouping conditions, the word preceding the target word had a high tone and the target word
itself had a LH tonal sequence. Controlling the acoustic characteristics of the target word and proximal context ensured
that any differences in participants’ fixation patterns between
the LH- and HL-grouping conditions could not be attributed
to proximal prosodic cues.
Pitch and duration manipulations were performed on the
filler items as well. To eliminate a consistent association between pitch and duration patterns, half of the filler items beginning with HL F0 contours contained one shortened syllable at a variable position in the sentence, whereas the other
half contained one lengthened syllable. Likewise, half of the
filler items starting with LH F0 contours contained one shortened syllable, and the other half had one lengthened syllable.

Procedure
Each trial began with the presentation of a visual display
containing four colored clip-art images, two of which cor-

1633

responded to the target word and the competitor word (Figure 2). The remaining two distractor images were selected
such that they were visually distinct from the target and competitor images and their labels were phonologically unrelated
to the target word. After 500 ms of visual preview, the participant heard a stimulus over Sennheiser HD 570 headphones
and was asked to click on the picture that was referred to in
the spoken sentence. They were not given feedback on their
performance during the experiment. Pilot testing indicated
that participants generally noticed that the speech had been
manipulated, so we employed the cover story that the goal
of the present study was to evaluate the comprehensibility of
synthesized speech stimuli for use in another study. Throughout the study, eye movements were tracked and recorded using a head-mounted SR Research EyeLink II system sampling at 250 Hz. Drift correction procedures were performed
after every fifth trial.

target

unrelated

competitor

Figure 2: An example display, with picture labels added.
Four lists were constructed by randomizing the positions
of the the images on the screen within each trial and pseudorandomizing the order of trials within the list. Within each
list, half of the experimental trials had HL-grouping prosody
and half had LH-grouping prosody. The assignment of items
to each type of grouping was counterbalanced across participants, for a total of eight lists. Four practice trials were included to familiarize participants with the study procedure.

Results
Three participants were excluded from analysis because they
did not meet inclusion criteria or did not complete the whole
experiment. These participants were replaced such that analyses of fixation patterns included data from five participants
for each of the eight experiment lists. Overall, participants
found the referent identification task to be easy, and clicked
on the incorrect picture on less than 3% of all experimental
trials. These trials were excluded from further analysis.
Figure 3 shows the mean proportion of fixations to the target, competitor, and distractor images as a function of condition starting at the onset of the target word. In the LHgrouping condition, the proportions of fixations to the target

and competitor images were roughly equivalent until approximately 200 ms following the offset of the embedded word
(566 ms), at which time participants began to converge on
the target image. However, in the HL-grouping condition,
fixation patterns revealed a competitor bias that emerged at
around 200 ms following target onset (i.e., approximately the
time at which signal-driven fixations would be expected to
emerge) and persisted until approximately 200 ms following
the offset of the embedded word.
For statistical analysis of these fixation curves, we employed growth curve analysis (GCA; Mirman et al., 2008),
a technique that is increasingly being applied to visual world
data. GCA is a variant of multi-level regression modeling
in which orthogonal power polynomial terms are fit to timeseries data to model variations in curve parameters (e.g., the
intercept and slope) that can be attributed to the independent
variable(s) and/or to individual differences in processing. Unlike other statistical methods traditionally used to evaluate effects of experimental factors in the visual world paradigm
(e.g., analysis of variance for proportions of fixations averaged over a single time window, or repeated-measures analyses across successive time windows), GCA explicitly models the trajectory of change over time through the comparison of curve parameters. This approach avoids several disadvantages of standard analysis of variance approaches, including the violation of independence assumptions and the
loss of fine-grained temporal detail. GCA is also an appropriate analysis technique for this experiment because previous
psycholinguistic research has revealed individual differences
in the effects of prosody on the interpretation of spoken language (e.g., Fraundorf & Watson, 2010). GCA, unlike standard analyses of variance, takes individual variation into account by explicitly incorporating parameters that estimate the
effects of factors for each participant.
Growth curve analyses were conducted separately for target and competitor fixations and included data from 150-1200
ms after the onset of the target word (i.e., from the earliest point at which signal-driven fixations could theoretically
be observed until the approximate time at which the proportion of target fixations reached its maximum value). Separate
analyses were done to assess by-subject and by-item effects
(indicated below as B1 and B2 , respectively). The perceptual
grouping hypothesis most directly predicts differences in the
intercept term, which represents the average height of each
curve, though any differences in other curve parameters between conditions are attributable solely to the distal context
and are therefore of interest.
For competitor fixations, cubic and quartic terms were included in addition to intercept and slope terms, due to the
characteristic presence of three inflection points in the competitor fixation curves. Distal prosody condition had a significant effect on the intercept term (B1 = -.031, t1 = -2.911,
p < .01; B2 = -.031, t2 = -2.810, p < .05), indicating that
the mean proportion of fixations to the competitor was significantly higher in the HL-grouping condition than in the LH-

1634

0.8

Proportion of fixations

0.6
Condition
HL competitor
HL target

0.4

LH competitor
LH target
unrelated
0.2

0.0
0

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

Time relative to target onset

Figure 3: Proportion of fixations to the target, competitor, and unrelated images in the HL-grouping and LH-grouping conditions. The mean duration of the embedded word was 366 ms, and the mean duration of the target word was 675 ms.
grouping condition. The effect of condition on the slope term,
on the other hand, was not significant (B1 = .064, t1 = .673, p
> .1; B2 = .079, t2 = .730, p > .1). This result reflected a similar rate of change in fixation proportions in the HL-grouping
and LH-grouping conditions. A significant effect of condition
on the quadratic term (B1 = -.224, t1 = -11.331, p < .0001; B2
= -.226, t2 = -12.006, p < .0001) revealed that the steepness of
the curve preceding and following the point of peak competitor fixations was greater in the HL-grouping condition than in
the LH-grouping condition. Likewise, condition had a significant effect on the cubic term (B1 = -.205, t1 = -10.379, p <
.0001; B2 = -.207, t2 = -11.025, p < .0001) but not the quartic
term (B1 = -.022, t1 = -1.099, p > .1; B2 = -.013, t2 = -.695,
p > .1). These terms also pertain to the shape of the curves
around the inflection points, but are otherwise difficult to interpret (Mirman et al., 2008). In summary, the competitor
fixation curve had a higher mean value and a steeper curve
surrounding inflection points in the HL-grouping condition
than in the LH-grouping condition.
For target fixations, distal prosody condition did not have
a significant effect on either the intercept term (B1 = .003, t1
= .257, p > .1; B2 = .001, t2 = .085, p > .1) or the slope
term (B1 = -.106, t1 = -.931, p > .1; B2 = -.118, t2 = -1.095,
p > .1). However, condition did have a significant effect on
the quadratic term (B1 = .235, t1 = 8.124, p < .0001; B2 =
.247, t2 = 7.320, p < .0001), and on the cubic term (B1 =
.080, t1 = 2.746, p < .01; B2 = .085, t2 = 2.508, p < .05).
These results suggest that the steepness of the curve around
the inflection points was greater in the LH-grouping condition
than in the HL-grouping condition, but otherwise the target
fixation curves did not differ significantly across conditions.

Discussion
According to the perceptual grouping hypothesis, distal
prosodic patterns can influence online language processing

by giving rise to periodic expectations about the prosodic organization of upcoming material. The perceptual grouping
hypothesis predicts greater lexical activation of words whose
boundaries are consistent with the expected prosodic structure, in the earliest moments of processing such words. We
tested this prediction in a visual world study by comparing
fixations to competing lexical alternatives such as pan and
panda. Results supported the predictions of the perceptual
grouping hypothesis. Starting around 200 ms after the onset
of the target word, the proportion of competitor fixations was
higher overall when the distal prosody was consistent with a
phonological phrase boundary following pan- than when the
distal prosody was consistent with prosodic boundaries preceding and following panda. This pattern of results suggests
that the embedded competitor word was more highly activated in the former condition immediately following the onset
of panda. The observed differences in the proportion of competitor fixations across conditions cannot be attributed to the
acoustic characteristics of the target word or its proximal context, since the acoustic-phonetic properties of the proximal
context were identical across conditions. We therefore conclude that distal prosodic patterns can influence the prosodic
structure that listeners project forward onto upcoming material in the speech stream, and that these prosodic expectations
can interact with online lexical segmentation and access.
These findings are congruent with studies showing that
other types of distal prosody influence word recognition. For
example, the distal speaking rate has been shown to influence
the segmentation of lexically ambiguous syllables in Dutch
(Reinisch, Jesse, & McQueen, in press) and the perception
of function words in English (Dilley & Pitt, 2010). Speech
processing can also be influenced by non-linguistic pitch information in the preceding context: Distal sequences of sine
wave tones with different spectral properties can influence
speech categorization (Holt, 2005). Taken together with these

1635

findings, the results from our study support the notion that
the global prosodic context influences not only the interpretation of local prosodic cues, but also lexical segmentation and
recognition processes.
An important remaining question concerns the characteristics of the distal prosodic patterns that are relevant for online
speech comprehension. In our stimuli, the distal prosody contained multiple regularities that could potentially contribute
to listeners’ prosodic expectations. For example, listeners
may be sensitive to the regular co-occurrence of the edges of
prosodic constituents and the edges of LH or HL tone groups
in the distal context. Alternatively, because the distal context consistently employed alternating sequences of strong
and weak syllables, listeners may primarily be sensitive to
the co-occurrence of certain types of tones with metrically
prominent syllables. Work in progress is assessing the effects
of distal prosody on the comprehension of words with different stress patterns to adjudicate between these possibilities.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a Javits fellowship and NSF
predoctoral fellowship to MB, NSF grant BCS-0847653 to
LCD, and NIH grants HD27206 and DC0005071 to MKT.
We gratefully acknowledge Dana Subik for assistance with
participant recruitment and testing, and the Tanenhaus lab and
the audience at AMLaP 2010 for helpful discussions.

References
Boersma, P., & Weenink, D.(2010). Praat: doing phonetics by
computer [Computer program]. Version 5.1.25, retrieved
20 January 2010 from http://www.praat.org.
Christophe, A., Peperkamp, S., Pallier, C., Block, E., &
Mehler, J. (2004). Phonological phrase boundaries constrain lexical access. I: Adult data. Journal of Memory and
Language, 51, 523–547.
Couper-Kuhlen, E.(1993). English speech rhythm: Form and
function in everyday verbal interaction. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Crystal, D. (1969). Prosodic systems and intonation in English. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cutler, A., & van Donselaar, W. (2001). Voornaam is not
(really) a homophone: Lexical prosody and lexical access
in Dutch. Language and Speech, 44, 171–195.
Dainora, A.(2001). An empirically based probabilistic model
of intonation in American English. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Chicago.
Dilley, L., Mattys, S. L., & Vinke, L. (2010). Potent prosody:
Comparing the effects of distal prosody, proximal prosody,
and semantic context on word segmentation. Journal of
Memory and Language, 63, 274–294.
Dilley, L., & McAuley, J. D. (2008). Distal prosodic context
affects word segmentation and lexical processing. Journal
of Memory and Language, 59, 291–311.
Dilley, L. C., & Pitt, M. A. (2010). Altering context speech

rate can cause words to appear or disappear. Psychological
Science, 21, 1664–1670.
Fraundorf, S. H., & Watson, D. G. (2010). Who cares about
prosody? Predicting individual differences in sensitivity to
pitch accent in online reference resolution. Poster presented at Architectures and Mechanisms for Language Processing 2010, York, UK.
Hale, J. (2001). A probabilistic Earley parser as a psycholinguistic model. Proceedings of the 2nd Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2, 159–166.
Handel, S. (1989). Listening: An introduction to the perception of auditory events. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Holt, L. L. (2005). Temporally nonadjacent nonlinguistic
sounds affect speech categorization. Psychological Science, 16, 305–312.
Huron, D. (2006). Sweet anticipation: Music and the psychology of expectation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Jurafsky, D.(1996). A probabilistic model of lexical and syntactic access and disambiguation. Cognitive Science, 20,
137–194.
Kamide, Y. (2008). Anticipatory processes in sentence processing. Language and Linguistics Compass, 2, 647–670.
Lehiste, I. (1977). Isochrony reconsidered. Journal of Phonetics, 5, 253–263.
Lerdahl, F., & Jackendoff, R. (1983). A generative theory of
tonal music. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Levy, R.(2008). Expectation-based syntactic comprehension.
Cognition, 106, 1126–1177.
Mirman, D., Dixon, J. A., & Magnuson, J. S. (2008).
Statistical and computational models of the visual world
paradigm: Growth curves and individual differences. Journal of Memory and Language, 59, 475–494.
Moulines, E., & Charpentier, F. (2008). Pitch-synchronous
waveform processing techniques for text-to-speech synthesis using diphones. Speech Communication, 9, 666–688.
Pierrehumbert, J.(2000). Tonal elements and their alignment.
In M. Horne (ed.), Prosody: Theory and experiment (pp.
11–36). Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Reinisch, E., Jesse, A., & McQueen, J. M. (in press). Speaking rate from proximal and distal contexts is used during
word segmentation. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 105, 466–476.
Salverda, A. P., Dahan, D., & McQueen, J. M. (2003). The
role of prosodic boundaries in the resolution of lexical embedding in speech comprehension. Cognition, 90, 51–89.
Tanenhaus, M. K., Spivey-Knowlton, M., Eberhard, K., &
Sedivy, J. C. (1995). Integration of visual and linguistic
information in spoken language comprehension. Science,
268, 1632–1634.
Thomassen, J. M.(1982). Melodic accent: Experiments and a
tentative model. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 71, 1596–1605.
Woodrow, H.(1911). The role of pitch in rhythm. Psychological Review, 18, 54–77.

1636

