UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Distributed Cognition and Insight Problem Solving

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/224200fb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Valle-Tourangeau, Frederic
Weller, Anna
Villejoubert, Gaelle

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Distributed Cognition and Insight Problem Solving
Frédéric Vallée-Tourangeau, Anna Weller, and Gaëlle Villejoubert
Department of Psychology, Kingston University
Kingston-upon-Thames UNITED KINGDOM KT1 2EE
f.vallee-tourangeau/a.weller/g.villejoubert@kingston.ac.uk

Abstract
Problem solving from a distributed cognitive system
perspective is an emergent product of the strategic and
opportunistic manipulation of artefacts populating a
physical space. In the present study, insight problem
solving was investigated with matchstick algebra
problems. These problems are false equations expressed
with Roman numerals transformed into true equations
by moving one matchstick. Participants were split in two
groups. In the first, the paper group, they examined a
static two-dimensional representation of the false
algebraic expression and told the experimenter which
matchstick should be moved. The non-interactive
procedure was similar to the one employed in Knoblich,
Ohlsson, Haider, and Rhenius (1999). In the second
group, the interactive group, participants manipulated a
concrete three-dimensional representation of the false
equation. Success rates in the paper group for different
problem types closely replicated the pattern of data
reported in Knoblich et al. In turn, participants in the
interactive group were significantly more likely to
achieve insight. Problem solving success in the paper
group was best predicted by performance on a numeracy
test, whereas in the interactive group, it was best
predicted by performance on a visuo-spatial reasoning
test. Different types of resources and skills were
involved in the different versions of the task.
Implications for process models of problem solving are
discussed.
Keywords: Problem solving, interactivity, individual
differences, distributed cognition, education.

Introduction
Transformation problems such as the Tower of Hanoi or
river crossing problems are structured in terms of a well
defined space of intermediate states linked by simple
discrete moves, with the goal state clearly visible or
imaginable. Their solution rarely involves ‘aha’ moments.
Insight problems on the other hand are different in that
the goal state, or resolution, is initially not visible or
imaginable. With insight problems most participants
initially experience an impasse from which they may or
may not emerge. The impasse is experienced as a result of
a problem representation that is driven by ‘organizing
assumptions’ (Segal, 2004, p. 142) that mislead the
reasoner and prevent him or her from anticipating the
solution. Overcoming an impasse is understood to be
driven by a representational change that re-cast the
relationship among the elements of the representation or

that redefine the role of these elements. This
representational perspective on insight has roots in Gestalt
psychology (e.g., Wertheimer, 1959) and has been
formulated in information processing terms by Ohlsson
(1984, 1992).
The initial representation of the problem is based on the
manner with which the reasoner configures perceptual
elements that compose the problem (how these elements
are ‘chunked’) and reflects the reasoner’s comprehension
based on his or her knowledge and expertise. Thus this
initial representation, structured by perceptual chunks and
conceptual assumptions, guides how the reasoner will
attempt to solve the problem. However that guidance may
also constrain and impede successful problem resolution.
Certain assumptions of the problem representation need to
be relaxed in order for the reasoner to solve the problem.
A classic example of the importance of constraint
relaxation in problem solving is offered by Maier’s
(1930) 9-dot problem. The task is to link all 9 dots with
four continuous lines without lifting the pen from the
paper. The perceptual configuration of the dots imposes
an implicit constraint that the lines can only be drawn
within the projected perimeter delineated by the dots.
Insight for this problem involves relaxing that constraint.
In turn, a well-known Max Wertheimer problem
illustrates how the segmentation of visual information
into chunks is an important determinant of the ensuing
problem representation and the ease with which a
reasoner can solve the problem (see Ohlsson, 1984; Segal,
2004; Fig. 1). In this problem, the reasoner must calculate
the area of the composite figure involving a square and a
parallelogram. This initial problem representation
specifies certain operators that must be retrieved from
long term memory (such as the formula to calculate the
area for parallelograms). It may be that given this initial
representation the reasoner is unable to retrieve the
appropriate operators and hence may experience an
impasse. The reasoner may seek to restructure the
problem representation by decomposing the perceptual
chunks at the heart of it. Some people may realize that the
square -parallelogram configuration can be decomposed
in terms of two overlapping triangles. This new chunking
arrangement may encourage a more fruitful representation
in terms of a rectangle (once the triangles no longer
overlap) that would cue much simpler operators to solve
the problem.

273

Figure 1: Max Wertheimer's square and parallelogram
problem. The goal is to find the surface area of the
composite figure. A decomposition of the perceptual chunks
that configured the initial problem representation (involving
a parallelogram on top of a square) leads to a representation
involving overlapping triangles which in turn leads to a
representation of a much simple perceptual chunk: a
rectangle.

Matchstick Algebra
Constraint relaxation and chunk decomposition are
important drivers of representational restructuring. The
reconstruction of a problem representation is deemed
necessary to overcome an impasse and achieve insight.
Constraint relaxation and chunk decomposition were
explored in a series of elegant experiments with matchstick
algebra problems developed by Knoblich, Ohlsson, Haider,
and Rhenius (1999). A matchstick algebra problem is a
false statement expressed with Roman numerals.
Participants are required to move, but not remove, one
stick to make the equation true, with the ‘V’ and ‘X’
numerals each consisting of 2 slanted sticks. For example,
‘VI = VII + I’ is a false statement that can be transformed
into a true one by moving a single stick from the ‘7’ on the
right of the equal sign to the ‘6’ on the left of it such as to
yield ‘VII = VI + I’. To achieve insight, participants must
relax constraints that reflect knowledge and assumptions
concerning algebraic transformations, and decompose
familiar perceptual chunks in the form of numerals and
symbols (operators).
Table 1: The four matchstick algebra problem types
developed by Knoblich, Ohlsson, Haider, and Rhenius
(1999). Solutions for problems for Type A through C require
relaxing constraints of increasing scope, while solving
problems of Type D requires decomposing a tight perceptual
chunk.
Type

Equation

Solution

A

VI = VII + I

VII = VI + I

B

I = II + II

I = III - II

C

III = III + III

III = III = III

D

XI = III + III

VI = III + III

Using matchstick algebra Knoblich et al. explored the
importance of constraint relaxation and chunk
decomposition in achieving insight. To test the importance
of constraint relaxation, they developed three types of false
statements the solution for which required relaxing
constraints of different scopes (see Table 1). Solving Type
A problems involved relaxing a relatively narrow

constraint that numerals cannot be decomposed (value
constraint). Relaxing that constraint enables participants to
transform a numeral to make the statement true. Solving
Type B problems involved relaxing a constraint with a
broader scope, that is one including the constraint on
manipulating operators (operator constraint). Solving Type
C problems involved relaxing a constraint with an even
broader scope, namely the constraint that people rarely
communicate in tautological terms (tautology constraint).
Hence to solve these problems, participants must realize
that tautologies are acceptable. Knoblich et al. predicted
that the solution rate for these three types of matchstick
algebra problems would be a function of the scope of the
constraint to be relaxed, with the narrow constraint of Type
A problems the easiest to relax and hence to solve, and the
broad constraint of Type C problems the hardest to relax
and solve. Knoblich et al. observed the highest rates of
problem solving success for Type A problems, followed by
Type B problems, and the hardest problems were Type C.
Problems of Type D involved relaxing the value constraint
(like problems of Type A) but the solution necessitated
decomposing a numeral that formed a much tighter
perceptual chunk. Knoblich et al. predicted that Type D
problems would be much harder to solve than problems of
Type A, which is what they observed.

Interactive Problem Solving
We pause here to note with interest a key feature of the
Knoblich et al. experimental procedure: Participants were
never invited to manipulate matchsticks as such in solving
these algebra problems. The so-called matchstick algebra
problems did not involve actual matchsticks. Rather the
false arithmetic statements were presented on a computer
screen and participants announced their proposed solution,
which was then noted by the experimenter. Yet, from a
distributed cognitive system perspective (Giere, 2006;
Cowley & Vallée-Tourangeau, 2010), thinking is the
product of an interactive assemblage of resources internal
and external to the agent. The environment and its content
can be exploited to facilitate reasoning and problem
solving in a variety of ways. To this end, a diverse range of
actions are performed, including reorganisation of the
environment, muttering to oneself, pointing and making
notes (Kirsh, 2009).
Kirsh suggests that it is through these actions and
interactions that thought is externalised, with external
artefacts and representations employed as vehicles for
ideas and hypotheses, lightening cognitive load. But these
externalisations do not merely function as a means to
offload memories and reduce cognitive demands. Rather
the generation and, importantly, manipulation of these
representations facilitate understanding by reordering the
original representation into one that may be more
cognitively congenial (Kirsh, 1996). The transformed
representation may potentially reveal affordances and new

274

opportunities to guide behaviour. Spatial rearrangement
may modify the problem so that it becomes more visually
compelling, allowing the perception of task elements that
were hitherto invisible to the reasoner. Spatial
rearrangement may also conserve internal computing
resources, as executing tasks externally (such as an object
rotation) may be quicker and require less effort than if
performed mentally, thereby increasing task efficiency
(Kirsh, 1995b).

The Present Study
We sought to investigate problem solving in a context
where matchstick algebra problems were expressed in a
physical representation that could be manipulated by
participants. We sought to determine the degree to which
constraints of different scopes and the tightness of
perceptual chunks remained important obstacles to insight
in an interactive version of this problem solving task.
Interactivity inevitably engages a broader range of
cognitive, perceptual and motor processes and hence
problem solving success may well implicate different skills
in interactive and non-interactive contexts. In an attempt to
gauge the importance of different cognitive skills in these
two versions of the task, we profiled participants’
numeracy, knowledge of Roman numerals, traditional
verbal intelligence (as measured with the National Adult
Reading Test; Nelson, 1991 which correlates positively
with the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale full scale IQ)
along with the Beta III test (Kellog & Morton, 1999).
Separate elements of the test assess aspects of non-verbal
intelligence including spatial reasoning, visual information
processing and the speed and accuracy of processing. We
were then in a position to identify the better predictor(s) of
performance in interactive and non-interactive versions of
insight problem solving using matchstick algebra.

Method
Participants
Fifty participants were recruited among students and
administrative staff on the campus of Kingston University.
Mean age was 27.84 (SD= 12.11) and the majority of
participants were female (N= 30).

Procedure
Participants were allocated on a random basis to one of
two experimental groups, the paper group or the interactive
group. In the paper group participants were presented
matchstick algebra problems on a sheet of paper and
informed the researcher which ‘matchstick’ could be
moved to transform the expression into a true equation.
Participants in the interactive group manipulated artefacts
to create and modify the false expressions into true ones.
All participants were presented with the four types of

problems (A though D) and hence the experimental design
was a 2 (group) by 4 (problem type) mixed design. The
dependent measure was the percentage of problems of
different types solved by the participants.
Participants were tested individually in a quiet room.
Participants first completed a numeracy test during a one
minute period. This test consisted of simple arithmetic
questions. They then completed the NART which involved
reading aloud a series of 50 words, the pronunciation for
each categorised as correct or incorrect by the
experimenter. Participants were then asked to complete the
Roman numerals test, in which they were required to
translate a series of simple Arabic numbers into their
Roman numeral equivalent within a one minute period. No
feedback on performance was given on any of these tests.
Participants from both groups were shown 12 incorrect
matchstick algebra equations; these equations were the
same as those developed by Knoblich et al. (1999;
Experiment 1).These 12 problems were composed of four
of each of Types A and B, and two of each of Types C and
D. The order of presentation was randomised for each
participant. Each equation was printed in the centre of a
sheet of white A4 paper in large, bold, black font held in a
ring binder with the following instruction at the head of
each page, “Move ONE stick to make the equation
TRUE”. Participants in the paper group were asked to
solve the equations using these sheets of paper only. For
the interactive group, we designed a magnetic board (27cm
x 21cm) on which participants created and modified
Roman numerals and algebraic statements using
magnetized matchsticks (.5cm x 4.5cm). Participants in the
interactive group were first asked to recreate the incorrect
form of the equation as presented to them on paper and
then to solve the equation by moving one stick to make the
equation read true. They were encouraged to touch and
manipulate the matchsticks in reasoning about the
problems. Participants in both groups were given a
maximum of 3 minutes to solve each equation, after which
they were presented the next problem.
The experimental session concluded with the five
components of the Beta III test: (i) The Coding test
required participants to match a series of symbols to
numerals (test duration: 120 seconds); (ii) the Picture
Completion section consisted of a series of pictures with
aspects/items missing that participants must complete
(180s); (iii) the Clerical Checking test displayed pairs of
symbols or numbers and participants were required to
judge whether the pairs were identical or not (120s); (iv)
the Picture Absurdities test consisted of a series of
panelled pictures and required participants to identify
which of a set of pictures showe something absurd or
illogical (180s); (v) finally, the Matrix Reasoning test
asked participants to choose a picture from a selection of
five pictures to fill in a gap in a sequence (300s).
Measures. Both the Maths and Roman numerals tests
were expressed in terms of percent correct answers. The

275

NART score was reported as the number of correctly
pronounced words. Matchstick algebra performance for
each participant was scored in terms of the percentage of
equations correctly solved for each of the four types of
problems. Each element of the Beta III test was first scored
individually, by summing the correct answers. These
scores were then converted to age corrected scaled scores
(ACSS; Kellog & Morton, 1999).

Results
Cognitive Profiles
Numeracy skills did not differ significantly between the
paper group (M = 49.5, SD = 25.9) and the interactive
group (M = 51.9, SD = 22.0), t(48) =0.35, p = .73.
Knowledge of Roman numerals was equivalent in both the
paper group (M = 48.7, SD = 23.2) and the interactive
group (M = 43.6, SD = 20.8), t(48) =0.83, p = .41.
Performance on the NART did not differ between
participants in the paper group (M = 26.40, SD= 6.11) and
those in the interactive group (M= 24.32, SD= 6.59), t(48)
= 1.16, p = .25. Finally, participants did not differ
significantly on any of the Beta III component tests; largest
non-significant t(48) = 1.19, p = .24 for clerical checking.

Matchstick Algebra Performance
The percentage of correct solutions for each problem type
for each participant was calculated. The percent correct
solution averages in both groups are displayed in Figure 2.
Solution rates appeared marginally greater in the paper
group compared to the interactive group for Type A
problems, but the interactive participants solved more of
types B, C and D problems than their paper counterparts. A
4 (problem type: A, B, C, D) by 2 (group: paper,
interactive) mixed analysis of variance (ANOVA) revealed
a significant main effect of problem type, F(3, 144) = 24.6,
p < .001, a significant main effect of group, F(1, 48) =
5.06, p = .029, and a significant interaction between
problem type and group on problem solving performance,
F(3, 144) = 5.03, p = .002.
Separate ANOVAs were conducted for the paper and
interactive groups. In the paper group, the problem type
main effect was significant, F(3, 72) = 29.2, p < .001. Post
hoc tests using the Bonferroni correction revealed that the
solution rates for Type A problems were higher than for
Types B (p < .001), C (p < .001), and D (p < .001), while
the solution rates for Type B problems were greater than
for Type C problems (p = .002). In the interactive group,
the problem type main effect was also significant, F(3, 72)
= 5.39, p = .002. Bonferroni corrected post hoc tests
revealed that the only significant differences in the solution
rates were observed between Types A and C (p = .02), and
Types B and C (p = .03): Thus, in the interactive group, the
solution rates for Type A, B, and D did not differ
statistically

Figure 2: Average solution rates for Types A, B, C and D in
the paper group (open bars) and the interactive group (dark
bars). Error bars are standard errors of the mean.

Predictors of Performance
Performance on some of the cognitive abilities tests was
correlated with overall performance on the matchstick
algebra task. For the paper group participants’ numeracy
was most strongly correlated with matchstick algebra
performance, r(23) = .51, p = .009, and performance on the
NART, r(23) = .45, p = .025. A stepwise regression
analysis produced a significant model, F(1, 23) = 8.13, p =
.009, with numeracy the sole variable entered in the model
explaining 26% of the variance in matchstick algebra
performance in the paper group. For the interactive group,
performance on two Beta component tests, picture
absurdities, r(23) = .46, p = .021, and matrix reasoning,
r(23) = .47, p = .019, were most strongly correlated with
matchstick algebra performance. A stepwise regression
analysis produced a significant model, F(1, 23) = 6.34, p =
.019, with matrix reasoning the sole variable retained in
the model, explaining 22% of the variance.

Discussion
The average solution rate for each of the four types of
problems in the paper group closely replicated the solution
rates reported in Knoblich et al. (1999). That is, Type A
problems were the easiest problems, producing
significantly higher rates of success than Types B and C
problems; Type C problems were the hardest. While
Knoblich et al. did not formulate a prediction concerning
the level of difficulty of Type D problems relative to Types
B and C, they did predict that Type D problems, involving
tighter perceptual chunks, would be harder to solve than
Type A problems, involving the same type of value
constraints but with looser perceptual chunks. Note that
this is exactly the pattern of solution rates observed in the
paper group. However, in the interactive group, the
patterns in the solution rates departed substantially from

276

those in the paper group and from those reported in
Knoblich et al. (1999). For one, solution rates for Type A
problems were identical to the solution rates for Type B
problems. Remarkably, the solution rates for Types A and
D did not differ significantly in the interactive group. The
tautology constraint in Type C problems was the hardest to
relax in both groups.

Interactivity Matters
Interactivity encouraged a much higher rate of insight
problem solving for all types of problems, with the
exception of the easiest type of problems, problem A
involving loose perceptual chunks and a low level
constraint. Interactivity encourages the rearrangement of
the matchsticks which generates configurations revealing
novel affordances for action. For example, picking up the
top horizontal stick of the equal sign creates a minus sign
that may frame the action of where to place the stick in
hand. Manipulation thus leads to opportunities that would
otherwise require cognitive effort to identify. Key abilities
for the purpose of this task may therefore involve the
strategic manipulation of the sticks, and the ability to
perceive and act upon affordances in that space. In turn,
participants in the static paper condition are confronted
with a permanent and perceptually immutable incorrect
form of the equation, continually re-focusing attention and
forcing the problem solver to attend to unhelpful
information. The incorrect representation acts like a
“rubber band” (Maglio, Matlock, Raphaely, Chernicky, &
Kirsh, 1999): no matter how far participants can mentally
morph the visual representation, the physical information
exerts a form of conceptual gravity that pulls these mental
efforts back to their starting point.
Physically moving a matchstick helps deconstruct chunks
by creating opportunities to perceive the elements that
make up the numerals. It also facilitates constraint
relaxation by revealing opportunities for action that the
new physical representation may afford. This in turn may
encourage additional manipulation of the physical
representation. Inevitably the physical representation of the
problem will be modified from its original form. Changes
in the problem representation initiate different activation
patterns in long-term memory, cue different knowledge,
and better position the reasoner to overcome an impasse.

Predictors of Performance
The insight problem solving success for participants in the
paper group was best predicted by their level of numeracy
assessed under timed conditions. The non-interactive
nature of the task meant that participants in the paper
group had to rely on their internal/mental computational
abilities to simulate certain matchstick movements. The
timed numeracy test likely used executive function
capacity and, of course, arithmetic abilities, key mental
resources to simulate algebraic transformations mentally.

In turn, performance in the interactive group was best
predicted by the Matrix Reasoning component of the Beta
III. This suggest that non-verbal, spatial and inductive
reasoning aspects of fluid intelligence are important in
determining matchstick performance in interactive insight
problem solving; verbal and mathematical skills are nolonger the dominant predictors of success. Thus different
contexts of reasoning engage different skills. These results
invite a careful examination of the manner with which
problem solving is investigated. The development of
process models of problem solving for insight as well as
for non-insight problems is inevitably predicated on a
certain experimental procedure, which engages different
cognitive abilities and strategies. The question becomes,
which experimental procedure offers the more
representative window onto problem solving occurring
outside the laboratory? We believe one that fosters
interactivity.

Complementary Strategies
Participants from both groups naturally employed
complementary strategies to reduce cognitive demands and
achieve insight. Interaction with both printed and physical
numerals of the matchstick equations in both groups was
rife. A large number of participants in the interactive group
would be in constant contact with the sticks even when
they were not being moved. Participants would rest their
fingers on the magnetic sticks and run them across the
sticks maintaining continuous contact. Tapping and
touching of the sticks are examples of complementary
strategies, focusing attention to the stick in question, like
pointing a pen at an item on a written list (Kirsh, 1995a).
Touching the sticks may also form a type of symbolic
marking in which the contact is a concrete cue that there is
something to remember about that stick (Kirsh, 1995a).
Participants were also seen to pick a matchstick from the
board and hold it in their hand for extended periods of
time, potentially allowing them to predict the
consequences of action from moving the stick, creating a
new short term structure to the task (Kirsh, 1995b).
Participants in the interactive group would also frequently
move the matchsticks into novel positions, physically
testing ideas before placing them back to their original
position. Spatial re-configuration of the equations allowed
participants to encode strategy, simplify the form of the
equation, unveiling new affordances and opportunities to
guide subsequent action.
Participants in the paper group also engaged in
complementary strategies during problem solving.
Participants would frequently be in contact with the printed
Roman numerals: They would move their finger across the
printed equation as if to guide or focus thought, often using
their finger to represent a matchstick, mimicking rotations
and movements to aid visualisation and test spatial
configurations. Some would frequently hover over the
numerals, as though a close proximity to the numerals was

277

necessary. Others would tap the printed numerals. The use
of hands in the paper group may reflect an attempt to
materialise mental projections.

How People Think
The experimental procedure developed in the study
reported here coupled people with artefacts in the process
of thinking. And while the problem solving task remained
constrained and artificial, we would argue that the
interactive methodology employed here offers a much
closer approximation of real-world problem solving
behaviour than the non-interactive procedure initially
employed in Knoblich et al. (1999). Improved performance
in the interactive group should not be interpreted to call
into question Ohlsson’s (1992) representational change
theory of insight: It remains a productive characterization
of the processes involved in overcoming an impasse and
achieving insight.
However, what the data presented here strongly suggest
is that such theories must be examined with experimental
procedures that encourage the construction and
modification of distributed problem representations. These
distributed representations recruit resources that are
internal and external to the thinking agent; the control over
behavior is also distributed among internal and external
factors. The patterns in the correlations between test of
cognitive abilities and performance with the matchstick
algebra problems converge on the notion that designing
interactive versions of these tasks is not simply an exercise
in making things more concrete to facilitate reasoning.
Rather, making the task concrete to foster interactivity
inevitably engages a different set of cognitive, perceptual
and motor skills. The data reported here encourage the
design of experimental environments that capture problem
solving as situated, embedded, and embodied activities,
which are likely more representative of the manner people
think and behave. To be sure, interactivity introduces a
large number of degrees of freedom which reduce
experimental control. But it also offers much richer data
from which to infer the reasoning mechanisms at play
when solving problems, data that inform how reasoning
outside the laboratory proceeds.

Acknowledgments
We thank Susan Cook for her help designing and
producing the material used in this experiment.

References

Giere, R. (2006). Scientific perspectivism. University of
Chicago Press.
Kellog, C. E., & Morton, N. W. (1999). Beta III Manual.
The Psychological Corporation, A Hartcourt
Assessment Company.
Kirsh, D. (1995a). Complementary strategies: why we use
our hands when we think. In J. Moore, & J. Fain
Leman (Ed.), Proceedings of the Seventeenth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, (pp. 212217). Mahwah: NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Kirsh, D. (1995b). The intelligent use of space. Artificial
Intelligence, 73, 31-68.
Kirsh, D. (1996). Adapting the environment instead of
oneself. Adaptive Behavior, 4, 415-452.
Kirsh, D. (2009). Interaction, external representation and
sense making. In N. A. Taatgen, & H. v. Rijn (Ed.),
Proceedings of the Thirty First Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1103-1108). Austin,
TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Knoblich, G., Ohlsson, S., Haider, H., & Rhenius, D.
(1999). Constraint relaxation and chunk decomposition
in insight problem solving. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 25,
1534-1555.
Maier, N. R. F. (1930). Reasoning in humans: On
direction. Journal of Comparative Psychology, 10, 115143.
Maglio, P. P., Matlock, T., Raphaely, D., Chernicky, B., &
Kirsh, D. (1999). Interactive skills in Scrabble. In M.
Hahn, & S. C. Stoness (Eds.), Proceedings of the
Twenty-First Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 326-330). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, Publishers.
Nelson. H. E. (1991). National Adult Reading Test (2nd
Ed.). Windsor, Berkshire: The NFER-NELSON
Publishing Company Ltd.
Ohlsson, S. (1984). Restructuring revisited II: An
information processing theory of restructuring and
insight. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 25, 117129.
Ohlsson, S. (1992). Information processing explanation of
insight and related phenomena. In M. T. Keane and K.
J. Gilhooly (Eds.), Advances in the psychology of
thinking, volume 1 (pp.1-44). London: Harvester
Wheatsheaf.
Segal, E. (2004). Incubation in insight problem solving.
Creativity Research Journal, 16, 141-148
Wertheimer, M. (1959). Productive thinking (enlarged
edition). New York: Harper & Brothers Publishers.

Cowley, S., & Vallée-Tourangeau, F. (2010). Thinking in
action. AI & Society, 25, 469–475.

278

