UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Dual Character Concepts

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/38156495

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Knobe, Joshua
Prasada, Sandeep

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Dual Character Concepts
Joshua Knobe (joshua.knobe@yale.edu)
Program in Cognitive Science, P.O. Box 208306
New Haven, CT 06520-8306 USA

Sandeep Prasada (sprasada@hunter.cuny.edu)
Department of Psychology, 695 Park Ave
New York, NY 10065 USA
Abstract
Four experiments provided evidence for a class of ‘dual
character concepts.’ Such concepts are characterized in terms
of both (a) concrete features and (b) abstract values. Three
experiments found that when an object fulfills only one of
these two criteria, it is judged to be a category member in one
sense but not in another. A fourth experiment showed that
dual character concepts also support a distinct form of
normative judgment.
Keywords: Concepts; natural kinds; normativity.

Imagine a physics professor who spends her days writing
out equations but who clings dogmatically to a certain
theoretical perspective against all empirical evidence. Does
this person genuinely count as a scientist?
In a case like this, one might feel that both answers are in
some sense correct. It might therefore seem right to say:
(1) There is a sense in which she is clearly a scientist,
but ultimately, if you think about what it really
means to be a scientist, you would have to say that
she is not a scientist at all.
Now suppose we come upon a person who has never been
trained in formal experimental methods but who approaches
everything in life by systematically revising her beliefs in
light of empirical evidence. In a case of this latter type, it
might seem appropriate to make the converse sort of
statement:
(2) There is a sense in which she is clearly not a
scientist, but ultimately, if you think about what it
really means to be a scientist, you would have to
say that she truly is a scientist.
To the extent that people do in fact show these patterns of
intuition, we might conclude that they actually have two
different characterizations of what it means to be a scientist
– one in terms of concrete activities (conducting
experiments, formulating theories, etc.), the other in terms
of more abstract values (an impartial quest for empirical
truth).
The implicit assumption in most work on conceptual
representation seems to have been that concepts characterize
members of a category in a single way – whether via the
representation of a definition, a prototype, salient
exemplars, or a theory (for a review, see Murphy, 2002).
Could current approaches to conceptual representation

accommodate concepts that provide two ways of
characterizing their members? Or must they be modified to
handle such concepts? Before these broader issues can be
addressed, we need a better understanding of the concepts in
question. The experiments in this paper are aimed at
providing this information.

Dual character concepts
The experiments seek to demonstrate that there is a whole
class of concepts which are represented via both (a) a set of
concrete features and (b) a set of abstract values that the
concrete features are seen as realizing. These two
representations are intrinsically related, but they are
nonetheless distinct, and they can sometimes yield opposing
verdicts about whether a particular object counts as a
category member or not.
We will argue that this pattern of intuitions can be found
across a broad array of different concepts: SCIENTIST, ART,
CRIMINAL, TEACHER, ROCK MUSIC, MOTHER, LOVE, and
many others. These concepts, we suggest, differ
fundamentally from the types of concepts that have been
studied in the existing literature (e.g., from natural kind
concepts). We will refer to them as dual character concepts.
Not all concepts, however, are dual character concepts.
Take the concept BUS DRIVER. It would be odd to say
something like (3) of a person who does not have any of the
features normally associated with bus drivers.
(3) There is a sense in which she is clearly not a bus
driver, but ultimately, if you think about what a bus
driver really is, you would have to say that she
truly is a bus driver.
This latter concept does not appear to provide an abstract
way of characterizing a category. Similarly for a wide range
of
other
concepts:
BUS
DRIVER,
PHARMACIST,
ACQUAINTANCE, RUSTLING NOISE, SECOND COUSIN, and so
on. These concepts, we suggest, do not have a dual
character. We will use them in our studies as control
concepts.

The role of normative considerations
Dual character concepts provide two distinct ways of
characterizing category members: one based on concrete
features, the other based on what we have been calling
‘abstract values.’ The latter way of characterizing category

2965

members implicates a normative dimension in the
representation of dual character concepts. What is the nature
of these normative representations?
It seems that they are importantly different from the
normative representations that have been investigated within
the literature on concepts. A number of studies have shown
that normative judgments can impact judgments of
typicality (Barsalou, 1985; Lynch, Coley & Medin, 2000).
When people are thinking about typical instances of goal
defined categories such as diet food, they tend to look for a
food that is in some way ideal for dieting (Barsalou, 1985).
Furthermore, experts’ judgments of the typicality of natural
kind categories such as trees are influenced by judgments
about how desirable or ideal a tree is (Lynch, Coley &
Medin, 2000; Burnett, Medin, Ross & Blok, 2005).
Dual character concepts require an additional normative
dimension. This point comes out especially clearly when we
consider cases in which two dimensions of normativity are
found in a single concept. The concept scientist, for
example, is associated with various concrete activities, and
we can imagine a person who shows excellence in all of
them (a talent for theory, experimental design, statistical
analysis, etc.). We might praise such a person by saying:
(4) She is a good scientist.
This normative evaluation might play a certain role in
intuitions about typicality, as predicted by existing theories.
But there is also another, quite different dimension of
normativity. Specifically, it might be thought that certain
people embody, in their whole way of life, the broader
values associated with the scientific enterprise. We could
then praise a person who embodies these values by saying:
(5) She is a true scientist.
These two dimensions of normativity can sometimes come
apart. For example, a person who does not have the relevant
concrete skills but who nonetheless embodies throughout
her life the abstract values that characterize science might
not be a good scientist, but we could nonetheless praise her
by saying ‘She is a true scientist.’
Furthermore, these different dimensions of normativity
appear to arise for different concepts. We can apply the
notion of goodness across an enormous variety of concepts
(‘a good scientist,’ ‘a good coffee,’ ‘a good day’). By
contrast, the second dimension of normativity seems to arise
only for concepts in a more restricted class. A person might
embody the values that characterize science and therefore be
regarded as a ‘true scientist,’ or a painting might embody
the values that characterize art and therefore be regarded as
a ‘true work of art,’ but there are other cases in which this
mode of thinking seems not to get a grip. A person might be
highly skilled at driving buses and therefore be known as a
good bus driver, but it seems hard to imagine how we could
take a person to embody the broader values that characterize
bus driving and therefore say of her: ‘She is a true bus
driver.’

In short, it appears our conceptual systems support at least
two types of normative judgments and that dual character
concepts support both types of normative judgments.

Hypotheses and overview of experiments
Our claim is that there is a distinctive class of concepts – the
dual character concepts – which show two important
characteristics:
Hypothesis 1. Dual character concepts represent a
system of abstract values which characterize members of
the category. Thus, given any dual character concept c, it
should be possible to make judgments about whether a
given object realizes those values and can therefore be
described by a sentence of the form ‘That is a true c.’
Hypothesis 2. Dual character concepts represent two
distinct ways of characterizing members of a category:
one in terms of relatively concrete features, the other in
terms of the abstract values that these features realize.
These two ways of characterizing members of the
category allow people to make two independent
assessments of category membership.
To conduct these experiments, we need a set of concepts
hypothesized to have a dual character and a contrasting set
of concepts that can be used as controls. For dual character
concepts, we used SCIENTIST, ROCK MUSIC, LOVE, ARTIST,
FRIEND, CRIMINAL, TEACHER, MOTHER, SOLDIER and POEM.
For control concepts, we used BARTENDER, RUSTLING
NOISE, IRRITATION, OPTICIAN, ACQUAINTANCE, CASHIER,
PHARMACIST, SECOND COUSIN, CARJACKER and TABLE OF
CONTENTS.
As a stimulus check, we conducted a brief study to verify
that values play a role in characterizing the concepts we
picked out as dual character concepts but not the control
concepts. Twenty-five participants recruited through
Amazon’s Mechanical Turk were asked about all twenty of
the concepts in random order. For each of the concepts,
participants were told to imagine someone saying: ‘He is a
scientist [bartender, optician, etc.].’ They were then told to
imagine another person responding:
I completely disagree. That person is not really an
artist [bartender, optician, etc.] at all. In fact, if you
think that he is really an artist [bartender, optician,
etc.], I would have to say that you have some
fundamentally wrong values.
The question for each item was whether this reference to
values made sense. Participants marked their answers on a
scale from 1 (‘doesn’t make sense’) to 7 (‘makes sense’). As
predicted, the reference to values was judged to make more
sense for the dual character concepts (M = 3.8) than for the
control concepts (M = 2.2), (t1(24) = 6.87, p < .001; t2(18) =
5.50, p < .001). In fact, the distribution of means for the
items was non-overlapping with the exception of one item.
This suggests that the stimulus set correctly distinguished
concepts that are characterized via abstract values and those

2966

that do not. We used this set of items for generating the
stimuli for all 4 experiments.

and, in particular, that they support a distinctive abstract
form of normative judgment.

Experiment 1

Experiment 2

Experiment 1 tests the hypothesis that dual character
concepts support judgments not only about whether
something is a ‘good’ category member but also whether it
is a ‘true’ category member whereas control concepts only
support the former type of normative judgment.

Experiment 2 investigated the hypothesis that since dual
character concepts provide two distinct ways of
characterizing members of a category, they would allow two
independent assessments of category membership. In this
experiment, participants received a series of vignettes in
which a category member (x) was described as possessing
the concrete properties characteristic of a category (C), but
lacking certain abstract normative properties. For example,
the vignette for the dual character concept ARTIST described
a person who creates paintings for a living but who has no
real interest in creating work of deep aesthetic value and is
simply trying to make money. Similarly, the vignette for the
control concept PHARMACIST described a person who fills
prescriptions for a living but who has no real interest in
helping people and is simply trying to make money. After
reading the vignettes, participants were asked to judge the
truth of two statements. The first was what we will call the
member statement: ‘There is a sense in which this person is
clearly a scientist [bartender].’ The second was the nonmember statement: ‘Ultimately when you think about what
it really means to be a scientist [bartender], you would have
to say that this person is not truly a scientist [bartender].’
For dual character concepts, it was predicted that
participants would agree with both statements. By contrast,
for control concepts, it was predicted that participants would
not see the concept as having any separate abstract sense
and hence that they would agree only with the first
statement.

Method
For each of the dual character and control concepts, we
generated a statement of the form That is a good x and That
is a true x. The statements were presented with a 7-point
scale whose ends were labeled sounds weird and sounds
natural.
Twenty-nine English speakers participated via the Internet
using Amazon’s Mechanical Turk (AMT). Each participant
received all 40 statements in a random order and rated how
natural they sounded.

Results
The mean ratings are shown in Figure 1. Results were
analyzed using 2x2 ANOVAs with concept type (dual
character/control) and statement type (good/true) as factors.
We report both participant (F1) and item analyses (F2).
The key prediction of an interaction between category
type and statement type was confirmed (F1(1, 28)= 68.51, p
<.001; F2 (1. 18) = 4.70. p <.05). As predicted, the
interaction was due to significantly higher ratings for good
statements as compared to true statements for the control
categories (F1 (1. 28) = 60.12. p <001; F2 (1, 9) = 8.85, p
<.02), but no difference between the two statement types for
the dual character categories (F1 <1; F2<1).
7

6

5

Good

4

True

3

Series
3
Series
4
Series
5

2

1

0

Dual Character

Control

Figure 1. Mean ratings by condition for Expt. 1.
(Error bars show SE mean.)

Method
Thirty native English speakers participated in the
experiment via the Internet using AMT. Vignettes were
constructed for each concept used in Experiment 1 in the
manner described above.
Each participant received all 20 vignettes in a random
order and judged the truth of the ‘member’ and ‘nonmember’ statements for each vignette on a 7 point scale.

Results
The mean ratings are shown in Figure 2. 2x2 ANOVAs
with category type (dual character, control) and membership
statement type (member, non-member) were performed.

Discussion

7

As predicted, participants were willing to apply the word
‘good’ to both dual character concepts and control concepts
(‘good scientist,’ ‘good cashier’), but their use of the word
‘true’ was more restricted. They were willing to apply this
word to dual character concepts (‘true scientist’) but not to
control concepts (‘true cashier’). This result provides some
initial evidence for the hypothesis that dual character
concepts differ in important respects from other concepts

6

5

Member
Nonmember
Series3
Series4
Series5

4

3

2

1

0

Dual Character

Control

Figure 2. Mean ratings by condition for Expt. 2.

2967

(Error bars show SE mean.)
The key prediction of an interaction between category type
and statement type was confirmed (F1(1, 29)= 136.24, p
<.001; F2 (1. 18) = 59.60. p <.001). As predicted, the
interaction was due to significantly higher ratings for
member statements as compared to non-member statements
for the control categories (F1 (1. 29) = 138.63. p <001; F2 (1,
9) = 71.63, p <.001), but no difference between the two
statement types for the dual character categories (F1 (1,29)=
2.61, p>.12; F2(1,9)= 2.67, p>.14).

Discussion
The results of Experiment 2 provide clear evidence that dual
character concepts provide two bases for categorizing items
as belonging in the category. Participants were willing to
grant membership on the basis of concrete properties, but
were also in agreement that those items that lacked the
abstract normative characteristics of the category were not
ultimately true members of the category. This contrasted
with the control concepts where participants judged the
object to be clearly a category member and did not see any
more abstract sense in which one could say that, ultimately,
it was not truly a category member at all. Thus dual
character concepts allow participants to judge category
membership either on the basis of the concrete properties or
the abstract normative values that categorize the category.
With the control categories, what you see is what you get.

Experiment 3
The fact that something other than readily observable
concrete properties are relevant to category membership for
dual character concepts is reminiscent of research on the
representation of natural kind concepts (e.g. Keil, 1989;
Gelman & Wellman, 1991). For natural kind concepts, the
“something other” is understood to be hidden causes or
essences. Could the judgments observed in the previous
experiment be the same phenomena that have been observed
for natural kind concepts? We do not think so. One
important difference is that whereas dual character concepts
provide two legitimate ways of characterizing and
categorizing category members, natural kind concepts are
usually understood to have only one legitimate way of
determining category membership, with the easily
observable superficial properties providing at best a quick
and dirty heuristic for determining category membership.
Experiment 3 investigates whether dual character
concepts and natural kind concepts differ in this manner by
running an experiment like Experiment 2 with the addition
of vignettes of natural kind categories. The natural kind
vignettes were adapted from Keil (1989) and described
concrete superficial characteristics of a given category, but
lacking crucial underlying causal factors of that category.
A complex pattern of judgments across the three types of
concepts was predicted. For control concepts, participants
should focus on the concrete observable properties and
ignore the more abstract values. Conversely, for the natural

kind properties, they should focus on the hidden essence and
ignore the concrete observable properties. For dual character
concepts, participants should say that it can count as a
category member in one sense while simultaneously not
counting as a category member in another.

Method
Thirty native English speakers participated in the
experiment via the Internet using AMT. In addition to the
vignettes from Experiment 2, we included 10 vignettes of
natural kind categories that were adapted from Keil (1989).
These vignettes described things with the concrete
superficial characteristics of a given category, but lacking
the crucial underlying causal factors of that category. The
crucial underlying causal factors described were those of a
different category.

Results
The mean ratings given in each condition are shown in
Figure 3. The key prediction of an interaction between
category type and statement type for dual character and
natural kind concepts was confirmed (F1(1, 29)= 74.23, p
<.001; F2 (1, 18) = 35.39. p <.001). As predicted, the
interaction was due to significantly higher ratings for nonmember statements as compared to member statements for
the natural kind categories (F1 (1, 29) = 127.79. p <001; F2
(1, 9) = 114.29, p <.001), but no difference between the two
statement types for the dual character categories (F1 (1, 29)=
1.28, p >.27; F2 < 1).
7

6

5

Member
Nonmember
Series3
Series4
Series5
Series6
Series7
Series8

4

3

2

1

0

Dual Character

Control

Natural Kinds

Figure 3. Mean ratings by condition for Expt. 3.
(Error bars show SE mean.)
The interaction between category type and statement type
for natural kind and control concepts was also significant
(F1(1, 29)= 206.22, p <.001; F2 (1, 18) = 153.78. p <.001).
As predicted, the interaction was due to significantly higher
ratings for non-member statements as compared to member
statements for the natural kind categories (F1 (1, 29) =
127.79. p <001; F2 (1, 9) = 114.29, p <.001), but the
opposite for the control concepts (F1 (1, 29)= 117.25,
p<.001; F2 (1, 9) = 55.70, p <.001).

Discussion
Experiment 3 provides clear evidence that dual character
concepts are represented differently than natural kind
concepts. There is, however, a methodological issue one
may raise concerning Experiments 2 & 3. Perhaps the
differences between concept types was due to the vignettes

2968

not being properly matched? We
methodological concern in Experiment 4.

addressed

this

Experiment 4
In Experiment 4, we did away with the vignettes and simply
asked participants to judge the extent to which statements of
the following sort sounded weird/sounded ok to them:
(6) There's a sense in which she is clearly a
scientist/bartender, but ultimately, if you think about
what it really means to be a scientist/bartender, you'd
have to say that there is a sense in which she is not a
scientist/bartender at all.
We predicted that such statements would sound fine for dual
character concepts, but not for the control single character
concepts.
If dual character concepts provide two ways of
characterizing and thus categorizing items, it should also be
possible to deny membership on the basis of concrete
characteristics, but allow membership on the basis of the
item embodying the abstract normative characteristics that
characterize the category. Thus, we predict that participants
should find statements of the following sort to sound fine
for dual character concepts, but not the control concepts.
(7) 'There's a sense in which she is clearly not a
scientist/bartender, but ultimately, if you think about
what it really means to be a scientist/bartender, you'd
have to say that there is a sense in which she is a true
scientist/bartender after all.

(Error bars show SE mean.)

Discussion
The results of this experiment suggest that the effects seen
in Experiments 2 and 3 were not artifacts due to potentially
unmatched vignettes. On the contrary, even when one omits
the vignettes, participants still think that certain sentences
sound right with dual character concepts but not with
control concepts.
Furthermore the fact that both types of statements were
rated highly for dual characteristic concepts shows that the
concrete and abstract criteria can come apart in either
direction. Just as it is possible to fulfill the concrete criteria
without fulfilling the abstract ones, it is possible to fulfill
the abstract criteria without fulfilling the concrete ones.

General Discussion
Four experiments found that dual character concepts
differed from the control concepts across a number of
different measures.
First, participants were willing to apply the adjective
‘true’ with dual character concepts (‘true scientist’) but not
with control concepts (‘true cashier’).
Perhaps more tellingly, when participants were given
vignettes about objects that had all the concrete features that
would be stereotypically associated with a category but
nonetheless lacked the abstract values that characterize the
category, they were willing to use sentences of the form:
(8) There is a sense in which she is clearly a scientist,
but ultimately, if you think about what it really means
to be a scientist, you would have to say that she is not a
scientist at all.

Method
The concepts used in Experiments 1 & 2 were used to
construct statements of the form of (X) and (Y). We refer to
these as concrete-only and abstract-only statements.
Thirty native English speakers participated in the
experiment via the Internet using AMT. Participants were
instructed to rate the extent to which the sentences sounded
ok/sounded bad. Each participant received all 40 items in a
different random order.

Results
The mean ratings by condition are shown in Figure 4. As
predicted, there was a main effect of concept type with
higher ratings for dual character concepts (F1(1, 29)= 91.34,
p <.001; F2 (1, 18)=105.83, p <.001). There was no effect
of statement (F1& F2 < 1), or interaction (F1& F2 < 1).

However, participants were not willing to use sentences of
this form with either control concepts or natural kind
concepts. Indeed, even in the absence of any vignette, they
indicated that sentences like this make sense with dual
character concepts but not with control concepts.
Finally, in cases of dual character concepts, people were
able to make sense of the converse sentence:
(9) There is a sense in which she is clearly not a
scientist, but ultimately, if you think about what it
really means to be a scientist, you would have to say
that she truly is a scientist.
However, participants indicated that such sentences could
not be applied in cases of control concepts.
All in all, then, the experimental evidence indicates that
dual character concepts do indeed differ from other concepts
in systematic ways. We will be focusing here on two claims
about the nature of this difference: (a) that each dual
character concept provides two distinct criteria for category
membership; (b) that one of these criteria involves certain
kinds of abstract values.

Figure 4. Mean ratings by condition for Expt. 4.

2969

Distinct criteria
One striking aspect of dual character concepts is that people
are willing to say that a single object can fall under such a
concept in one sense while not falling under the concept in
another. How is this duality to be understood?
One way to get a handle on this phenomenon is to
compare it with cases in which people have only a single
system of criteria but these criteria allow different degrees
of category membership. Take the concept HOT CHOCOLATE.
It might happen that some objects fulfill the criteria for this
concept to a high degree, others do not fulfill them at all,
and some stand right at the border, such that a person could
say: ‘Loosely speaking, this is hot chocolate, but strictly
speaking, it is not hot chocolate.’ Yet one should not
therefore conclude that people have two distinct systems of
criteria for hot chocolate. Rather, it seems they have a single
system of criteria, and although certain objects fulfill those
criteria perfectly, others only fulfill them to a certain degree.
The results of the present studies, however, suggest that
something more is going on in the case of dual character
concepts. To say that an individual is a ‘true scientist’ is not
simply to say that this individual exhibits the characteristic
features of scientists to an unusually high degree. After all,
as we found in Experiment 4, people are willing to say that
there might be a certain sense in which an individual counts
as a true scientist even if there is a sense in which this
individual does not count as a scientist at all.
So what we see arising in these cases appears to be
something more fundamental. It seems that people actually
are adopting two distinct systems of criteria, such that a
single object can fulfill either one of the criteria while
failing to fulfill the other.

Abstract values
A second striking aspect of dual character concepts is the
role played by abstract values. People appear to understand
the concept SCIENTIST in terms of an impartial quest for
empirical knowledge, ROCK MUSIC in terms of raw
emotional intensity, and so on. When an object fails to
embody these abstract values, participants conclude that
even if it has the concrete features associated with a given
category, there is still a sense in which it does not count as a
genuine category member.
The phenomenon at work here seems to show a certain
structural similarity to the one we find in natural kind
concepts. Faced with a natural kind concept like SKUNK,
people might observe numerous different superficial
features (stripedness, smelliness, etc.), but they also
conclude that these superficial features are united by all
having the same underlying causes. These underlying causes
are then seen as the true criteria for category membership.
Likewise, in the case of a dual character concept like
scientist, people might observe numerous different concrete
activities (conducting experiments, analyzing data, etc.), but
they conclude that all of these concrete activities are ways
of realizing the same abstract values. In an analogous

fashion, these abstract values are treated as criteria for
category membership.
Yet, despite these structural similarities, there are also
important respects in which dual character concepts differ
from natural kind concepts. Natural kinds are characterized
in terms of underlying causes (e.g., DNA), whereas dual
character concepts are characterized in terms of abstract
values (e.g., raw emotional intensity). The hidden essence of
a natural kind concept is often entirely unknown, whereas
the abstract values of a dual character concept are typically
known. And, as Experiment 3 shows, participants judge that
membership in a natural kind is independent of concrete
superficial features, whereas participants think that there is a
sense in which concrete features can be sufficient for
membership in a dual character category.
To capture the distinctive properties of dual character
concepts, it may be necessary to extend the theories
developed for natural kind concepts in a number of
directions. Above all, it may be necessary to generalize
these theories so that they apply not only to causal relations
but also to normative relations. Such a generalization may at
first seem surprising, but a surge of recent research has
indicated that normative considerations can impact people’s
cognition in a wide array of domains, including everything
from causal judgment to theory-of-mind (for a review, see
Knobe 2010). In combination with other recent findings
(Prasada & Dillingham 2006; 2009), the present results
suggest that this pervasive impact of normativity extends to
conceptual representation as well.

References
Barsalou, L.W. (1985). Ideals, central tendency, and
frequency of instantiation as determinants of graded
structure in categories. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 11, 629654.
Gelman, S.A. & Wellman, H.M. (1991). Insides and
essences: Early understanding of the non-obvious.
Cognition, 38, 213-244.
Keil, F.C. (1989). Concepts, kinds, and conceptual
development. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Knobe, J. (2010). Person as Scientist, Person as
Moralist. Behavioral and Brain Sciences. 33: 315-329.
Lynch, E. B., Coley, J. D., & Medin, D. L. (2000). Tall is
typical: Central tendency, ideal dimensions, and graded
category structure among tree experts and novices.
Memory & Cognition, 28, 41- 50.
Murphy, G.L. (2002). The big book of concepts. MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA.
Prasada, S., & Dillingham, E. (2006). Principled and
statistical connections in common sense conception.
Cognition, 99, 73-112.
Prasada, S., & Dillingham, E. (2009). Representation of
principled connections: A window onto the formal
aspect of common sense conception. Cognitive Science,
33, 401-448.

2970

