UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Dynamical Emotions: Bodily Dynamics of Affect during Problem Solving

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/62m8r5s7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Author
D'Mello, Sidney

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Dynamical Emotions: Bodily Dynamics of Affect during Problem Solving
Sidney D’Mello (sdmello@memphis.edu)
Institute for Intelligent Systems, University of Memphis
Memphis, TN 38152, USA

There are distinctive reasons for focusing on body
movements over the face and speech. First, it could be
argued that body motions are ordinarily unconscious,
unintentional, and thereby not susceptible to social editing,
at least compared with facial expressions, speech intonation,
and some gestures. Second, human bodies are relatively
large and have multiple degrees of freedom, thereby making
the body an effective affective communicative channel.
Third, the expectation of a systematic link between bodily
movements and complex mental states is supported by
embodied theories of cognition and emotion (Niedenthal,
2007).
Most (but not all) of the studies that have investigated the
role of body movements in the expression of affective states
have focused on the degree of bodily arousal, specific
postures (e.g., forward-leans, arms akimbo), and some
gestures (e.g., pointing, hailing) (Bull, 1987; Coulson,
2004). Comparatively, little is known about the low-level
bodily correlates of affective states like frustration, anxiety,
and cognitive-affective amalgamations such as confusion
and flow/engagement. This paper addresses this issue by
analyzing how these affective states influence the dynamics
of presumably unconscious bodily movement
In addition to simple measures of bodily motion, such as
amount of movement and variability in movement, we focus
on complex system measures as an index of the embodied
nature of cognition and affect. Though relatively well
established in the cognitive sciences, dynamical systems
perspectives are only beginning to gain momentum in the
affective sciences (Camras & Shutter, 2010; Coan, 2010;
Lewis, 2005). Dynamical theories of emotion challenge the
classical view that a central affect program coordinates the
physiological, behavioral, and subjective components of an
emotional episode (i.e., an anger circuit (Ekman, 1992)).
Instead, they posit that these components are loosely
coupled and are constantly interacting in a self-organizing
fashion. When this system is perturbed, it is jolted from its
state of equilibrium, until it spontaneously reorganizes and
equilibrium is restored. The emotion “emerges” from the
attractor (a set of states towards which the system regularly
converges to) in which this dynamical trajectory converges
(Camras & Shutter, 2010).
The embodied nature of cognition and affect lead us to
hypothesize that variations in affective states will be
associated with meaningful shifts in fluctuations of bodily
movements. The present study addresses this hypothesis by
showing that when individuals engage in complex problem
solving tasks, patterns of bodily movement exhibit dynamic
signatures that may give away whether someone is in an
anxious state, a confused state, a frustrated state, etc.

Abstract
This paper investigates the low level bodily correlates of
affective states, such as boredom, confusion, anxiety, and
frustration, that spontaneously emerge during complex
problem solving tasks. Participants were video recorded while
they solved difficult analytical reasoning problems after
which they self-reported their affective states via a
retrospective affect-judgment protocol. Time series of bodily
motions were automatically extracted from the videos of
participants’ faces and upper bodies via a motion filtering
algorithm. Recurrence quantification analyses revealed that
participants who reported increased levels of anxiety and
frustration had less recurrent and deterministic movements
compared to their counterparts. Importantly, these patterns
could not be explained by the mere amount of movement or
the variability in movement, but by non-obvious dynamical
patterns in movement. We orient our findings towards
theories that emphasize complex systems approaches to
studying emotion.
Keywords: emotion; bodily movement; dynamical systems;
recurrence quantification analysis.

Introduction
The significance of non-verbal channels in human-human
communication is widely acknowledged, however, the
impetus has been on oculesics (eye contact), peripheral
physiology, facial expressions, gesture, and paralinguistic
features of speech. Comparatively, little attention has been
directed towards the role of gross body movement (i.e.
posture, movement) as a non-verbal communicative
channel. This oversight is unfortunate because it has been
known for several decades that posture is an important
diagnostic cue of emotions, attitudes, social relationships,
personality, and a host of other affective, cognitive, and
social constructs (Ekman, 1992; Oullier & Basso, 2010;
Russell, Bachorowski, & Fernandez-Dols, 2003).
When it comes to affective states (general term covering
moods and emotions), which are the focus of this paper, it
has been claimed that the face plays a primary role in
discriminating between specific emotions such as anger and
fear (Ekman, 1984). Posture and body movements, on the
other hand, are sometimes considered to be a mere indicator
of the intensity of an emotion, thereby being downgraded in
importance as an affective communicative channel (Bull,
1987). This view has been subsequently challenged by a
number of studies, which showed the efficacy of the whole
body in communicating specific emotions and attitudes,
independent of facial expressions and paralinguistic features
of speech (Castellano, Mortillaro, Camurri, Volpe, &
Scherer, 2008; Coulson, 2004; Scherer & Ellgring, 2007).

402

Recurrence quantification analysis (RQA) (Webber &
Zbilut, 2005) were used to extract dynamical measures from
nonlinear time series of naturalistic bodily movements and
correlate these measures to self-reported affective states.
RQA is an invaluable tool to uncover patterns in nonlinear
time series because it offers a window into the dynamics of
complex systems, while at the same time, avoiding several
of the assumptions of traditional time series analysis
techniques
(e.g.,
assumptions
of
stationary,
homoscedasticity). It has yet to find widespread use in the
cognitive sciences, hence, we begin with a brief description
of analyzing dynamical systems with RQA.

from 0 to 1 and the recurrence rate for the Lorenz system
presented in Figure 1D is .042.
Determinism is a measure of the proportion of points in
the recurrence plot that form diagonal lines, which are
indicative of repetitive (or deterministic) patterns in the
dynamical trajectory. Determinism also ranges from 0 to 1,
and the determinism of the recurrence plot of the Lorenz
attractor is .99 (very deterministic).

Recurrence Quantification Analysis (RQA)
A dynamical system at time consists of a state, which is an
-dimensional point in a -dimensional space, called a state
space or phase space. There is a fixed rule, which
determines how the system transitions from one state to
another and a trajectory represents a sequence of such state
transitions. For example, the popular Lorenz attractor is a
dynamical system governed by the following three
equations:
;
;
(
and are parameters) (Lorenz, 1963). Time series
of length 1,000 created from the three Lorenz equations are
presented in Figure 1A and the resultant phase space plot is
presented in Figure 1B. It should be noted that the system is
called an attractor (Lorenz attractor) because the trajectory
are attracted to certain points in the phase space (the lines)
and repelled from others (the white space).
Recurrence quantification analysis is a technique aimed at
uncovering the intrinsic dynamics in non linear dynamical
systems, such as the Lorenz system (Webber & Zbilut,
2005). It consists of computing the distance between all
possible combinations of
points in the phase space,
representing these distances as a
matrix (called a
recurrence plot), and deriving measures from the matrix
(i.e., quantifying the plot). A recurrence plot for the Lorenz
attractor is presented in Figure 1D. Each point in the plot
(matrix) consists of the distance between two points in the
phase space. For example, cell (100, 130) in the recurrence
plot represents the distance between the 100th and 300th
point in the phase space. Matrix cells are only included in
the plot if the distance between the corresponding points is
within some threshold (scored as 1 or 0 otherwise). The
freely available CRP toolbox (Marwan, Romano, Thiel, &
Kurths, 2007) was used for all the recurrence analyses
reported in this paper.
Although it is possible to derive a number of measures
from the recurrence plots, the present analysis focuses on
two fundamental measures: recurrence and determinism.
Recurrence is a measure of the proportion of points in the
phase space that are within some threshold distance to one
another. Recurrence can be computed by simply adding up
the number of points in the recurrence plot and dividing it
by the total number of possible points (
. It can range

Figure 1. Recurrence quantification analysis of the Lorenz
attractor.
It is important to emphasize one critical point pertaining
to recurrence analyses of natural time series, such as time
series of bodily motion fluctuations analyzed in this paper.
Unlike mathematical dynamical systems, such as the Lorenz
attractor, we rarely know the precise laws (or equations) that
govern the dynamics of phenomenon in the behavioral
sciences. What we usually have is one or more measures of
a complex system, such as a time series of bodily
fluctuations. Fortunately, it is possible to reconstruct the
dynamics of a complex system with a single time series
using time-delayed surrogates of that time series (Takens,
1981). This is illustrated by the reconstructed phase space of
the Lorenz system depicted in Figure 1C. This phase space
was constructed from only one of the three time series
presented in Figure 1A and the reconstructed (Figure 1C)
and actual (Figure 1B) phase spaces are remarkably similar
(the similarity is more obvious after rotating Figure 1C).
Hence, an essential step in RQA is to reconstruct the
dynamics of the system (phase-space reconstruction) prior
to creating and quantifying the recurrence plots. In fact, the
recurrence plot in the figure was computed from the
reconstructed phase space (Figure 1C) instead of the actual
phase space (Figure 1B).

403

observations; hence, the subsequent analysis focuses on this
set of six frequent states.

Method
Participants

Data Treatment

Participants were 41 undergraduate students who were
enrolled in a preparatory course for the Law School
Admissions Test (LSAT); this test is required for admission
to Law School in the U.S. There were 26 females (63%) and
15 males (37%). 78% were Caucasians and the remaining
22% were African-Americans. All of the participants
indicated that they were interested in attending law school
and were paid $30 for their participation.

Participants’ gross body movement was monitored from the
videos of the face and upper body via a motion-filtering
algorithm. The algorithm computes the amount of motion in
a given frame Ft by measuring the proportion of pixels in Ft
that have been displaced (i.e., motion is greater than a
predefined threshold) from a moving background model
constructed on the basis of N earlier frames (see Figure 3AD; N = 4 for present analysis). The proportion of pixels with
motion provides an index of the amount of movement in
each frame.
Sample output of the motion tracking algorithm is
presented in Figure 2. Panels A shows a single frame
extracted from a video sequence, while the output of the
motion filtering algorithm is shown in Panel B. It is
important to note that background noise (i.e. the patterns on
the walls and ceilings) have been correctly filtered out. A
sample time series of bodily movements is presented in
Figure 3.

Procedure
Phase 1: Problem Solving. Participants solved difficult
analytical reasoning problems taken from the LSAT over
the course of the session. They interacted with a customized
software program on a Tablet PC that delivered the
questions, monitored their responses, and provided feedback
(i.e. “Correct” or “Incorrect”). Effectively solving the
analytical reasoning problems requires a considerable
amount of knowledge representation, drawing diagrams,
taking notes, and other related activities. Participants used a
software application, Windows Journal™ (a computerized
program that simulates a notepad) to take notes and draw.
The experimenter left the room after demonstrating the
software interfaces to the participants. They were told that
they would be paid two dollars for each correct answer. All
participants were paid $30. Each problem had a scenario
(e.g., a flight schedule with constraints) and approximately
5-6 sub-questions pertaining to the scenario. Participants
interacted with the system for 35 minutes and videos of the
participant’s face and computer screen were recorded.

Figure 2. Sample output from motion filtering algorithm

Phase 2. Judging Affective States. Participants provided
self-judgments of their affective states immediately after the
tutorial session; learning activities during the session were
not interrupted. Participants were provided with a checklist
of 14 states (anger, anxiety, boredom, contempt, confusion,
curiosity, disgust, eureka, fear, frustration, happiness,
sadness, surprise, and neutral) along with definitions.
Similar to a cued-recall procedure (Rosenberg & Ekman,
1994), the judgments for a participant’s session proceeded
by playing a video of the face along with the screen capture
video of the computer interface. Videos of the screen were
included to facilitate the affect judgment procedure by
allowing participants to incorporate contextual factors of the
problem solving process with their facial expressions.
Participants provided affect ratings over the course of
viewing these videos. Specifically, the states were tracked at
points halfway between the presentation of the problem and
the submission of the response. These center points were in
order to capture their states while participants were in the
midst of active problem solving.
Mean proportional scores for the six most frequent states
were confusion (.135), frustration (.071), curiosity (.186),
boredom (.115), anxiety (.043), and neutral (.363). These
remaining eight states comprised a mere 8.7% of the

Figure 3. Sample time series of bodily movements

Results and Discussion
Time series were extracted from each of the videos with the
motion filtering algorithm. Four measures were computed
for each participant’s time series. The first two measures
consisted of the mean and standard deviation of the time
series. These basic measures reflect simple movement
(mean) and variations in movement (standard deviation).
The two dynamical measures consisted of recurrence and
determinism as described above. RQA parameters were

404

embedding dimension = 4; delay = 50, range (1024, see
below), norm = maximum norm, radius = 0.3, and line = 2;
see Webber & Zbilut (2005) for details.
It is important to emphasize one critical point pertaining
to the computation of these measures. The face videos were
recorded at 15 frames per second and each video was
approximately 35 minutes long. These large time series of
31,500 frames (15 × 60 × 35) introduced some
computational problems because it was difficult to store the
31,500 × 31,500 recurrence matrix in memory. These
computational problems were circumvented by dividing the
time series into 1024-frame windows and computing the
four dependent measures for each window. An aggregate
score for each participant was then computed by averaging
across windows. A similar procedure was adopted for the
computation of the basic descriptive measures (mean and
standard deviation).
We computed correlations between the four dependent
measures to test whether the basic and dynamical measures
were capturing unique aspects of the time series. Values
outside of a -2SD to 2SD range were identified as outliers
and removed prior to computing the correlations.
Mean motion did not significantly (p < .05 unless
specified otherwise) correlate with either recurrence (r = .165) or determinism (r = -.149). It did, however, correlate
with standard deviation of movement (r = .490), thereby
indicating that amplified movement was associated with
heightened variability of movement. Standard deviation did
not significantly correlate with determinism (r = -.244), but
it did correlate with recurrence (r = -.613). Hence, it appears
that increased variability of movement was related to less
recurrence, which is what would be expected. Recurrence
and determinism were also strongly correlated (r = .766), so
participants with more recurrent movements also yielded
more deterministic patterns. Since only one of the four
correlations between the basic and dynamical measures was
significant (i.e., the inverse correlation between standard
deviation and recurrence), we concluded that, to some
extent, these simple and dynamical measures are capturing
different aspects of bodily motion.
Next, we computed a 6 × 4 across-subjects correlation
matrix between the proportional occurrence of six frequent
affective states and the four measures of motion (see Table
1). Standard deviation did not correlate with any of the
affective states. This indicates that simple variability in
movement is not very diagnostic of affect. Recurrence and
determinism demonstrated similar correlational patterns;
hence, the subsequent analyses simply refer to these as the
dynamical measures.
Simple motion (mean) positively correlated with boredom
and confusion, and negatively correlated with the neutral
state. This suggests that the experience of boredom and
confusion during the problem solving sessions was
associated with more bodily movement. In contrast, the
neutral state was associated with less movement.
A rather different pattern emerged from the dynamical
measures. Both recurrence and determinism were negatively

correlated with anxiety and frustration, but were positively
correlated with neutral. Hence, it appears that participants
who reported increased levels of cognitive distress (anxiety
and frustration) had less fluid and less deterministic
movements than their counterparts.
Table 1. Correlations between proportional affect and bodily
fluctuation measures
Basic Measures
Affect

Mean

Anxiety
-.009
Boredom
**.530
Confusion
**.412
Curiosity
-.173
Frustration
-.026
Neutral
*-.293
Note. ** p < .05; * p

Dynamical Measures

Stdev

Recurrence

Determinism

-.012
.237
.236
-.097
.153
-.222
< .10.

*-.323
-.147
-.081
-.248
**-.334
**.469

**-.385
-.223
.011
-.271
**-.339
**.430

The results so far indicate that both the simple and the
dynamical measures are correlated with different affective
states. Importantly, both measures appear to detect
departures from the neutral state, albeit for different
affective states. While the interpretation for the correlations
between magnitude of movement (mean motion) and
boredom and confusion are straightforward, the dynamical
patterns are more non-obvious. Since recurrence was
correlated with standard deviation, there is the question of
whether these dynamical measures explain additional
variance above and beyond the more simple descriptive
measures (mean and standard deviation).
This question was addressed with a partial correlation
between the dynamical measures and anxiety, frustration,
and neutral after controlling for the magnitude (mean of
each time series) and variability in movement (standard
deviation of each time series). The results yielded
significant relationships between recurrence and both
anxiety (r = -.426) and neutral (r = .495). Similarly, the
partial correlations between determinism and both anxiety (r
= -.400) and neutral (r = .400) were significant. The results
were mixed for frustration. There were marginally
significant correlations between proportional occurrence of
frustration and recurrence (r = -.292, p = .094) and
determinism (r = -.321, p = .069). Taken together, these
results indicate that the movements of individuals
experiencing anxiety and frustration cannot be simply
attributed to the magnitude or variability in movement, but
rather less fluid and less predictable movements.
As an illustrative example, a 1024 frame excerpt of time
series for participants reporting high and low anxiety levels
are presented in Figure 4A and B, respectively. The time
series shows smoother motions for the low anxiety
participants compared to the jerky fluctuations for the high
anxiety participant. These patterns are also evident in the
reconstructed phase spaces and recurrence plots presented in
Figure 4. Note that the trajectory visits a much larger

405

portion of the phase space of the high anxiety participant
(Figure 4C), compared to the participant who reported being
less anxious (Figure 4D). Consequently, there is
considerably less recurrence associated with the high
anxiety participant, as demonstrated by the nearly empty
recurrence plot ((Figure 4E). In contrast, there are clearly
visible patterns of recurrent motion for the participant
reporting less anxiety (Figure 4F).

consistent with medium to large effects. We also selected
tasks that had some real-world relevance and methodologies
with limited experimenter control thereby yielding
naturalistic expressions of spontaneous affective states.
It is important to address a couple of potential concerns
with the present methodology. This retrospective affect
judgment methodology was adopted because it affords
monitoring participants’ affective states at multiple points,
with minimal task interference, and without participants
knowing that these states were being monitored. Although
this affect judgment method has been previously used
(Rosenberg & Ekman, 1994), producing similar
distributions of states as online methods (Craig, D'Mello,
Witherspoon, & Graesser, 2008), and the affective labels
obtained correlate with online recordings of facial activity in
expected directions (D'Mello & Graesser, 2010), there is the
concern that showing participants videos of their faces
might have introduced some methodological artifacts. The
concern stems from the possibility that participants could
have inferred their bodily motions from the videos of their
faces and based their judgments on these bodily movements.
This is an unfortunate complication that is difficult to
mitigate because it is difficult to automatically segregate
facial movement from general body movement. We would
argue though that it is quite unlikely that participants could
have perceived variations in the dynamical patterns, guessed
our hypotheses, and selected their judgments accordingly.
We conclude by discussing some of non-obvious findings
with respect to how affect is embodied in bodily movement.
Boredom is typically considered to be associated with lower
arousal (Pekrun, Goetz, Daniels, Stupnisky, & Raymond,
2010), while increased arousal is associated with
engagement (Bianchi-Berthouze, Kim, & Patel, 2007).
Hence, one counterintuitive finding is that boredom was
associated with increased instead of diminished movement,
a finding that has received some previous empirical support
(Mota & Picard, 2003).
It is tempting to speculate on the exact nature of the
bodily movements during the experience of anxiety and
frustration. Are the movements associated simply more
pronounced, jerky, and less fluid for these states of distress
and subtle, smooth, and calm during normal cognitive
functioning? This is a challenging question to answer by
simply eyeballing the videos because the movements of
individuals who experience heightened anxiety and
frustration cannot be simply attributed to greater movement
(mean of each time series) or larger variability in movement
(standard deviation of each time series). Hence, it is not the
magnitude or variability of bodily movements, but the
dynamics of these movements that best explains these
correlations.
It is important to align the present findings within some of
the more recent complex systems approaches to emotion
(Camras & Shutter, 2010; Coan, 2010; Lewis, 2005).
Dynamical theories of emotion conceptualize emotions as
emergent attractor states that trajectories converge upon
when the cognitive-affective system is perturbed by an

Figure 4. Bodily dynamics of high and low anxiety
participants.

General Discussion
The majority of research on the embodiment of emotion has
focused on facial movements, speech contours, and
physiological measures, such as electromyography and
electrocardiography (Calvo & D’Mello, 2010; Russell, et
al., 2003). In our view, the discovery of systematic covariation between the dynamics of bodily movement and
affective experiences highlights the importance of the body
as an important channel of affective expressions. Although
facial expressions are considered to be strongly associated
with affective expression, and entire theories of emotion are
based on facial behavior alone (Ekman, 1984), metaanalyses on correlations between facial expressions and selfreported emotions have yielded small to medium effects for
spontaneous expressions (Camras & Shutter, 2010;
Fridlund, Ekman, & Oster, 1987; Ruch, 1995; Russell, et al.,
2003). Although our results warrant replication, the reported
correlations between the fractal dimension and affect were

406

internal or external event. The attractor landscape and the
control parameters that modulate the dynamics of the
system are ostensibly organized based on past experience,
affective traits, social constraints, developmental changes,
and a host of other factors. One can envision an attractor for
anger, anxiety, frustration, and so on, each tightly coupled to
an individuals’ past experiences and evolutionary niche in
the environment. The present results support the notion of
cognitive-affective states causing and being caused by
(circular causality) complex dynamical interactions between
loosely-coupled entities by showing that there is systematic
covariation between the experience of states, which are
diagnostic of cognitive distress, and the body’s ability to
self-organize. A critical next step of this research is to test
causal links between emotional states and bodily
fluctuations in order to uncover the dynamical signature of
specific discrete emotions, i.e. identifying an attractor for
anxiety, or frustration, or confusion.

D'Mello, S., & Graesser, A. (2010). Multimodal semiautomated affect detection from conversational cues,
gross body language, and facial features. User Modeling
and User-adapted Interaction, 20(2), 147-187.
Ekman, P. (1984). Expression and the nature of emotion. In
K. Scherer & P. Ekman (Eds.), Approaches to emotion
(pp. 319-344). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ekman, P. (1992). An argument for basic emotions.
Cognition & Emotion, 6(3-4), 169-200.
Fridlund, A. J., Ekman, P., & Oster, H. (1987). Facial
expressions of emotion. In A. W. Siegman & S. Feldstein
(Eds.), Nonverbal behavior and communication (2nd ed.,
pp. 143–223). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lewis, M. D. (2005). Bridging emotion theory and
neurobiology through dynamic systems modeling.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 28(2), 169-245.
Lorenz, E. N. (1963). Deterministic Nonperiodic Flow.
Journal of Atmospheric Sciences, 20, 130-141.
Marwan, N., Romano, M., Thiel, M., & Kurths, J. (2007).
Recurrence plots for the analysis of complex systems.
Physics Reports, 438(5-6), 237-329.
Mota, S., & Picard, R. (2003). Automated Posture Analysis
for Detecting Learner's Interest Level Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition Workshop, 2003. CVPRW '03.
Conference on (Vol. 5, pp. 49-49).
Niedenthal, P. M. (2007). Embodying emotion. [Review].
Science, 316(5827), 1002-1005.
Oullier, O., & Basso, F. (2010). Embodied economics: how
bodily information shapes the social coordination
dynamics of decision-making. Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society B-Biological Sciences, 365(1538),
291-301.
Pekrun, R., Goetz, T., Daniels, L., Stupnisky, R. H., &
Raymond, P. (2010). Boredom in achievement settings:
Exploring control–value antecedents and performance
outcomes of a neglected emotion. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 102(3), 531-549.
Rosenberg, E., & Ekman, P. (1994). Coherence between
expressive and experiential systems in emotion. Cognition
& Emotion, 8(3), 201-229.
Ruch, W. (1995). Will the real relationship between facial
expression and affective experience please stand up - the
case of exhilaration. Cognition & Emotion, 9(1), 33-58.
Russell, J. A., Bachorowski, J. A., & Fernandez-Dols, J. M.
(2003). Facial and vocal expressions of emotion. Annual
Review of Psychology, 54, 329-349.
Scherer, K., & Ellgring, H. (2007). Are facial expressions of
emotion produced by categorical affect programs or
dynamically driven by appraisal? Emotion, 7(1), 113-130.
Takens, F. (1981). Detecting strange attractors in
turbulence. Lecture Notes in Mathematics, 366-381.
Webber, C. L., & Zbilut, J. P. (2005). Recurrence
quantification analysis of nonlinear dynamical systems. In
M. A. Riley & C. C. V. Orden (Eds.), Contemporary
nonlinear methods for behavioral scientists : A webbook
tutorial.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Blair Lehman, Natalie Person, Rick Dale, Art
Graesser, Kevin Shockley, and Michael Riley. This research
was supported by the NSF (HCC 0834847, ITR0325428).
Any
opinions,
findings
and
conclusions
or
recommendations expressed in this paper are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views the NSF.

References
Bianchi-Berthouze, N., Kim, W., & Patel, D. (2007). Does
body movement engage you more in digital game play?
And Why? In A. Paiva, R. Prada & R. Picard (Eds.),
Proceedings of the Second International Conference on
Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction
(ACII2007) (pp. 102-113): Springer.
Bull, P. (1987). Posture and gesture. Oxford Pergamon
Press.
Calvo, R. A., & D’Mello, S. K. (2010). Affect detection: An
interdisciplinary review of models, methods, and their
applications. IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing,
1(1), 18-37.
Camras, L., & Shutter, J. (2010). Emotional facial
expressions in infancy. Emotion review, 2(2)(120-129).
Castellano, G., Mortillaro, M., Camurri, A., Volpe, G., &
Scherer, K. (2008). Automated analysis of body
movement in emotionally expressive piano performances.
Music Perception, 26(2), 103-119.
Coan, J. A. (2010). Emergent ghosts of the emotion
machine. Emotion Review, 2(3), 274-285.
Coulson, M. (2004). Attributing emotion to static body
postures: Recognition accuracy, confusions, and
viewpoint dependence. Journal of Nonverbal Behavior,
28(2), 117-139.
Craig, S., D'Mello, S., Witherspoon, A., & Graesser, A.
(2008). Emote aloud during learning with AutoTutor:
Applying the facial action coding system to cognitiveaffective states during learning. Cognition & Emotion,
22(5), 777-788.

407

