UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Early Talkers and Late Talkers Know Nouns that License Different Word Learning Biases

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6k58j089

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Colunga, Eliana
Sims, Clare

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Early Talkers and Late Talkers Know Nouns that License Different
Word Learning Biases
Eliana Colunga (eliana.colunga@colorado.edu)
Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, 345 UCB
Boulder, CO 80309-0345 USA

Clare E. Sims (clare.holtpatrick@colorado.edu)
Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, 345 UCB
Boulder, CO 80309-0345 USA
Abstract
In typical development, word learning goes from slow and
laborious to fast and seemingly effortless. Typically
developing 2-year-olds are so skilled at learning noun
categories that they seem to intuit the whole range of things in
the category from hearing a single instance named – they are
biased learners. This is not the case for children below the
20th percentile on productive vocabulary (late talkers). This
paper looks at the vocabulary composition of age-matched
18-30-month-old late- and early-talking children. The results
of Experiment 1 show that late talkers’ vocabularies are more
variable than early talker’s vocabularies. Crucially,
Experiment 2 shows that neural networks trained on the
vocabularies of individual late talkers learn qualitatively
different biases than those trained on early talker
vocabularies. These simulations make testable predictions for
world learning biases of late- vs. early-talking children. The
implications for diagnosis and intervention are discussed.
Keywords: Late talkers; early talkers; computational models;
neural networks, vocabulary composition.

Introduction
There is extraordinary variability in the vocabularies of
very young children. A two-year-old in the lower 10th
percentile may produce around 10 words whereas a twoyear-old in the top 10th percentile will produce well over
300 (Fenson, Dale, Reznick, Thal, Bates, Hartung, Pethick,
& Reilly, 1993). In general, the course of word learning
proceeds from slow, effortful learning of nouns and of the
range of things that belong in a category, to very rapid
learning of object names. Indeed, typically developing 2year-olds are so skilled at learning new nouns that they
seem to intuit the whole range of things in a named category
from a single naming experience. This is not necessarily the
case for children below the 15th-20th percentile on
productive vocabulary, or late talkers. Why do some
children learn words quickly and early and others learn
words slowly, maybe even showing effects that persist into
adolescence? This paper looks at two possible contributing,
and interrelated, factors: noun vocabulary composition and
word learning biases.
The evidence suggests that children become skilled noun
learners, at least in part, because they know about the
different kinds of properties that are relevant for
categorizing different kinds of things. In the Novel Noun

Generalization task (NNG), typically-developing children
show word learning biases that are specific to different
kinds: they generalize names for solid objects by shape and
names for non-solid substances by material (e.g., Jones,
Smith & Landau, 1991; Soja, Carey, & Spelke, 1991).
The evidence also suggests that children learn how to
learn nouns – and specifically learn how different kinds of
properties are relevant for different kinds of things – as a
consequence of learning names for things. Each noun the
child learns appears to teach the child something general
about how to learn new nouns that name things of that same
kind, and critically, at the same time, this learned general
knowledge constrains and facilitates the types of nouns the
child will learn next. To the extent that this interrelation
holds true for children in different ends of the language
spectrum – late talkers and early talkers – one might be able
to leverage this process to predict outcome. The first step,
however, is to show that 1) late talkers and early talkers
know different sorts of nouns and 2) that these differences
in vocabulary structure lead to differences in word learning
biases. This paper presents a first look at these questions by
examining the noun vocabulary composition of 18-30month-old late- and early-talking children and showing that
neural networks trained on the vocabularies of individual
late talkers learn qualitatively different biases than those
trained on early talker vocabularies.

Vocabulary composition and word learning biases
The relationship between vocabulary composition and
word learning biases has been typically characterized in one
of two ways: abstract knowledge guides, facilitates and
indeed allows word learning (e.g., Soja et al, 1991; Gelman
& Bloom, 2000) or the words that have been learned give
rise to, create, and in fact constitute generalized knowledge
about word learning (e.g., Colunga & Smith, 2005,
Samuelson, 2008). We would like to bypass the debate on
whether word-learning biases are the egg to the vocabulary
chicken or the other way around and focus instead on the
interrelationship between these two factors.
In the domain of names for objects and substances, and in
typical development, vocabulary structure and abstract
knowledge in the form of kind-specific generalizations
appear to be tightly coupled. First, the tendency to attend to
shape in the specific context of naming artifacts emerges as

2550

children learn nouns, becoming particularly robust around
the time children have between 50 to 150 nouns in their
productive vocabulary (Gershkoff-Stowe & Smith, 2004).
Second, the order of development of these word learning
biases reflects the statistical structure of early noun
vocabularies, (Samuelson & Smith, 1999; Colunga & Smith,
2005). Third, changing 17-month-olds’ vocabulary
composition by intensively teaching them names for
artifacts yields an early bias to generalize names for artifacts
by shape and accelerates learning of object names outside
of the lab, causing a dramatic increase in vocabulary size for
children in the experimental training group but not for those
in the control groups (Smith, Jones, Landau, GershkoffStowe & Samuelson, 2002). Fourth, computational models
trained on the structure of the average 30-month-old
vocabulary, show word learning biases like those of young
children when processing new objects (Colunga & Smith,
2005), and further the structure of the training set affects
subsequent training, facilitating the learning of some sorts
of categories but hindering others (Colunga, in prep).
Altogether, these results suggest a developmental feedback
loop between learning object names, developing biases to
attend to the relevant properties for artifacts, and the
learning of more object names.

Late Talkers
Children below the 15th-20th percentile on normative
measures of productive vocabulary size, so-called late
talkers, are not a homogenous group in terms of their
developmental outcomes: some catch up (Rescorla, 2002), a
few will be diagnosed with Specific Language Impairment,
and for some the source of the delay may be environmental
(Rescorla, Roberts, & Dahlsgaard, 1997). However,
Rescorla and colleagues argue against considering late
talkers, preschoolers with specific language impairment, and
typically developing children as distinct groups, and argue
instead for conceptualizing them in terms of a “language
endowment spectrum.” Importantly, although there is
continuity in vocabulary measures at the group level, the
outcome for individual children cannot be accurately
predicted on the basis of vocabulary production or
comprehension (Thal, Bates, Goodman, & Jahn-Samillo,
1997; Desmarais, Meyer, Bairati & Rouleau, 2008).
The literature briefly reviewed above suggests that, in
typical development, the words a child knows and what the
child knows about learning words in general go hand in
hand, and that learning names for categories of things
organized by shape speeds up learning nouns. However, this
may not be the case for all children. Unlike typically
developing children, late talkers do not systematically
extend the name of a novel solid object to other objects that
match it in shape, and in fact, in one study, almost half of
the late talkers systematically extended the novel name of a
solid object to others matching in texture rather than shape
(Jones, 2003). The decoupling of vocabulary acquisition and
word-learning biases may mean that these children are not
just limited in their production of object names (the measure

that defines them as late talkers) but also deficient in the
processes that subserve the acquisition of new words and in
their knowledge about those categories. If this were the
case, a natural prediction would be that noun vocabularies
of late-talkers should have a different structure than noun
vocabularies of typically developing children. For the
purposes of this paper we will focus on contrasting the
vocabularies of children on the two opposite ends of the
spectrum, late talkers and early talkers.

Experiment 1
Method
Materials. The vocabulary measure used is the BatesMacArthur Communicative Developmental Inventory
toddler version (MCDI) both to select children and to
measure vocabulary composition. This is a parent checklist
that asks parents to indicate the words that their child
produces and although it is imperfect as a measurement
instrument (Fenson, et al, 1994) it appears to be reliable and
to be systematically related to children’s performances in a
variety laboratory measures of word learning, including
especially their word-learning biases in the Novel Noun
Generalization task (e.g., Landau, et al, 1988).
Participants. The vocabularies of 15 late talkers and of 15
early talkers were selected out of a pool of 148 parent-filled
MCDI forms for children between 18-30 months of age. The
criterion for inclusion was that there existed a vocabulary
form from a child matching in age to within 5 days in both
the late talker and the early talker groups. Late talkers fell
under the 25th percentile; early talkers were above the 75th
percentile according to the MDCI norms.
The ages for the two language groups ranged from 18.49
months to 28.26 months (M=23.14 and 23.15 for late and
early talkers respectively. Vocabulary sizes for the late
talker group ranged between 15 and 425 words (M=132.53);
for the early talker group vocabulary size was between 158
and 664 words (M=457).
Results
To get a sense of the variability in vocabulary
composition (as opposed to vocabulary size) in children at
different percentiles in vocabulary development, for each
individual child, we looked at the proportion of nouns they
knew for the categories of 1) solid things alike in shape
(e.g., spoon), 2) solid things alike in material (e.g., chalk),
3) solid things alike in both shape and material (e.g., penny),
4) non-solid things alike in shape (e.g., bubble), 5) non-solid
things alike in material (e.g., milk), 6) non-solid things alike
in both (e.g., jeans). Nouns in children’s vocabularies were
classified as falling in each of these categories according to
adult judgments made for each of the nouns in the MCDI
reported in Samuelson & Smith, 1999. Figure 1 shows the
proportion of words for solids and non-solids that are
organized by shape (x-axis) and material (y-axis), for each
of the 15 late talkers (triangles) and early talkers (crosses).

2551

Although there is some overlap between the two groups,
there is greater variability in the composition of the
vocabularies of the late-talker sample, for both solids and
non-solids. Subjecting children’s proportion of words to a
2(Language Group: early talkers, late talkers) x 2(Solidity:
solid, non-solid) x 3(Dimension: shape, material, both)
repeated measures ANOVA with age in months as a
covariate, yielded the expected main effects of solidity,
F(1,27)=50.7, p<.0001, and dimension, F(2,54)=8.416,
p=.001, indicating that there were more words for solids
than non-solids, and more words for shape-based categories
than any other type respectively. In addition, the expected
interaction between solidity and dimension was significant,
F(2,54)=12.37, p<.0001. There were more shape-based
words for solids, and less shape-based words for non-solids.
There was also a marginally significant 3-way interaction
between solidity, dimension and language group,
F(2,54)=3.18, p=.055. Descriptively, late talkers have
relatively more words for solid that are organized by shape
than early talkers, and relatively fewer words for solids
organized by material or both.

vocabularies and thus many more ways of “selecting” the
words they know out of the vocabulary checklist. Put
another way, as early talkers approximate mastery of the
whole checklist, their vocabularies will tend toward the
structure of the checklist. The crucial question, then, is
whether these differences in vocabulary composition are
differences that matter. Do the different nouns late- and
early-talkers know yield different word learning biases?

Discussion
As predicted, late talkers and early talkers show a difference
in the structure of their noun vocabularies. As a group, late
talkers show more variability in their vocabulary structures
than early talkers. This is perhaps not strange given that, on
average, the children in the late talker group have smaller

2552

Figure 2. Architecture of the networks used in Exp. 2

To answer this question, in Experiment 2 we trained
individual neural networks on the noun vocabulary structure
of each individual late-talking and early-talking child in
Experiment 1. If the differences in vocabulary structure can,
to some extent, explain the differences in language ability,
we would expect late talker vocabularies to yield different
word learning biases than early talker vocabularies. More
specifically, we would expect early talker vocabularies to
yield word learning biases that would facilitate the learning
of a vocabulary structured like the MCDI – highlighting
shape similarities for solids and material similarities for
non-solids. In contrast, we would expect networks trained
on late talkers’ vocabularies to generalize more variable
word learning biases, and perhaps even biases that would be
unhelpful in learning early vocabularies.

Experiment 2
Method
The computational models are a modified version of the
ones Colunga & Smith, 2005. The main difference is that
these networks were trained using the Leabra algorithm, an
algoritm that combines Hebbian and error driven learning
(O’Reilly, 1996), instead of Contrastive Hebbian Learning
as in the original simulations.
Architecture. The architecture is implemented as shown
in Figure 2. Words are represented discretely (as single
units) and are input on the Word Layer. Referents are
represented as distributed patterns over several dimensions
on the Perception Layer. For example, the shape and
material of an object (say the roundness of a particular ball
and its yellow rubbery material) are represented by an
activation pattern along the Perception layer. Solidity and
Non-solidity are represented discretely; one unit stands for
Solid and another for Non-Solid. Finally, there is a hidden
layer that is connected to all the other layers and to itself.
These networks have been shown to model performance in
an analog of the NNG Task when trained on vocabularies
structured as those of the average 30-month-old.
Training. The networks are trained with categories
presenting the same correlational structure as each
individual child’s noun vocabulary. On each training trial, a
word is paired with a referent. The patterns associated with
each word are determined by adult judgments of the early
noun corpus. For example, adults judged balls to be similar
in shape but different in material. To simulate this, we
randomly selected an input vector to represent ball shape.
Then on individual training trials, we paired that pattern
with the label ball and a randomly selected material pattern.
We do this for each noun in the training set. Each network
was trained in this way for its simulated vocabulary until
they reached asymptotic (and near perfect) performance.
This part of the simulation is intended to put into the
networks the lexical knowledge that the individual child
would bring to the laboratory NNG task.
Because we are interested in the consequences of different
vocabulary structures regardless of their size, all networks

were trained to learn 24 nouns, proportionally structured
like their corresponding child’s vocabulary. Thus, the only
difference between networks were the differences in
vocabulary composition found in Experiment 1.
Testing. The question is what sort of word learning bias
will the networks learn given different vocabulary
structures. We address this question in a virtual version of
the NNG task. On each test trial of the virtual NNG task,
we presented the network with three novel entities (one at a
time) on the perception layer – an exemplar, and two choice
items, one matching the exemplar in shape only and one
matching in material only. For each of these three inputs,
we recorded the resulting pattern of activation on the hidden
layer. This is a measure of how the network represents
these items. If the network emphasizes the shape of the
item then the similarities of the internal representations for
the exemplar and its shape matching choice should be
greater than the similarity of the internal representations for
the exemplar and the material matching choice. If, however,
the internal representations highlight the material of the
items, then the similarity of the internal representations for
the exemplar and the shape matching choice should be less
than the corresponding similarity of the exemplar and the
material matching choice. We used these similarities along
with Luce’s choice rule to calculate probability of choice
using these similarity measures in order to predict
performance in the novel noun generalization task.
In previous work these models have been used to
demonstrate the plausibility of the idea that the correlations
in the early noun lexicon are sufficient to create second
order generalizations – knowledge that any solid thing
should be named by shape, and any non-solid thing should
be named by material. The present simulations extend this
work to variable vocabularies of individual children in the
bottom and top ends of the language endowment spectrum.

Results
The networks’ predictions for each of the fifteen
vocabularies of early talkers and late talkers are shown in
Figures 3 and 4 respectively. In short, all networks in the
early talker group show a shape bias for solids, and 12/15
early talker networks show a material bias for non-solids as
well. In contrast, 12/15 late talker networks show a shape
bias for solids and only 3/15 show a material bias for nonsolids. Interestingly, 6/15 late-talker networks show a shape
bias for non-solids, a novel prediction that has not been
empirically tested so far. To further analyze the networks’
performance, networks were classified according to the
observed generalization patterns: correct if they showed a
shape bias for solids and a material bias for non-solids, halfright if they show the appropriate shape bias for solids but
no consistent bias for material, or wrong, if they showed an
incorrect overgeneralized shape biased to non-solids. A chisquare test showed these types of word learning biases were
distributed differently in late talker and early talker
networks, X2(2,15)=11.21, p=.003 (Yates’ p=0.017).

2553

Figure 3. Predicted proportion of shape choices for
each of the early talker networks
Note that our small sample did not allow for precision
matching by vocabulary, however, the highlighted portions
of the two graphs above indicate the area of overlap in
vocabulary range. The late talker children in the highlighted
area have vocabulary sizes between 155-425 (M=257.2) and
ages between 23-28 months (M=25.2); the early talker
children in the highlighted area have vocabulary sizes
between 158-451 (M=331.3) and ages between 18-22
months (M=19.9). As shown in the figures, the predicted
word learning generalizations for these vocabulary-matched
children are qualitatively different – the networks predict
that older late-talker children with similar vocabulary sizes
as their younger early-talker counterparts nevertheless show
less robust word learning generalizations in the NNG task.

whose vocabularies went into these simulations were
between 18 and 28 months of age. In general, children at
this age do not show a robust material bias for non-solids;
that does not happen until age 3 (but see Colunga & Smith,
2005 for an early material bias for non-solids presented in
simple shapes in children in this age group), yet a majority
of the early talker networks (and a couple of late talker
networks) show material biases for non-solids. This is a
novel prediction. What the networks suggest is that early
talkers will show an early material bias for non-solids. We
are currently running a longitudinal study examining
vocabulary composition via the MCDI and word learning
biases in the lab in children starting at 16 months, and by 19
months of age, every child in the early talking group (6
children) show a robust shape bias for solids and an equally
robust material bias for non-solids in a novel noun
generalization task. Although this is a small sample size,
and there is some question as to whether the effect will
remain stable, this preliminary data suggests that the
networks’ predictions may indeed be true.
The second result from the networks that appears to
contradict findings documented in the literature is that a
majority of late talkers show a shape bias for solids. This
goes against the findings reviewed in the introduction in
which late talkers did not show a shape bias for solids and
might have even have a texture bias instead. One possible
way to reconcile this contradiction is that the children in the
Jones, 2003 study were generally older than the children in
this study (25-41 months of age, M=33.25). It is possible
that the shape bias for solids predicted by these simulations
will disappear in the next 10 months or so. There is another
intriguing possibility, however, and one that points out a
limitation in the models. These models do not make a
distinction between naming and non-naming contexts. It is
possible that the shape preference for solids here is not a
true shape bias, but rather an overgeneralized heightened
attention to shape. The fact that 6/15 late talker vocabularies
yielded a shape bias for non-solids suggests that this may be
the case. Looking at the late-talking group of the ongoing
longitudinal study suggests that this may be the case, 5/8
toddlers at 19 months show an overgeneralized shape bias
for non-solids and for a non-naming control task. A study
with larger numbers of early takers and late talkers is
necessary to confirm these predictions.

General Discussion
Figure 4. Predicted proportion of shape choices for
solids and nonsolids for the late talker networks

Discussion.
The results of the simulations suggest that the differences
in noun vocabulary composition between late- and earlytalking children may result in differences in word learning
biases. It is important to note a couple of things that may
seem to contradict previous findings. First, the children

The work presented here makes several contributions.
First, the findings of these two studies show that late talkers
and early talkers know different sorts of nouns, a new
finding that may have important implications for early
identification of at-risk children. At the very least, the
finding that there are different vocabulary structures in these
two groups of children is a promising direction in looking
for ways to predict outcome from characteristics that are
easily measured at an early age.
Furthermore, the finding that these differences in
vocabulary composition lead to qualitatively different word

2554

learning biases in a computational model that has been
previously shown to capture various aspects of novel noun
learning, suggests a promising use for process-level
computational models. Efforts to tease apart the
contributions of different factors to outcomes in late talkers
have come up with some characteristics that put children at
higher risk, but the underlying mechanisms are not well
understood and the need to identify subgroups within latetalking toddlers remains. The work of Ziegler and
colleagues in the domain of dyslexia offers a good example
of the potential for using computational models – and
specifically models that operate at the mechanistic level – in
simulating individual differences and further understanding
subtypes in atypical development (Ziegler, Castel, PechGeorgel, George, Aario, & Perry, 2008). Thus, the models
presented here are a promising first step in leveraging
computational models to aid in the understanding of why
some late talkers catch up and others do not.
Finally, these models represent an important extension
over previous word-learning modeling efforts in that they go
beyond modeling the performance of the mythical average
child to making predictions about the performance of
individual children, and of children who are both at the top
and at the bottom of the vocabulary spectrum. In so doing,
the simulations presented here make novel and testable
predictions. They predict that early talkers and late talkers
will show different word learning biases in the novel noun
generalization task. More specifically, the simulations
predict that, between 18 and 30 months of age, early talkers
will show an early material bias and that late talkers will
show an overgeneralized shape bias.
The work presented here also has some clear limitations.
First, the fact that we do not have outcome data for the
children in these studies seriously constrains what we can
infer from these results and their potential use in early
identification of at risk children – will the late talking
children who show correct biases catch up? Or are the ones
showing the overgeneralized shape bias the ones on the right
track? Are these differences in vocabulary and in word
learning biases predictive of outcome? Second, all of these
networks are identical except for the vocabulary structure on
which they are trained. Although it is possible to see this as
a strong demonstration of the relationship between
vocabulary composition and word learning biases, allowing
for pre-existing individual differences in these models may
increase their power. Finally, there is more to language, and
even more to word learning, than learning nouns. Thus,
these models capture only a sliver of language learning and
may miss components crucial to achieving the ultimate goal
of increasing diagnostic power at the individual level.
In spite of these limitations, the models presented here
constitute an innovative approach to predicting and
characterizing typical and atypical vocabulary acquisition in
young children. The relationship between vocabulary
composition and word learning biases modeled here – the
words you know determine the way you learn new words,
which constrains and facilitates the words you will know

next, and so on – opens a new way of thinking about
computational models, to capture not only averages and not
only individuals, but individual trajectories. If we can build
computational models that can successfully capture this selfconstructing developmental loop, the implications for early
diagnosis, designing early interventions, and understanding
the mechanisms that underlie word learning in typical and
atypical development are far-reaching.

References
Colunga, E., & Smith, L. B. (2005). From the lexicon to
expectations about kinds: a role for associative
learning. Psychological Review, 112(2), 347–382.
Desmarais, C. S., Meyer, F., Bairati, I., & Rouleau, N.
(2008) Systematic review of the literature on
characteristics of late-talking toddlers. Intl. J. of Language
and Communication Disorders. 43(4) pp:361-389.
Fenson, L., Dale, P., Reznick, J. S., Thal, D., Bates, E.,
Hartung, J., Pethick, S., & Reilly, J. (1993). The
MacArthur Communicative Development Inventories:
User’s guide and technical manual. San Diego, CA:
Gelman, S. A., & Bloom, P. (2000). Young children are
sensitive to how an object was created when deciding
what to name it. Cognition, 76(2), 91-103.
Gershkoff-Stowe, L., & Smith, L.B.(2004). Shape and the
first hundred nouns. Child development 75(4),1098-1114.
Jones, S. S. (2003). Late talkers show no shape bias in a
novel name extension task. Dev. Science, 6(5), 477-483.
Jones, S. S., Smith, L. B., & Landau, B. (1991). Object
properties and knowledge in early lexical learning. Child
Development, 62(3), 499-516.
Landau, B., Smith, L. B., & Jones, S. S. (1988). The
importance of shape in early lexical learning. Cognitive
Development, 3, 299-321.
Rescorla, L. (2002). Language and reading outcomes to age
9 in late-talking toddlers. Journal of Speech, Language,
and Hearing Research, 45, 360-371.
Rescorla, L., Roberts, J. & Dahlsgaard, K. (1997). Late
talkers at 2: Outcome at age 3. Journal of Speech &
Hearing Research, 40, 556-566.
Samuelson, L. K., & Smith, L. B. (1999). Early noun
vocabularies: Do ontology, category structure and syntax
correspond? Cognition, 73(1), 1-33.
Smith, L. B., Jones, S. S., Landau, B., Gershkoff-Stowe, L.,
& Samuelson, L. . (2002). Creating a shape bias creates
rapid word learners. Psychological Science, 13, 13-19.
Soja, N. N., Carey, S., & Spelke, E. S. (1991). Ontological
categories guide young children’s inductions of word
meaning. Cognition, 38(2), 179-211.
Thal, D. J., Bates, E., Goodman, J., & Jahn-Samilo, J.
(1997). Continuity of language abilities: An exploratory
study of late- and early-talking toddlers. Developmental
Neuropsychology. 13(3), 239-273.
Ziegler, J. , Castel, C., Pech-Georgel, C., George, F., Alario,
F-X., & Perry, C. (2008). Developmental dyslexia and the
dual route model of reading: Simulating individual
diﬀerences and subtypes. Cognition, 107, 151–178.

2555

