UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effects of Semantic Integration and Advance Planning on Grammatical Encoding in Sentence
Production

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2vt99426

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Gillespie, Maureen
Pealmutter, Neal J.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effects of Semantic Integration and Advance Planning on Grammatical Encoding
in Sentence Production
Maureen Gillespie (gillespie.m@neu.edu), Neal J. Pearlmutter (pearlmutter@neu.edu)
Department of Psychology, 125 NI, Northeastern University
Boston, MA 02115 USA
Abstract
To examine how semantic integration and the scope of advance
planning affect utterance planning and subject-verb agreement
error rates, participants described picture displays using complex subject noun phrases (e.g., the apple for the pie(s)), with
singular head nouns (apple) and local nouns (pie(s)) in prepositional phrase modifiers, and then completed them as full sentences. Semantic integration (the conceptual link between elements within a phrase; Solomon & Pearlmutter, 2004) was
manipulated by varying the preposition used to link the head
noun and local noun. Speech onset times and agreement error rates were recorded. Speakers were faster to initiate speech
when the head and local noun were integrated than when they
were unintegrated. Agreement errors were more likely when
the local noun was plural than when it was singular. Supporting
the scope of planning account of agreement (Gillespie & Pearlmutter, 2011), speakers who were slower to initiate speech produced more agreement errors, suggesting that speakers who do
more advance planning are more likely to experience interference during agreement computation.
Keywords: language production; subject-verb number agreement; advance planning; speech errors; semantic integration;
grammatical encoding

The study of language production is concerned with how
speakers translate non-verbal thoughts into meaningful,
grammatical utterances. Bock and Levelt (1994) separate the
planning process required for language production into three
main levels: the message level, which represents the speaker’s
intended meaning; the grammatical encoding level, which
translates the meaning into a sequence of words; and the
phonological encoding level, which translates the sequence
of words into the sounds required to produce the utterance.
Planning in language production is thought to proceed incrementally; the system takes advantage of the sequential nature
of production, allowing speech to be initiated before an entire
utterance is prepared for articulation. Planning in language
production proceeds quickly and accurately the majority of
the time; however, speech errors do occasionally occur. If the
scope of advance planning at a given level is large, multiple items are likely to be simultaneously available, which increases the chance of interference and certain speech errors
(Garrett, 1975).
Subject-verb agreement error production has been studied
extensively in the language production literature (e.g. Bock
& Cutting, 1992; Eberhard, Cutting, & Bock, 2005; Gillespie & Pearlmutter, 2011; Solomon & Pearlmutter, 2004).
The most replicated finding in this domain is the mismatch
effect: Agreement errors are most common when the subject of a complex noun phrase (NP) is singular and a local noun in a modifier is plural (e.g., *The key to the cabi-

nets WERE...; Bock & Miller, 1991). Some previous research
has focused on how syntactic structure constrains agreement
computation (e.g., Bock & Cutting, 1992; Franck, Vigliocco,
& Nicol, 2002); however, there is increasing evidence that
the timing of planning of a local noun relative to the head
noun determines interference effects (Gillespie & Pearlmutter, 2010, 2011; Gillespie, Pearlmutter, & Shattuck-Hufnagel,
2010; Nicol, 1995; Solomon & Pearlmutter, 2004). Gillespie
and Pearlmutter (2011) proposed that interference from local nouns is determined by the scope of advance planning
in language production: Local nouns planned overlappingly
with the head noun are more likely to interfere with agreement computation.
One way the head and local noun may be planned closer together in time is if they occur in a close semantic relationship.
Solomon and Pearlmutter (2004) conducted experiments manipulating semantic integration (the degree to which elements
within a phrase are conceptually linked) of the head and local noun. Participants read subject NP preambles with a local noun in a prepositional phrase (PP) modifier off a computer screen and then went on to complete them as full sentences. In a series of studies, they found that agreement errors
were more likely to occur in highly integrated cases (e.g., the
chauffeur for the actor(s)) than less integrated cases (e.g., the
chauffeur near the actor(s)). They interpreted these findings
as evidence that semantic integration can affect the timing of
planning of elements within a phrase, independent of syntactic structure.
Another way the head and local noun may be planned with
more overlap is if they appear close together within the utterance. Gillespie and Pearlmutter (2011) showed that plural
local nouns that are linearly closer to the head noun are more
likely to create interference during agreement computation
than local nouns appearing more distally, when controlling
structural distance. These results suggest that planning proceeds in the order in which items are to be produced, with
semantic integration shifting the relative timing of planning.
Thus, given Gillespie and Pearlmutter’s findings, the degree
to which speakers plan local nouns in advance should affect
agreement error rates.
There is experimental evidence that the production system
does a considerable amount of advance planning (e.g., Smith
& Wheeldon, 1999; Wagner, Jescheniak, & Schriefers, 2010).
Smith and Wheeldon examined the scope of conceptual and
grammatical encoding during language production using a
picture description task. They designed visual arrays of three
pictures in which one, two, or all three pictures moved, and

1625

participants had to describe the movement. The movements
were designed to elicit sentences where the subject NP was
either complex (e.g., the dog and the foot) or simple (e.g., the
dog). They found that speech onset times for single-clause
sentences with complex subject NPs were longer than for
single-clause sentences with simple subject NPs. They argued
from this that the entirety of the subject NP must be grammatically encoded prior to speech onset, and that the scope of
grammatical encoding is the first full phrase of an utterance.
Wagner et al. (2010) found evidence that the scope of advance planning of lexical items is flexible rather than determined by grammatical structure. In a series of studies, participants described picture displays, using simple sentences
(e.g., the frog is next to the mug) and complex sentences (e.g.,
the red frog is next to the blue mug). An auditory distractor word that was semantically related to either the first noun
or second noun was played at varying stimulus onset asynchronies. In general, when a semantically related distractor
was co-present with a picture to be named, speech onset times
were longer than when the distractor was unrelated to the picture, due to both lexical items being active and in competition
for production. This effect is known as semantic interference.
Wagner et al. found a reliable semantic interference effect for
the second noun in the simple sentences and a weaker semantic interference effect for complex sentences, suggesting that
speakers plan the second noun in their utterance farther in
advance when cognitive demands are low. In addition, they
found that speakers who initiated speech faster (those with
shorter average speech onset times) showed reduced semantic interference effects relative to speakers who were slower
to initiate speech, indicating the possibility of individual differences in planning scope. These findings suggest that individuals’ planning scopes may influence how susceptible they
are to agreement errors.
The current study examined the effect of advance planning
on agreement error rates, by combining methods from the
scope of planning literature and subject-verb agreement error elicitation studies. All previous studies of agreement production have had a comprehension component: Participants
have either read or listened to preambles prior to using them
to complete a full sentence. As mismatch effects are also observed in comprehension studies (e.g., Pearlmutter, Garnsey,
& Bock, 1999), it is possible that interference from the comprehension system could be driving effects in production due
to the two systems sharing at least some representations (e.g.,
Garrod & Pickering, 2004). Using a presentation method that
requires speakers to formulate their utterance from the message level should better approximate the natural production
process and avoid potential confounds from comprehension.
In the current study participants described picture displays
using complex subject NPs (subject head nouns followed by
PP modifiers) and then went on to complete these descriptions (preambles) as full sentences. Semantic integration was
manipulated by varying the preposition used to link the head
and local noun in the display. Responses were recorded, and

speech onset times, which can reflect advance planning in language production (e.g. Smith & Wheeldon, 1999), were measured; and responses were examined for subject-verb agreement errors. This study aimed to replicate the mismatch and
semantic integration effects on error rates from earlier studies,
but using pictorial stimuli. Furthermore, because Solomon
and Pearlmutter suggested that semantically integrated nouns
are planned with more overlap than unintegrated pairs of
nouns, planning of the subject NP may be completed more
quickly when the head noun and local noun are semantically
integrated than when they are unintegrated, predicting shorter
speech onset times for integrated conditions than for unintegrated conditions.

Method
Participants One hundred fifty-three Northeastern University undergraduates participated in the experiment for course
credit. After excluding data from non-native speakers, participants who had language/cognitive disorders or could not follow instructions, recording failures, and a counterbalancing
error, 127 participants’ data were included in the error analyses. Speech onset time (SOT) data were available for 118 of
these participants.
Materials and design Twenty-four picture pairs like that
shown in Figure 1 were created. The computer display screen
was split in half vertically with one or two pictures arranged
vertically on each side. A picture of the head noun, enclosed
by a colored outline, was presented on one side of the screen,
and a picture of the local noun was presented on the other side
of the screen. In half the trials the head noun appeared on the
left side of the screen (as in Figure 1), and in the other half
the head noun appeared on the right. Local noun plurality was
manipulated by presenting either a single picture (as in Figure 1a, 1c) or a pair of identical pictures on the same side of
the screen (as in Figure 1b, 1d). Participants were required to
construct NP PP preambles from the pictures presented. Participants linked the head noun and local noun with one of two
prepositions that manipulated semantic integration; the color
of the outline around the head noun determined which preposition was to be used. A blue outline indicated for, the preposition that created a more integrated relationship between the
head and local noun; and a green outline indicated near, the
preposition that created a less integrated relationship between
the nouns (see Solomon & Pearlmutter, 2004). Examples of
the preambles to be constructed for the displays in Figure 1
are provided in the second column. Local noun number, linking word, and head noun position were varied within picture
pair, creating eight conditions. Each of eight counterbalanced
lists included 24 fillers and exactly one version of each of the
24 experimental items. All fillers had the same basic structure
as the critical items, but with plural head nouns.
Picture norming Seventy-six participants not involved in
any other part of the experiment were presented with 122
black-and-white line drawings of inanimate objects and were

1626

Figure 1: Examples of the picture displays representing four
of the eight conditions. The remaining four conditions were
created by switching the head noun and local noun positions
on the screen. Preambles that were intended to be constructed
from each display are presented in the second column.

required to provide a one-word label for the picture as quickly
as possible. Data from one participant were excluded. Names
and naming times were recorded for each picture. The 48 pictures used in the critical items were highly codable (i.e., only
elicited one or two nearly synonymous labels), their labels
were singular count nouns that had regular plural forms, and
the average naming latency for critical items was 914ms (SD
= 94ms). Pictures for filler and practice trials were also taken
from this set.
Semantic integration norming A separate set of 123 participants produced the preamble aloud and rated the picture
displays for semantic integration on a 7-point scale with
higher numbers indicating a tighter conceptual link. As in
Solomon and Pearlmutter (2004), the for versions were referred to as the integrated condition and the near versions
were referred to as the unintegrated condition. Data from
seven participants were excluded due to participants being
non-native speakers or recording failure. Only trials for which
participants correctly constructed the preamble with the expected noun labels (according to picture norming) were included, and these remaining data were analyzed in a linear mixed-effect model with head position, integration, local noun number, and their interactions as fixed effects; and
with participant and item intercepts as random effects. Items

linked with for were rated as more integrated than items
linked with near (t = 13.12, p < .001)1 . Items with plural
local nouns were rated as more integrated than items with singular local nouns (t = 2.13, p < .05). An interaction of linking word and local noun number was marginal (t = 1.94, p
= .06), with the effect of plurality stronger for for items than
near items2 . No other results were significant.
Procedure Each participant was run individually in the
main experiment. On each trial, a fixation cross was presented
in the center of the screen for 1000ms to focus attention. The
picture display immediately followed. 500ms later the colored outline appeared, indicating which picture was the head
noun. Participants were required to name the head noun picture (including the determiner the), produce the linking word
indicated by the color of the outline, name the local noun
picture (including the determiner the), and then produce an
ending that formed a complete sentence. The pictures disappeared after 3000ms, and a prompt to continue to the next trial
was presented. Participants were not instructed as to how they
should formulate a completion, only that they should form
a complete sentence. Speech onset times (SOTs) were measured from the onset of the picture display until the speaker
triggered the voice key. Nine practice items preceded the 48
trials.
Apparatus A Macintosh computer running the PsyScope
(v. 1.2.5) software package (Cohen, MacWhinney, Flatt, &
Provost, 1993) controlled stimulus presentation, with a button box to record SOTs. Responses were recorded to CD for
analysis.
Response scoring All responses were transcribed and assigned to one of four coding categories: (1) correct, if the participant said the preamble correctly, exactly once, produced
an inflected verb immediately after the preamble, and used
a verb form that was correctly marked for number; (2) error, if all the criteria for correct responses were met, but the
verb form did not agree in number with the subject; (3) uninflected, if all the criteria for correct responses were met, but
the verb was uninflected; and (4) miscellaneous, if the participant made an error in the preamble, if a verb did not immediately follow the preamble, or if the response did not fall into
any of the other categories. Trials in which a participant made
no response were excluded from all analyses. If the participant produced a disfluency (e.g., pauses, coughs) before, during, or immediately after producing the preamble and went
on to produce a correct, error, or uninflected response, the
scoring category and the disfluency were recorded.

1 Regression analyses were performed in R (R Development Core Team., 2009), using the languageR package (Baayen,
2008). Models were fit using the lme4 package (v. 0.999375-32), and
p-values were obtained using MCMC sampling in the coda package
(v. 0.13-4).
2 The semantic integration ratings for the plural local noun conditions are the most critical for the integration manipulation as only
plural local noun conditions should show reliable error rates. Thus,
integration was manipulated as desired.

1627

1600
1500
1400
1300

SOT (ms)

1300

Left

1000

1100

1200
1000

Plural local noun
Singular local noun

1200

1600
1400

1500

Plural local noun
Singular local noun

1100

SOT (ms)

Integrated
Unintegrated

Right
Head Position

Integrated

Unintegrated
Integration

Figure 2: Mean SOTs as a function of head position, integration, and local noun number. Error bars indicate ±1 SEM.

Figure 3: Mean SOTs for slow initiators as a function of integration and local noun number. Error bars indicate ±1 SEM.

Results

spond to integrated than unintegrated versions (t = −2.77, p
< .01). The interaction of integration and local noun number
was marginal (t = 1.89, p = .08). In the integrated condition,
slower participants were slower to respond to the plural local
noun condition than the singular local noun condition3 ; this
difference was not observed for the unintegrated condition.
This pattern is displayed in Figure 3.

Speech onset time A linear mixed-effect model was used
to analyze untransformed SOT data from 118 participants
(Baayen, 2008). Analyses were also conducted for logtransformed SOTs; statistical patterns were identical to the
untransformed data unless otherwise noted. Fixed effect predictors were head position, integration, noun number, and
their interactions; random effects were participant and item
intercepts. Only trials for which participants correctly constructed the preamble with the expected noun labels (according to norming) were included. Trials where the SOT was
more than ±2.5 SDs from the participant’s mean SOT were
not included, nor were trials where the voice key was triggered before the appearance of the outline.
Mean SOTs for each condition are shown in Figure 2. Participants were faster to initiate speech when the head noun appeared on the left side of the screen than when it appeared on
the right (t = -4.87, p < .001). Speech was initiated faster for
integrated than unintegrated versions (t = -2.20, p < .05; this
effect did not reach significance for log-transformed SOTs,
t = -1.60, p = .11). No other results were significant (|t|s
< 1.63, ps > .13).
If SOTs reflect advance planning of upcoming material,
the speakers who are slower to initiate speech should show
stronger integration effects than speakers who are faster to
initiate (see Wagner et al., 2010). Linear mixed-effect models (as described above) were run on the data from the fastest
half of participants (N = 59) and the slowest half of participants (N = 59). The fastest half of participants were faster
to respond when the head noun appeared on the left than
when it appeared on the right (t = −4.68, p < .001), but
no other main effects nor interactions were significant. The
slowest half of participants also showed the head position effect (t = −2.94, p < .01). In addition, they were faster to re-

Response analyses Analyses were performed for error
rates that included disfluencies (patterns were identical if disfluency cases were excluded). Performing ANOVAs on proportion data is problematic and may produce spurious results;
Jaeger (2008) instead suggested analyzing such data using
logit mixed-effect models. However, the error rates produced
in subject-verb agreement studies are extremely low, creating problems in applying the logit link function during model
fitting (the log odds of proportions near 0 approach negative
infinity). Thus, following Barr (2008), the data were analyzed
using empirical logit weighted linear regression, aggregating
separately over participants and items. By-participant and byitem weighted linear regressions on transformed error rates
were performed with head position, linking word, noun number, and all interactions as sum-coded fixed effects (t-tests
of parameter estimates are identified as t1 for by-participant
analyses and as t2 for by-item analyses).
Untransformed mean error rates are shown in Figure 4.
Agreement errors were more likely when the local noun was
plural than when it was singular (t1 = 6.81, p < .01; t2 = 10.2,
p < .01), but there were no other main effects nor interactions
(|t|s < 1).
To determine if speakers’ average SOTs predicted their
error rates, a second by-participant error rate model was
3 A linear mixed-effect model equivalent to a t-test comparing the
local noun number conditions in the integrated version showed that
this effect was marginal (t = 2.31, p = .052).

1628

10 12 14
8
6
4
0

2

Error rate (%)

Plural local noun
Singular local noun

Integrated

Unintegrated

Integration

Figure 4: Untransformed mean error rates as a function of
linking word and local noun number. Error bars represent ±1
SEM calculated from the by-participant analysis.
run with data from participants whose SOTs were available
(N =118). Fixed effect predictors were local noun number,
participant mean speech onset latency (obtained from the
SOT analyses), and their interaction; the only random effect
was the participant intercept. Agreement errors were more
likely when the local noun was plural than when it was singular (t = 6.68, p < .001). The odds of producing agreement
errors increased with speech onset latency (t = 1.11, p < .05).
There was a marginal interaction of noun number and speech
onset latency, such that the mismatch effect was larger for
speakers with longer average SOTs (t = 1.40, p = .06).
For uninflected and miscellaneous responses, the only significant result was that there were more miscellaneous errors
when the head appeared on the right than on the left (t1 =
-2.01, p < .05; t2 = -2.50, p = .19).

Discussion
This agreement error elicitation paradigm allowed speech onset time (SOT) to be measured in addition to error rates, while
approximating the natural production process. The SOT results reflect the nature of the grammatical encoding process
in this task. Speakers were faster to initiate speech when the
head noun appeared on the left. This result is possibly due to
native English speakers in this task being biased to attend to
the left side of the screen because English is written left to
right, and speakers prefer to begin their utterances with the
first item they look at (Griffin & Bock, 2000). Speakers were
faster to initiate their responses when the head and local noun
were integrated (linked with for) than when they were unintegrated (linked with near). This result suggests that speakers
were sensitive to the semantic integration manipulation and
completed planning of the subject NP more quickly when the
preposition created a tighter semantic link between the head
and local noun (see also Gillespie et al., 2010).
Interestingly, the integration effect was only present for the

slowest initiators. The slower initiators also showed a trend
toward a local noun number effect in the integrated condition, with no such effect in the unintegrated condition. If the
slow initiators plan the full subject NP prior to speech onset (see Smith & Wheeldon, 1999), the head and local noun
should be planned with some degree of temporal overlap.
When the head and local nouns mismatched in number (plural local noun conditions), the number mismatch could introduce competition or interference, increasing SOTs. Thus,
the speeded planning of the integrated condition may result
in the head and local noun being planned with some overlap
which would introduce competition in the number mismatch
cases, predicting a local noun number effect. In the slowerto-plan unintegrated condition, the head and local noun may
be planned with relatively little overlap, resulting in little or
no interference in the number mismatch cases, resulting in no
local noun number effect.
The scope of planning account of agreement computation
(Gillespie & Pearlmutter, 2011) predicts that differences in
timing of planning due to semantic integration (as observed
in SOTs) should lead to a difference in error rates, but the integration effect (Solomon & Pearlmutter, 2004) was not replicated in the error data. It is possible that the overall timing
difference between integrated and unintegrated cases was not
large enough to have a reliable effect on error production. Or,
speakers may have been less sensitive to the semantic integration manipulation than they were in previous studies. In
previous studies, there were fillers that contained a variety of
structures which could have forced participants to pay attention to the message-level properties expressed in the preambles; in the current task, the preambles had identical structures that only varied in the preposition, allowing the speakers to do less conceptual processing. Notably, speakers in this
study often produced sentences that reflected a tight semantic link between the head and local noun even in unintegrated
conditions (e.g., The apple near the pies should be used in
them), which also could have decreased sensitivity to the semantic integration manipulation.
Even though the semantic integration effect was not replicated in the error analyses, these results suggest that the
new paradigm can reliably reproduce the mismatch effect observed in many other agreement error elicitation studies relying on text or auditory stimuli (e.g. Bock & Miller, 1991). Interestingly, the slower initiators showed marginally stronger
mismatch effects than the faster initiators. These results are
consistent with the scope of planning account of agreement
production (Gillespie & Pearlmutter, 2011): Speakers who
plan more of their utterance in advance are more likely to
experience interference from plural local nouns during agreement computation.
Of course it is possible that the speakers who were slower
to initiate speech were just not very good at the task, which
could lead to agreement errors as well as other types of speech
errors such as disfluencies and preamble errors. To determine
if this was the case, regression analyses predicting participant

1629

disfluency rates and preamble error rates (both empirical-logit
transformed) from mean SOT were performed. There was no
reliable relationship between mean SOT and disfluency rate
(t = −0.22, p = .82), and the numerical pattern showed that
speakers who were faster to initiate speech were more likely
to be disfluent. Wagner et al. (2010) found a similar numerical
pattern, with speakers who did less advance planning producing more disfluencies. Thus, the pattern of disfluencies observed in this study is consistent with the SOT and error data,
suggesting that faster initiators did less advance planning than
slower initiators.
There was a nonsignificant positive relationship between
SOT and preamble error rates (t =1.10, p = .28); however,
with slower initiators more likely to produce errors when creating the preambles, this suggests that the slower initiators
may have had more difficulty than the faster initiators. These
preamble errors were of many types, including exchange errors (e.g., the pies for apple... I mean the apple for the pies)
and anticipations (e.g., the apples for the pies, no... the apple
for the pies). These types of errors have been hypothesized
to arise due to multiple items being simultaneously planned
and prepared for production (Dell, 1986; Garrett, 1975; Pearlmutter & Solomon, 2007). Unfortunately, unambiguous exchange and anticipation errors were very rare in the current
experiment (10 out of 592 preamble errors), so there was not
enough data to determine if slower initiators were also more
susceptible to these specific types of speech errors.

Acknowledgments
We thank our research assistants for running participants and
transcribing, and Keith Levin for creating the pictures.

References
Baayen, R. H. (2008). Analyzing linguistic data: A practical
introduction to statistics using R. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Barr, D. J. (2008). Analzing ‘visual world’ eyetracking data
using multilevel logistic regression. Journal of Memory
and Language, 59, 457-474.
Bock, K., & Cutting, J. (1992). Regulating mental energy: Performance units in language production. Journal
of Memory and Language, 31, 99-127.
Bock, K., & Levelt, W. (1994). Language production: Grammatical encoding. In M. Gernsbacher (Ed.), Handbook of
psycholinguistics (p. 945-984). San Diego, CA: Academic
Press.
Bock, K., & Miller, C. A. (1991). Broken agreement. Cognitive Psychology, 23, 45-93.
Cohen, J. D., MacWhinney, B., Flatt, M., & Provost, J.
(1993). PsyScope: A new graphic interactive environment
for designing psychology experiments. Behavior Research
Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 25, 257-271.
Dell, G. S. (1986). A spreading activation theory of retrieval
in language production. Psychological Review, 93, 283321.

Eberhard, K. M., Cutting, J. C., & Bock, K. (2005). Making
syntax of sense: Number agreement in sentence production.
Psychological Review, 112, 531-559.
Franck, J., Vigliocco, G., & Nicol, J. (2002). Subject-verb
agreement errors in French and English: The role of syntactic hierarchy. Language and Cognitive Processes, 17,
371-404.
Garrett, M. F. (1975). The analysis of sentence production.
In G. Bower (Ed.), Psychology of learning and motivation
(Vol. 9, p. 133-177). New York: Academic Press.
Garrod, S., & Pickering, M. J. (2004). Why is conversation
so easy? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 8-11.
Gillespie, M., & Pearlmutter, N. J. (2010). Against structural constraints in subject-verb agreement production.
Manuscript submitted for publication.
Gillespie, M., & Pearlmutter, N. J. (2011). Hierarchy and
scope of planning in subject-verb agreement production.
Cognition, 118, 377-397.
Gillespie, M., Pearlmutter, N. J., & Shattuck-Hufnagel, S.
(2010, March). Prosodic phrasing reflects planning processes in sentence production. Paper presented at the 23rd
Annual CUNY Conference on Human Sentence Processing, New York, NY.
Griffin, Z., & Bock, K. (2000). What the eyes say about
speaking. Psychological Science, 11, 274-279.
Jaeger, T. F. (2008). Categorical data analysis: Away from
ANOVAs (transformation or not) and towards logit mixed
models. Journal of Memory and Language, 59, 434-446.
Nicol, J. L. (1995). Effects of clausal structure on subjectverb agreement errors. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 24, 507-516.
Pearlmutter, N. J., Garnsey, S. M., & Bock, K. (1999). Agreement processes in sentence comprehension. Journal of
Memory and Language, 41, 427-456.
Pearlmutter, N. J., & Solomon, E. S. (2007, March). Semantic
integration and competition versus incrementality in planning complex noun phrases. Paper presented at the 20th
Annual CUNY Conference on Human Sentence Processing, San Diego, CA.
R Development Core Team. (2009). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. Vienna: R Foundation
for Statistical Computing, http://www.R-project.org.
Smith, M., & Wheeldon, L. (1999). High level processing
scope in spoken sentence production. Cognition, 73, 205246.
Solomon, E. S., & Pearlmutter, N. J. (2004). Semantic integration and syntactic planning in language production.
Cognitive Psychology, 49, 1-46.
Wagner, V., Jescheniak, J. D., & Schriefers, H. (2010). On
the flexibility of grammatical advance planning during sentence production: Effects of cognitive load on multiple lexical access. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 36, 323-340.

1630

