UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effects of Aging and Individual Differences on Credibility Judgment of Online Health
Information

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9tw5b1mw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Liao, Q. Vera
Fu, Wai-Tat

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effects of Aging and Individual Differences on Credibility Judgment of Online
Health Information
Q. Vera Liao (liao28@illinois.edu) & Wai-Tat Fu (wfu@illinois.edu)
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801 USA
experience, and domain knowledge interact to influence
credibility judgment of online information. Given that
credibility judgment plays a vital role in older adults’
successful and safe consumption of online health
information, a systematic study on age differences in
credibility judgment will critically facilitate older adults to
benefit from the massive amount of online health
information for better maintenance of their health
conditions.
In this study, we were interested in the difference in the
credibility judgment of online health information between
younger and older adults, as well as the underlying factors
of such differences. To this end, we collected the credibility
rating and verbal protocols as younger and older adults
evaluated the credibility of health information on different
Websites. We analyzed the potential differences between
the two groups in terms of their credibility judgment, and
the strategies they used. We also studied the extent to which
these differences could be explained by age-related
individual differences such as their cognitive ability,
Internet experience, and health related domain knowledge.

Abstract
We investigated the effects of aging and individual
differences on credibility judgment of online health
information. Analysis of credibility judgment ratings
revealed that older adults were less influenced by argument
strength in content messages and contextual Website features
than younger adults. Verbal protocol analysis revealed that
older adults tended to accept the facts they read on the Web
page instead of further deliberating on their credibility. They
also tended to pay less attention to contextual Website
features relevant to the credibility of the information. We also
found that older adults’ lower sensitivity to credibility cues
on a Web page could at least be partially explained by their
declined cognitive ability and lack of Internet experience. On
the other hand, health-related domain knowledge was found
to be useful in helping older adults to make better credibility
judgments.
Keywords: Web credibility, cognitive aging, Elaboration
Likelihood Model

Introduction
Because it is difficult to control the quality of the massive
amount of online health information, many argue that
credibility judgment should be taken as an indispensable
component of online health information consumption, since
health advice acquired from unreliable sources can be
hazardous, or even life threatening. This issue becomes
more prominent as studies have shown that, unlike other
routine online activities such as reading news, users often
do not have a trusted Web portal in mind when seeking for
health related information. Instead, they often rely on
search engines to solve their medical problems, and may
bypass the main page and encounter information from
untrusted sources (Eysenbach, 2007). A better
understanding of the factors that influence credibility
judgment will greatly enhance the safety and effectiveness
of online health information consumption by the public.
Among the increasing number of e-health consumers,
older adults constitute a notable group, possibly because of
their naturally higher need for health information. Research
has shown that, compared to younger adults, older adults
tend to exhibit distinctive behavior and performance in
terms of searching, evaluating, and comprehending Web
information (Chin & Fu, 2010; Hanson, 2009). The age
differences, according to these studies, could be attributed
to some unique characteristics of older adults, such as
declined cognitive ability and inadequate experience with
information technology. Despite its importance, there is a
general lack of research studying age differences in
credibility judgment of online information. To the best of
our knowledge, there is still no research aiming at
unpacking how age differences, cognitive abilities, Internet

Related Work
Many research studies on Web credibility have assumed
some forms of the dual processing model of persuasive
communications (e.g., Metzger, 2007) such as the
Elaboration Likelihood Model (ELM, Petty & Cacioppo,
1986). When applying the ELM to Web credibility,
individual’s attitude formation could be explained as they
encounter two distinctive types of cues: (1) content cues are
associated with the content/argument of Web information,
which requires systematic, deliberative processing, and (2)
contextual cues may be associated with the surface features
of the Websites (e.g., interface design, information source,
etc), which can be processed in a heuristic way by relying
on practical rules or experience (Petty & Cacioppo, 1986).
How cues from these two sources interact and impact users’
credibility judgment is an interesting question since users
may often receive cues that contradict each other. For
example, one study showed that credibility features of
healthcare Website have only small correlation with the
accuracy of information it provided (Heinke et al., 2002),
which implies that apparently credible Website may not
necessarily provide reliable health information.
Since the processing of content cues tends to be more
cognitively demanding, studies have found that users
tended to process them by heuristic processing (Hilligoss &
Rieh, 2008;.Sillence et al., 2007). However, there existed
mixed results regarding the effects of specific contextual
cues on users’ credibility assessment. While most studies
showed that notably better design appearances contributed

384

to higher perceived credibility (Alsudani & Casey, 2009),
users were often found to disregard certain Website features
such as third party endorsement, author information,
advertisement, etc, when making credibility judgment
(Hong, 2006), even though these features were considered
indicators of credibility in reflective situations such as
surveys (Fogg, 2001). These results implied that the
application of dual processing model to Internet may be a
complicated issue.
The primary focus of our study was to explore age
differences in credibility judgment of online health
information. Several lines of research provided robust
evidence for age related declines in central cue (content)
processing (Peters et al., 2007), which suggested that older
adults tend to process less information and demonstrate
worse judgments and decisions than younger adults.
However, other age-related factors, such as better
experience and knowledge, may be able to narrow the gap
by compensating for the age-related declines (Peters et al.,
2007). It is possible that, for example, better health
knowledge may compensate for the general lack of Internet
experiences of older adults in their credibility judgments. A
systematic study on the intricate relations among cognitive
ability, Internet experience, and health related domain
knowledge will shed light on how they interact to influence
credibility judgment.

modified their use of evidence, argument rigor, information
quality and bias, which have been identified to be
information credibility indicators (Fogg, 2003; Hamilton,
1998; Rieh, 2007). The medicine names were modified
such that they could not be recognized. To further verify
our manipulation, we asked a group of 7 pilot participants
naïve to the experiment to rate the credibility by reading the
article. We filtered out articles that had the lowest
consistencies among the pilot participants and ended up
with 8 sets of documents.
Contextual Cue Manipulation
For contextual cue manipulation, we focused on design
look and source features. Fogg et al. showed that design
look, including layout, typography, images, etc, tended to
have the largest impact on web credibility evaluation (Fogg,
2001). Source features are Website features that indicate the
source authority, including references, author information,
third-party endorsements, site ownership, commercial
features, etc (Hong, 2006). We selected web page templates
from highly recognized and professionally designed
healthcare Websites based on their public reputation,
Website traffic, and endorsement by Health on the Net
Network (HON). We adopted the design and source
features of these Web pages to represent “strong”
contextual cues, and deliberately removed some of these
features (3-5 changes per page) to create Web pages that
had “weak” contextual cues.
Measures of cognitive ability, Internet experience and
domain knowledge
For cognitive abilities, we focused on fluid mental abilities
(working memory and processing speed), which are found
to be most vulnerable to effects of aging. Previous studies
also identified these abilities to be some of the major causes
for older adults’ disadvantages in processing content cues
(Peters et al., 2007). Working memory was measured by the
Letter Number Sequencing Task, while processing speed
was measured by the Pattern and Letter Comparison Task
(Salthouse, 1991; Chin & Fu, 2010). These tasks have been
frequently used in previous studies to measure individual
differences in these cognitive abilities in the area of
cognitive aging.
Research on age differences in online behavior often
found that older adults tended to have less experience with
the Internet. It was suggested that Web use experience
could affect individual’s credibility evaluation with Web
information. To measure Internet experience, we randomly
selected 12 questions from the Knowledge-related Internet
Information Seeking Semi-structured Interview (KRIISS)
(Sharit et al., 2008). The interview asks questions regarding
how the Internet works, how to use Web browser tools and
how to perform information search task.
According to the theory of ELM, domain knowledge
could facilitate individual’s deliberative processing of
content. Also previous studies have shown that topical
knowledge influence users’ perceived credibility of Web
information (Ferebee, 2008). In our study, task-related
domain knowledge was measured by a fluency task, in

METHOD
Participants
16 older adults (aged between 62 and 80, Mean=69.38,
SD=5.81; 62.5% were female) and 16 younger adults ( aged
between 19 and 26, Mean=21.56, SD=2.10, 50% were
female) participated in our study. All participants were
recruited from the Urbana-Champaign area in the US.
There was no significant difference in the education level
and self-reported experience in seeking health related
information on Internet between two age groups.

Experimental Design and Materials
We employed a 2×2×2 mixed factor design to study older
and younger adults’ credibility judgment of online health
information. There were two within subject variables:
content cue strength and contextual cue strength, and one
between subject variable: age. All participants performed
eight credibility judgment tasks, with each task composed
of four Web pages that corresponded to the four possible
combinations of strong/weak contextual and content cues.
Content Cue Manipulation
For content cue manipulation, we adopted the empirical
method to verify the argument strength of the contents
shown on the Web pages (Petty & Cacioppo, 1986). First,
we selected materials from a popular healthcare Website
(www.revolutionhealth.com). It has articles of alternative
medicine for different diseases, with ratings provided by
users and professionals. Based on the ratings we selected
articles with “strong” and “weak” content cues. We further

385

which participants were asked to generate as many relevant
keywords as possible for each of the eight diseases we used
in experiment. The average number of keywords for each
disease, as an indication of their retrieval of related
concepts from memory (Griffiths et al., 2007), was used as
an index of individual’s task related domain knowledge.

domain knowledge interacted with age difference in
credibility judgment.

Age Differences in Credibility Judgments
We performed a three-way ANOVA on the credibility
ratings, with content cue strength and contextual cue
strength as within subject variables, and age as between
subject variable. The results showed that the main effects of
content cue ( F(1,30)=22.04, p <0.01) and contextual cue
(F(1,30)=41.81, p<0.01) were significant. Also the
interaction between content cue and age (F(1,30)=4.18,
p=0.05) , and interaction between contextual cue and age
(F(1,30)=5.60, p=0.03) were significant. Interestingly, the
two-way interactions indicated that older adults were less
able to differentiate between more credible information
from less credible one in terms of message content, as well
as contextual Website features, and gave closer credibility
ratings between strong and weak content/contextual cues
(Figure 1). Then we tested the main effects of content cue
and contextual strength in each age group. The results
showed that while younger adults could successfully
differentiate between strong and weak contextual cues
(F(1,15)=19.10, p <0.01), old adults were less able to do so
(F(1,15)=3.90, p =0.07). It further confirmed that older
adults had difficulties in differentiating between strong and
weak contextual cues.

Task and Stimuli
Before the experiment, all participants were given the set of
standardized pretests to measure their cognitive ability,
Internet experience, and health related domain knowledge.
Participants then read the instruction of the task, which
asked them to imagine that they were asked to help a friend
to evaluate some alternative medicines randomly collected
from the Internet. The concern for potentially ineffective or
fake medicine was mentioned to implicitly induce their
motivation for judging the credibility of each page.
Participants were then presented with the task interface,
which presented the 4 web pages under each of the 8
diseases on a regular Web browser. Participants could then
click one of the disease names and browse any of the four
web pages, each of which described an alternative
medicine. Participants could then click on the “Rate” button
on the interface and submit their ratings of the medicine
based on scale from 1(not recommend) to 7 (highly
recommend). Concurrent verbal protocols were collected by
asking participants to “think aloud” during two of the eight
tasks. All the protocols were recorded as digital files by the
computer and later transcribed and analyzed.

RESULTS
We divided our analysis into two parts: First, we tested
whether there were age differences in the credibility rating
given to the medication information, and analyzed the
processes by collecting concurrent verbal protocols from
participants as they performed the credibility judgment.
Second, we explored how individual differences in
cognitive ability, Internet experience, and health related
Categories

Content
processing:
Deliberation

Content
processing:
Facts
reading

Contextual
cue
processing

Figure 1. Average credibility ratings given to pages with
strong or weak content (contextual) cue

We collected verbal protocols from each participant for
two of the eight tasks. We classified the transcribed
protocols based on whether they were about the content or

Subcategories
1.1Checking evidence

Criteria
Checking studies, data, etc

1.2Evaluating
information quality
1.3 Reasoning

Commenting on the completeness, accuracy, writing
tone, or bias of information,etc
Commenting on logical problems, contradictory facts,
unclear explanations, etc; doubting claims, motives, etc;
Talking about personal experience and preference

1.4Relating to personal
experience
1.5Comparson
2.1Introduction
(effectiveness)
2.2 Side effects
2.3 Interactions
2.4 Dosage
3.1Design feeling
3.2Reference features
3.3Website
source
features
3.4Commertial features

Comparing with other medicines read
Reading claims in the introduction part, including
treaging efficacy, ease of use, history,background, etc
Reading claims in the side effects part
Reading claims in the interactions part
Reading claims in the dosage part
Aesthetical quality, layout, color, structure,etc
Referrence literature, resource links, suggestions for
relevant information, etc
Features indicating Website reliability, e.g. sponsor
information, contact, endorsement
Advertising, promotion, donate button, etc

Examples
“There is high quality scientific evidence”,
“The research looks only preliminary”
“There is way too much information devoted to healthy
lifestyle, not the medicine itself”,
“ It said few adverse effects in the first part, but listed
numerous ones in side effects part”
“I took similar fiber product before and it helps”
“I would not recommend OTC products”
“It works the same way with last one”
“It lowers cholesterol”,
“It has been used in Asia for 1000 years”
“Side effects included dizziness”
“Caution advised in people who take drugs lowering
blood pressure”
“The dosage is 25 mg”
“layout is pretty simple, easy to read”
“It lists some decent referecne”,
“Have links to read abstract of research ”
“The Website is a non-profit organization”,
“American Heart Association recommended”
“The site is covered by advertisements”

Table 1. Coding scheme for verbal protocol analysis

386

contextual cues. For content cue processing, we further
differentiated protocols showing that participants were
passively reading facts or statements on a page from those
showing that they were actively deliberating on information
they read (see Table 1). An example of deliberation may be
“The medicine drops weight too fast, sounds fake”, which
indicated the participant was making inference based on
what they read. In contrast, an example of facts reading
may be “the medicine can help you lose 15 pounds a week”.
This differentiation had important practical implications
because a higher number of protocol tokens showing that
they were passively reading rather than actively
deliberating over the information could imply that
participants were less sensitive to the information quality or
logic of the page content; and if so, they could potentially
be misled or misinformed as a result of lack of deliberation.
We then investigated which major categories of the
protocols showed significant age difference. First we
conducted a two-way ANOVA by using age and type of
cues(deliberation, facts reading and contextual cue
processing) as independent variables, and the percentage of
cue as dependent variable. It showed that the effects of type
of cues was significant (F(1,90)=46.33, p< 0.01), and the
interaction between age and type of cues was significant
(F(2,90)=14.55, p< 0.01). The results indicated that there
was age difference for some type of cues. Hence we
conducted post-hoc analysis using three t-tests with
Bonferroni correction to compare the results of younger and
older adults for each type of cues. As shown in Figure 2,
younger adults had higher percentages under the category
and contextual cue processing (p=0.016), while older adults
had a higher percentage in the category of facts
reading(p=0.001). The results suggested that contextual cue
processing contributed more to younger adults’ final ratings
than that of older adults, while older adults’ tended to
simply rely more on accepting the facts they read to make
their final ratings.

Bonferroni test to compare the results of younger and older
adults for each type of cue. As Figure 3 showed, younger
adults had a higher tendency to process contextual cues
than older adults(p=0.001), while older adults had a higher
tendency to read facts of the medicine than younger
adults(p=0.010).
Previous studies supporting the stage model of Web
credibility assessment indicated that users tended to first
engage in preliminary assessment with the site by
processing contextual cues before performing a more
systematical, in-depth evaluation of the information on that
site (Hilligoss & Rieh, 2008;Wathen & Burkell, 2002).
However, it is worth noting that our results showed that
older adults did not seem to conform adults tended to
deviate from “common” behavioral patterns as observed in
to this model of credibility assessment. They had a higher
tendency to start by reading facts than deliberation (p<0.01)
and processing contextual (p<0.01). This trend may imply
that older “regular” Internet users (who were likely younger
adults in previous studies). Intuitively, this could be
explained by the possibility that older adults were less
adapted to processing information on Web pages.

Figure 3. Percentage of first noticed cue from each
category for each participant

Effects of Individual Differences
Consistent with previous studies, our pretest showed that
older adults in general had lower cognitive ability than
younger adults (p<0.01). To understand how cognitive
ability influenced credibility judgment, we performed
median splits in each age group based on the cognitive
ability scores and compared how the high and low cognitive
ability groups differed in their credibility judgment. Within
each of these two groups we performed the same three-way
ANOVA. By comparing the results we found that the
interaction between content cue and age was only
significant among users with low cognitive ability
(F(1,14)=10.92, p<0.01), but not among users with high
cognitive ability (F(1,14)=0.33, p=0.57). Figure 4
illustrated the differences: for content cue processing, older
adults with high cognitive ability could perform almost as
well as younger adults. However, older adults with low
cognitive ability were less able to differentiate between
credible contents and less credible ones.
Consistent with previous studies, our measure showed
that older adults were generally less experienced with
Internet than younger adults (p<0.01). To study the role of
Internet experience in credibility judgment, we performed a

Figure 2. Percentage of cues in each category mentioned
by each participant

We were also interested in what cues older and younger
adults processed first when they evaluated a new Web page.
A two-way ANOVA with type of cues and age as
independent variable, and the proportion of the type of cue
in the first cue mentioned by each participant was
conducted. It showed there was significant effects of type of
cue( F(1,90)= 10.52, p<0.01), and significant interaction
between age and type of cues( F(2,90)= 11.99, p<0.01). The
results indicated there was age difference in some type of
cues. Then we conducted post-hoc analysis using t-test with

387

Figure 4. Average credibility rating given to pages with strong
or weak content cue by low/high cognitive ability group

median split based on the Internet experience score to
generate the high and low Internet experience groups, and
performed the same three-way ANOVA in each group. By
comparing the results we found that the interaction between
contextual cue strength and age was significant in the low
Internet experience group (F(1,14)=5.96, p=0.03), but not
in the high Internet experience group (F(1,14)=0.50,
p=0.49).It indicated that older adults with more Internet
experience could perform just as well as younger adults in
contextual cue processing(Figure 5). It suggested that
Internet experience was critical for older adults’ contextual
cue processing when making credibility judgment.

Figure 6. Average credibility rating given to pages with strong or
weak contextual/content cue by low/high domain knowledge
group

CONCLUSION
To summarize, we found that older adults were in general
less able to differentiate between credible content and noncredible one. Also older adults were less sensitive to the
contextual Website features that were indicators of
information credibility. By performing verbal protocol
analysis to study participants’ credibility judging process,
we found that: 1) For content cue processing, older adults
had a higher tendency to passively read facts on the Web
page, which implied they may accept what was claimed
without further deliberating on its credibility; 2) For
contextual cue processing, older adults would less likely
pay attention to features or attributes of the Website during
credibility judgment. Moreover, while younger adults
tended to start with processing contextual cues on the
Website, older adults would more likely start by directly
reading the text on the Web page. These results seemed to
support the notion that older adults’ were less adapted to the
Web environment than younger adults, and appeared to be
browsing Web pages as if they were processing traditional
forms of text such as books or newspapers.
To understand how individual differences influenced
credibility judgment and contributed to older adults’
different performance, we compared results of groups with
different levels of cognitive ability, Internet experience, and
domain knowledge. We found that: 1) the generally lower
cognitive ability largely contributed to older adults’ lower
ability to differentiate between strong and weak content
cues; 2) the generally lower Internet experience of older
adults could at least partially explain their lower ability to
differentiate between strong and weak contextual cues; and
3) health related domain knowledge could, to some extent,
compensate for older adults’ lower abilities in making
credibility judgments, as those who had better health
knowledge could perform as well as younger adults in both
content processing and contextual processing.
To the best of our knowledge, this was the first study
systematically looking at individual differences and Web
credibility judgment. Moreover as a quantitative laboratory
study, it provided good supplement for credibility studies

Figure 5. Average credibility rating given to pages with strong
or weak contextual cue by low/high Internet experience group

In our study, there was no significant age difference in
domain knowledge between the younger and older groups
(p=0.52). We divided all participants into groups of low
and high domain knowledge by performing median split
based on the domain knowledge scores. As shown in Figure
6, in the low domain knowledge group, the two-way
interaction between content cue and age (F(1,14)=4.35,
p=0.05), and two-way interaction between contextual cue
and age(F(1,14)=6.09, p=0.03), were still significant.
Interestingly, we observed the two-way interaction between
age and content cue (F(1,14)=0.68, p =0.42) and the twoway
interaction
between
age
and
contextual
cue(F(1,14)=0.50, p =049) became not significant in the
group of high domain knowledge. Three-way ANOVA with
domain knowledge (high/low), content cue strength and
contextual cue strength performed among older adults
showed that there was a marginally significant two-way
interaction between domain knowledge and contextual cue
(F(1,14)=4.08, p =0.06), while no similar interaction was
observed among younger adults. The results suggested that
higher domain knowledge could compensate for older
adults’ lower abilities in differentiating between strong and
weak content, as well as contextual cues. And older adults
who had better health knowledge seemed more likely to
perform just as well as younger adults in credibility
judgments (Figure 6).

388

based on dual processing models, considering most
previous studies used qualitative evidence or self-reported
data. Also, our results have implications for better
supporting older adults’ consumption of online health
information. Specifically, we identified three credibility
judgment strategies that were more effective: 1) actively
deliberate on the credibility of the message rather than to
passively read facts stated on the Web page 2) initiate
credibility judging process by examining contextual cues
first, as it takes less cognitive effort and could be more
easily adopted by older adults, and 3) better training in
using Internet as well as general health related knowledge
and actively applying them will make the information
quality judgment more effective. Future research will focus
on how we could provide instructions or training to older
adults with these strategies to improve their credibility
judgment outcomes.

Griffiths, L.T., M. Steyvers, and A. Firl. (2007). Google
and the Mind: Predicting Fluency with PageRank.
Psychological Science 18. 12 , 1069-1076.
Hamilton, M.A. (1998). Message Variables That Mediate
and Moderate the Effect of Equivocal Language on
Source Credibility. Journal of Language and Social
Psychology 17,1, 109-143.
Hanson, V.L.(2009). Cognition, Age, and Web Browsing.
In Proc. UAHCI2009(245-250). Springer-Verlag.
Heinke Kunst, D.G., Pallavi M Latthe, Manish Latthe,
Khalid S Khan. (2002). Accuracy of information on
apparently credible Websites: survey of five common
health topics. British Medical Journal 324, 581-582.
Hilligoss, B. and S.Y. Rieh. (2008). Developing a unifying
framework of credibility assessment: Construct,
heuristics, and interaction in context. Information
Processing & Management 44. 4, 1467-1484.
Hong, T.(2002). The influence of structural and message
features on Web site credibility. Journal of the American
Society for Information Science and Technology 57. 1,
114-127.
Metzger, M.J. (2007). , Making sense of credibility on the
Web: Models for evaluating online information and
recommendations for future research. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science and
Technology 58. 13, 2078-2091.
O’Grady, L. (2006). Future directions for depicting
credibility in health care web sites. International Journal
of Medical Informatics, 58-65.
Peters, E., et al. (2007). Adult Age Differences in Dual
Information Processes: Implications for the Role of
Affective and Deliberative Processes in Older Adults'
Decision Making. Perspectives on Psychological Science
2. 1, 1-23.
Petty, R.E., Cacioppo, J.T. (1986). The Elaboration
Likelyihood Model. Advances in Experimental Social
Psychology 19. 123-205.
Rieh, S.Y. (2007). Credibility: A Multidisciplinary
Framework. Annual Review of Information Science and
Technology 41, 307-364.
Salthouse, T.A. (1991). Mediation of Adult Age
Differences in Cognition by Reductions in Working
Memory and Speed of Processing. Psychological Sicence
2, 179-183.
Sillence, E., et al. (2007). How do patients evaluate and
make use of online health information? Social Science &
Medicine 64. 9, 1853-1862.
Sharit, J., et al. (2008). Investigating the Roles of
Knowledge and Cognitive Abilities in Older Adult
Information Seeking on the Web. ACM Trans. Comput.Hum. Interact 15. 1, 1-25.
Wathen, C.N. and J. Burkell. (2002). Believe it or not:
Factors influencing credibility on the Web. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science and
Technology 53. 2, 134-144.

REFERENCES
Alsudani, F. and M. Casey. (2009). The effect of aesthetics
on web credibility. In Proc. 23rd British HCI Group
Annual Conference on People and Computers (pp. 512519).
Chin, J. and W.-T. Fu. (2010). Interactive effects of age and
interface differences on search strategies and
performance. In Pro. CHI2010 (pp. 403-412).
Czaja, S.J., et al.(2009) Older Adults and Internet Health
Information Seeking.In Proc. HFES2009(pp. 126-130).
Dutta-Bergman, M.J. (2004), The Impact of Completeness
and Web Use Motivation on the Credibility of e-Health
Information. Journal of CommunicationJournal of
Communication 54. 2, 253-269.
Eysenbach, G. (2007). Credibility of Health Information
and Digital Media: New Perspectives and Implications
for Youth. The John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur
Foundation Series on Digital Media and Learning.
Eysenbach, G., et al. (2002). Empirical Studies Assessing
the Quality of Health Information for Consumers on the
World Wide Web: A Systematic Review. JAMA 287. 20
2691-2700.
Eysenbach, G., E.R. Sa., and T.L. Diepgen. (1999).
Shopping around the internet today and tomorrow:
towards the millennium of cybermedicine. British
Medical Journal 319. 1294, 1-5.
Ferebee, S. (2007). An examination of the influence of
involvement level of web site users on the perceived
credibility of web sites. In Proc. 2nd International
Conference on Persuasive Technology(pp. 176-186).
Springer-Verlag.
Fogg, B.J. (2003). Prominence-Interpretation Theory:
Explaining How People Assess Credibility Online. In
Proc. CHI 2003. ACM Press.
Fogg, B.J., et al. (2001). What makes Web sites credible?: a
report on a large quantitative study. In Proc.
CHI2001(pp. 61-68) ACM.

389

