UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effects of scene variation on referential overspecification

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/32t0m0g7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Koolen, Ruud
Goudbeek, Martijn
Krahmer, Emiel

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effects of scene variation on referential overspecification
Ruud Koolen (R.M.F.Koolen@uvt.nl)
Martijn Goudbeek (M.B.Goudbeek@uvt.nl)
Emiel Krahmer (E.J.Krahmer@uvt.nl)
Tilburg centre for Cognition and Communication (TiCC), Tilburg University
P.O. Box 90153, NL-5000 LE Tilburg, The Netherlands
Abstract
This study presents the results of two experiments conducted
to investigate how the amount of variation between target and
distractor objects in a visual scene influences referential
overspecification. We hypothesized that as this variation gets
higher, speakers tend to include more redundant information
in their target descriptions. The results showed that this was
indeed the case. We suggest that scene variation causes
speakers to make use of quick heuristics when selecting the
content of their referring expressions, and discuss the
implications of these findings for computational models that
automatically generate referring expressions.
Keywords: Referential overspecification; scene variation;
computational models.

Introduction
In everyday language use, speakers often refer to objects in
the world (target objects) in such a way that an addressee is
able to uniquely identify them from other objects (distractor
objects). A common way to do this is by producing definite
descriptions of the target, such as ‘the green chair’ or ‘the
brown desk’. In order to make communication successful,
speakers constantly need to decide on the semantic content
of these referring expressions. Bach (1994) argued that
referring expressions are contrastive by means of their
distinguishing attributes; these are attributes that can be
ascribed to the target, but not to the distractors. Still, the
question remains which and how many target attributes
should be provided to make the target easily identifiable.
It is often assumed that speakers tend to obey the Maxim
of Quantity by Grice (1975), stating that speakers should be
‘only as informative as required’. This would result in
minimally distinguishing target descriptions, containing just
enough information (i.e., target attributes) for successful
target identification, but not more information. However,
several psycholinguistic studies have shown that speakers
do not always follow Grice’s Maxim of Quantity, and that
they overspecify their referring expressions by including
redundant attributes of the target. In other words, referring
expressions often contain information that is not needed for
unique target identification (Pechmann, 1989; Maes, Arts &
Noordman, 2004; Engelhardt, Bailey & Ferreira, 2006).
Why would speakers do this so often?
It is generally assumed that referential overspecification is
guided by both speaker- and addressee-oriented processes
(Arnold, 2008). Several studies have revealed that listeners
find it easier to identify a target when they are provided with
an overspecified reference rather than a minimally specified

one (e.g., Nadig & Sedivy, 2002; Paraboni, van Deemter &
Masthoff, 2006), and that overspecified expressions often
lead to shorter identification times (Arts et al., 2011). While
this addressee-oriented approach is considered to be the
traditional cognitive view on overspecification, the focus in
this paper lies on the speaker-oriented processes that cause
speakers to overspecify. Experimental evidence for the
occurrence of these processes comes from Belke and Meyer
(2002), who show that speakers tend to include absolute and
perceptually salient attributes (such as ‘colour’) in their
referring expressions, even if these attributes do not have
contrastive value. This result is in line with earlier work by
Eikmeyer and Ahlsèn (1996), Pechmann (1989), and
Schrieffers and Pechmann (1988), who also found that
speakers tend to include perceptually salient attributes in
their target descriptions, even if these attributes do not
directly serve the target identification goal.
The above psycholinguistic considerations concerning the
occurrence of referential overspecification have important
implications for researchers in the field of Natural Language
Generation (NLG), who build systems that automatically
generate natural language text or speech from non-linguistic
information (e.g., from a database; Reiter & Dale, 2000).
NLG systems typically require Referring Expression
Generation (REG) algorithms that automatically generate
distinguishing descriptions of objects (Mellish et al., 2006).
Various REG algorithms have been proposed, and many
have taken the Maxim of Quantity as a starting point (Dale
& Reiter, 1995). For example, the Full Brevity Algorithm
(Dale, 1989) is based on a strict interpretation of the Maxim
and seeks to find the shortest possible target description (in
terms of the number of attributes included). The Incremental
Algorithm (Dale & Reiter, 1995) proposes a more relaxed
interpretation of the Maxim of Quantity, since it attempts to
account for the occurrence of referential overspecification
by using a predetermined preference order for all possible
target attributes in a particular domain. In practice, this
means that the target’s ‘type’ is added first. In case this
leads to a distinguishing description, the system terminates
the expression without including any other target attributes.
If ‘type’ does not rule out all distractors, preferred target
attributes such as ‘colour’ are added to the description (but
only if they have some contrastive value). If that still does
not suffice, less preferred attributes such as ‘size’ are added.
However, since the algorithm does not backtrack for
redundancy, it does not remove preferred attributes that turn
out to be redundant in the end (because there turns out to be
another - less preferred - attribute that excludes all

1025

distractors at once). In this way, overspecified expressions
can be generated.
The question is to what extent the current REG algorithms
are psychologically realistic. Van Deemter et al. (accepted)
argue that REG algorithms have several properties that are
problematic in this respect. First, REG algorithms are
typically deterministic, that is, they always generate the
same referring expression in a particular context. Obviously,
this is not in line with what humans do. Second, although
we have seen that some of the current REG algorithms are
somehow able to deal with referential overspecification,
they have not found a systematic way to do this. Arguably,
human speakers seem not to have such problems, suggesting
that they rely on different (and more clever) attribute
selection mechanisms that the current REG algorithms do
not yet incorporate. More concretely, it is argued by many
researchers that people may rely on quick heuristics when
making decisions (Tversky & Kahnemann, 1982). Van
Deemter et al. (accepted) suggest that similar processes
might also play a role when speakers produce referring
expressions: instead of searching for attributes with high
distinguishing value, they may base their attribute selection
on other criteria (e.g., attribute preference).
In this paper, we aim to investigate in more detail the
differences between human heuristics and the mechanisms
that REG algorithms base their content selection on. We
assume that these differences become larger when the
referring task gets more difficult, in particular when the
scene variation gets higher: that is, when the objects in a
scene differ along a higher number of attributes. Our central
hypothesis is that a high scene variation causes speakers to
overspecify their references more frequently, as compared
to when this variation is low. More specifically, we expect
that in situations where the scene variation is high,
heuristics cause human speakers to include preferred - but
redundant - attributes in their descriptions, and that this
causes the expressions to be more frequently overspecified.
When confronted with a simple scene, speakers might be
more likely to be able to quickly determine which attributes
distinguish a target from its distractors. However, when a
scene becomes more varied (and hence more complex)
speakers might be more likely to rely on a heuristic, which
causes them to select attributes from the target without
making sure that these are strictly needed to distinguish the
target. Based on prior research discussed earlier, it seems
plausible that speakers for this will prefer absolute (such as
colour) over relative attributes (such as size). We therefore
expect our participants to use colour more frequently (even
when it is redundant) when a visual scene displays a high
variation than when it does not.
In contrast, the current REG algorithms act differently in
the exact same communicative situations as compared to
humans, by generating minimally distinguishing referring
expressions instead of overspecified ones, irrespective of the
variation in the scene. For example, in situations where
‘type’ would be sufficient to distinguish a particular target,
for example the Full Brevity Algorithm and the Incremental

Algorithm would never include redundant attributes in their
descriptions. Thus, if humans would indeed overspecify
their references more when the scene variation gets higher,
improvement of the current REG algorithms is needed to
make their output more psychologically realistic.
In order to investigate the effect of scene variation on the
amount of referential overspecification, we performed two
experiments in which participants were presented with
picture grids consisting of eight pictures (one target and
seven distractors), asking them to produce distinguishing
descriptions of the target objects. These two experiments
consisted of two conditions: one in which the variation in
the scene was kept low, and one in which the variation was
high. The amount of variation in the scenes varied between
experiments: in Experiment 1, targets could be distinguished
in terms of their type only, while in Experiment 2 additional
attributes were required. In neither of the experiments,
‘colour’ was needed to distinguish the target. We will study
whether a higher scene variation indeed causes speakers to
include more redundant target attributes in their referring
expressions. Finally, we will contrast our findings with the
state-of-the-art REG algorithms.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants Participants were undergraduate students who
participated in pairs. Twenty-one students (10 male, 11
female, mean age = 21 years and 7 months) acted as
speakers in this experiment. Another twenty-one students
acted as addressees. All participants were native speakers of
Dutch and participated for course credits.
Materials The stimulus material consisted of artificially
constructed pictures of furniture items1, which have been
extensively used before in the field of REG generation (i.e.
Gatt et al., 2007). The furniture items varied in terms of four
attributes and their corresponding values. All possible
attribute-value pairs are listed in table 1.
Table 1: Attributes and possible values of the furniture
items.
Attributes
type
colour
orientation
size

Possible values
chair, sofa, fan, television, desk
red, blue, green, brown, grey
front, back, left, right
large, small

The critical trials all contained eight furniture items: one
target object and seven distractor objects. The basic idea of
the experiment was that two participants took part in a
language production task, where one participant (the
1

These objects were taken from the Object Databank, developed
and freely distributed by Michael Tarr at Brown University. URL:
http://www.tarrlab.org/

1026

speaker) provided descriptions of the target objects and the
other one (the addressee) used these descriptions to identify
the corresponding target objects by distinguishing them
from the distractor objects. For the speakers, the target
referents were clearly marked by black borders so that they
could easily distinguish them from the distractor objects.
The furniture items were positioned on a computer screen in
a 2 (row) by 4 (column) picture grid.
Experiment 1 had two conditions. The critical trials in the
low variation condition were constructed in such a way that
there was limited variation between the target and the
distractor objects: the furniture items differed only in terms
of the attribute ‘type’. This means that the grid contained
different types of furniture items that all had the same
colour, orientation and size. In the high variation condition,
however, the target and the distractor objects differed in
terms of all four possible attributes: ‘type’, ‘colour’,
‘orientation’ and ‘size’. Mentioning ‘type’ was sufficient to
successfully distinguish the target in all critical trials in the
two conditions, which implies that including preferred
attributes such as ‘colour’ was never needed to distinguish
the target. Figure 1 depicts examples of critical trials in the
two respective conditions.
The trials were built in such a way that an algorithm like
the Incremental Algorithm would never include ‘colour’ in
dd

Figure 1: Examples of critical trials in Experiment 1: for
the low variation condition (upper picture) and for the high
variation condition (lower picture). Manipulations of colour
may not be visible in a black and white print of this paper.

its descriptions: since mentioning ‘type’ was sufficient for
distinguishing the target in both of the two conditions, the
algorithm would not include any further preferred (but
redundant) attributes.
There were ten critical trials in each of the two conditions,
giving rise to twenty critical trials. Together with forty
fillers, this made a block of sixty trials in a fixed random
order, which was counterbalanced for order across the
experiment. The fillers consisted of four pictures of
Greebles (Gauthier & Tarr, 1997): one clearly marked target
referent and three distractor objects, all positioned in a 2 by
2 picture grid. Because initially designed so as to share
characteristics with human faces, Greebles are complex and
difficult objects to refer to, which made them useful fillers
in our experiment. The Greebles could not be distinguished
in terms of their colour because they were all in the same
colour every time (so speakers were not primed with the
attribute colour when describing the fillers).
Procedure The experiment was performed in an
experimental laboratory. After the two participants had
arrived in the room, it was randomly decided who was going
to act as the speaker and who as the addressee, whereafter
they were seated opposite to each other. The speaker was
presented with the sixty trials on a computer screen, and was
asked to describe the target referents in such a way that the
addressee would be able to uniquely identify them. The
instructions emphasized that it would not make sense (and
that it was not allowed) to include location information in
the descriptions, since the addressee was presented with the
pictures in a different order. The speaker could take as much
time as needed to describe the target, and his or her target
descriptions were recorded with a voice recorder. The
addressee was presented with the same sixty trials as the
speaker in a paper booklet, and was asked to mark the
picture that he or she thought the speaker was describing on
an answering form. The instructions emphasized that the
addressee was – to a limited extent – allowed to ask for
clarification: it was allowed to ask the speaker to give more
information or to repeat information that had already been
given, but not to ask for specific information (i.e., specific
attributes). Once the addressee had identified a target, this
was communicated to the speaker, who then went on
describing the next one. After completion of the experiment,
none of the participants indicated that they had been aware
of the actual goal of the study.
Design and statistical analysis Experiment 1 had a within
participants design with Scene variation (levels: low, high)
as the independent variable, and the average number of
referring expressions containing a colour attribute (as
explained below) as the dependent variable. Our statistical
procedure consisted of two repeated measures ANOVAs:
one on the participants means with the participants as the
random variable (F1), and one on the item means with the
items as the random variable (F2).

1027

We chose the proportional use of the attribute ‘colour’ as
the dependent variable indicating overspecification in
referring expressions. As described above, we made sure
that speakers never needed to include colour in their
descriptions in order to produce a distinguishing description
of the target. Thus, if speakers mentioned colour anyway,
this caused the expression to be overspecified.

Materials Again, there were twenty critical trials in two
conditions, and these trials all contained one clearly marked
target referent and seven distractor objects. Like in the first
experiment, we included forty fillers consisting of four
pictures of Greebles (Gauthier & Tarr, 1997).
Again, there was maximum variation between the target
and the distractor objects in the high variation condition
(thus, the objects again differed in terms of the attributes
‘type’, ‘colour’, ‘orientation’ and ‘size’). However, unlike in
Experiment 1 (where the objects only had different types),
the pictures in the low variation condition now varied in
terms of three attributes: again ‘type’, but also ‘orientation’
and ‘size’. This caused the difference between the trials in
the two conditions to be more subtle as compared to in
Experiment 1.
Figure 3 depicts examples of trials in the two conditions of
experiment 2. In all critical trials, mentioning ‘type’ plus
one other attribute (‘orientation’ or ‘size’) was sufficient to
produce a distinguishing description of the target. Again,
mentioning ‘colour’ was never needed to distinguish the
target. As in Experiment 1, the trials were built in such a
way that algorithms like the Incremental Algorithm would
never include ‘colour’ in their target descriptions. In the low
variation condition in figure 3, the algorithm would not
select ‘colour’ because all pictures have the same colour. In
the high variation condition in figure 3, the algorithm will
fif

Results
Figure 2 depicts the proportion of expressions that contained
a colour attribute as a function of the condition in which the
descriptions were uttered.

Figure 2: The proportion of referring expressions (plus
standard deviations) containing a ‘colour’ attribute as a
function of the variation in the visual scene.
As hypothesized, the scene variation affected the
proportional use of the redundant attribute ‘colour’ (F1(1,20)
= 12.537, p = .002; F2(1,18) = 23.416, p < .001). More
specifically, speakers were more likely to include ‘colour’
when there was high variation in the picture grid (M = .24,
SD = .07) compared to when this variation was low (M =
.04, SD = .02).
This first experiment confirmed our hypothesis about the
role of scene variation on speakers’ tendencies to include
redundant attributes in their target descriptions. In the next
experiment, we will see whether the same applies when the
difference between the low and high variation conditions
gets more subtle.

Experiment 2
Method
Participants Participants were again undergraduate students
who participated in pairs. This time, there were twenty-two
students who acted as speakers (10 male, 12 female, mean
age = 22 years and 4 months). None of these speakers acted
as a speaker in Experiment 1. Another twenty-two students
acted as addressees in this experiment. Most of these had
been speakers in Experiment 1, in a few cases the addressee
was a confederate. The participants were all native speakers
of Dutch and participated for course credits.

Figure 3: Examples of critical trials in Experiment 2: for the
low variation condition (upper picture) and for the high
variation condition (lower picture). Manipulations of colour
may not be visible in a black and white print of this paper.

1028

first select ‘type’. Since both remaining objects are then
brown chairs, the algorithm will then select ‘size’ instead of
the preferred attribute ‘colour’.
Procedure, design and statistical analysis As above.

Results
Figure 4 depicts the proportion of expressions that contained
a colour attribute as a function of the condition in which the
descriptions were uttered.

Figure 4: The proportion of referring expressions (plus
standard deviations) containing a ‘colour’ attribute as a
function of the variation in the visual scene.
The general picture of the results of this experiment is
comparable to that of the results of Experiment 1. We again
found that the amount of variation between the target
referent and the distractor objects affected the number of
times that speakers included the redundant attribute ‘colour’
in their referring expressions (F1(1,21) = 7.092, p = .015;
F2(1,18) = 10.515, p = .005). More specifically, the results
showed that speakers were more likely to include ‘colour’
when the variation in the picture grid was high (M = .18, SD
= .06) compared to when it was low (M = .09, SD = .05).
The results of Experiment 2, as those of Experiment 1,
confirmed our central hypothesis, and indicate that speakers
include more redundant attributes in their references when
the variation in a visual scene is high.

Discussion
The results of the two experiments presented in this paper
show that when the objects in a visual scene vary along a
relatively high number of dimensions, speakers are more
likely to mention such variant attributes when describing a
target object (even if this would result in overspecification).
In particular, our results show that this is true for ‘colour’:
the participants more often mentioned colour when the
target object occurred in a high variation scene, as compared
to when it occurred in a low variation scene. Since all trials
were constructed in such a way that mentioning ‘colour’
was never needed to distinguish the target from the
distractors, these results suggest that a high variation in a

visual scene leads to more overspecification in speaker’s
descriptions.
As we have seen in the introduction of this paper, several
papers in psycholinguistics (e.g., Belke & Meyer, 2002;
Pechmann, 1989) have shown that speakers tend to include
absolute and salient attributes (such as ‘colour’) in their
descriptions, even if these do not have constrastive value.
Often, such redundant attributes cause expressions to be
overspecified. However, as far as we know, none of the
previous studies has studied whether overspecification is
influenced by the amount of variation in the visual scene.
Following Tversky and Kahneman (1982) and van Deemter
et al. (accepted), one can argue that speakers are guided by
heuristics when selecting the attributes that they want to
include in their references. For example, one heuristic could
be that speakers tend to mention attributes that vary along
the objects in a scene. Our results suggest that this heuristic
could count for salient attributes such as ‘colour’.
The current state-of-the-art REG algorithms make use of
other mechanisms than heuristics in order to select the
content of their generated output. For example, the
Incremental Algorithm proposed by Dale and Reiter (1995)
sometimes includes redundant target attributes in referring
expressions, but the mechanism that this algorithm rests
upon in doing this (i.e. using a preference order) still differs
from what humans do. The results of our two experiments
provide evidence for this. In this respect, it needs to be
emphasized that our experimental trials were constructed in
such a way that the Incremental Algorithm would never
include ‘colour’ in its generated descriptions. Our finding
that speakers in both experiments often included ‘colour’ in
their descriptions (contrary to the predictions of the
Incremental Algorithm) underlines the differences between
humans and algorithms in terms of the way in which they
select the content of their expressions. This suggests that in
order to generate psychologically realistic descriptions, the
Incremental Algorithm needs to include preferred attributes
such as ‘colour’ in its descriptions more often, even if they
do not rule out any of the distractor objects.
The difference between making use of heuristics and the
mechanisms that algorithms base their content selection on
becomes even larger if one takes the relationship between
overspecification and scene variation into account. As the
results of our two experiments suggest, speakers are more
likely to apply a heuristic when they are presented with a
picture grid in which the variation between the target and
the distractor objects is relatively high. For the Incremental
Algorithm, this implies that it should be made sensitive to
the variation in the scene in which the target occurs.
Our findings provide empirical evidence for a suggestion
raised in a paper by Koolen, Gatt, Goudbeek and Krahmer
(submitted), being that speakers include more (redundant)
information in their referring expressions when the range of
attributes that is available for a speaker to describe the target
is high. Koolen et al. report the results of an experiment in
which speakers were asked to produce referring expressions
in two domains: furniture and people. The pictures in the

1029

furniture domain were similar to the ones used in this study,
and varied in terms of only four attributes (‘type’, ‘colour’,
‘orientation’ and ‘size’). The pictures in the people domain,
however, varied in terms of at least ten attributes (including
‘age’, ‘hair colour’, etc). The results revealed that references
to people were indeed more frequently overspecified than
references to furniture items. However, these results had one
important restriction, namely that two different domains
were compared. As a result, it could have been the case that
the number of attributes that were available to describe a
target object was not the only factor causing speakers to
overspecify. In this paper, we have solved this restriction by
comparing visual scenes within a single domain.
In future research, we aim to expand the current study by
focusing on a characteristic of the above described people
domain (as used by Koolen et al., submitted), namely that
all pictures in this domain are of the same type (<type =
person>). It can be argued that this specific characteristic
may cause speakers to mention more redundant attributes,
because the pictures look more perceptually similar (which
could make the referring task more difficult). Therefore, we
aim to compare the level of overspecification of target
descriptions uttered in a visual scene consisting of furniture
items of one type (e.g., eight desks) with target descriptions
uttered in a scene consisting of objects of multiple types.

Conclusion
Speakers are more likely to include salient attributes such as
‘colour’ in their target descriptions when the variation in the
visual scene they are presented with is high as compared to
when it is low. Often, mentioning such attributes leads to
overspecification, which is problematic for computational
models that aim to generate psychologically realistic target
descriptions.

Acknowledgments
The research reported in this paper forms part of the NWO
VICI project ‘Bridging the gap between psycholinguistics
and computational linguistics: the case of referring
expressions’ (Grant 277-70-007). We thank Tessa Dwyer
and Joost Driessen for assistance in collecting the data.

References
Arnold, J. E. (2008). Reference production: productioninternal and addressee-oriented processes. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 23 (4), 495-527.
Arts, A., Maes, A., Noordman, L., & Jansen, C. (2011).
Overspecification facilitates object identification. Journal
of Pragmatics, 43, 361-374.
Bach, K. (1994). Thought and reference. Oxford University
Press, Oxford.
Belke, E., & Meyer, A. (2002). Tracking the time course of
multidimensional stimulus discrimination: Analysis of
viewing patterns and processing times during “same”
“different” decisions. European Journal of Cognitive
Psychology, 14, 237-266.

Dale, R. (1989). Cooking up referring expressions.
Proceedings of the 27th annual meeting of the association
for Computational Linguistics (pp. 68-75). University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Dale, R. & Reiter, E. (1995). Computational interpretations
of the Gricean maxims in the generation of referring
expressions. Cognitive Science, 18, 233-263.
van Deemter, K., Gatt, A., van Gompel, R. & Krahmer, E.
(accepted). Computational linguistics of reference
production. Topics in Cognitive Science.
Gatt, A., van der Sluis, I., van Deemter, K. (2007).
Evaluating algorithms for the generation of referring
expressions using a balanced corpus. Proceedings of the
European Workshop on Natural Language Generation
(ENLG) (pp. 49-56). Saarbruecken, Germany.
Gauthier, I., & Tarr, M. (1997). Becoming a Greeble expert:
exploring mechanisms for face recognition. Vision
research, 37, 1673-1682.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In: P. Cole, &
J. L. Morgan (Eds.), Speech Acts. Academic Press, New
York.
Eikmeyer, H. J. & Ahlsén, E. (1996). The cognitive process
of referring to an object: A comparative study of German
and Swedish. Proceedings of the 16th Scandinavian
Conference on Linguistics. Turku, Finland.
Engelhardt, P. E., Bailey, K. G. D., & Ferreira, F. (2006).
Do speakers and listeners observe the Gricean maxim of
quantity? Journal of Memory and Language, 54, 554-573.
Koolen, R., Gatt, A., Goudbeek, M., & Krahmer, E.
Overspecification in referring expressions: causal factors
and language differences. Submitted.
Maes, A., Arts, A. & Noordman, L. (2004). Reference
management in instructive discourse. Discourse Processes,
37, 117-144.
Mellish, C., Scott, D., Cahill, L., Evans, R., Paiva, D., &
Reape, M. (2006). A reference architecture for Natural
Language Generation systems. Natural Language
Engineering 12 (1), 1-34.
Nadig, A. S., & Sedivy, J. C. (2002). Evidence of
perspective-taking constraints in children's on-line
reference resolution. Psychological Science, 13, 329-336.
Paraboni, I., van Deemter, K., & Masthoff, J. (2007).
Making referents easy to identify. Computational
Linguistics, 33, 229-254.
Pechmann, T. (1989). Incremental speech production and
referential overspecification. Linguistics 27, 89-110.
Reiter, E. & Dale, R. (2000). Building Natural Language
Generation sytems. Cambridge University Press.
Schriefers, H. & Pechmann, T. (1988). Incremental
production of referential noun phrases by human speakers.
In: M. Zock, & G. Sabah (Eds.), Advances in Natural
Language Generation, volume 1. Pinter, London.
Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D. (1982). Judgement under
uncertainty: heuristics and biases. In D. Kahneman, P.
Slovic & A. Tversky (Eds.), Judgement under uncertainty,
heuristics and biases. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

1030

