UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Ethnocentrism Maintains Cooperation, but Keeping One's Children Close Fuels It

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6jf3n0n5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Kaznatcheev, Artem
Shultz, Thomas R.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Ethnocentrism Maintains Cooperation, but Keeping One’s Children
Close Fuels It
Artem Kaznatcheev (artem.kaznatcheev@mail.mcgill.ca)
Department of Combinatorics & Optimization and Institute for Quantum Computing,
University of Waterloo, 200 University Avenue West, Waterloo, Ontario, N2L 3G1 Canada

Thomas R. Shultz (thomas.shultz@mcgill.ca)
Department of Psychology and School of Computer Science,
McGill University, 1205 Penfield Avenue, Montreal, QC H3A 1B1 Canada
Abstract

ciety (Hamilton, 1964; Trivers, 1971; Axelrod & Hamilton, 1981; Fehr & Fischbacher, 2003).

Ethnocentrism, commonly thought to rely on complex
social cognition, can arise through biological evolution
in populations with minimal cognitive abilities. In fact,
ethnocentrism is considered to be one of the simplest
mechanisms for establishing cooperation in the competitive environment of natural selection. Here we study
a recent agent-based model. Through our simulations
and analysis, we establish that the mechanism responsible for the emergence of cooperation is children residing
close to their parents. Our results suggest that group
tags maintain cooperation, but do not create it. We
formalize this observation as the dual direct hypothesis:
ethnocentric agents dominate humanitarian agents by
exploiting the unconditional cooperation of humanitarians of different tags to maintain the number of ethnocentric agents after world saturation. We affirm previous observations on the importance of world saturation,
finding its drastic effect on dynamics in both spatial tagbased and tag-less models.

Game theory can address the relation between evolution and cooperation (Maynard Smith, 1974). One
approach is to allow randomly paired agents to play
the prisoners dilemma (PD) game, a paradigmatic example of the problems in achieving mutual cooperation (Trivers, 1971; Axelrod & Hamilton, 1981). Here
a cooperator pays some cost c to provide a larger benefit
b to another agent, whereas a defector pays no cost and
provides no benefit. If the agents are chosen randomly
from a well-mixed population and interactions modify
individuals’ reproductive potential, then defectors will
evolve to dominate the population. To establish largescale cooperation, this random-interactions model must
be modified.

Keywords: cooperation; evolution; agent-based modeling; ethnocentrism; viscosity; minimal cognition.

Introduction
Cooperation is essential for complex biological systems, including human society, but its evolution is puzzling because of the competitiveness of natural selection. The green-beard effect, or ethnocentrism in humans, is thought to be one of the simplest mechanisms
for enabling cooperation (Hamilton, 1964). Here, we
study a recent tag-based model of evolution of cooperation (Hammond & Axelrod, 2006a, 2006b). With the aid
of simulations, we show that the factor responsible for
inter-agent cooperation is not the visible group tags of
agents, but rather children residing close to their parents.
Our results suggest that tags can maintain cooperation,
but do not actually create cooperation.
Altruistic cooperation, benefiting another at a cost to
oneself, is essential to establishing more sophisticated
levels of organization in biological systems. However,
evolution — the main driving force for biological change
— is based on competition between individuals. Consequently, one would expect natural selection to promote
selfishness and design creatures for their own success
at the expense of competitors. Yet the world abounds
with cooperation: from single cells coming together in
multi-cellular organisms to social insects and human so-

The addition of identifiable tags to agents is one of
the simplest ways to promote cooperation. Tag-based
models rely on the so-called green-beard effect: the
idea that agents can use an arbitrary tag to guide cooperation without any further information about other
agents’ strategies (Hamilton, 1964; Riolo, Cohen, & Axelrod, 2001; Traulsen & Schuster, 2003; Jansen & van
Baalen, 2006; Hammond & Axelrod, 2006a, 2006b; Antal, Ohtsuki, Wakeley, Taylor, & Nowak, 2009). The effect has been observed in human placenta (Haig, 1996),
ants (Keller & Ross, 1998), and microbes (Lenski &
Velicer, 2000; Queller, Ponte, Bozzaro, & Strassmann,
2003; West, Griffin, Gardner, & Diggle, 2006). More
abstractly, the beards can be any perceivable quality
that distinguishes individuals: chemical signals, physical
shapes, or cultural distinctions such as language, religion
or ethnic characteristics.
In such multi-tag environments, humans exhibit a
pervasive syndrome of discriminatory behaviors, including ethnocentrism (Hewstone, Rubin, & Willis, 2002;
Brown, 2004) — the human social equivalent of the
green-beard effect — which has been implicated in phenomena ranging from consumer choice (Klein & Ettenson, 1999) and voting (Kinder, 1998), to democratic instability (Rabushka & Shepsle, 1972) and war (van der
Dennen, 1995). Thus tags are interesting for studying
both human cognition and social behavior and the be-

3174

havior of simple cognitive agents.
By considering an abstract biologically motivated
model, we take a biogenic approach to cognition (Lyon,
2006). During an interaction the agent observes its partner’s tag and then makes a decision to cooperate or defect. To accomplish this, the agent must be capable of active categorical perception, a standard problem of study
in minimal cognition (Beer, 2003). Note that the agent
does not receive any direct information on its partner’s
strategy, and instead relies on potential correlations of a
partner from the same group having the same strategy.
This prototypic decision making is in the scope of minimal cognition (van Duijn, Keijzer, & Franken, 2006).
Our approach of studying the explicit dynamics and visualizing trends over evolutionary cycles places our work
within dynamic modeling of cognition (Beer, 2000). We
believe it is important to look at simple agents in such
a full view, incorporating their evolutionary history and
social setting.
We adopt this full view to answer a number of questions relevant to the evolution of cooperation, ethnocentrism, and cognition. Most generally, we clarify the minimal modifications of the inviscid model needed to foster
cooperation. In particular, we examine the role ethnocentrism plays in creating and sustaining cooperation.
Our technical contribution is to clarify the mechanism
that allows cooperation to emerge and sustain itself in a
simple spatial model. We show that the minimal cognition we demand of our agents can help maintain cooperation, but not create it.

The Model
Hammond and Axelrod (2006a, 2006b) extended beyond
random interactions and proposed an agent-based simulation (hereafter, the standard model) for studying the
green-beard effect. Instead of randomly choosing interaction pairs, agents populate a toroidal lattice and interact with their four adjacent neighbors. Each individual
is simple, only perceiving whether it shares a common
tag with neighbors, allowing for two interaction strategies, an in-group (IGS) and an out-group (OGS) strategy. The outcome of PD interactions is added to the
agent’s potential to reproduce (PTR): the agent’s chance
of cloning itself into one of the four neighboring cells if
one is empty. Each evolutionary cycle, an agent has a
constant probability of dying and vacating its location
until habitation by a new agent. To start the world,
introduce the randomness necessary for evolution, and
avoid the population dying out, a randomly generated
individual (with random tag, IGS, and OGS) is placed
in a randomly selected empty cell at the start of each
cycle.

Previous Results
Hammond and Axelrod (2006b) showed that, after a
transient period, ethnocentric agents dominate the pop-

ulation. Shultz, Hartshorn, and Hammond (2008) examined the transient period to uncover evidence for
early competition between ethnocentric and humanitarian strategies. More recently, Shultz, Hartshorn, and
Kaznatcheev (2009) focused on explaining the mechanism behind ethnocentric dominance over humanitarians. In particular, they introduced the direct and freerider-suppression hypotheses and showed evidence for
the former. The direct hypothesis states that ethnocentric clusters of agents directly suppress contacted clusters of humanitarian agents. The contrasting free-ridersuppression hypothesis is that ethnocentrics are more
effective than humanitarians at suppressing free riders: selfish and traitorous agents. Kaznatcheev (2010a)
showed that ethnocentrism is not robust to increases
in the cost of cognition and studied the proportion of
cooperative interactions to show that ethnocentrics can
maintain higher levels of cooperation than humanitarians. Most recently, Kaznatcheev (2010b) demonstrated
that ethnocentric behavior is robust across a variety of
games, even when out-group hostility is classically irrational. However, questions remain about how and why
such ethnocentric cooperation emerges.

Restricted models
In a set of restricted simulations, we identify which aspects of the standard model are critical for ethnocentric dominance, what roles they play, and suggest an
intuition for understanding why ethnocentric cooperation emerges. We extend previous work by explicitly
examining the dynamics of each model over time. We
show that cooperation is created by population viscosity, and tags help to maintain cooperation. We also reinforce the importance of world saturation that Shultz
et al. (2009) first observed: world saturation produces a
drastic change in the dynamics of cooperation in spatial
models.
We removed key characteristics of the standard model
— arbitrary tags and local child-placement — in order
to assess their effects on cooperation. Without tags,
agents cannot distinguish between in-group and outgroup agents. Without local child-placement, a randomized procedure was used: a parent cloned an identical
copy of itself into a randomly selected cell. If no empty
cell was found in four tries, no child was created, analogous to having no empty neighbors in the standard
model. Removing one or both of these features (tags
or local child-placement) provided three restricted simulations with which to study the evolution of cooperation.

Simulation Results
For all four cases: standard, no child-proximity, no tags,
and neither tags nor child-proximity, we studied 6 parameter variations. In all simulations, we kept the world
size (50 by 50), default PTR (0.12), death rate (0.10),
and number of tags (4 — for the cases that had tags)

3175

constant. Small variations in these parameters preserve
the qualitative nature of the results.
The important parameter of the simulation is the underlying interaction between agents. Large variations
in the game were considered earlier by Kaznatcheev
(2010b), but we consider only the prisoner’s dilemma and
the natural variable is the ratio between b — the benefit
of receiving, and c — the cost of giving. We kept the
cost of giving constant at c = 0.01 and varied the benefit of receiving through 6 settings for each case study:
0.0015, 0.0020, 0.025, 0.030, 0.035, and 0.040. Thus,
we looked at 6 different b/c ratios with 4 different types
of simulations (standard model, no child-proximity, no
tags, and neither tags nor child-proximity). For each of
the 24 case-parameter combinations, we conducted 30
simulations for 1000 cycles each and considered mean
results. We present results for 3 of the six b/c ratios in
Figure 1. The remaining 3 cases are qualitatively similar
and omitted for brevity.
Cooperation emerged in only one of the restricted
models, but did not persist there as well as in the standard model. Figure 1 shows the proportion of cooperative behavior for each condition at each evolutionary
cycle for 3 different values of b/c; each line’s thickness
quantifies the standard error from averaging across 30
simulations.
The red (without tags) and yellow (with tags) lines
show the two models without random child-placement,
neither of which led to cooperation. On the other hand,
both of the models with local child-placement caused
cooperation to emerge; the green (without tags) and blue
(with tags, standard model) lines show these results. It
is clear that the standard model and the no-tag model
show similar levels of cooperation in the early stages,
and peak at approximately the same maximum level of
cooperation. However, the standard model is able to
maintain the achieved level of cooperation, while in the
no tag model cooperation decays.
As the environment becomes more benign (higher b/c)
the decay in the no tag model is less pronounced until
for b/c = 4 there is no decay. Figure 1 shows that local
child-placement drives the early emergence of cooperation, whether tags are present or not, while the addition
of tags maintains this cooperation in more competitive
environments, allowing it to dominate in the long term.

Discussion and Future Directions
Examining the simplified conditions shows how cooperation emerges in the standard model. Cooperation
emerged without tags if children were placed near their
parents, but not when tags were present without local
child-placement. These results suggest that child proximity is the driving force behind the emergence of cooperation and that tags help maintain cooperators by
providing a way to resist invading defectors. To under-

Figure 1: Proportion of cooperative interactions averaged over 30 simulations vs. cycle for the standard model
and three simplified conditions with 3 different b/c ratios.
Line thickness indicates 1 SE around the mean. The data
start at cycle 25 for the standard model (blue), cycle 50
for no tags (green) and cycle 100 for no child proximity
(yellow) and no tags or child proximity (red). Data before the start cycle were omitted for clarity because their
SEs were too high to be meaningful.

3176

stand why child proximity is the key factor, we examine
the differences between placing children locally and randomly.
When children are placed randomly, we can use standard tools of evolutionary game theory (Hofbauer & Sigmund, 2003) to analyze the dynamics. For PD interactions, the population converges toward total defection.
To bolster cooperation, it is important to increase the
probability of self-interaction: interaction with agents
of the same strain (genetically identical) as oneself. If
agents interacted only with same strain partners, then
a simple group selection argument shows that cooperators (humanitarians or ethnocentrics in the tag models)
would dominate: cooperative self-interaction would increase their fitness past the base PTR, while defectors
would remain at base PTR. On the other hand, in the inviscid model, the probability of interacting with a strain
is the proportion of that strain in the population. Thus,
a defector has the same probability as a cooperator of interacting with a cooperator. Since defectors benefit more
from the interaction, the defectors will have a higher fitness.
Without a mechanism to increase the probability of
self-interaction, cooperation cannot emerge in the PD.
This mechanism can be a preset bias toward similar
agents (Riolo et al., 2001; Traulsen & Claussen, 2004),
a much higher level of mutation for tags than for strategies (Antal et al., 2009), or in the case of Hammond and
Axelrod (2006a, 2006b): spatial viscosity.
Because spatial structure affects humanitarian and
ethnocentric agents in the same way, this analysis also
casts doubt on earlier expectations that a simple variation of the Hammond and Axelrod model could favour
humanitarian cooperation (Shultz et al., 2008, 2009).
This agrees with evidence that natural selection favours
strategies that are increasingly accurate in targeting altruism to only the same strain (Clune, Goldsby, Ofria,
& Pennock, 2011). To curb ethnocentrism more drastic
variations, like cost of cognition (Kaznatcheev, 2010a),
have to be introduced. Future research can look at
specific cognitive mechanisms and constraints that are
needed to favour humanitarian cooperation.
Ohtsuki and Nowak (2006) showed that the increase in
self-interaction can be analyzed mathematically in simple structures such as regular random graphs. Unfortunately, their methods are not applicable to highly structured graphs such as the toroidal grid in our study, nor
to models with free space and world saturation. For our
model, careful study of simulation results is the best approach to understanding the dynamics. An important
future question is to understand if there are simple analytic approximations to our model.
Visualizing trends over cycles, as in Figure 1, allows us to see that local child-placement (without tags)
does about as well as the standard simulation (both lo-

cal child-placement and tags) up to around 300 cycles.
Shultz et al. (2009) have previously found that world
population saturates at about 300 cycles, on average,
and that is where ethnocentrics start to pull ahead of
humanitarians (who cooperate with everyone). As the
world fills up and clusters of cooperators collide with
egoists, the presence of group tags become critically important. The partial information about their parents
allows ethnocentric agents to avoid exploitation by egoists, and lets them maintain their levels, unlike the cooperators in no-tag simulations, or humanitarians in tag
simulations. Tags provide cooperators with information
with which to avoid potential exploiters.
In particular, without tags, there are two strains to
consider, cooperators and defectors; an agent has no way
of telling them apart, and consequently is at the mercy
of the distribution of agents. Adding, for example, four
tags increases the strains to 16 — four strategies for each
tag. If agents distinguish tags, they know that 12 of
those 16 strains are not their own (different tag) and can
be defected against, producing ethnocentric agents that
cooperate with their in-group but not with out-groups.
Our results suggest a new role for group tags, not as
a mechanism to fuel cooperation, but as a method for
sustaining it after world saturation.
Unfortunately, there are two distinct features of world
saturation: (i) the total world population stabilizes and
remains relatively constant, and (ii) clusters of cooperators and egoists start to collide. The first feature is
the definition and method of detecting world saturation
used by Shultz et al. (2009), but the second feature is
the important feature for explaining the decline of cooperation after world saturation. Under the parameter
ranges we study, both features occur together. However,
in worlds with low default PTR and high death rate, the
total population at world saturation is very low. In such
cases, we cannot reasonably say that clusters of agents
collide. A tempting future direction is to consider models or parameter settings where the two features of world
saturation can be studied separately and their individual contributions to the emergence of cooperation better
understood.
Analyzing trends over cycles allows us to notice qualitative similarity in the decline of humanitarians in tag
simulations found in previous studies (Shultz et al., 2008,
2009) and the decline in cooperation in no tag cases.
This observation suggests a refinement of the direct hypothesis. Proposed as a method of ethnocentric dominance over humanitarians, there was strong early support for the direct hypothesis that stated that ethnocentric agents suppressed humanitarians directly. However, it is clear in the no-tag simulations that there are
no ethnocentric agents to suppress cooperators (who are
functionally equivalent to humanitarians) and yet cooperation declines in the population. This suggests that a

3177

decline in cooperation is the default behavior after world
saturation.
We should think of ethnocentric agents not as suppressing humanitarians but instead exploiting their unconditional cooperation in order to bolster ethnocentric
fitness. We call this the dual direct hypothesis because
it is an alternative view of the original direct hypothesis.
While the original direct hypothesis stressed that humanitarians were exceptionally disadvantaged by their
interaction with ethnocentrics, here we stress the dual
notion that instead ethnocentrics were exceptionally advantaged by their interaction with humanitarians. Our
hypothesis is that ethnocentric agents dominate humanitarian agents by exploiting the unconditional cooperation of humanitarians to maintain the number of ethnocentric agents after world saturation. Humanitarian
numbers decrease not because of suppression by ethnocentrics, but because of a lack of mechanism for maintaining fitness in the highly competitive post-saturation
environment.
Although the difference from the direct hypothesis is
subtle it is an important conceptual clarification. Previous results that built support for the direct hypothesis
carry over nicely to the dual direct hypothesis. However, the dual direct hypothesis is also consistent with
the findings of this study, while the original is harder to
justify. With the dual direct hypothesis, we can clearly
say that ethnocentrism maintains but does not create
cooperation among simple agents.
This interpretation is strengthened by the decline in
the importance of tags as the environment becomes less
competitive. In the prisoner’s dilemma the competitiveness of the environment is captured by ratio between b —
the benefit of receiving, and c — the cost of giving. As
b/c increases, the risk of being a cooperator decreases.
If b/c = k then as long as at least one out of every k
agents you cooperate with is of the same strain as you,
you have produced a net benefit for your strain. Thus,
low b/c corresponds to a more competitive environment
where agents have to take higher risks.
The results in Figure 1 show that as the environment
becomes less competitive (compare the plots for b/c = 2
and 4), tags become less important. In a highly competitive environment (b/c = 2) the proportion of cooperation
differs by over 40% between the tag and no tag conditions while for b/c = 4 the two conditions produce almost the same levels of cooperation (less than 10% difference). The cooperation maintaining mechanism of tags
is only important in competitive environments of low b/c
ratio. A more thorough future direction is to quantify
our observation by building on the ideas of Kaznatcheev
(2010a) and studying the maximum cost of cognition
ethnocentric agents are willing to sustain for various levels of environmental competitiveness.
The cognition employed by our simulated agents is

fairly minimal, but not beyond the pale of what contemporary cognitive science regards as cognition (Beer,
2000, 2003; Lyon, 2006; van Duijn et al., 2006). Although humanitarian (cooperate with all) and selfish
(cooperate with none) strategies are indeed simple, the
conditional strategies of ethnocentrics and traitors (reverse of ethnocentrism) are more complicated and come
with an extra cognitive cost that has evolutionary consequences (Kaznatcheev, 2010a). Indeed, just to condition, we have to assume that agents are capable of
categorical perception; a task that already merits a rich
analysis (Beer, 2003). A natural future direction is to
replace our primitive agents by Beer’s model agents and
coevolve their neural structure and strategy.
Framing ethnocentrism as the green-beard effect in biology also opens up the potential for empirical studies on
simple animals that have been proposed as model organisms for both minimal cognition and evolution, such as
E.coli (van Duijn et al., 2006) and fruit flies (Greenspan
& van Swinderen, 2004). In fact, the documentation
of the green-beard effect in microbes (Lenski & Velicer,
2000; Queller et al., 2003; West et al., 2006) and the
proposal of microbes as the simplest cognitive agents (di
Primio, Muller, & Lengeler, 2000; van Duijn et al., 2006)
could provide fertile ground for studying the coevolution
of strategic behavior and cognition. We believe that it
is important for cognitive science to occasionally stretch
beyond its dominant anthropogenic focus on individual
humans and consider the full range of cognition, whether
supported by brains or metabolic processes, in its full social and evolutionary dimensions. When expanded completely, it seems important to strive for abstract explanations like those offered by our current results.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Kyler Brown and Julian
Z. Xue for helpful comments. This research began while
AK was at the School of Computer Science and Department of Physics, McGill University. It was supported by
a summer research fellowship to AK and an operating
grant to TRS, both from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, and an operating
grant to TRS from the Deans Excellence Fund, Faculty
of Science, McGill University.

References
Antal, T., Ohtsuki, H., Wakeley, J., Taylor, P. D., &
Nowak, M. A. (2009). Evolution of cooperation
by phenotypic similarity. PNAS USA, 106 , 85978600.
Axelrod, R., & Hamilton, W. (1981). The evolution of
cooperation. Science, 211 , 1390-1396.
Beer, R. D. (2000). Dynamical approaches to cognitive
science. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 4 , 91-99.
Beer, R. D. (2003). The dynamics of active categorical

3178

perception in an evolved model agent. Adaptive
Behavior , 11 , 209-243.
Brown, D. E. (2004). Human universals, human nature,
and human culture. Daedalus, 133 (4), 47-54.
Clune, J., Goldsby, H. J., Ofria, C., & Pennock, R. T.
(2011). Selective pressures for accurate altruism targeting: evidence from digital evolution for
difficult-to-test aspects of inclusive fitness theory.
Proc. R. Soc. B , 278 , 666-674.
di Primio, F., Muller, B., & Lengeler, J. (2000). Minimal
cognition in unicellular organisms. In J.-A. Meyer
(Ed.), SAB2000 proceedings supplement: Sixth international conference on simulation of adaptive
behavior. from animals to animats. (p. 3-12). Honolulu: The International Society for Adaptive Behavior.
Fehr, E., & Fischbacher, U. (2003). The nature of altruism. Nature, 425 , 785-791.
Greenspan, R. J., & van Swinderen, B. (2004). Cognitive
consonance: complex brain functions in the fruit
fly and its relatives. Trends in Neurosciences, 27 ,
707-711.
Haig, D. (1996). Gestational drive and the green-bearded
placenta. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 93 , 65476551.
Hamilton, W. (1964). The genetical evolution of social
behaviour. I and II. Journal of Theoretical Biology,
7 , 1-52.
Hammond, R., & Axelrod, R. (2006a). Evolution of
contingent altruism when cooperation is expensive.
Theoretical Population Biology, 69 , 333-338.
Hammond, R., & Axelrod, R. (2006b). The evolution
of ethnocentrism. Journal of Conflict Resolution,
50 , 926-936.
Hewstone, M., Rubin, M., & Willis, H. (2002). Intergroup bias. Annual Review of Psychology, 53 , 575604.
Hofbauer, J., & Sigmund, K. (2003). Evolutionary game
dynamics. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., 40 , 479-519.
Jansen, V. A., & van Baalen, M. (2006). Altruism
through beard chromodynamics. Nature, 440 , 663666.
Kaznatcheev, A. (2010a). The cognitive cost of ethnocentrism. In S. Ohlsson & R. Catrambone (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 32nd annual conference of the
cognitive science society. Austin, TX: Cognitive
Science Society.
Kaznatcheev, A. (2010b). Robustness of ethnocentrism
to changes in inter-personal interactions. Complex
Adaptive Systems - AAAI Fall Symposium.
Keller, L., & Ross, K. (1998). Selfish genes: a green
beard in the red fire ant. Nature, 394 , 573-575.
Kinder, D. (1998). Opinion and action in the realm of
politics. In D. Gilbert, S. Fiske, & G. Lindzey
(Eds.), Handbook of social psychology. Boston:

McGraw-Hill.
Klein, J., & Ettenson, R. (1999). Consumer animosity and consumer ethnocentrism: An analysis of
unique antecedents. Journal of International Consumer Marketing, 11 , 5-24.
Lenski, R., & Velicer, G. (2000). Games microbes play.
Selection, 1 , 51-57.
Lyon, P. (2006). The biogenic approach to cognition.
Cognitive Processing, 7 , 11-29.
Maynard Smith, J. (1974). The theory of games and the
evolution of animal conflict. Journal of Theoretical
Biology, 47 , 209-221.
Ohtsuki, H., & Nowak, M. A. (2006). The replicator
equation on graphs. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 243 , 86-97.
Queller, D., Ponte, E., Bozzaro, S., & Strassmann, J.
(2003). Single-gene greenbeard effects in the social
amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum. Science, 299 ,
105-106.
Rabushka, A., & Shepsle, K. (1972). Politics in plural societies: a theory of democratic instability. Columbus, OH: Merrill.
Riolo, R., Cohen, M., & Axelrod, R. (2001). Evolution
of cooperation without reciprocity. Nature, 414 ,
441-443.
Shultz, T. R., Hartshorn, M., & Hammond, R. A.
(2008). Stages in the evolution of ethnocentrism.
In B. Love, K. McRae, & V. Sloutsky (Eds.), Proceedings of the 30th annual conference of the cognitive science society (p. 1244-1249). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Shultz, T. R., Hartshorn, M., & Kaznatcheev, A. (2009).
Why is ethnocentrism more common than humanitarianism? In N. Taatgen & H. van Rijn (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 31st annual conference of the
cognitive science society (p. 2100-2105). Austin,
TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Traulsen, A., & Claussen, J. (2004). Similarity-based cooperation and spatial segregation. Physical Review
E , 70 , 046128.
Traulsen, A., & Schuster, H. G. (2003). Minimal model
for tag-based cooperation. Physical Review E , 68 ,
046129.
Trivers, R. (1971). The evolution of reciprocal altruism.
The Quarterly Review of Biology, 46 , 35-57.
van der Dennen, J. (1995). The origin of war. Groningen, Netherlands: Origin Press.
van Duijn, M., Keijzer, F., & Franken, D. (2006). Principles of minimal cognition: Casting cognition as
sensorimotor coordination. Adaptive Behavior , 14 ,
157-170.
West, S., Griffin, A., Gardner, A., & Diggle, S. (2006).
Social evolution theory for microorganisms. Nature
Reviews Microbiology, 4 , 597-607.

3179

