UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Everyday Cognitive Science: Using the methods of cognitive science to explore spatial
thinking in related disciplines

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7866k3rf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Keehner, Madeleine
Montello, Dan
Fabrikant, Sara
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Everyday Cognitive Science: Using the Methods of Cognitive Science to
Explore Spatial Thinking in Related Disciplines
Madeleine Keehner (M.M.Keehner@Dundee.ac.uk)
University of Dundee
School of Psychology
Dundee, DD14HN UK

Dan Montello (montello@geog.ucsb.edu)
Department of Geography
University of California, Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106 USA

Sara Fabrikant (sara@geo.uzh.ch)
Department of Geography,
University of Zurich
Winterthurerstrasse 190
CH-8057 Zurich, Switzerland

Eric M. Riggs (emriggs@purdue.edu)
Department of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences and Center for Research and Engagement in Science and
Mathematics Education
Purdue University
West Lafayette, Indiana 47907-2051 USA

Ruth Conroy Dalton (Ruth.dalton@northumbria.ac.uk)
Northumbria University
School of the Built and Natural Environment
Wynn-Jones Building
Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 8ST UK

Keywords: navigation; spatial representation;

science, and the other a related discipline such as
geosciences and architecture.

individual differences; wayfinding

Motivation
This symposium will address how the breadth of
investigation within the cognitive sciences can be
brought to bear on applied everyday common
problems, such as difficulties with reading charts and
maps, and difficulties in using an in-car navigation
device. Research with a problem-based focus often
requires a systems approach that requires
assimilation of work from many different
disciplines. Such problems thus constitute ideal
domains for illustrating the benefits of such multidiscipline and multi-method approaches. Speakers
will focus on the use of spatial thinking in the
context of examining these applied problems. These
speakers span at least two disciplines, one a
traditional discipline represented within cognitive

Spatial Thinking in Medicine
Madeleine Keehner
This talk will consider spatial cognition in the
domain of medicine. Medicine involves many
problems that are demanding of spatial thinking and
spatial learning. These include learning about the
spatial structures, spatial relations, and dynamic
processes of human anatomy; understanding 2-D
medical images (MRI, CT, X-ray, etc) by mapping
these representations onto long term knowledge of 3D anatomical structures; and operating within
perceptually constrained and spatially demanding
environments such as minimally invasive surgery
and dentistry. These problems draw on a range of
cognitive processes, including moment-to-moment
fluid processes of mental representation and

2418

manipulation, long term learning of knowledge and
skills, and “embodied” processes of interacting with
external tools and media. What they all have in
common is a substantial reliance on spatial
cognition. I will present research on performance in
selected tasks and findings relating to individual
differences. Potential implications for training and
pre-selection of entrants will be discussed.

Spatial Cognition in the Real World: Is
Spatial Cognition Everywhere?
Dan Montello
Researchers in several disciplines, including
psychology, geography, neuroscience, linguistics,
and computer science, have delimited an area of
study known as “spatial cognition.” Although one
can find the roots of spatial cognition research in
late 19th and early 20th century work, the past
couple decades has seen greatly expanded interest
in this area (technological developments, notably
virtual reality and fMRI, are just part of the
reason). Yet, it is surprisingly difficult to define
explicitly what constitutes the domain of spatial
cognition. I discuss the ontology of what makes a
task spatial, what makes it cognitive, and what
makes it spatial cognitive. I present a taxonomy of
real-world tasks (as opposed to tasks on
psychometric tests, in real or virtual laboratories,
etc.) that seem substantially to involve spatial
cognition. I also discuss efforts to develop
explicit-report scales to assess individual and group
differences in abilities performing real-world
spatial-cognition tasks.

Visual Geoanalytics Methods to
Evaluate the Cognitive Adequacy and
Perceptual Salience of Visual Analytics
Displays
Sara Fabrikant
Visual (geo)analytics is based on the intuition that
interactive and dynamic depictions of complex and
multivariate databases amplify human capabilities
for (spatio-temporal) inference and decisionmaking, as they facilitate cognitive tasks such as
pattern recognition, association, and analytical
reasoning. But how do we know whether visual
(geo)analytics really works?
I present evaluation approaches to support the
systematical assessment of users’ visual interaction
and sense making strategies when using interactive
visuo-spatial displays of geographic information. I
review self-developed theory- and data-driven
evaluation methods to assess the cognitive

adequacy and perceptual salience of visual
geoanalytics interfaces. The proposed approaches
are applied to response data collected from humansubject experiments and include (eye movement)
sequence similarity analysis, computational verbalprotocol analysis, and spatial analyses using
geographical information systems (GIS). With
these interdisciplinary methodological
contributions we hope to provide a better
understanding of how people use and make sense
of highly interactive multivariate data displays to
for knowledge construction in a geographical
context.

Visualizing Sub-surface Geology:
Characterizing Visual Penetrative Ability
Using Embodied Cognition
Eric M. Riggs & Matthew Alles
Visual penetrative ability (VPA) is a skill required
to visualize the three-dimensional (3-D)
underground structure of layered rocks from twodimensional (2-D) surface clues. VPA is a basic
skill for any geologist, but is often difficult to
teach. We conducted think-aloud, discursive
interviews where introductory students solved
geologic block-diagram visualization tasks.
Analysis of student gestures made during problem
solving from the perspective of embodied
cognition yields insight into difficulties faced by
students. Students with high VPA rapidly
construct a three-dimensional mental model, and
readily produce gestures and physical expressions
illustrating their spatial understanding. Students
with poor VPA tend to view external information
as merely “gift wrapping” and do not perceive the
internal structure. They also do not typically
address spatial concepts through physical
expression. We construct a process model for VPA
that describes the origin of commonly observed
errors at crucial steps, and accommodation
strategies used by students struggling with this type
of spatial visualization.

The Design and Experience of
Architecture
Ruth Conroy Dalton
The practice of architectural design is an activity
usually undertaken by professionals after many years
of rigorous, specialist education and training.
Conversely the everyday experience of inhabiting,
moving around, understanding and remembering
buildings is common to all of us and such skills are
acquired gradually throughout our lifetimes, starting
at a young age. This presentation will endeavor to

2419

outline the different kinds of spatial thinking that
architects and building users employ. It will identify
the non-correspondences between these different
activities and suggest potential communication
problems that might arise as a result. One method of
bridging this divide is to formalize spatial systems
such as buildings by producing graphic

visualizations that allow both groups to externalize
their spatial thinking. Such externalized
visualizations may serve as a common arena for
discourse. It is suggested that the tools developed
and employed by space syntax researchers may serve
to fulfill this spatial communication role.

2420

