UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Everyday navigation in real and virtual environments informed by semantic knowledge

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4gn2z699

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Kalff, Christopher
Strube, Gerhard

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Everyday Navigation in Real and Virtual Environments
Informed by Semantic Knowledge
Christopher Kalff
Gerhard Strube (strube@cognition.uni-freiburg.de)1
Center for Cognitive Science, University of Freiburg
Friedrichstr. 50. D-79098 Freiburg, Germany

Abstract
The effect of semantic knowledge on performing an everyday
wayfinding task was investigated in real and virtual grocery
stores. Participants had to search for 15 food items exhibiting
varying degrees of congruency with background knowledge
with respect to their placement in a mid-sized supermarket.
Food categories and the congruency of categories with the
placement of pertinent food items was assessed pre-experimentally using a card-sorting task with customers and store
managers. Experiment 1 was conducted in a real supermarket
(tracing participants by means of RFID techniques) and
replicated in the same market as a virtual environment (Exp.
2), allowing insights into potential differences. Exp. 3 used a
VR variation where all the pictures on the shelves of the VR
supermarket were replaced with printed labels. Results
regarding semantic knowledge yielded stable and fairly high
effect sizes across experimental conditions, revealing that
semantic congruency with shopping goods’ placements made
the search for food items much more efficient. The results
show that even abstract background knowledge (semantic
categories) may be involved in human navigation.

Keywords: Navigation, wayfinding, semantic knowledge,
virtual reality, spatial cognition.

Presenting1 background knowledge as a decisive factor in
human everyday cognition, sounds like nothing new in
cognitive science. Not quite so in spatial cognition, specifically in wayfinding, and navigation in general. In contrast to
the largely empty mazes so popular in experimental studies
of human navigation, everyday navigation takes place in
urban environments that are crowded rather than devoid of
objects: streets are full of shops, offices, and restaurants,
rooms are rarely empty but have furniture, or goods of any
kind. An extreme case is the grocery store that typically has
thousands of items on sale, quite the opposite to an empty
room.
When shopping, customers must find their way around.
when shopping for everyday goods like groceries, or
hardware. The everyday foraging of humans has to be fast
and successful. Therefore, people should be oriented in a
supermarket (Underhill, 1999). Our study identifies what
makes this kind of navigation efficient.
Human navigation has been studied extensively in the
laboratory, and occasionally in the wild. In the seminal
1
Corresponding author, because of the untimely death of
Christopher Kalff, who was my doctoral student.

study of Thorndyke and Hayes-Roth (1982), navigation in a
real building was shown to make use of the building’s
geometry, as well as of episodic memory (i.e., having been
in this building before). Recently, following their lead, a
number of studies have addressed navigation in indoor and
urban environments (e.g., Hölscher, Büchner, Meilinger, &
Strube, 2009; an overview of different wayfinding tasks and
respective studies can be found in Wiener, Büchner, &
Hölscher, 2009). The findings of these studies underline that
the factors influencing human navigation enumerated by
Wang and Spelke (2000; 2002), namely, path integration,
view-dependent place recognition, and reorientation by
geometric properties, appear to be modified by strategic
behavior and background knowledge. In contrast to episodic
knowledge (i.e., familiarity with the environment), this
knowledge may be characterized as generalized experience
with similar (esp. human-made) environments, like the usual
placement of staircases, or hallways in public buildings. We
suppose that with regard to supermarkets, it is semantic
knowledge – knowing about the categories of food – that
guides customers in their daily hunt for what is needed to
feed the fridge and the oven, and ultimately, us and our
families.
We will first report how the experimental items were
selected on the basis of food-related semantic knowledge,
and follows with a real-world experiment in a supermarket
where we tested how helpful this knowledge was in a search
task. We then present a replication experiment in a virtual
supermarket setting, and follow with another replication that
exchanges the visual appearance of goods with verbal
labels, in order to test the possible influence of concrete
visual information against abstract semantic information.

Knowledge of Food Categories
A group of six grocery store managers and another group of
32 naïve customers (19 female, 13 male; mean age 36.7
years) were tested individually. All participants were
handed 98 small plastic cards naming typical grocery store
goods and were asked to sort them into arbitrarily sized
groups, then find suitable verbal labels for the categories
they had constructed, and pair-wise ratings for the similarity
between groups (Kalff & Strube, 2008).
The results were used to derive items for the search task
in Exp. 1 to 3. Five items each were selected for three item
groups, A to C:
Item group A: Items placed together (in the shelves of the
supermarket) with others that received high similarity

2264

ratings (knowledge-congruent items: yoghurt drinks,
canned corn, cake decoration granules, long grain rice,
gravy powder),
Item group B: misplaced items, placed together with other
items that received low similarity ratings with them
(knowledge-incongruent items: cereal bar, packaged marble cake, deli olive oil, vanilla yoghurt, pickled herring),
Item group C: items on which customers (as well as shop
managers) disagree with respect to their grouping and/or
similarities to other items (non-categorizable items: salt,
fresh yeast, tomato puree, baby food, UHT milk).

Experiment 1 (in the real supermarket)
Method
Participants. Thirty-eight participants (22 women and 16
men) aged 19 to 38 (M = 23.63, SD = 3.94) took part in the
experiment. They were mainly cognitive science students
from the University of Freiburg. They were recruited
through advertisements on the campus and via an e-mail
distributor. Participants were either awarded course credit or
received a monetary compensation. The instruction deliberately did not mention any terms regarding supermarkets or
(grocery) shopping, solely referring to a navigation task
inside a building.
Procedure. The complete experimental procedure lasted
approximately two hours. All participants were tested
individually. Participants were welcomed at a playground in
the vicinity of the supermarket. They were first handed a
letter briefing them on the course of events and explaining
the use of the equipment. Then they had to fill in a
questionnaire probing for preferences in spatial orientation
(the FRS-questionnaire, Münzer & Hölscher, accepted)2.
The (underground) supermarket was then entered from the
parking deck via the back entrance to prevent participants to
gain an overview of the environment. Subsequently the
main search task (see below) was initiated.
After completing the search for 15 items (trials), participants
were led outside again to complete the following post-tests.
Roughly half of the participants filled in a Euclidean
distance estimation matrix consisting of 8 items. The other
half was asked to execute 15 triple-comparisons (identifying
the smallest Euclidean distance of three items constituting
triangles). All participants subsequently had to produce a
semi-free sketch-map of the supermarket environment. This
was followed by a post-experimental evaluation of the
shopping frequency for the 15 items and the frequency of
visits to this particular store and stores of the same brand in
general. Participants were also asked to give written
responses regarding their strategies for finding the items.

Finally, participants were handed a questionnaire on general
shopping behavior and demographic data.
Experimental tasks. The experiment consisted of the main
search task and several pre- and post-tests.
The search task was conducted in a medium sized
(approximately 800m2/ 8611 ft2 of sales area) German
supermarket housing some 15.000 product. Figure 1 shows
the supermarket environment and the locations of the 15
items (see Table 1 for explanations).
The starting point (depicted with an asterisk) is at the first
set of shelves, not at the entrance. This was mandatory as
the experiment was run during normal store opening times
and we did not want to obstruct the customer flow. Data
collection was supported by technologically advanced
apparatus. For obtaining participants’ trajectories we relied
on Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) (Joho,
Plagemann, & Burgard, 2009). For this purpose 350 RFID
Tags were distributed throughout the store. The tags (small
antennae, in fact) were tracked through a custom-made
shopping cart carrying two RFID-antennae along with a
laser range scanner and a notebook computer. Participants
were instructed to stay always close to the shopping cart,
providing valid trajectory data. Additional behavioral
measures and related positions were recorded using the realtime logging software WayTracer developed by
Kuhnmünch and Strube (2006). WayTracer was installed on
a notebook with a pen-enabled screen that was carried by an
experimenter walking behind the participant.

Item token
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
X11
X12
X13
X14
X15

Item name
Yoghurt drinks (A)
Cereal bars (B)
Tinned maize (A)
Salt (C)
Cake decoration granules (A)
Delicatessen olive oil (B)
UHT-milk (C)
Long grain rice (A)
Packaged marble cake (B)
Tomato puree (C)
Vanilla yoghurt (B)
Gravy powder (A)
Pickled herring (B)
Baby food (C)
Fresh yeast (C)

Table 1: Explanation of the abbreviations used in Figure 1 and
group memberships of the experimental items in parentheses (‘A’
being congruent, ‘B’ being incongruent and ‘C’ exhibiting possible
incongruence—or twofold equivocality).

2

This questionnaire is a German version of two well-established
measures used in spatial cognition research: the SBSOD [Santa
Barbara Sense of Direction Scale] developed by Hegarty et al.
(2002), and the QSR [Questionnaire on Spatial Representation]
(Pazzaglia, & DeBeni, 2006).

Items were searched for one-by-one and the detected item
always provided the starting point for the next trial. The
order of the items can be found in Table 1.

2265

Figure 1: The supermarket environment. The entrance is located at the bottom left. The produce section is marked by dark green coloring.
Dark gray is used for the produce section and for the shelves that house cooled products (mainly dairy goods).
Light gray is used for deep-frozen food and sales counters for meat, cheese, and fish. All other shelves remain uncolored.
The starting point for the experimental trials is marked by an asterisk.

An abort criterion was defined as follows: Participants were
encouraged to search until they found the product. If they
still hadn’t found it after having explored the entire
supermarket area (often overlooking the particular item
repeatedly), the experimenter stopped the trial. Then they
were led to the correct location for the next trial to begin.
After all 15 items were processed, participants were led
outside the building to complete the post-tests.
Materials: The 15 items shown in Table 1 were to be found,
starting with x1, finishing with x15 (in the fixed-order
condition; semi-randomized and completely randomized
conditions were also done to corroborate the results).

Results and Discussion
Main search task. The following results for the main search
task are those for the fixed-order condition..
After excluding 18 trials when items had not to be
searched for, but merely headed to, 541 valid search time
trials remained. Search times were adjusted with respect to
the route distance that had to be travelled to reach the items
in an optimal way (the shortest possible path), and the
(average) amount of weekly visits to our test store (the only
predictor using a backward multiple linear regression; r2 =

.137, p > .001). Outlier correction removed 18 data points
that exceeded three times the interquartile range, leaving
523 trials for the analysis. The ANOVA (with participants
as a random factor) shows a significant influence of
background knowledge congruency on search time: F(2,
78.165) = 69.847, p < .001, partial-η2 = .641. GamesHowell post-hoc comparisons reveal significant differences
between all three conditions: all p < .001 with group ‘A’
outperforming the groups ‘B’ and ‘C’ and group ‘C’ ranging
between the two others (see Figure 2). A planned Helmert
contrast between group ‘A’ and groups ‘B & C’ likewise
exhibits a significant difference for the adjusted search time
(p < .001).
Two other important dependent measures are the travelled
route distance for finding the items and the amount of stops
during the search. Route distance will be reported as the
percentage above optimal (PAO), i.e. the overshoot of the
optimal path length expressed in percentage of that
optimum:
∙ 100.

2266

is highly significant, p < .001, as are all Games-Howell
post-tests (all p < .001). They also correlate highly with
search time (r = .761 and .746) and among each other (r =
.869). Search times, PAO values, and number of stops in a
search trial all correlated higher with each other (PAO and
Search Time, r = .761; PAO and Number of Stops, r = .896;
Search Time and Number of Stops, r = .746; all p>.001).
These results clearly show the impact of semantic
background knowledge about food categories in a real
environment.

40
20
0
‐20
‐40
‐60
Figure 2: Search time corrected for optimal route distance
and weekly visits to the particular supermarket-environment
for the three groups (A, B & C, from left to right). Error
bars = ± 1 SE.
The travelled route distance was obtained by processing the
RFID data. The exact procedure of extracting spatial
information from RFID signal strength is explained in Joho,
Plagemann, and Burgard (2009). Conversion of the X,Ycoordinates into trajectories was achieved by applying a
MatLab-script. The complete trajectory data was split into
trials and output to the main data file. The outlier removal
consisted of removing all trials excelling three times the
interquartile range. This left us with 476 valid trials. These
were also subjected to a random-factor ANOVA resulting in
a main effect of congruency with background knowledge
categories: F(2, 80.4) = 66.603, partial-η2 = .624. The
Helmert contrast comparing group ‘A’ with ‘group B & C’

Experiment 2 (in the virtual supermarket)
The objective of Exp. 2 was to replicate our real-world
findings in a virtual reality version of the supermarket (see
Figure 3) in order to gain insight into the comparability of
the two settings, since results from real, as compared to
virtual environments, have sometimes been found to
disagree with those in real-world environments (e.g., Farell
et al., 2003; Richardson, Montello & Hegarty, 1999). The
third experiment for example (which will be reported after
this one) will strip the products of all non-semantic
information.

Method
Participants. 28 student participants (15 women and 13
men) aged 20 to 26 (M = 22.54, SD = 1.45) took part in the
experiment. None of them had knowledge of the initial realworld experiment.

Figure 3: Screenshot of the supermarket in virtual reality (a faithful replication of the real supermarket).

Apparatus. All virtual reality (VR) experiments were
conducted with a triple-screen setup. Each screen had a size
of 28 inches and a resolution of 1360x786 pixels resulting in
a total resolution of 4080x768 pixels with a color depth of
32bit and a refresh rate of 60Hz. For the navigation device
we used a wireless joypad, which had two joysticks, one
allowing to turn around and the other to go forward or
backward. We didn't allow additional movement options
like sidestepping or combinations thereof because this
caused motion sickness during the pretesting phase in some
cases. The maximum turning velocity used was 29 degrees
per second and the maximum movement velocity was 1.8
meters per second. After finding an item one had to press a
button on the joypad where (after the actual position was
checked and if the person was located correctly) the next

instruction was shown. For our virtual world model we used
a ground plan which was consistent with the trajectory data
of the real supermarket and contained information about the
position and sizes of every shelf. Virtual shelves were
modeled to scale an textured with images of food items that
were actual photos taken in the real supermarket.
Procedure. The procedure paralleled the real-world
experiment (Exp. 1) closely. The main search task was
preceded by a brief training course in a different virtual
environment.

Results and Discussion
Main search task. Data were treated in the same way as in
Exp. 1; 367 valid trials remained for analysis. Backward

2267

linear regression on the residualized search time yielded two
significant variables: shopping frequency of the experimental items (zero-order correlation r = -.25, p < .001), and
self-assessed knowledge of the placement heuristics used in
this supermarket chain (r = -.123, p < .05).
ANOVA with participants as a random-factor shows a
significant influence of background knowledge congruency
on search time: F(2, 61.769) = 27.884, p < .001, partial-η2 =
.474. Games-Howell post-hoc comparisons reveal
significant differences between all three conditions: all p <
.001 with group ‘A’ outperforming the groups ‘B’ and ‘C’
and group ‘C’ ranging between the two others (see Figure
X3). A planned Helmert contrast between group ‘A’ and
groups ‘B & C’ likewise exhibits a significant difference for
the adjusted search time (p < .001).
As shown in Fig. 4, our results in VR parallel those of
Exp. 1 almost exactly.

100
50
0
‐50
‐100
Figure 4: Search time corrected for optimal route distance,
z-standardized item purchase frequency and
knowledge of the store’s placement for the three groups
(A, B & C, from left to right). Error bars = ± 1 SE.

Figure 5: A screenshot of the labeled supermarket.

Experiment 3 (VR, Verbal Labels Only)
Our results so far have shown that navigation in an everyday
search task, either a real, or a virtual supermarket, was
significantly influenced by knowledge of food categories.
What remains to be clarified is the nature of this background
knowledge: Is it plain semantic, conceptual knowledge, or
does it need to be augmented by the looks of the items on
sale? What if the complete environment would be stripped
of coloring, type of packaging and other visual features that
might create uniqueness? The ‘labeled’ supermarket aims at
dissociating the influence of visual information and pure
semantic background knowledge by replacing every item by
a written label (see Fig. 5).

Method
With the exception of verbal labels instead of pictures on
the virtual shelves, Exp. 3 replicated Exp. 2.
Participants. 28 students (15 women and 13 men) aged 19
to 30 (M = 23.18, SD = 2.2) took part in the experiment. In
order to render the labels legible, not every single item
received a written counterpart, but the grain size of the

labels was well below that of the food categories used in our
initial assessment of background knowledge.

Results and Discussion
After data conditioning (as in the former experiments),
410 valid trials were analyzed using a random-factorANOVA. Results show a significant difference regarding
the three knowledge congruency groups: F(2, 54.367) =
11.398, p < .001, partial-η2 = .295. Games-Howell post-hoc
test prove significant differences between groups ‘A’
(congruence) and ‘B’ (incongruence) (p < .001), and groups
‘A’ and ‘C’ (twofold equivocality) (p < .01). The nature of
these differences can be seen in figure Y3. A planned
Helmert-contrast between group ‘A’ versus groups ‘B & C’
is also highly significant (p < .001).
Again, the ANOVA results for Exp. 3 parallel those for Exp.
1 and Exp. 2, demonstrating that even when the supermarket
environment has been ‘semanticized’, by stripping its items
from their visual appearance, semantic background knowledge still turns out to be helpful. Fig. 7 shows the results not
with the standardized search-time residuals, but with the
PAO values.

2268

Acknowledgements
This work was funded by the Transregional Collaborative
Research SFB/TR8 “Spatial Cognition” of the German
Research Council (DFG). We thank the DFG, and also wish
to thank Martin Senk, Dominik Joho, and our student
research assistants B. Lammers, B. Schiffler, A. Nau, A.
Leicht, F. Stein and S. Maciej. We especially thank Edeka
Südwest GmbH, Offenburg, for cooperating in our research.
Figure 6: Search time corrected for optimal route distance,
z-standardized item purchase frequency and
knowledge of the store’s placement for the three groups
(A, B & C, from left to right). Error bars = ± 1 SE.

Figure 7: Travelled route distance expressed in PAO
(percentage above optimal path length) for the three groups
(A, B & C, from left to right). Error bars = ± 1 SE. The
optimal, i.e., shortest path, corresponds to a value of 100.

General Discussion
The bottom line of our findings is that even abstract
(semantic) background knowledge can be a decisive factor
in human wayfinding. Other well-known factors (e.g., those
cited by Wang & Spelke) may be mediated by background
knowledge, and in certain environments, where this
knowledge is applicable, guide navigation. The main point
is that whenever the environment itself is structured
according to semantic (or whatever) principles, as is often
the case in urban, or other human-made environments,
pertinent background knowledge will be useful to find one’s
way around, especially in search tasks. Large grocery shops
like the ‘real’ supermarket where Exp. 1 was conducted,
organize the layout of their products according to food
categories (with some notable exceptions), so knowledge of
food categories turns out to be helpful. Largely the same
holds for conventional layouts of buildings, e.g. opera
houses, where general knowledge about their spatial layout
will be of help, or statistical knowledge about cooccurrences (e.g., in Germany, you will be well advised
when looking for a medical doctor, to spot the next
pharmacy, which is far easier to spot than a medical office).
We hope to have shown that for everyday navigation, at
least, ‘higher’ cognitive processes like the utilization of
semantic knowledge, may play an important part.

References
Farrell, M., Arnold, P., Pettifer, S., Adams, J., Graham, T.,
& Macmanamon, M. (2003). Transfer of route learning
from virtual to real environments. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Applied, 9, 219-227.
Hegarty, M., Richardson, A. E., Montello, D. R., Lovelace,
K., & Subbiah, I. (2002). Development of a self-report
measure of environmental spatial ability. Intelligence, 30,
425-447.
Hölscher, C., Büchner, S., Meilinger, T., Strube, G. (2009).
Adaptivity of wayfinding strategies in a multi-building
ensemble: the effects of spatial structure, task
requirements and metric information. Journal of
Environmental Psychology 29(2), 208-219.
Joho, D., Plagemann, C., & Burgard, W. (2009). Modeling
RFID signal strength and tag localization for mapping.
Proceedings of the IEEE, International Conference on
Robotics and automation (ICRA), Kobe, Japan.
Kalff, C., & Strube. G. (2008). Where is the fresh yeast?
The use of background knowledge in human navigation.
In: C. Hölscher (Ed.), Spatial Cognition 2008. Bremen,
Germany.
Kuhnmünch, G., & Strube, G. (2009). WayTracer - A
mobile assistant for logging navigation behavior.
Pazzaglia, F., & DeBeni, R. (2006). Are people with high
and low mental rotation abilities differently susceptible to
the alignment effect?, Differences, 16, 369-377.
Richardson, A. E., Montello, D. R., & Hegarty, M. (1999).
Spatial knowledge acquisition from maps, and from
navigation in real and virtual environments. Memory and
Cognition, 27, 741-750.
Thorndyke, P. W., & Hayes-Roth, B. (1982). Differences in
spatial knowledge acquired from maps and navigation.
Cognitive Psychology, 14, 560-589.
Underhill, P. (1999). Why we buy: The science of shopping.
New York, NY: Simon and Schuster Press.
Wang, R. F., & Spelke, E. S. (2000). Updating egocentric
representations in human navigation. Cognition, 77, 215250.
Wang, R. F., & Spelke, E. S. (2002). Human spatial
representations: Insights from animals. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 6(9), 376-382.
Wiener, J. M., Büchner, S. J., & Hölscher, C. (2009).
Taxonomy of human wayfinding tasks: A knowledgebased approach. Spatial Cognition & Computation, 9,
152-165.

2269

