UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Examining the Role of Object Size in Judgments of Lateral Separation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1625t84k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Thomson, Robert
Lacroix, Guy

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Examining the Role of Object Size in Judgments of Lateral Separation
Robert Thomson (rthomson@connect.carleton.ca)
Guy Lacroix (guy_lacroix@carleton.ca)
Psychology Department, Carleton University
1125 Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, ON K1S5B6 Canada
asked to judge how far away an object feels to them (a
Abstract
judgment of apparent distance), their answers tend to ignore
Research on depth judgments has found a small but
familiar size cues and correspond more to the object’s
significant effect of object size on perceived depth (Gogel &
Da Silva, 1987). Research on judgments of separation (e.g.,
angular size. If instead observers are asked to judge how far
Levin & Haber, 1993), however, has found that visual angle
away an object would be if measured with a meter stick (its
is the predominant determiner of exocentric distance
objective distance), then their answers tend to be influenced
judgments. The goal of the present research was to examine
by familiar size cues. No process specified in the sizethe influence of object size on judgments of lateral separation
distance invariance hypothesis captures the effect of task
using a one-shot change detection paradigm. Experiment 1
instruction on size and distance judgments.
used a forced-choice response, finding a significant influence
of object size on distance judgments. Experiment 2 replicated
In addition, visual illusions have also provided evidence
these results using a distance reproduction task. These results
not captured by the SDIH. For instance, the zenith moon
are discussed in terms of Gogel and Da Silva’s (1987) Theory
appears both smaller and farther away than the horizon
of Off-Sized Perceptions.
moon, a finding that is inconsistent with the size-distance
Keywords: distance estimation; perception; spatial cognition;
invariance hypothesis (Kaufman & Rock, 1962). The sizechange detection;
distance invariance hypothesis instead predicts that when
the moon appears smaller at its zenith, it should appear
Introduction
closer than when along the horizon, not farther away. This
The ability to recognize objects and judge distances is
incongruence is called the size-distance paradox.
essential for navigating through the environment. During
Dissociating Perceived Size and Cognitive Size
object recognition, an observer will automatically determine
To account for the differential effect of task instruction and
its angular size and, in many cases, then perceive the object
illusions such as the size-distance paradox, the SDIH was
as having an expected size or range of acceptable sizes (i.e.,
modified to represent a relation between apparent size,
its familiar size; Haber & Levin, 2001). For instance, once a
apparent distance, and (arguably) apparent visual angle
student recognizes that an object on a table is a beer bottle,
(McCready, 1985). This single-process model of size and
the student has access to its familiar size (around 20 cm
distance perception presupposed that size judgments could
tall). This metrical size judgment is also referred to as the
not dissociate linear size determined primarily by angular
linear size of an object. In addition to size perception, there
size from linear size influenced by familiar size and other
are two types of distance perceptions: egocentric and
“cognitive” cues. In other words, perceived linear size and
exocentric. Egocentric distance perception is the perception
cognitive size judgments could not be disentangled and were
of an object in depth, that is, a judgment made of the
thus part of an encapsulated process.
distance between one’s self and an object. Using a football
To test the single process model, Gogel (1976) developed
analogy, it is the kind of perception that the quarterback
an
indirect head-motion tracking technique to measure
uses when he decides how far to throw the ball downfield to
perceived
egocentric distance. He found only a negligible
reach his receiver. Exocentric distance perception is the
effect of familiar size on perceived distance. Observers
perception of inter-object distance, that is, a judgment made
made both verbal and head-motion judgments of the
of the distance between two objects irrespective of observer
distance of similar-sized transparencies of three familiar
position. Returning to the football analogy, exocentric
objects (a key, sunglasses, and a guitar) whose sizes
distance perception arises, for instance, when the
simulated distances of 63 cm, 185 cm, and 1236 cm
quarterback estimates the distance between his wide
respectively. The actual distance of the transparencies was
receiver and the opposing team's defensive back.
133 cm. Familiar size cues influenced verbal reports of
Size-Distance Invariance
distance and, to a lesser extent, head-motion responses. The
The size-distance invariance hypothesis (SDIH) was an
actual size of a guitar is 19.6 times the size of the key.
early attempt to capture the relationship between size and
Nonetheless, the transparency of the guitar was reported to
distance perception (Filpatrick & Ittelson, 1953). It states
be only 10 times the size of the transparency of the key for
that observers expect that an object at a relatively farther
verbal reports and 1.4 times the size of the key in headdistance will project a smaller retinal image size than the
motion responses. This result is noteworthy considering that
same object at a relatively closer distance. While the
the study used apparent instructions, which should have
majority of size and distance judgments are consistent with
reduced the effectiveness of familiar size cues. While both
this hypothesis, task instructions and certain visual illusions
verbal reports and head-motion responses exhibited familiar
have generated apparently contradictory evidence (Epstein,
size effects, they were much more pronounced in the verbal
1963 McCready; 1985). For instance, when observers are
reports. This evidence suggested that the cognitive size

549

predominantly influenced only direct (e.g., verbal) reports of
distance and not raw representations of perceived distance
(Mershon & Gogel, 1975). The head-motion technique
experiment results led to the conclusion that perceived size
(determined by angular size) and distance could be
dissociated from cognitive judgments of size and distance.

the cognitive secondary process utilizes top-down
information such as familiar size cues to calibrate distance
judgments. When an object is perceived as off-sized this
weights the cognitive effects of the secondary process.
By independently manipulating familiar size cues (object
size) and visual angle (lateral separation), it is possible to
determine if familiar size cues affect judgments of lateral
separation in a manner that is consistent with the theory of
off-sized perceptions (Gogel, 1998). By changing object
size between the source and target images, participants
should perceive the objects as off-sized, which, in turn,
should more heavily weight the secondary process in the
distance judgment and reduce accuracy in the present task.
Consequently, participants were asked to detect changes
in lateral separation. If visual angle is the predominant
determiner of exocentric distance as theorized by Levin and
Haber (1993) and Matsushima et al. (2005), then changes in
object size should not significantly affect the accuracy of
judgments of lateral separation. If, however, the familiar
size cue is also a significant determiner of judgments of
lateral separation, then changes in object size should reduce
the accuracy of inter-object distance judgments consistent
with the theory of off-sized perceptions.

The Theory of Off-Sized Perceptions
Consequently, Gogel and Da Silva (1987) postulated a
two-process theory, called the theory of off-sized
perceptions. The primary process is perceptual and is
consistent with the SDIH. The secondary process is
cognitive and is influenced by top-down memory effects
such as familiar size cues. Attention, the availability of
visual cues, and experiment instructions determine the
extent to which the secondary process influences distance
judgments. For instance, when an object is perceived as offsized (i.e., when its perceived size is different than its
expected or familiar size), this more heavily weights the
cognitive secondary process. The evidence used to support
the theory of off-sized perception has exclusively been
based on judgments of depth. Thus, it has been shown to be
valid for egocentric judgments only.
While the theory is claimed to be a generalized model for
size and distance perception, it has also been argued that
egocentric and exocentric judgments subsume separate
processes (Gogel, 1965). Therefore, it is not clear that the
theory of off-sized perceptions can be applied in the same
manner to exocentric distance judgments or to judgments of
lateral separation, which are a depth-controlled subset of
exocentric distances. There is evidence, however, that
egocentric distance judgments and judgments of lateral
separation do use similar processes. Sterken, Postma, De
Haan, and Dingemans (1999), for instance, used a change
detection task to determine whether egocentric distance and
lateral separation information are independently stored in
visual memory. They showed that co-occurring lateral
displacement reduced the accuracy of egocentric judgments
below-chance levels. Similarly, co-occurring egocentric
displacement reduced the accuracy of judgments of lateral
separation to at-chance levels. This interference between
egocentric and lateral separation information indicates that
representations of egocentric distance and lateral separation
are correlated.

Method
Participants
Thirty Carleton University undergraduate students were
awarded extra course credit for their participation. All
participants exhibited normal or corrected-to-normal vision.
Materials
The source image consisted of two identical white squares
appearing on the central horizontal axis of the computer
screen (see Figure 1). They were placed at equal distances
from the center of the display. On half of the trials, the
objects were arranged horizontally (left and right of the
centre of the screen) and on half of the trials they were
arranged vertically (above and below the centre of display).

Experiment 1: Forced-Choice Task
The objective of this experiment was to use a one-shot
change detection task to determine the role that object size
plays in judgments of lateral separation. Prior research has
argued that visual angle is the predominant cue in exocentric
distance perception (Levin & Haber, 1993). In other words,
when both depth and separation (i.e., angular size) vary,
observers tend to judge distance using the separation
between objects and ignore relative depth and size cues.
Gogel and Da Silva’s (1987) two-process theory of offsized perceptions, however, predicts that only the primary
perceptual representation should be derived from angular
size (i.e., visual angle). The representation generated from

Figure 1. Sample conditions from the one-shot change detection
methodology. The bar above the squares in the target images represents the
original separation from the source image. They are included for illustrative
purposes and were not shown to the participants.

550

White squares were selected to ensure that the objects had
no features which might promote cues other than relative
size and familiar size. The squares' identical sizes also
controlled for the perception of the relative depth of the
objects as being perpendicular to the observer and
equidistant (Gogel & Harker, 1955). Moreover, plain shapes
are unlikely to cue prior knowledge, such as prototypical
sizes of objects influencing the perception of scale.
The objects in the source image had three possible sizes
(1.05°, 1.45°, & 1.85°). The objects’ size in the target image
either remained the same as in the source image or were
varied in the target image by +/- 0.20° or +/- 0.40°. The
initial distance between objects in the source image was
generated using multiples of initial object size, ranging from
2, 3, or 4 objects apart. Either the source and target image
remained unchanged or one of three possible types of
changes occurred in the target image: a change in objectsize, a change in inter-object distance, or both a change in
object-size and inter-object distance.
The pattern mask consisted of a randomly-generated static
white-noise image with a dot-density of 34 dots per square
cm. This image served both to mask the previous pattern
and to eliminate any retinal afterimage which could
otherwise have been used as an index of spatial position.

Participants were instructed to respond with their first
impression of distance, consistent with apparent task
instructions (Epstein, 1963). They were further directed to
respond as fast as possible without sacrificing accuracy. No
feedback was provided regarding the accuracy of their
responses.
A short four-trial practice phase familiarized participants
with the experimental procedures. In total, 216 trials were
completed during the experimental phase. This included 36
baseline trials where neither size nor distance was changed
between the source and target image (i.e., the source and
target images were identical). The 180 remaining trials were
divided among three change types: 72 in both the sizechange and congruent change conditions, and 36 trials in the
distance-change condition. The 72 size- and congruent
change trials included an equal number from the three initial
sizes (1.05°, 1.45°, 1.85°), three initial distances (2, 3, 4
object-multiples apart), four size-change or congruent
changes (increase and decrease by 0.20° and 0.40° of visual
angle), and two orientations (horizontal and vertical
presentation). There were fewer trials (36) in the distancechange condition because participants exhibited ceiling
performance at the +/-0.20° distance change levels in pilot
studies, thus the decision was made to eliminate the +/-0.40°
distance change trials from the experiment. Otherwise, trial
order was randomized across participants.

Apparatus
The present research was developed using the VisionEgg
Toolkit (Straw, 2008). The stimuli were presented on a 24”
LCD monitor with a screen brightness of 400cd/m2 and a 2
ms response. The desk and walls were covered with a
minimally-reflective black plastic to reduce the contrast and
salience of the wall texture. To control for accommodation
and parallax cues (Gogel, 1976), a chin rest was placed at a
fixed height of 100 cm such that participants’ eyes were
centered on the monitor at a distance of 60 cm. An office
chair was used to fit each participant to the equipment.
Responses were recorded on a three-button mouse.

Results and Discussion
One participant was excluded from all analyses because he
failed to follow procedures. The remaining 29 participants’
results were entered into all subsequent analyses.
Two separate 4(change type: no-change, size-change,
distance-change, congruent change) x 3(initial distance: 2,
3, or 4 object-multiples) x 2(orientation: horizontal, vertical)
repeated-measures ANOVAs were conducted for accuracy
(i.e., proportion correct) and response times (in ms).
Adopting the analyses of a similar change detection task
from Henderson and Hollingworth (1999), data were
collapsed across the objects’ initial size. In the present
analyses, 14 responses (0.23% of trials) were excluded due
to having no response or RTs exceeding 10 s.
When Mauchley’s test of sphericity was violated,
Greenhouse-Geisser adjusted values were reported. All ps <
.001 unless otherwise indicated and all post-hoc analyses are
reported with pairwise Bonferroni-adjusted values.

Procedure
Upon entering the experiment room, participants sat at the
computer and had their chair adjusted such that they were
sitting centered in front of the monitor with their chin
comfortably on the chinrest. They were then instructed to
fixate on the center of the screen.
A trial consisted of two sequentially-presented images
separated by a white-noise mask. First, a source image was
presented for 1200 ms followed by a 600ms randomized
white-noise mask. Durations for stimuli presentation were
derived from a similar one-shot change detection task in
Cole et al. (2003). Presenting the mask for 600 ms
minimizes the possibility that a change in object size or a
change in separation be perceived as a change in depth
(Rensink, 2002). Instead, depth should be specified by the
convergence of participants’ eyes fixated on the physical
distance of the display.
On each trial, participants indicated whether the distance
between the two objects was different in the target image
when compared with the source image. They were provided
with three possible responses: closer, same, or farther.

Accuracy
The main effect of change type was significant, F(1.90,
53.2) = 41.08, MSE = 6.67, ηp2 = .595. Participants were
most accurate on distance-change and no-change trials (M =
.83 and .74), followed by size-change and congruent change
trials (M = .61 and .48). These results are consistent with the
interpretation that changing object size between the source
and target images causes observers to make an off-sized
perception, which, in turn, more heavily weights the
secondary cognitive process and reduces overall accuracy.
The main effect of initial distance was also significant,
F(2, 56) = 14.74, MSE = .363, ηp2 = .345, with farther
distances resulting in reduced accuracy (M = .70, .67, .62

551

for 2, 3, and 4 objects-apart initial distance, respectively).
This result is consistent with visual angle having a reduced
influence on judgments of separation because the accuracy
of visual angle judgments is relatively lower at greater
eccentricities (Matsushima et al., 2005).
The initial distance x change type interaction was also
significant, F(6, 168) = 19.96, MSE = .014, ηp2 = .416.
Accuracy decreased with farther distances for three of the
change types (no-change, size-change, distance-change), but
increased for congruent change trials (see Figure 2). This
reversal may be due to the reduced effectiveness of visual
angle at farther separations. In the congruent change type
trials, relative size cues indicate that the distance judgment
should be “same” because object size and visual angle both
change in proportion between the source and target images.
The judgment from relative size cues conflicts with the
judgment indicated by visual angle cues. Visual angle cues
instead indicate that the response should be “closer” or
“farther” because the visual angle has changed.

incorrectly report no change (or the wrong change) in
distance when distance was varied, or they incorrectly report
a change in distance when distance remained unchanged.
Table 1
Frequency of Response Type Examined Across Changes in Size and Distance.

Response
CLOSER

OBJECT SIZE
No Change
Smaller
68 (25%)
60 (12%)

Larger
180 (54%)

Change

SAME

772

563

712

FARTHER

202 (75%)

431 (88%)

151 (46%)

Binomial

p < .001

p < .001

p = .061

CLOSER

415

417

a

SAME

88 (82% )

534 (85%)

FARTHER

19 (18%)

93 (15%)

Binomial

p < .001

p < .001

CLOSER

16 (23%)

a

SAME

54 (77%)

435 (93%)

FARTHER

451

574

Binomial

p < .001

p < .001

Decrease

Increase

1.0

34

(7%)

Note. Numbers bolded indicate the number of correct responses. Percent values
represent breakdown of response type among only incorrect responses. Exact
binomial test assesses proportion of incorrect responses based on 50% chance.

0.8

Proportion Correct

Distance
No

In examining incorrect response frequencies (see Table
1), the proportion of incorrect responses occurring nearchance levels would be indicative that incorrect responses
were simply guesses. The results instead indicate that
participants were not guessing when responding incorrectly.
Interestingly, in the baseline no-change trials, participants
were three times as likely to incorrectly judge a distance
farther than closer, despite the fact that neither size nor
distance changed. It thus appears that participants are biased
towards “farther” judgments. Binomial tests further revealed
that in the size-change trials, when object size increases
there are significantly more incorrect “closer” responses
than in the baseline trials. Similarly, when object size
decreased there were significantly more incorrect “farther”
responses than in the baseline trials. These results are
consistent with participants making large and small offsized judgments, respectively.
In the congruent change trials, the majority of errors were
“same” whether or not size increased or decreased. This
finding implies that participants were not solely using the
off-sized perception to assume that, for instance, a large offsized perception results in a “closer” distance judgment.
Instead, it appears that participants may have been assessing
both changes in object size and changes in separation when
making distance judgments.

0.6

0.4

No Change
Distance Change
Size Change
Size and Distance Change

0.2

0.0
2 Objects Apart

3 Objects Apart

4 Objects Apart

Initial Distance

Figure 2. The Interaction between Initial Distance and Change Type for
Accuracy. Error bars represent Standard Error.

At closer initial distances, it appears that relative size cues
are more effective, which overrides visual angle as a cue
(which should also be more effective), thus resulting in
more errors. At the farthest 4-object initial distance,
however, the effectiveness of the relative size cue likely is
reduced and distance judgments become more accurate. In
fact, at the farthest distance, post-hoc tests reveal that only
the accuracy of distance-change trials are different than the
accuracy for the congruent, size, and no-change trials.
Finally, there was no main effect of orientation on accuracy,
F(1, 28) = .406, MSE = .012, p = .529, ηp2 = .014, nor was
orientation present in any significant interaction.
Patterns of Errors
The previous analyses have identified that trials where
object size changes (i.e., size-change and congruent change)
have reduced accuracy compared to baseline no-change
trials. These results, however, do not identify whether the
kinds of errors support the hypotheses that off-sized
perceptions occur when object size is modified. Responses
are judged to be erroneous when participants make an
inaccurate inter-object distance judgment, that is, when they

Response Times
The main effect of change type was significant, F(2.46, 69)
= 18.21, MSE = 2420000, ηp2 = .394, with participants
responding faster to no-change or distance-change trials (M
= 1255 ms and 1294 ms) than trials involving size-change or
congruent change (M = 1404 ms and 1418 ms). These
results imply that participants were detecting the change in
object size, and potentially, that some additional processing

552

was undertaken consistent with an off-sized perception more
heavily weighting the secondary inferential process.
A main effect of initial distance was also significant,
F(1.60, 44.9) = 3.75, MSE = 257000, p = .040, ηp2 = .118,
such that participants responded more slowly when initial
distances were greater (M = 1288ms, 1326ms, 1347ms for 2,
3, and 4 objects-apart distance). Although this main effect
was significant, post-hoc tests identified no significant
difference in RTs between distances (ps > .108). Unlike the
accuracy results, there was no significant interaction
between change type and distance. This implies that
different distances do not engage separate judgment
processes. Finally, there was no effect of orientation on
RTs, F(1, 28) = 0, MSE = 12.2, p = .989, ηp2 = .000.
In addition to examining overall RTs, a 4(change type:
no-change, size-change, distance-change, congruent change)
x 2(response accuracy: RTs for correct and incorrect
response) repeated-measures ANOVA was also conducted
to determine if there was evidence for differential processes
implicated for correct versus incorrect responses. Overall,
participants were faster on correct trials than on incorrect
trials (M = 1316 ms vs. 1495 ms), F(1, 28) = 26.32, MSE =
1860000, ηp2 = .485, consistent with the assumption that
participants were not just making a speed-accuracy tradeoff.
A more revealing result emerged from the significant
response accuracy x change type interaction, F(1.99, 55.7) =
9.297, MSE = 1230000, ηp2 = .249. Participants responded
faster for correct responses (than incorrect) in three of the
change types (477 ms faster in the no-change trials, 151 ms
faster in the distance-change trials, and 191 ms faster in the
size-change trials). However, participants responded faster
for incorrect responses than correct responses (102 ms
faster) in the congruent change condition. This reversal in
RT latencies in the congruent change trials indicates that
participants were not just taking longer to respond when
unsure of their response. Instead, these results are once
again consistent with the hypothesis that secondary
cognitive processes were being activated when conflicting
size information was present (e.g., off-sized perceptions).
In summary, Experiment 1 has shown that object size
influences judgments of lateral separation consistent with
the predictions from the theory of off-sized perceptions.

should remain unchanged when object size changes. This
lack of influence would support the view that visual angle is
the predominant cue for distance perception. If, as seen in
Experiment 1, changes in object size significantly influence
the perception (and reproduction) of distance, then dragging
accuracy should change linearly with changes in object size.
For example, if object size is increased between the source
and target images, then the reproduced distance should
increase linearly with the degree of change in object size.

Method
Participants
Twenty-three Carleton University undergraduate students
were awarded extra course credit for their participation. All
participants exhibited normal or corrected-to-normal vision.
Materials and Procedures
The experimental stimuli consisted of the sequentiallypresented images described in the Experiment 1. In the
source image, two squares of equal size (the objects) were
presented at an equal distance from the center of the screen.
In the target image, one square was anchored on the screen
in the same location as in the source image and grayed out,
representing the fact that it could not be dragged. The other
square was adjacent to the first, placed closer to the center
of the screen. The initial object size, initial distance, and
orientation were all the same as in Experiment 1. The
anchored object was counterbalanced such that on half the
trials the anchored object was to the left (in horizontallypresented trials) or above (in vertically-presented trials) the
centre of the screen, and on half the trials the anchored
object was to the right or below the centre of the screen.
Participants completed 180 trials. The trials were equally
divided among five change types: size unchanged, size
increased by 0.40° or .20° of visual angle, and size
decreased by 0.40° or 0.20° of visual angle. Each change
type included an equal number of trials from three initial
sizes, three distances, two orientations, and two anchors.

Results and Discussion
Two separate 5(size-change: large-size-increase, small-sizeincrease, no-change, small-size-decrease, large-sizedecrease) x 3(initial distance: 2, 3, or 4 object-multiples) x
2(orientation: horizontal, vertical) repeated-measures
ANOVAs were conducted for accuracy (i.e., deviation) and
response times (in ms). Deviation was measured as the
difference between the dragged distance and the original
distance presented in the source image. Similar to
Experiment 1, data were collapsed across objects’ initial
size. In the present analyses, 27 trials (0.65%) were
excluded for having either no recorded response or
deviations more than 3 SD.
Consistent with the results of Experiment 1, the main
effect of size-change type was significant, F(2.16, 47.6) =
50.95, MSE = 11.16, ηp2 = .698. Participants exhibited the
least dragging deviation when size did not change, followed
by small size-change trials, and large size-change trials (see
Figure 4). Within-subjects contrasts revealed that changes in
object size linearly influenced the accuracy of distance

Experiment 2: Drag-and-Drop Task
The objective of this experiment was to replicate and extend
the results of Experiment 1 by requiring participants to
respond with a mouse to reproduce the distance from the
source image. This can provide a quantitative measure of
the weighting of familiar size cues on judgments of
separation. In addition, this will provide additional evidence
to determine why participants were three times as likely to
incorrectly judge the separation “farther” than “closer” in
the no-change condition in Experiment 1.
The theory of off-sized perceptions predicts that changes
in object size should heavily weight inferential processes
resulting in altered distance judgments. If changes in object
size do not influence distance judgments, then dragging
accuracy (measured in deviation from expected location)

553

reproductions, F(1, 22) = 80.34, MSE = 23.866, ηp2 = .785.
These results support the interpretations from Experiment 1:
object size influences the accuracy of distance judgments
consistent with the theory of off-sized perceptions.

1963). While this implies that a change in the angular size
of the squares is detected (in a way analogous to an offsized perception), participants could be observing the
perceived size of the squares to be the same (i.e., size
constancy) and modifying their perception of the objects’
perceived depth which would affect the scale of the
perceived separation. In Experiment 2, deviation in
reproduced distance due to changing object size was only
17% to 42% of expected values, which reflects only partial
size constancy. This could be due to perceived change in
depth conflicting with the constant depth specified by the
monitor, resulting in a weighted value.
There are several reasons why a perspective-based size
constancy account may be questioned. First, mask durations
are long enough so that there is no perceived motion to
trigger a motion-based shift in perspective (Rensink, 2002).
Second, perspective necessarily requires the detection of a
change in angular size similar to that of an off-sized
perception. Third, no participants self-reported a perceived
change in depth on post-test questionnaires.
Finally, further works needs to be done to understand why
participants tend to underestimate relatively farther
distances and overestimate relatively closer distances. While
the results are consistent with visual attention returning to
rest during the pattern mask, there is no direct evidence of
this occurring in the using the present task.

Accuracy (in Degrees of Visual Angle)

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5
2 Objects Apart
3 Objects Apart
4 Objects Apart
-1.0
-.40°

-.20°

No Change

+.20°

+.40°

Size Change Type

Figure 3. The Interaction between Initial Distance and Size-Change Type
on Accuracy. Error bars represent Standard Error.

Additionally, the main effect of initial distance was also
significant, F(1.14, 25.0) = 35.67, MSE = 53.26, ηp2 = .619,
with farther initial distances resulting in relatively increased
amounts of underestimation. Within-subjects contrasts
revealed that different initial distances exhibited linear
changes in deviation, F(1, 22) = 38.08, MSE = 60.434, ηp2 =
.634. These changes in deviation may be due to participants’
attention returning to a resting state during the pattern mask
and feeding back into their prior perception of separation
from the source image. It may also be the case that,
however, because participants always dragged the mouse
from zero separation, that the underestimation was in part
due to a directional bias in the method of adjustment.
To more easily compare the results of the current
experiment with those of Experiment 1, participants’
accuracy was converted to categorical closer-, no-change,
and farther-responses by determining 99% confidence
intervals for trials where object-size remained unchanged
for each participant, and computing all values below this
interval as a closer-response and values above this interval
as a farther-response. A z-test for proportions identified that
similar proportions of response types were found between
Experiment 1 and the current study (z = .472, p = .637 for
no-change, z = 1.36, p = .174 for size decrease, and z = 3.60,
p = .001 for size increase).
Response times analyses exhibited no significant results
for distance after factoring out psychophysical dragging
times, F(1.28, 28.2) = 2.07, MSE = 422000, p = .138.

References
Cole, G.G., Kentridge, R.W., Gellatly, A.R.H., & Heywood, C.A. (2003)
Detectability of onsets versus offsets in the change detection paradigm.
Journal of Vision, 3, 22-31.
Epstein, W. (1963). Attitudes of Judgment and the SDIH. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 66 (1), 78-83.
Filpatrick, F. P., & Ittelson, W. H. (1953). The size-distance invariance
hypothesis. The Psychological Review, 60 (4), 223-231.
Gregory, R. L. (1963). Distortion of Visual Space as Inappropriate
Constnancy Scaling. Nature, 199, 678-688.
Gogel, W. C. (1965). Size cues and the adjacency principle. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 70 (3), 289-293.
Gogel, W. C. (1976). An indirect method of measuring perceived distance
from familiar size. Perception & Psychophysics, 20 (6), 419-429.
Gogel, W. C., & Da Silva, J. A. (1987). A two-process theory of the response
to size and distance. Perception & Psychophysics, 41(3), 220-38.
Gogel, W. C., & Harker, G. S. (1955). The effectiveness of size cues to
relative distance as a function of lateral visual separation. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 50 (5), 309-315.
Henderson, J. M., & Hollingworth, A. (1999). The role of Fixation Position
in Detecting Scene Changes Across Saccades. Psychological Science, 10
(5), 438-443.
Kaufman, L., & Rock, I. (1962). The moon illusion. Science, 136, 953-961.
Levin, C. A., & Haber, R. N. (1993). Visual angle as a determinant of
perceived inter-object distance. Perception & Psychophysics, 54 (2),
250-259.
Matsushima, E. H., de Oliveira, A. P., Ribeiro-Filho, N. P., & Da Silva, J.
A. (2005). Visual angle as determinant factor for relative distance
perception. Psicologica, 26, 97-104.
McCready, D. (1985). On size, distance and visual angle perception.
Perception & Psychophysics, 37, 323-334.
Rensink, R.A. (2002). Change Detection. Annual Review of Psychology,
53, 245-277.
Sterken, Y., Postma, A., De Haan, E. H. F., & Dingermans, A. (1999).
Egocentric and Exocentric Spatial Judgments of Visual Displacement.
The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 52 (4), 1045-55.
Straw AD (2008). Vision Egg: an open-source library for realtime visual
stimulus generation. Frontiers of Neuroinformatics, 2 (4).

General Discussion
Experiment 1 and 2 have shown that changes in object size
reduce the accuracy of judgments of lateral separation in a
manner consistent with the theory of off-sized perceptions
(Gogel & Da Silva, 1987). Another possibility, however, is
that participants were automatically scaling the depth in the
target image according to the laws of perspective (Gregory,

554

