UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Experimental investigation of effects of representations and contexts on comprehension
and generation of line graphs

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0949g34v

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Kanzaki, Nana
Miwa, Kazuhisa

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Experimental investigation of effects of representations and contexts on
comprehension and generation line graphs
Nana Kanzaki (kanzaki@cog.human.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Information Science, Nagoya University, Japan

Kazuhisa Miwa (miwa@is.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Information Science, Nagoya University, Japan
shapes of the two graphs were different; therefore, the representation effect identified and the effects of such perceptual
shapes were confounded. One important improvement of an
experimental approach in the current study is that we use a
set of graphs each of which is completely identical from the
other in its perceptual characteristics.

Abstract
In this study, we investigated the representation effect in comprehending graphs. Many previous studies have confirmed the
representation effect. In Experiment 1, we replicated the representation effect but using a set of graphs each of which is
completely identical from the other in its perceptual characteristics. Participants drew a specific aspect of information from
a line graph depending on the relation of x-axis and z-legend
of the graph. In Experiment 2, participants were given a context for problem solving. The result showed that participants
read a graph based on a given context; and the representation
effect in comprehension was limited. In Experiment 3, participants generated a line graph by themselves. The result showed
that they did not necessarily generate a consistent graph with
a given context, and in comprehension the requirement of a
context has very strong effects similarly as in Experiment 2.

Effects of contexts on graph comprehension

Keywords: representation; context; graph comprehension;
graph generation

Introduction
It is efficient to use diagrams for solving problems (Larkin
& Simon, 1987). There are many previous studies about
effects of graph representation and prior knowledge of the
graph readers on graph comprehensions.

Effects of representations of graphs on graph
comprehension
Graphs can be represented as various forms. Different representations of graphs generated from an identical data set elicit
different interpretations of the graphs. We call this effect of
representation on graph comprehension the representation effect.
The representation effect has been confirmed through various previous studies of graph comprehension. For example,
in studies of inferences from bar and line graphs, viewers are
more likely to describe x-y trends when viewing line graphs
than bar graphs (Zacks & Tversky, 1999; Shah, Mayer, &
Hegarty, 1999). By contrast, bar graphs emphasize discrete
comparisons (Zacks & Tversky, 1999; Shah et al., 1999).
Peebles and Cheng (2003) suggested that the comprehension time of certain information differs depending on the
graph structure. Shah and Carpenter (1995) confirmed that
x-y trends were comprehended easily, although z-y trends
were comprehended with difficulty, using three-variable line
graphs (e.g., Carpenter & Shah, 1998).
In the preceding studies, a set of two graphs was usually
used. Two graphs were generated from an identical data set.
The relation of x-axis and z-legend was reversed in one graph
from the relation in the other graph. However, perceptual

Graphs are used in various situations and often utilized to
solve specific problems. When graphs are used in a certain context, their comprehension might be affected not only
by their representations but also the given contexts and perspectives determined by the contexts. We examine the effect
of such contexts on the comprehension of information from
graphs.
Freedman and Shah (2002) proposed a model of
graph comprehension using a framework provided by the
Construction-Integration (CI) model of text and discourse
comprehension (Kintsch, 1988). In this model, the comprehension of graphs is influenced by the interaction between the
bottom-up processes of visual features and the top-down processes of such prior knowledge as domain knowledge, graphical literacy skills, and explanatory skills. Shah and Hoeffner
(2002) reported that the comprehension of graphs was difficult if the information in the graphs contradicted the viewers’
prior knowledge. Moreover, Freedman and Smith (1996) observed that viewers tended to overestimate the trends of data
when their prior knowledge of the domain was activated.
However, when viewers read graphs for a specific purpose,
they sometimes have perspectives given by a certain context
without expectations about the data tendency. In the previous
studies of text learning, the effects of the given perspectives
were confirmed (Pichert & Anderson, 1977; Schraw, Wade,
& Kardash, 1993). If this idea can be expanded to graph
comprehension, the representation effect might be affected by
such given contexts. The second objective of this study is to
investigate how the representation effect and given contexts
interact on graph comprehension.
It has been noted that constructing, generating, and selecting graphs are important for graph comprehension skills
(Friel, Curcio, & Bright, 2001). Graphs are often generated
by viewers themselves in certain contexts. If the representation effect is affected by given contexts, one crucial question
is: can undergraduates generate graphs whose representations
are appropriate for the given contexts? The third objective
of this study is to investigate whether or not undergraduates
generate graphs consistent with the representation effect in

2196

contexts in which the graphs are used.
Additionally, we also investigate the differences in comprehending graphs provided by others and generated by viewers
themselves. The comprehension of graphs is presumably affected not only by their representations but also the activities
that generated them when the graphs were generated by viewers themselves.
Cox (1997) confirmed qualitative differences in mistakes
made by problem solvers between solving problems with provided diagrams and while generating diagrams. Furthermore
in learning situations, more positive effects have been confirmed in learning while comparing their own generated diagrams and diagrams provided by others than in learning with
only provided diagrams (Meter, Aleksic, Schwartz, & Garner,
2006). Therefore it is possible that there is a different tendency in graph comprehension when reading provided graphs
and reading graphs generated by viewers themselves.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 investigated whether the degree of ease of comprehending information in line graphs changes depending on
their representations, even when the graphs generated from
an identical data set, in other words, to confirm the representation effect pointed out in previous studies. In Experiment
1, the representation effect was investigated from the viewpoint of the comprehension of the simple main effects of line
graphs.

Method
Participants Forty-two undergraduates participated in the
experiment. Half was assigned to the original graph condition
where they read an original graph described as follows, and
the other half was assigned to the interchanged graph condition where they read an interchanged graph in which the
independent variables of the x-axis and the z-legend of the
original graph were interchanged.
Materials Figure 1 shows example graphs used in Experiment 1. The graphs consist of two independent and one dependent variables. For the effect on a dependent variable,
there is an interaction of two independent variables. The
shapes of the original graph and its interchanged graph are
identical. Independent and dependent variables that do not
correlate in a usual context were selected as the labels of factors so that participant comprehension may not be influenced
by their prior knowledge.
Procedure The experiment was performed as part of the
assignments in an information literacy class. The participants read the provided graph and described the information
gleaned from it. Seven minutes were assigned for this task.
An example of the instructions is as follows:
“The following graph shows the amount of books
sold in a certain bookstore as a function of temperature
and humidity. Based on this graph, describe how temperature and humidity influenced book sales.”

ldo
s
sk
oo
bf
ot
nu
o
m
A

High
humidity
Low
humidity

Low

High

Temperature
(a) Original graph

dl
so
sk
oo
bf
ot
nu
o
m
A

High
temperature
Low
temperature

Low

High

Humidity
(b) Interchanged graph

Figure 1: Examples of graphs used in Experiment 1. Figure 1(a) is an example original graph, and Figure 1(b) is its
interchanged graph.

Classifying descriptions The participant descriptions were
classified by the simple main effects described. The classification criteria were as follows:
(1) Descriptions about the simple main effect of a factor
placed on the x-axis (x-axis simple main effect description);
an example description in this category for a graph where the
x-axis was temperature was as follows:
“When the humidity is high, sales increase as the
temperature rises. But when the humidity is low, sales
do not change even if the temperature changes.”
(2) Descriptions about the simple main effect of a factor
placed on the z-legend (z-legend simple main effect description); an example description in this category for a graph
where the x-axis was temperature was as follows:
“When the temperature is high, sales increase as the
humidity rises. But when the temperature is low, sales
do not change even if the humidity changes.”

Results and discussions
Figure 2 shows the proportions of participants whose descriptions were classified as the x-axis and z-legend simple main
effect descriptions in each condition. The participants who
described both x-axis and z-legend simple main effects were
double-counted. In both the original and interchanged graph
conditions, the proportion of the x-axis simple main effect descriptions was significantly larger than that of the z-legend
descriptions (in the original graph condition: p = .015; in the
interchanged graph condition: p = .000, one-tailed Fisher’s
exact tests).
These results indicate that the information comprehended
from graphs changed when the x-axis and z-legend factors in
the graphs were interchanged, confirming the representation
effect. Therefore, these results suggest that the degree of ease
of comprehending information depends on the graph representations even if the graphs are generated from the identical data set. In the following experiments, we investigate the
factors that affect the degree of ease of comprehending information regarding the x-axis simple main effect description
as information comprehended easily and the z-legend simple
main effect description as information comprehended with
difficulty.

2197

tsn 1.0
pai 0.8
cit
ra
p 0.6
fo
no 0.4
tir
op 0.2
or
P0.0

1.0
tsn
ap0.8
ic
it
ra
p0.6
fo
no0.4
it
ro
po0.2
r
P

x-axis simple main effect
z-legend simple main effect

Original

0.0

Interchanged

x-axis simple main effect
z-legend simple main effect

Consistent

Inconsistent

Control

Figure 2: Proportions of participants whose descriptions classified as x-axis or z-legend simple main effect descriptions in
Experiment 1.

Figure 3: Proportions of participants whose descriptions classified as x-axis or z-legend simple main effect descriptions in
Experiment 2.

Experiment 2

Tasks The graph was the x-axis import graph or the x-axis
export graph, both of which were identical to the graphs generated in Experiment 2. In each experiment condition, the
participants were given a context by instructions printed on
an experiment sheet. Half of the participants in each condition was given the import adjustment context, and the other
half was given the export adjustment context.
In the consistent condition, half of the participants was
given the instructions of the import adjustment context and
presented with the x-axis import graph. The other half was
given the instructions of the export adjustment context and
presented with the x-axis export graph. By contrast, in the
inconsistent condition, half of the participants was given the
instructions of the import adjustment context and presented
with the x-axis export graph. The other half was given the
instructions of the export adjustment context and presented
with the x-axis import graph.
In the control condition, the participants received no contexts, and half was presented with the x-axis import graph,
and the other half was presented with the x-axis export graph.
All participants described what influence the amount of imports and exports had on net income based on the presented
graph.

In Experiment 1, we investigated the representation effect
when a graph was provided without specific contexts. But
generally, graphs are read in a specific problem-solving context. A specific problem-solving context may have graph
readers to draw certain information from a graph. In Experiment 2, we investigated how the representation effect and
given contexts interact in graph comprehension.
In Experiment 2, the participants read graphs in specific
contexts. The shape of the graph used in Experiment 2 was
identical to the one used in Experiment 1. The labels of the
dependent variables were “amount of imports” (large/small)
and “amount of exports” (large/small), and the label of the
independent variable was “net income.”
One of two contexts was given to the participants: (1) import adjustment: a context was given in which net income
must be increased by adjusting the amount of imports, and
(2) export adjustment: a context was given in which net income must be increased by adjusting the amount of exports.
It is presumed that the import adjustment context facilitates comprehending that the amount of imports should be
increased (or kept) when the amount of exports is large (or
small). Therefore, this context facilitates the comprehension
of the simple main effect of the amount of imports. On the
other hand, it is presumed that the export adjustment context
facilitates the comprehension of the simple main effect of the
amount of exports.

Method
Participants Fifty-nine undergraduates participated in the
experiment for which three conditions were set up: (a) consistent condition: the participants read a graph in which the
information required to be drawn by a given context was comprehended easily, (b) inconsistent condition: the participants
read a graph in which the information required to be drawn
by a given context was comprehended with difficulty, and (c)
control condition: the participants read a graph without contexts. The participants were randomly arranged into one of
the three conditions. There were 19 participants in the consistent condition, 22 in the inconsistent condition, and 18 in
the control condition.

Coding description The participant descriptions were classified with the same criterion as in Experiment 1.

Results and discussions
Figure 3 shows the proportions of participants whose descriptions were classified as x-axis or z-legend simple main effect
descriptions in each condition. First, the same Fisher’s exact
test as in Experiment 1 was performed in the control condition. The proportion of x-axis simple main effect descriptions
was marginally larger than that of the z-legend descriptions
(p = .082). This result is consistent with the result in Experiment 1.
Second, to examine whether a given context influences the
degree of ease of comprehending information, paired comparisons were performed between the control condition and each
of the two experimental conditions. In the consistent condition, a two (conditions: consistent and control) x two (descriptions: x-axis and z-legend simple main effects) test of two

2198

factors’ interaction in proportions using the z-scores was performed. There was a marginal interaction (z = 1.62, p < .10).
Next, in the inconsistent condition, a two (conditions: inconsistent and control) x two (descriptions: x-axis and zlegend simple main effects) test of two factors’ interaction in
proportions using the z-scores was performed. There was a
significant interaction between the two factors (z = 2.26, p <
.05). Subsequently, Fisher’s exact tests (one-tailed) were performed in each description. The proportion of participants
describing the z-legend simple main effect in the inconsistent condition was significantly larger than in the control
condition (p = .039). But there was no difference between
the two groups in the x-axis simple main effect descriptions
(p = .200).
These results indicate that the information comprehended
with difficulty can be relatively easily inferred from graphs
when contexts that promote inference of the information are
given. This means that the representation effect confirmed in
Experiment 1 is limited when specific contexts require participants to read certain aspects of in formation.

Experiment 3
In Experiments 1 and 2, the effects of representation of graphs
and given contexts in graph comprehension were investigated. Furthermore, we performed Experiment 3 to investigate how the representation effect and such given contexts
interact in generating a graph.
In Experiment 3, the participants were given identical contexts as in Experiment 2 and generated graphs from provided
data. The results of Experiments 1 and 2 imply that the participants are expected to generate a consistent graph where
the representation effect and given contexts do not contradict. Additionally, we also replicate the findings confirmed in
Experiments 1 and 2 when interpreting graphs generated by
viewers themselves.

Method
Participants Eighty-five undergraduates participated in the
experiment and were randomly assigned to one of the three
conditions: (a) import adjustment, (b) export adjustment, and
(c) control. There were 28 participants in each of the import
adjustment and control conditions and 29 in the export adjustment condition.
Tasks There were two tasks in Experiment 2.
Task 1: graph generation task: the participants were given a
set of data to calculate the mean value of the net income in
each of four situations: large or small amount of imports
and large or small amount of exports. Based on their calculated results, the participants drew graphs on experiment
sheets shown in Figure 4. The participants selected the labels
of the x-axis and the z-legend by themselves. The instructions
for the import adjustment condition were as follows:
“The data show the relationship between the net income and the amount of imports and exports in a certain
company that cannot determine the amount of exports
because of a contract with their destination. The amount

)n
lioi 800
m
( 600
e
m
oc 400
int 200
e
N 0

Large
Small

Small

Large

Figure 4: Graph format used in Task 1 of Experiment 3.

of exports changes randomly. On the other hand, they
can adjust the amount of imports. You have to explain
how to adjust the amount of imports based on the change
of the amount of exports to improve net income.”
In the instructions for the export adjustment condition,
“destination” for exports was replaced with “supplier” for imports and “imports” and “exports” were interchanged.
In the control condition, the following instructions were
printed without contexts.
“The data show the relationship between the net income and the amount of imports and exports in a certain
company.”
Task 2: reading graph task: the participants read a graph generated by themselves in Task 1 and were provided with the
following instructions: “Based on this graph, describe the influence of the amount of imports and exports on net income.”
Classifying generated graphs The generated graphs in
which the amount of imports was placed on the x-axis and
the amount of exports was placed on the z-legend were classified as x-axis import graphs. On the other hand, the graphs
in which the amount of exports was placed on the x-axis and
the amount of imports was placed on the z-legend were classified as x-axis export graphs.
Classifying descriptions The participant descriptions were
classified by almost the same criterion as in Experiment 1.
For the x-axis import graphs, descriptions about the simple
main effect of the amount of imports were classified as x-axis
simple main effect descriptions, and the simple main effects of
the amount of exports were classified as z-legend simple main
effect descriptions. By contrast, for the x-axis export graphs,
descriptions about the simple main effect of the amount of
exports were classified as x-axis simple main effect descriptions, and the simple main effects of the amount of imports
were classified as z-legend simple main effect descriptions.

Results and discussions
Generated graphs Nine participants were excluded from
analysis because they generated incorrect graphs. Table 1
shows the numbers of graphs classified into each category
in each condition. First, to examine the distribution of the

2199

1.0
tsn
ap0.8
ic
it
ra
p0.6
fo
no0.4
it
ro
po0.2
r
P

Table 1: Numbers of participants who generated x-axis import or x-axis export graphs in Experiment 3.
Import adjustment
Export adjustment
Control

x-axis import
13
12
14

x-axis export
13
14
10

0.0

graphs generated without contexts, Fisher’s exact test (twotailed) was performed on the distribution of the numbers of
x-axis import graphs and x-axis export graphs in the control condition. There was no significant difference (p =
.541, n.s.).
Second, to examine whether the structure of the generated graphs was influenced by the contexts, a three (conditions: import adjustment, export adjustment, and control) x
two (generated graphs: x-axis import and x-axis export) chisquare test was performed on the distribution of the numbers
of generated graphs. There was no significant difference in
the distribution (χ2 (2) = 0.768, n.s.). This result suggests
that there was no difference in the structure of the generated graphs even when different contexts were given, implying that the participants did not necessarily generate graphs
whose structures were consistent with the given contexts.
Next, we performed the same analysis as in Experiment 2.
To do so, the participants were grouped depending on whether
they generated a consistent graph with the given context or
not.
Consistent graph generated group : the participants who generated a consistent graph with the given context: i.e., in the
import adjustment condition, participants who generated xaxis import graphs, and in the export adjustment condition,
participants who generated x-axis export graphs.
Inconsistent graph generated group : the participants who
generate an inconsistent graph with the given context: i.e., in
the import adjustment condition, participants who generated
x-axis export graphs, and in the export adjustment condition,
participants who generated x-axis import graphs. This means
that in these graphs, the contexts encourage the participants
to read information comprehended with difficulty, i.e., the zlegend simple main effect descriptions.
Comprehension of simple main effects Figure 5 shows
the proportions of participants whose descriptions were classified as x-axis or z-legend simple main effect descriptions in
each group. First, the same Fisher’s exact test as Experiment
1 was performed in the control condition. The proportion of
x-axis simple main effect descriptions was significantly larger
than that of the z-legend descriptions (p = .003). This result
was consistent with the result in Experiment 1.
Second, to examine whether a given context influences
the degree of the ease of comprehending information, the
same tests as in Experiment 2 were performed. The results
showed no interaction in the comparison of the consistent
and control groups (z = 0.52, n.s.), but a significant interaction in the comparison of the inconsistent and control groups

x-axis simple main effect
z-legend simple main effect

Consistent Graph Inconsistent
Generated
Graph Generated

Control

Figure 5: Proportions of participants whose descriptions classified as x-axis or z-legend simple main effect descriptions in
Experiment 3.

(z = 2.93, p < .01). Subsequently, Fisher’s exact tests (onetailed) were performed in each description. The proportion of
participants describing the z-legend simple main effect in the
inconsistent graph generated group was significantly larger
than in the control group (p = .008). But there was no difference in the x-axis simple main effect descriptions between the
two groups (p = .159).
These results indicate that information comprehended with
difficulty can be inferred from graphs generated just like from
graphs provided by others when contexts that promote inference of the information are given.

General Discussions
In this study, we investigated the representation effect using a
set of graphs each of which is completely identical from the
other in its perceptual characteristics. We confirmed that the
changes of representations actually affected the comprehension of certain information drawn from graphs.
This result consists with multiple previous studies (Shah
& Carpenter, 1995; Shah et al., 1999). Shah et al. (1999)
concluded that graph comprehensions are affected by visual
chunks. Their study suggested that the simple main effects
of the x-axis are comprehended easier than the effects of legends because viewers make visual chunks of each line automatically and the cognitive loads for the comprehension of
the simple main effects of the x-axis become lighter than for
the comprehension of the legends.
In the CI model of graph comprehension (Freedman &
Shah, 2002), graph comprehensions are made through the interaction between actual data and prior knowledge. Freedman
and Smith (1996) confirmed that viewer perceptions depend
on their prior theories activated beforehand. Prior knowledge
dealt with in such previous studies provided viewers with specific expectations for the interpretation of data.
On the other hand, the contexts investigated in this study
did not have viewers expect specific data tendencies, even
though they required a certain perspective to comprehend the
information. This result supports the idea that contexts for
problem solving also affect the comprehension of graphs, as
prior knowledge does.

2200

In the results of Experiment 2, the effects of given contexts were much larger than the representation effect. In a
previous study about the effects of given perspectives on text
comprehension (Schraw et al., 1993), it was confirmed that
the effects of the task-based importance (given perspective)
on text learning were larger than that of the text-based importance determined by the text contents. So, the results of
present study replicated this effect in graph comprehension.
In Experiment 3, the participants generated graphs in contexts that required the comprehension of certain information,
but their graphs did not necessarily represent forms promoting comprehension of the information. It has been noted that
constructing, generating, and selecting graphs are important
for graph comprehension skills (Friel et al., 2001); however,
half of them generated an inconsistent graph with the given
context.
On the other hand, when contexts were given, the information promoted to be drawn by the contexts was more actively
comprehended, even when inconsistent graphs were generated.
Since several previous studies focused on the effect of generating diagrams, we performed further analysis across Experiments 2 and 3. In the control condition of Experiments
2 and 3, a two (experiment: Experiments 2 and 3) x two (descriptions: x-axis and z-legend simple main effects) test of two
factors’ interaction in proportions using the z-scores was performed. There was no interaction (z = 0.62, n.s.). Therefore,
we confirmed that there was no difference between the comprehension from graphs generated by the viewers themselves
and from graphs provided by others.
Stull and Mayer (2007) indicated that learning while generating diagrams is not necessarily promoted, compared with
learning while viewing diagrams provided by others, because,
in the former case, extraneous cognitive loads emerge when
generating diagrams. Our study found no difference between
the two situations because the participants preliminarily generated graphs and then read them; no extraneous processing
emerged while comprehending the graphs.
On the other hand, Meter et al. (2006) reported more positive effects in learning with graphs generated from texts while
comparing the generated graphs with graphs provided from
others than learning only with the provided graphs. They believe that this effect is caused by constructing mental models
while generating diagrams and by elaborating such mental
models while comparing generated diagrams with ones provided by others. However, in our study, this effect was not
confirmed. The reason is because in our task generating diagrams did not require the elaboration of mental models of the
relationship between the variables.

References

Freedman, E. G., & Shah, P. (2002). Toward a model of
knowledge-based graph comprehension. In M. Hegarty,
B. Meyer, & N. H. Narayanan (Eds.), Diagramatic representation and inference (p. 18-30). Berlin: SpringerVerlag.
Freedman, E. G., & Smith, L. D. (1996). The role of data
and theory in covariation assessment: Implications for the
theory-ladenness of observation. Journal of Mind and Behavior, 17(4), 321-343.
Friel, S. N., Curcio, F. R., & Bright, G. W. (2001). Making
sense of graphs: Critical factors influencing comprehension and instructional implications. Journal for Research
in Mathematics Education, 32(2), 124-158.
Kintsch, W. (1988). The role of knowledge in discourse comprehension - a construction integration model. Psychological Review, 95(2), 163-182.
Larkin, J. H., & Simon, H. A. (1987). Why a diagram is
(sometimes) worth ten thousand words. Cognitive Science,
11, 65–99.
Meter, P. V., Aleksic, M., Schwartz, A., & Garner, J. (2006).
Learner-generated drawing as a strategy for learning from
content area text. Contemporary Educational Psychology,
31, 142–166.
Peebles, D., & Cheng, P. C. H. (2003). Modeling the effect
of task and graphical representation on response latency in
a graph reading task. Human Factors, 45, 28–45.
Pichert, J. W., & Anderson, R. C. (1977). Taking different
perspectives on a story. Journal of Educational Psychology, 69, 309–315.
Schraw, G., Wade, S. E., & Kardash, C. A. M. (1993). Interactive effects of text-based and task-based importance on
learning from text. Journal of Educational Psychology, 85,
652–661.
Shah, P., & Carpenter, P. A. (1995). Conceptual limitations
in comprehending line graphs. Journal of Experimental
Psychology-General, 124, 43–61.
Shah, P., & Hoeffner, J. (2002). Review of graph comprehension research: Implications for instruction. Educational
Psychology Review, 14, 47–69.
Shah, P., Mayer, R. E., & Hegarty, M. (1999). Graphs as
aids to knowledge construction: Signaling techniques for
guiding the process of graph comprehension. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 91, 690–702.
Stull, A. T., & Mayer, R. E. (2007). Learning by doing versus
learning by viewing: Three experimental comparisons of
learner-generated versus author-provided graphic organizers. Journal of Educational Psychology, 99(4), 808-820.
Zacks, J., & Tversky, B. (1999). Bar and lines: A study of
graphic communication. Memory & Cognition, 27, 1073–
1079.

Carpenter, P. A., & Shah, P. (1998). A model of the perceptual and conceptual processes in graph comprehension.
Journal of Experimental Psychology-Applied, 4, 75–100.
Cox, R. (1997). Representation construction: externalised
cognition and individual differences. Learning and Instruction, 9, 343–363.

2201

