UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Exploring Spaces to Make the Right Choice: The Cognitive Science of Search

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7gr41793

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Fu, Wai-Tat
Hills, Thomas

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Exploring Spaces to Make the Right Choice: The Cognitive Science of Search
Symposium Organizers:
Wai-Tat Fu (wfu@illinois.edu)

Thomas T. Hills (thomas.hills@unibas.ch)

Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Department of Psychology, University of Basel

Other Speakers:
Art B. Markman (markman@psy.utexas.edu)
Department of Psychology
University of Texas at Austin

Peter M. Todd (pmtodd@indiana.edu)
Department of Cognitive Sciences and Psychology
Indiana University

Keywords: Search, Exploration, Cognitive mechanisms

more complete understanding of emergent patterns of
individual and aggregate search behavior in large-scale
information spaces.

Introduction
One important question in cognitive science is how humans
search for useful resources in the environment. Indeed,
understanding the search process is often a critical step for
studying how an agent learns, adapts, and behaves in an
uncertain environment. More generally, search is required
whenever an agent faces a problem and there are
uncertainties involved during the process of solving the
problem. Given its ubiquity, the search process is found to
be central in many cognitive activities, ranging from vision,
memory retrieval, problem solving, decision making, web
navigation, to social selection. However, research on search
has a tendency to fragment into multiple areas. The goal of
this symposium is to lead an integrative discussion of the
over-arching principles underlying the search process, and
highlight how search plays a central role in cognition. To
this end, participants in this symposium will present
research results that show how humans search in different
spaces such as information spaces (Wai-Tat Fu), decision
spaces (Thomas Hills), motivational spaces (Art Markman),
and social and non-social spaces (Peter Todd).

Overview of Presentations
Wai-Tat Fu
Exploratory Information Foraging
Information search has become an important part of human
activities as people acquire new information about the world
and adapt to the changes. The theory of information
foraging analogizes information search with animal
foraging, and assumes that the search process can be
characterized as an optimization process that maximizes the
intake of information while minimizing the costs of
switching between information patches. Computational
cognitive models based on the theory of information
foraging provide good prediction on how people search for
specific information on WWW. Recent research, however,
shows that information foraging behavior is often
exploratory, in which the information goal evolves as new
information is discovered and integrated into their internal
representations of the environment (Fu, Kannampallil, &
Kang, 2009). This dynamic updating of internal
representations and search policies is found to be highly
adaptive to the characteristics of the environment. Modeling
the exploratory information foraging behavior can provide a

Thomas Hills & Ralph Hertwig
Individual Differences and Executive processing in
Information Search
Recent work on individual differences in information
search reveals that people differ in how they mediate local
versus global search policies. In other words, people differ
in how long they search in a local region of the information
space before making a global transition to another local
region of the space. This may be a consequence of a general
executive search process that mediates search across
domains, including spatial search and problem solving
(Hills, Todd, & Goldstone, 2008), memory search (Hills &
Pachur, in review), and external information search among
gambles (Hills & Hertwig, 2010).
We investigated individual differences in local-versusglobal search when people were searching for information
prior to making a decision between several options. In
these studies, individuals were invited to explore several
options that each produced different payoff distributions.
Following a period of unconstrained information search
(participants can explore options as they please for as long
as they like), participants make a decision about which
option they will choose for real, and then receive its
associated payoff. Across multiple studies, we consistently
find that some individuals search one option
comprehensively before transitioning to a second option;
other individuals frequently transition back and forth
between options, using a piecewise search. These different
search policies correspond to different final decisions,
which are consistent with different cognitive models for
how these individuals process the information when
comparing the two samples. Moreover, these search and
decision differences correlate with working memory span
and are consistent with a broader model of a domain general
cognitive control of search, which applies for both external
and internal patterns of information search.

Arthur B. Markman, Bradley C. Love & A. Ross
Otto
Modeling the motivational and environmental factors
affecting exploration
Intelligent agents need to resolve the tradeoff between
trying new options (exploration) and relying on actions that

2512

have succeeded in the past (exploitation) in a variety of
settings. Our research has examined both motivational
factors and elements of the choice environment that
influence the way this tradeoff is resolved.
The research on motivation examines the concept of a
regulatory fit (Maddox & Markman, 2010). Much research
suggests that people can have an overall orientation to
approach positive states or to avoid negative states. A fit
occurs when this overall orientation matches the rewards or
punishments that are prominent in the environment. An
approach orientation fits with an environment that has
rewards (or gains) and an avoidance orientation fits with an
environment that has punishments (or losses). Regulatory
fit increases people’s tendency to explore across a variety of
choice and problem solving settings.
On the environment side, exploration is influenced by the
stability of the environment. In stable environments, past
experience is a good guide to future outcomes. In contrast,
in unstable environments, past experience is not a strong
indicator of future outcomes. Consistent with this intuition,
people’s behavior is more exploratory in unstable
environments than in stable ones.
A key limitation to advancing research on exploration in
repeated choices is that most extant modeling frameworks
are purely descriptive. These models illuminate patterns of
repeated choices (Daw, O'Doherty, Dayan, Seymour, &
Dolan, 2006; Sutton & Barton, 1998; Yi, Steyvers, & Lee,
2009). To expand on this work, we developed an ideal
observer and actor model that provides an ideal assessment
of the current state of the world to determine the optimal
course of action. This model provides important insights
into people’s performance in repeated choice tasks.

Peter M. Todd, Ke Sang, Robert Goldstone
Exploring (and exploiting) different spaces:
How people search for social and non-social resources
Organisms must adaptively trade off between exploring
and exploiting their environment to obtain the resources
they need. This applies to whatever space the organism is
searching: whether the two- or three-dimensional physical
environment, looking for patches of food; the social
environment, looking for mates; or the mental environment,
looking for information in memory. Different spaces and
resource types call for different search strategies. How well
do humans accomplish the explore/exploit tradeoff in
different settings, and what strategies do they use? Here we
contrast search behavior in two simplified versions of
adaptive spaces: a resource-accumulation setting, where
individuals make a series of decisions whether to explore to
find a new resource or exploit a previously-encountered
one; and a mate search setting, where individuals explore a
sequence of potential mates and must decide whether they
are interested in each (the “exploiting” decision), without
being able to return to any previously seen. In the first, we
boil search down to a minimal setting in which the
explore/exploit tradeoff must be made. Individuals aim to
accrue as many points as possible over a 20-turn search, at
each turn either exploring by flipping over a card from a
deck and receiving the number of points (1-99) shown on it,

or exploiting a previously-found card by pointing to it on
the table and taking (again) the number of points it
has. With this accumulation of resources during both
exploration and exploitation and the ability to return to
previously-found items, this search resembles a noncompetitive
foraging
task
with
non-depleting
resources. The optimal strategy in this case is to use a
decreasing threshold, switching from exploration to
exploitation whenever the best card seen so far exceeds the
current threshold level. In the second task, individuals
encounter a sequence of potential mates and must decide in
each case whether they are interested in this person, without
being able to go back and re-evaluate or change their mind
about anyone previously seen. For this competitive social
search, without knowledge of the range of values available,
where reward only comes from the choices made and not
during exploration, and there is no returning to previous
options, the optimal strategy is to set a threshold based on a
brief period of initial exploratory search and use that to
guide the further exploitation choices. We show how close
people come to the optimal strategy in each case, and how
their strategies differ between the settings, in both cases
finding simple strategies that work very well.

References
Daw, N. D., O'Doherty, J. P., Dayan, P., Seymour, B., &
Dolan, R. J. (2006). Cortical substrates for exploratory
decisions in humans. Nature, 441, 876-879.
Fu, W.-T., Kannampallil, T., & Kang, R. (2009). A
Semantic Imitation Model of Social Tag Choices. In
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Social Computing, pp. 66-72, Vancouver, BC.
Fu,	   W.-­‐T.	   and	   P.	   Pirolli	   (2007).	   "SNIF-­‐ACT:	   A	   cognitive	  
model	   of	   user	   navigation	   on	   the	   World	   Wide	   Web."	  
Human-­‐Computer	  Interaction	  22:	  355-­‐412.	  
Hills, T., & Hertwig, R. (2010). Information search and
decisions from experience: Do our patterns of
sampling foreshadow our decisions? Psychological
Science, 21, 1787-1792.
Hills, T., & Pachur, T. (In review). Dynamic search and
working memory in social recall.
Hills, T., Todd, P.M., & Goldstone, R.L. (2008). Search
in external and internal spaces: evidence for
generalized
cognitive
search
processes.
Psychological Science, 19, 676-682.
Maddox, W. T., & Markman, A. B. (2010). The motivationcognition interface in learning and decision making.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 19(2), 106110.
Pirolli,	  P.	  (2007).	  Information	  foraging	  theory	  :	  adaptive	  
interaction	   with	   information.	   NY:	   New	   York,	   Oxford	  
University	  Press.
Sutton, R. S., & Barton, A. G. (1998). Reinforcement
learning: An introduction. Cambridge, MA: The MIT
Press.
Yi, S. K. M., Steyvers, M., & Lee, M. (2009). Modelling
human performance in restless bandits with particle
filters. The Journal of Problem Solving, 2(2), 81-101.

2513

