UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Exploring Visual Attention in Musicians: Temporal, Spatial and Capacity Considerations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8s57282c

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Lim, Ahnate
Sinnett, Scott

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Exploring Visual Attention in Musicians: Temporal, Spatial and Capacity
Considerations
Ahnate Lim (ahnate@hawaii.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Hawaii at Manoa
2530 Dole Street, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA

Scott Sinnett (ssinnett@hawaii.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Hawaii at Manoa
2530 Dole Street, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA
Abstract

Plasticity can also be seen in attentional and perceptual
mechanisms of populations not suffering any sensory loss,
with many recent findings indicating that modulation can
occur as a side effect of particular daily activities or
hobbies. For instance, a recent functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) study found video-game players
to have more prefrontal cortex activity during complex nongaming tasks when compared with non-players, a change
attributed to the demands on spatial attention while training
with video games (Granek, Gorbet, & Sergio, 2010).
Dovetailing with this finding, behavioral experiments
suggest enhanced performance, including greater
availability of attentional resources on various paradigms
such as multiple object-tracking, enumeration, perceptual
load, and the Attentional Network Test (ANT, see Posner &
Rothbart, 2007; Dye, Green, & Bavelier, 2009; for review
see I. Spence & Feng, 2010). One might ask then whether
regular practice of other more ancient and ubiquitous
activities, such as musical performance, would also result in
augmentation of specific information processing capabilities
in musicians?
Indeed, the topic of non-musical benefits from musical
exposure has seen considerable research (not in the least due
to public interest and popular notions such as the “Mozart
effect”), with results suggesting enhancements in areas such
as mathematics, language, spatial abilities, and memory.
However, many of these ‘listening’ experiments (e.g.,
Rauscher, Shaw, & Ky, 1993) involved performing tasks
after listening to excerpts of classical music, and have
generally provided inconclusive evidence, with follow-up
studies showing only limited effects, or effects accountable
to mood arousal or other indirect factors (Schellenberg,
2001; Steele et al., 1999; Thompson, Schellenberg, &
Husain, 2001).
Other studies take a different approach by instead
comparing expert musicians to non-musicians to ascertain
possible effects of long term musical training. A study by
Helmbold and colleagues (2005), for example, compared 70
musicians to non-musicians on psychometric assessments of
intelligence and general mental abilities, and found that
musicians performed better on two tasks: flexibility of
closure (detecting single elements in complex objects), and
perceptual speed (finding letters amongst digits). The
authors speculated that the better performance on perceptual
speed tasks could be explained by the demands of musical

Considerable evidence converges on how attention can be
modulated through training (e.g., video game playing). While
previous research suggests that musical training can modulate
early perceptual and attentional processes, no single
investigation to date has been conducted on the same
participants to measure specific mechanisms of attention
(temporal, spatial, and capacity) in musicians. In Experiment
1 we used a temporal order judgment (TOJ) task with both
exogenous and endogenous cues in order to measure temporal
and spatial attention. In Experiment 2, a cued-target detection
task was presented with a concurrent high load task to assess
capacity processing in musicians. Of the three measures,
musicians performed better than controls on two,
demonstrating a lower threshold for judging temporal order in
addition to increased capabilities to process distracting
information despite attentional resources being largely
depleted. Together, these results provide novel findings on
multiple aspects of attention in musicians.
Keywords: attention, musician, plasticity, temporal order
judgment, spatial, capacity, exogenous, endogenous

Introduction
Attention is a fundamental cognitive mechanism that
enables humans to select the most crucial information from
a constant array of sensory input, thereby allowing for
efficient and effective functioning. Interestingly, exposure
to particular experiences has been shown to modulate
various aspects of human attention, as seen from evidence at
both the behavioral and neurological levels.
Recent neurological evidence suggests that brain
functioning involves distributive processing and plastic
characteristics (Mercado, 2008; Mesulam, 1990). For
instance, this “plasticity” of the brain can be seen in
common interactions across sensory modalities (Shimojo &
Shams, 2001), when adapting to particular conditions such
as age, disease, stress, and even addiction (Kolb, Gibb, &
Robinson, 2003), or even in congenitally blind adults, as a
study by Röder et al. (1999) revealed greater peripheral
spatial localization abilities and more finely tuned early
attentional mechanisms when compared to blindfolded
controls. These and other studies suggest not only that the
brain can partially compensate for losses in one modality
through enhancements in another (for an example of tactile
compensation, see Borsook et al., 1998), but also that
attentional mechanisms can be correspondingly modulated.

580

training in requiring quick recognition of musical symbols
or structures. Another study on temporal processing and
detection found musicians to be better at discriminating time
change to rhythmic patterns, but only when these were
simple patterns (Jones & Yee, 1997). Furthermore, recent
research using a line bisection task also showed faster
reaction times and fewer errors in musicians when
compared to controls (Patston, Hogg, & Tippett, 2007).
Recent research has extended findings of better
performance at temporal order judgment (TOJ) tasks to both
video game players (West, Stevens, Pun, & Pratt, 2008) as
well as musical-conductors (Hodges, Hairston, & Burdette,
2005). Hodges et al. (2005) examined the effects of musical
expertise by comparing conductors to age and education
matched controls. Overall, conductors were found to have
better pitch discrimination skills as well as shorter auditory
temporal thresholds than controls. Specifically, in an
auditory TOJ task, conductors required less time between
two sounds to correctly discriminate which one had
occurred first. Interestingly however, no such differences in
performance were seen when comparing musicians and
controls on an analogous visual TOJ task.
Collectively, these and other findings suggest that
enhanced aspects of temporal processing in expert
musicians are at the very least correlated with their
extensive training. In the present investigation we extend
these findings by measuring three aspects of attention;
spatial, temporal, and overall capacity. While previous
findings would suggest enhancements in temporal
perception (see Hodges, et al., 2005), it is unknown how
general musical training (non-music-conductors) might
affect overall attentional resources and whether spatial
attention would likewise be modulated (i.e., analogous to
findings observed with expert video game players in the
auditory modality; see Donohue, Woldorff, & Mitroff,
2010). Lastly, it is worth noting that both experiments in
this study were conducted in the visual modality, and given
that music is largely an auditory and temporal task, any
potential enhancement in other sensory modalities could
therefore suggest concomitant crossmodal enhancements.

(Shore, Spence, & Klein, 2001; C. Spence, Shore, & Klein,
2001; Zampini, Shore, & Spence, 2005). It is premised on
the idea that temporal perception is influenced by attention,
and thus attended stimuli are perceived prior to unattended
stimuli. Alerting participants to a particular side by using an
exogenous (peripheral) cue can create this prior entry effect.
Exogenous orienting can occur from any stimulus that
causes a reflexive, automatic, or bottom-up orienting of
attention (e.g., bright flashes, loud sounds, etc.) that
immediately captures attention. By using such a cue in the
TOJ task prior to the onset of the first stimuli, participants’
attention will be directed to the cued side. If both left and
right stimuli are then presented simultaneously, the effect
will be that the cued side is perceived as having occurred
first. Thus, when the PSS is calculated for the task, it is
observed as being shifted towards the cued side (Shore, et
al., 2001). An analogous effect would occur for endogenous
(central arrow) cues, however in this case the observer has
more volitional control over orienting effects (for
comparison see Schmidt, 2000). Specifically, we are
interested in seeing whether patterns of perceptual effects
will be different in musicians due to the possible modulation
of spatial processing. For instance, if musical training does
lead to enhanced perception, then the JND should be smaller
for musicians when compared with non-musicians.
Additionally, PSS values might change, potentially
reflecting a lesser likelihood to be distracted by exogenous
or endogenous cues (i.e., PSS values would be smaller for
musicians).

Methods
Participants Eight trained musicians (mean age = 21±2, 4
females) were recruited from various music performance
classes at the University of Hawaii at Manoa. They had 11
years of musical training and practiced 9 hours per week on
average. A variety of focus instruments were reported,
including woodwind, stringed, piano, and voice. Care was
taken to ensure that none of the participants reported
extensive experience with video games. An additional 10
control participants were recruited (mean age = 21±5, 6
females), all of which had no significant musical training or
video game experience.
Materials Visual stimuli were presented on a 20” (60Hz)
Intel Core2Duo iMac using DMDX software (Forster &
Forster, 2003). Observers sat approximately 60 cm from the
display. Vertical and horizontal lines subtended 0.9° within
the placeholder squares (1.4° wide) 4° from fixation (see
Figure 1). Exogenous cues were created by thickening
placeholder squares to 4 pixels, whereas endogenous cues
consisted of a central arrow (both lasting 45 ms).
Procedure Throughout each trial a fixation cross flanked by
two placeholders would remain on the display (see Figure 1
for durations). Both left and right placeholders were equally
likely to be cued, after which a target (horizontal or vertical
line) would appear (equiprobably) in one of the place
holders (left or right, also equiprobably) for a specified
stimulus onset asynchrony (SOA) interval, followed by the

Experiment 1
In Exp. 1 we used a visual temporal order judgment (TOJ)
task with exogenous and endogenous cues to measure both
temporal processing and spatial attention. The TOJ task
allows the calculation of the just noticeable difference
(JND) and the point of subjective simultaneity (PSS). The
JND refers to the smallest amount of time needed to
separate both stimuli for an observer to be able to correctly
identify the order of presentation (i.e., a measure of
temporal perception). The PSS reflects the degree to which
a spatial cue (peripheral or central) directs attention, thereby
requiring the uncued side to be presented in advance of the
cued side for simultaneity to be perceived (i.e., a measure of
spatial attention).
Using cues in a TOJ task also creates a ‘prior entry’
effect, which has been the subject of many experiments

581

Exogenous cue = 45ms

+

Cue-target interval = 45ms

+

SOA

+

Until response

+

1.6 cm

10.8 cm

0.0

0.5

1.0

Musicians Endogenous

-300

0

300 -300

Controls Exogenous

0

300

Controls Endogenous

1.0

Prestimulus interval = 1000ms

+

Musicians Exogenous

Vertical item cued
Horizontal item cued

0.5

Exogenous condition

Bonferroni corrected post hoc tests revealed larger PSS
scores for exogenous than endogenous cues overall (63.0 ms
vs. 13.9 ms, p < .001; see Figure 3).

Proportion responding horizontal first

other stimuli in the other place holder. Participants then
made an unspeeded forced choice response on the keyboard
to indicate either “horizontal” or “vertical” first responses.
An adaptation of Stelmach and Herdman’s (1991) stepfunction procedure was used to determine the SOAs for
each trial. Each trial began with an SOA of 267 ms.
Depending on whether a correct or incorrect response was
made, the SOA would respectively increase or decrease (by
16.7 ms) on the next trial. The experiment terminated after a
total of 14 correct/incorrect reversals occurred.

Endogenous condition
0.0

Prestimulus interval = 1000ms

+

-300

Endogenous cue = 45ms

0

Cue-target interval = 45ms

+

SOA

+
+

300 -300

0

300

Horizontal first SOA (ms)

Figure 2: Proportion of “horizontal first” responses as a
function of stimulus onset asynchrony (SOA). Note the
larger gap between horizontal and vertical curves for
exogenous trials compared to endogenous (reflecting larger
effects on PSSs), and also the steeper slopes for musicians
(reflecting lower JNDs).

Until response

Figure 1: Time-course representation of Experiment 1.

100

The exogenous and endogenous conditions were
presented separately and counterbalanced. Onscreen
instructions and repeatable practice trials with feedback
were also given to each participant before each experimental
block.

80

Musicians
Controls

PSS (ms)

0

20

40

For the analyses, data from each participant were separated
into horizontally or vertically cued trials (see Figure 2). A
logistic model was then fitted to each cue type for each
participant. Two measures were then calculated for each
individual. First, the PSS was interpolated from the model
for SOAs corresponding to the 50% proportion for
horizontal first responses. Secondly, the JND was calculated
by first interpolating the SOAs corresponding to .75 and .25
proportions, and then halving the distance between these
SOAs. One musician was excluded from the analysis due to
large error rates, and one control participant was excluded
due to non-convergence of the fit algorithm.
Separate mixed ANOVAs were performed on PSS and
JND scores. Using within subject factors (2) of PSS for
exogenous and endogenous cues revealed a highly
significant main effect of cue type (F (1,14) = 21.0, p <
.001), but no significant effects for participant type or
interaction (both F (1,14) < 1, ns), indicating no substantial
differences in PSS patterns across musicians and controls.

60

Results

PSS Exo

PSS Endo

JND Exo

JND Endo

Figure 3: Mean PSS and JND scores (and SE) for musicians
and controls
The same ANOVA conducted for JND scores revealed
a significant main effect of participant type (F (1,14) = 14.9,
p < .01), but no effects of cue type (F (1,14) < 1, ns) or
interaction (F (1,14) = 1.03, p > .1), suggesting different
JND patterns between musicians and controls, but similar
patterns of scores across exogenous and endogenous

582

conditions. Planned t-tests comparing musicians and
controls confirmed lower JND scores for both exogenous
(36 vs. 56 ms; t(11.7) = 1.8, p < .05) and endogenous cues
(36 vs. 78 ms; t(9.5) = 3.0, p < .01).

to the occurrence of either a numerical digit within the
stream or an orthogonally cued spatial target. Responses
were made using one of three keys following detection of
either 1) a number, 2) an upward spatial target, or 3) a
downward spatial target. Numbers occurred within the
stream on 67% of the trials (majority of the time), whereas
on the rest of the trials no numbers occurred, and instead
visual targets occurred in one of four corners concurrent to
display of the letter stream.

Discussion
The main finding of Experiment 1 was the improved
temporal processing of musicians, evidenced by smaller
JND scores which reflect that less time was needed to
separate the stimuli for musicians to still be accurate,
regardless of whether it was an exogenous or endogenous
cue. Additionally, the PSS scores were not different across
groups, suggesting that spatial attention was similarly
captured, although exogenous PSS scores for both groups
were significantly larger than their endogenous scores,
demonstrating the automatic and stronger effects of
exogenous cues. In Experiment 2 we expand on these
findings by exploring the attentional capacity of musicians.

30 cm

21 cm

Legend

Experiment 2

P

= Visual target location
= Visual cue location

K

Considering the larger capture by exogenous cues than
endogenous cues for all participants as illustrated in
Experiment 1, automatic capture of attention may be
expected due to the simplicity of the required task. Although
previous experiments have also shown such effects, recent
findings suggest that the effects of exogenous orienting may
be lessened, or eliminated, under certain circumstances.
Using a paradigm involving both a demanding central
task and a cued peripheral target detection task, Santangelo
and colleagues have shown that exogenous orienting does
not capture attention in a mandatory fashion (see
Santangelo, Olivetti Belardinelli, & Spence, 2007;
Santangelo & Spence, 2007, 2008). That is, when one’s
attention is engaged in performing a perceptually or
attentionally demanding task, the automatic effects of
exogenous cues have been shown to disappear. We adapted
this task and required participants to respond to a
demanding central digit detection task, while at the same
time respond to orthogonally cued peripheral targets (see
Santangelo, et al., 2007; Santangelo & Spence, 2007). If
musicians do have increased attentional capacity, then they
may continue to show cuing effects when compared with
controls, despite the difficult central task.

R
M

F
D
K

T
P
K

B
K
R

9

...

Digit detection
(67% of trials)

...

Target discrimination
(33% of trials)

Figure 4: Schematic representation of Experiment 2.
See text for details.
Each trial consisted of a fixation cross (1000 ms)
followed by the RSVP stream of 11 items. On digit
detection trials, the numbers randomly occurred in either the
third, sixth, or ninth position in the stream. A spatial cue
was also presented on each trial (for 100 ms, identical to
item duration), occurring in the third or sixth position on
either the right or left side of the display equiprobably.
When spatial targets occurred, they appeared two positions
after the cue (5th or 8th position). Half of the spatial targets
were cued and the other half non-cued. Each task consisted
of 196 randomized trials counterbalanced with the digit,
target, cue combinations, and trial repetitions. Participants
were instructed to respond as soon as targets were detected.

Methods
Participants The same eight musicians and ten controls
from Experiment 1 also took part in Experiment 2.
Materials A rapid serial visual presentation (RSVP) stream
was constructed from randomly chosen non-repeated letters
(11 selected from set of 17: B, C, D, E, F, J, K, L, M, N, P,
R, S, T, Y, X, Z) each presented for 100 ms with 16.7 ms of
blank screen separating each letter. For digit detection trials,
numbers were selected from a set of six: 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9.
Visual targets were black circles (subtending 2°) and cues
were black rectangles (2.5° x 1.7°; see Figure 4).
Procedure Participants were required to monitor the RSVP
stream presented in the center of the display, and to respond

Results
One control participant’s data was excluded from the
analyses due to a high error rate exceeding 15%, all other
participants’ error rates were below 10%.
A mixed ANOVA on the RT scores with task type (2)
of digit detection and target discrimination revealed that
responses were faster for digit detection (F (1,15) = 7.7, p =
.01), indicating that participants correctly prioritized digit
detection over target discrimination. There were no main
effects of participant type (F (1,15) = 2.4, p = .1) or
interaction (F (1,15) < 1, ns). A separate ANOVA for cue

583

al., 2005). Secondly, attentional capacity in musicians
appeared to be larger than that of controls, to the extent that
there was a significant difference between the processing of
cued and non-cued items despite attentional resources being
arguably exhausted by a concurrent task (i.e., as evidenced
by no significant cuing effect in the control group).
Lastly, it should be noted that similar point of
subjective simultaneity scores between musicians and
controls in Exp. 1 suggests that musical experience did not
significantly modulate spatial attention. While these results
may differ from other expert populations (e.g., video game
players), this may be due to the fact that musical training
places a heavier emphasis on temporal processing for
synchronicity of performance, rather than on the processing
of rapidly presented peripheral events (i.e., as seen in video
game play).
These behavioral findings are also supplemented by
considerable evidence converging on greater neuroplasticity
in musicians resulting in both functional and anatomical
differences. These include for instance, increases of grey
and white matter volume in specific sites of the left
cerebellum, more pronounced cortical reorganizations for
musically related motor activity, as well as larger evoked
potentials for instrumental tones when compared to controls
(Gaser & Schlaug, 2003; Münte, Altenmüller, & Jäncke,
2002). Whether or not musically related brain plasticity may
be related to attentional mechanisms is speculative, but may
suggest that structural changes due to repeated exposure and
training with particular stimuli can indeed influence other
areas of performance.
Another important point to note is the exclusive use of
visual stimuli. Incidentally, our results may be seen to
support a supramodal account of attention where a single
attentional reservoir is used by multiple sensory modalities
(e.g., Farah, Wong, Monheit, & Morrow, 1989; for example
of audio enhancements with VGPs see Donohue, et al.,
2010). This account would suggest that training in an
environment dealing largely with auditory stimuli (such as
music) may actually lead to accompanying enhancements in
visual attention (although see Hodges, et al., 2005).
As a preliminary study, this research raises several
questions relevant to future investigations. What are the
specific training parameters that lead to attentional plasticity
and can these parameters be used in music education or to
enhance training in other domains? It should be noted that
musical training might not be the sole reason for enhanced
performance. It is possible that individuals with an already
superior attentional system are drawn to and predisposed to
expertise in activities such as music. The objective of future
studies should be to incorporate training conditions to more
directly ascertain the cognitive effects of musical training.

600

types (2) also revealed overall differences in cued and noncued trials (F (1,15) = .57, p = .03), but with no effects for
participant type (F (1,15) = 1.7, p > .1) or interaction (F
(1,15) = 1.5, p > .1). Planned comparisons between cued
trials and non-cued trials revealed that attentional capture
from cues occurred only for musicians (495 vs. 510 ms; t(7)
= 2.1, p < .05, Cohen's d = 0.80), and not for controls (551
vs. 556 ms; t(8) = 1.1, p > .1; see Figure 5). Furthermore,
independent t-tests revealed that musicians responded faster
than controls for both digit detection (473 vs. 519 ms; t(14)
= 1.6, p = .06, Cohen's d = 0.78) and cued target
discrimination trials (495 vs. 551 ms; t(13) = 1.4, p = .08,
Cohen's d = 0.68), with these differences approaching
significance.

500
400

450

RT (ms)

550

Musicians
Controls

Digit

Spatial cued

Spatial non-cued

Figure 5: Mean scores (and SE) for the three types of tasks
in Experiment 2.

Discussion
Results from control participants thus replicates Santangelo
and colleagues’ findings that under high load conditions,
exogenous orienting has been shown to disappear
(Santangelo & Spence, 2008). Crucial to this study,
however, exogenous cuing effects remained only for
musicians, suggesting a possible increase in attentional
resources that may spill over to process cues even under
conditions of high load (Lavie 1995; for example with
VGPs see Green & Bavelier, 2003).

General Discussion
This preliminary study has both theoretical and practical
relevance. To begin with, this is the first study of its kind
exploring temporal and spatial mechanisms of visual
attention and perception, as well as attentional capacity, in
the same group of trained musicians. There are two main
findings. First, the lower just noticeable differences scores
for musicians in Exp. 1 suggests that temporal
discrimination in musicians was significantly better than
controls, regardless of cue type. Combined with the faster
reaction times observed in Exp. 2, these findings are in line
with other research showing increased perceptual speed and
detection in trained musicians (Helmbold, et al., 2005; and
also extending results beyond conductors used in Hodges, et

References
Borsook, D., Becerra, L., Fishman, S., Edwards, A.,
Jennings, C., Stojanovic, M., et al. (1998). Acute
plasticity in the human somatosensory cortex following
amputation. Neuroreport, 9(6), 1013.

584

Donohue, S., Woldorff, M., & Mitroff, S. (2010). Video
game players show more precise multisensory temporal
processing abilities. Attention, Perception, &
Psychophysics, 72(4), 1120.
Dye, M. W., Green, C. S., & Bavelier, D. (2009). Increasing
Speed of Processing With Action Video Games. Curr
Dir Psychol Sci, 18(6), 321-326.
Farah, M., Wong, A., Monheit, M., & Morrow, L. (1989).
Parietal lobe mechanisms of spatial attention: modalityspecific or supramodal? Neuropsychologia, 27(4), 461470.
Forster, K., & Forster, J. (2003). DMDX: A Windows
display program with millisecond accuracy. Behavior
Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 35(1),
116.
Gaser, C., & Schlaug, G. (2003). Brain structures differ
between musicians and non-musicians. Journal of
Neuroscience, 23(27), 9240.
Granek, J., Gorbet, D., & Sergio, L. (2010). Extensive
video-game experience alters cortical networks for
complex visuomotor transformations. Cortex, 46(9).
Green, C. S., & Bavelier, D. (2003). Action video game
modifies visual selective attention. Nature, 423(6939),
534-537.
Helmbold, N., Rammsayer, T., & Altenmüller, E. (2005).
Differences in primary mental abilities between
musicians and nonmusicians. Journal of Individual
Differences, 26(2), 74-85.
Hodges, D. A., Hairston, W. D., & Burdette, J. H. (2005).
Aspects of multisensory perception: the integration of
visual and auditory information in musical experiences.
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1060,
175-185.
Jones, M., & Yee, W. (1997). Sensitivity to time change:
The role of context and skill. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance,
23(3), 693.
Kolb, B., Gibb, R., & Robinson, T. (2003). Brain plasticity
and behavior. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 12(1), 1.
Lavie, N. (1995). Perceptual load as a necessary condition
for selective attention. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 21(3), 451-468.
Mercado, E. (2008). Neural and cognitive plasticity: From
maps to minds. Psychological Bulletin, 134(1), 109.
Mesulam, M. (1990). Large-scale neurocognitive networks
and distributed processing for attention, language, and
memory. Annals of neurology, 28(5), 597-613.
Münte, T., Altenmüller, E., & Jäncke, L. (2002). The
musician's brain as a model of neuroplasticity. Nature
Reviews Neuroscience, 3(6), 473-478.
Patston, L., Hogg, S., & Tippett, L. (2007). Attention in
musicians is more bilateral than in non-musicians.
Laterality, 12(3), 262.

Posner, M., & Rothbart, M. (2007). Research on attention
networks as a model for the integration of
psychological science. Psychology, 58(1), 1.
Rauscher, F., Shaw, G., & Ky, K. (1993). Music and spatial
task performance. Nature, 365(6447), 611.
Röder, B., Teder-Sälejärvi, W., Sterr, A., Rösler, F.,
Hillyard, S., & Neville, H. (1999). Improved auditory
spatial tuning in blind humans. Nature, 400(6740), 162166.
Santangelo, V., Olivetti Belardinelli, M., & Spence, C.
(2007). The suppression of reflexive visual and auditory
orienting when attention is otherwise engaged. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 33(1), 137-148.
Santangelo, V., & Spence, C. (2007). Multisensory cues
capture spatial attention regardless of perceptual load.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 33(6), 1311-1321.
Santangelo, V., & Spence, C. (2008). Is the exogenous
orienting of spatial attention truly automatic? Evidence
from unimodal and multisensory studies. Consciousness
and cognition, 17(3), 989-1015.
Schellenberg, E. (2001). Music and nonmusical abilities.
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 930(1),
355-371.
Schmidt, W. (2000). Endogenous Attention and Illusory
Line Motion Reexamined. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance,
26(3), 980-996.
Shimojo, S., & Shams, L. (2001). Sensory modalities are
not separate modalities: plasticity and interactions.
Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 11(4), 505-509.
Shore, D. I., Spence, C., & Klein, R. M. (2001). Visual prior
entry. Psychological Science, 12(3), 205-212.
Spence, C., Shore, D. I., & Klein, R. M. (2001).
Multisensory prior entry. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 130(4), 799-832.
Spence, I., & Feng, J. (2010). Video games and spatial
cognition. Review of General Psychology, 14(2), 92.
Steele, K., Dalla Bella, S., Peretz, I., Dunlop, T., Dawe, L.,
Humphrey, G., et al. (1999). Prelude or requiem for the
Mozart effect? Nature, 400(6747), 827.
Stelmach, L. B., & Herdman, C. M. (1991). Directed
attention and perception of temporal order. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 17(2), 539-550.
Thompson, W., Schellenberg, E., & Husain, G. (2001).
Arousal, mood, and the Mozart effect. Psychological
Science, 12(3), 248.
West, G. L., Stevens, S. A., Pun, C., & Pratt, J. (2008).
Visuospatial experience modulates attentional capture:
evidence from action video game players. Journal of
Vision, 8(16), 13 11-19.
Zampini, M., Shore, D., & Spence, C. (2005). Audiovisual
prior entry. Neuroscience letters, 381(3), 217-222.

585

