UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Explaining drives the discovery of real and illusory patterns

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2m52h9pj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Williams, Joseph Jay
Lombrozo, Tania
Rehder, Bob

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Explaining drives the discovery of real and illusory patterns
Joseph Jay Williams (joseph_williams@berkeley.edu)
Tania Lombrozo (lombrozo@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley
Bob Rehder (bob.rehder@nyu.edu)
Department of Psychology, New York University
Children’s and adults’ attempts to explain the world around
them plays a key role in promoting learning and understanding,
but little is known about how and why explaining has this
effect. An experiment investigated explaining in the social
context of learning to predict and explain individuals’ behavior,
examining if explaining observations exerts a selective
constraint to seek patterns or regularities underlying the
observations, regardless of whether such patterns are harmful or
helpful for learning. When there were reliable patterns– such as
personality types that predict charitable behavior– explaining
promoted learning. But when these patterns were misleading,
explaining produced an impairment whereby participants
exhibited less accurate learning and prediction of individuals’
behavior. This novel approach of contrasting explanation’s
positive and negative effects suggests that explanation’s
benefits are not merely due to increased motivation, attention or
time, and that explaining may undermine learning in domains
where regularities are absent, spurious, or unreliable.
Keywords:
explanation,
self-explanation,
learning,
understanding, generalization, pattern detection, explanation
impairment effect

Explanation appears to possess a privileged relationship
with learning and understanding. To know a fact without
knowing why it is true can be deeply unsatisfying, not only
to career learners like scientists but also to everyday learners
and young children. Engaging in explanation goes beyond
rote knowledge to genuine understanding, bringing with it
the ability to generalize what is learned to novel situations.
Research in education and cognitive development
confirms and sheds light on the close connection between
explanation and learning. Educational studies on topics
ranging from math and physics to biology and computer
programming have found that generating explanations has a
powerful impact on learning and generalization (Chi et al,
1994; Renkl, 1997; for a review see Fonseca & Chi, 2010).
Even young children exhibit an insatiable desire to request
and learn from explanations (Chouinard, 2008; Legare et al,
2009), with prompts to explain accelerating major
conceptual transitions in number conservation and theory of
mind (Amsterlaw & Wellman, 2006; Siegler, 2002).
The importance of explanation has been recognized in
other disciplines as well. In cognitive psychology,
explanations are believed to play a central role in the
representation of conceptual knowledge, especially
knowledge about causal relationships (Carey, 1985; Murphy
& Medin, 1985). Research in artificial intelligence on how
machines learn has been inspired by a focus on explanation
as a process for learning from individual cases (DeJong,

1986; Mitchell et al, 2006). Finally, philosophers of science
have attempted to characterize the nature of scientific
explanation (Woodward, 2009).
Despite the broad relevance of explanation, little is known
about why the process of explaining, in particular, drives
effective learning. Previous work has identified
explanation’s role in revising beliefs and providing
metacognitive insight into what is not known (Chi, 2000).
Other investigators have proposed that explaining increases
motivation and attention (e.g., Siegler, 2002). However,
little experimental work has directly investigated and
compared alternative theories of the content and
consequences of explanation. This leaves important
questions unanswered: What is the nature of the cognitive
processing invoked by explaining? And why are the relative
benefits of explanation greatest in acquiring knowledge that
supports generalization?
This paper investigates the hypothesis that the process of
explaining drives the explainer to seek general patterns or
regularities that can account for or produce whatever
observation is the target of explanation. This hypothesis is
the central tenet of the subsumptive constraints account of
explanation (Williams & Lombrozo, 2010a), which is
motivated by work in philosophy on pattern subsumption
and unification theories of scientific explanation (Kitcher,
1981). Subsumption and unification theories suggest the
defining property of an explanation is that it shows how the
observation being explained is an instance of (subsumed by)
a general pattern or regularity. For example, in answering
“Why did that apple fall?” with “Because gravity
accelerated it towards the Earth,” a hypothetical Newton
shows how a particular event is subsumed under a general
pattern, in this case a law of gravitation. Furthermore, the
greater the number and diversity of observations attributable
to a single pattern, the better the explanation.
If learners are sensitive to a subsumptive constraint on
explanations, then asking “Why?” should implicitly
constrain their thinking, driving them to seek general
patterns that underlie what they are trying to explain. And
because patterns typically go beyond the idiosyncratic
properties of the individual observations being explained,
engaging in explanation should generate knowledge that
transfers and generalizes to new contexts and problems,
such as knowledge about underlying principles, laws,
relationships, and causal regularities. The subsumptive
constraints account thus sheds light on why explanation
promotes learning, and especially generalization.

1352

However, a subsumptive constraint also has a hidden
danger: What happens if people seek explanations in
contexts where underlying patterns do not exist, or are
imperfect and misleading? If explanation exerts a
subsumptive constraint, it will still drive a search for
patterns, and if people “discover” spurious or misleading
regularities, explaining will compromise learning. The
human preoccupation with explanation offers many
opportunities for this constraint to lead people astray. In the
context of social interactions, a tendency to explain other
people’s behavior could drive a search for generalizations
even when they are unreliable, at the expense of learning
about the individual. For example, instead of simply noting
that a friend Anna frequently donates to charities, explaining
that behavior might drive the “discovery” of a spurious or
misleading generalization that invokes her social group (e.g.
female, student) to explain the behavior.
The prediction that explaining can impair learning is
counterintuitive and stands out against a wealth of evidence
demonstrating broad benefits for engaging in explanation
(for a rare exception see Kuhn & Katz, 2009). Rather than
stemming from a selective constraint to find patterns, an
alternative learning engagement account of explanation’s
effects is that they arise through a general increase in
engagement with the current learning activity. For example,
explaining may help learning because it increases
motivation, study time, or attention (for discussion see
Siegler, 2002) – factors that are already known to be a
powerful force in learning (e.g., Pintrich & Schunk, 2002).
Both the subsumptive constraints account and the learning
engagement account predict beneficial effects of
explanation in a broad range of contexts, albeit through very
different mechanisms. A key divergence is in the untested
prediction, generated by the subsumptive constraints
account, that explaining will impair learning when patterns
are misleading. The experiment reported here tests this
prediction in the context of learning about people’s
behavior, investigating whether explaining interacts with the
structure of what is being learned to produce benefits when
there are patterns that support learning, but slower and more
inaccurate learning when patterns are misleading.
The strategy of investigating explanation by contrasting
its costs with its benefits may serve the same function as
visual illusions. Just as visual illusions illuminate the
mechanisms underlying successful perception, explanation
impairment effects can reveal the mechanisms underlying
explanation’s profound effects on learning and
generalization. Moreover, understanding when the drive to
explain leads to false “discoveries” and misleading beliefs is
consequential in its own right.

Enhancement and impairment of learning
through explaining behavior
Preliminary work on learning novel categories (Williams,
Lombrozo, & Rehder, 2010) provided some evidence that
explaining drives people to find underlying patterns and
impairs learning when the pattern is unreliable. Participants

learned about novel categories of vehicles by classifying
examples and receiving feedback. Learning about category
membership could proceed by using information unique to
each example (e.g. color) or a pattern about the vehicles’
intended environment (arctic versus jungle) that could be
reliable or misleading.1 While half of participants were
prompted to explain why an example was in a category, the
other half were instructed to think aloud to control for the
effects of verbalization without exerting the subsumptive
constraints of explanation. The experiment found an
interaction of explanation with the reliability of the pattern:
explaining slowed learning of the novel category when an
unreliable pattern was present.
However, this study suffers from an alternative
interpretation of the results in terms of implicit task
demands: participants may have inferred from the prompt to
explain that the experimenter would not ask them to explain
unless a pattern was present. On this account, participants’
increased attempts to find patterns was due to their beliefs
that such patterns existed rather than explaining per se.
Accordingly, a goal of the present work is to establish that
it is truly generating explanations that drives learners’
search for patterns. To this end, we compared an explain
condition with an anticipated explanation control condition
in which participants were informed before learning that
they would later have to explain. Before and during the
learning phase participants therefore believed they would
later have to provide explanations to the experimenter.
These two conditions are thus equated on the task demand
of implying the presence of a pattern while still differing in
the extent to which learners generate explanations.
Moreover, the current experiment used social materials
(predicting and explaining people’s behavior based on
descriptions about them) which provides a significant
generalization of the previous experiment on artificial
category learning. Predictions about behavior differ from
artificial category learning concerning vehicles in the beliefs
they draw on and the level of prior knowledge available, in
the nature and goals of the judgments, and in the degree of
personal and emotional relevance. Learning about people’s
behavior is also an important capacity for navigating the
social world and interpersonal relationships. In social
psychology, research has examined different kinds of
explanations for behavior (Malle, 2004), demonstrated that
generating explanations can influence expectations (Wilson
& LaFleur, 1995; Sanitioso, Kunda, & Fong, 1990) and
even suggested that explanatory considerations play a role
in the acquisition, representation, and justification of
stereotypes (McGarty, Yzerbyt, & Spears, 2002).
However, no research has tested whether generating
explanations for behavior drives the interpretation of
behavior in terms of underlying generalizations, rather than
simply learning about person-specific knowledge. If
explaining drives a search for patterns that link behavior to
general social categories – whether such links are reliable or
1

1353

These materials were adapted from Kaplan & Murphy (2000).

learners towards unifying patterns even in the face of errors
or exceptions, generating perseveration on imperfect
patterns that will slow learning.
The current experiment also bolstered the generality of
the findings through a number of changes from the previous
study on category learning (Williams et al, 2010). Learning
took place for a fixed number of blocks rather than to a
learning criterion, control participants were not required to
think out loud, and the pattern-related features that provided
the exceptions to the misleading pattern were fixed rather
than changing from block to block.

not – it could play a role in the construction of
generalizations represented in stereotypes. For example,
instead of simply encoding the fact that a friend Anna
frequently donates to charities, one could attempt to explain
the behavior by noting that she is an extravert, a member of
a particular ethnic group or social class, or a woman. Belief
in potential relationships between a social group and
behavior–e.g. extraverts frequently donate to charities–
could be promoted when these are invoked in explanations–
“Anna frequently donates to charities, because… she is
extraverted”– either directly or through subsequent biases in
confirmation. In sum, if explaining drives a search for
patterns, the illusory “discovery” of spurious or misleading
generalizations about behavior and social groups could
foster erroneous stereotypical beliefs, and impair accurate
learning and prediction of people’s behavior.

Experiment
In this experiment, participants used descriptions of
individuals (e.g. picture, age, personality, major) to predict
each individual’s behavior (whether they rarely or
frequently donated to charities). Accurate learning and
prediction of behavior could proceed either through the use
of individuating information specific to each person– e.g.
Anna, the 29-year old with red hair, frequently donates to
charities– or by discovering an abstract, underlying pattern–
e.g. individuals with extraverted personality traits, like
being friendly or self-assured, frequently donate to charities.
The experiment manipulated whether this pattern was
reliable, meaning that its use led to 100% prediction
accuracy, or misleading, meaning that its use led to 80%
prediction accuracy and 20% errors. For both reliable and
misleading patterns, participants were either asked to
explain why a person engaged in a behavior or they
participated in the anticipated explanation control condition,
in which they were instructed of a future explanation task
but not required to perform it during study.
A learning engagement account predicts that explaining
will have the general effect of enhancing learning, whether a
reliable or misleading pattern is present. For example,
participants may be more motivated to make accurate
predictions and utilize feedback, and more likely to spend
time and attention studying and thinking about the
descriptions of people and the behavior they engage in. If a
reliable pattern supports prediction then highly engaged
explainers may utilize it to learn more quickly than nonexplainers, but there is no reason for them to perseverate on
a misleading pattern when they can improve performance by
learning about individuating information or encoding
exceptions to the pattern. In contrast, a subsumptive
constraints account predicts an interaction, whereby
explaining speeds learning if a reliable pattern is present,
but impairs learning when the pattern is misleading,
generating greater prediction error on our task. This is
because attempting to generate explanations should drive

Participants Of the 188 participants who participated so
far, 76 were UC Berkeley undergraduates who participated
in the lab for course credit and 112 were online participants
from Amazon Mechanical Turk who received monetary
compensation.
Materials Table 1 summarizes the 10 person descriptions
that were studied in the reliable pattern condition. In the
experiment participants used each individual’s description
to predict whether that individual rarely or frequently
donates to charities. Each description consisted of six
features. There was one pattern-related feature that was
unique but an instance of extraversion/introversion (e.g.
dominating, cautious), and so discovery of this single
generalization (e.g. extraverted people frequently donate to
charities, introverts rarely) permitted predictions about all
10 individuals’ charitable behavior. There were three
individuating features that were unique to each person (the
person’s picture, name and age) and so prediction could
proceed by associating these with the individual’s charitable
behavior, although this required associating individuating
features with behavior for all 10 individuals. These features
were selected so that no obvious pattern (such as age and
gender) was diagnostic of rarely/frequently donating to
charity. Two irrelevant binary features (e.g. lives on West
[East] coast) were not informative about charitable
behavior.
In every presentation of a description the picture and
name were always listed first while the order of all other
features was randomized. To ensure that effects of
explanation did not depend on particular prior knowledge,
the pairing of charitable behavior (rarely/frequently donates)
with the extraverted/introverted pattern was counterbalanced
across participants to create the factor pattern-behavior
pairing: for half extraversion was linked to rarely donating
to charities (introversion-frequently) and for half
extraversion was linked to frequently donating
(introversion-rarely). The materials were identical in the
misleading pattern condition, except for a critical change:
the personality traits of two people (Kevin and Karen) were
switched so that the extraverted/introverted pattern now
only predicted behavior for 8 of the 10 people and resulted
in prediction errors for the other 2 people.
Procedure All participants were instructed that they
would observe descriptions of people and should learn (in

1354

also rated confidence in their judgment on a seven-point
scale. There were four kinds of judgments, concerning
pattern-related, transfer-pattern, and individuating features,
as well as conflict items. These different items were all
randomly interleaved. Knowledge about the relationship
between the pattern and charitable behavior was assessed by
presenting the 10 studied pattern-related personality
features (e.g. talkative), as well as 8 novel transfer pattern
personality features, which were associated with
extraversion/introversion but not previously presented (e.g.
talkative, reserved). Learning a link between an individual
and their behavior was measured in predictions about the 10
studied triples of individuating features (picture, name, age).
The 6 conflict items measured participants’ preferred basis
for prediction, by pitting novel pattern-related personality
features against studied triples of individuating features to
give opposite judgments.
To examine the use of the pattern-related and
individuating features in generalization, participants made
predictions about how likely (on a scale from 0 to 100)
individuals were to engage in novel charitable behaviors
(giving old clothes to the Salvation Army, supporting taxes
that increase welfare programs, giving money to homeless
people). Specifically, 6 transfer pattern generalization
judgments used single novel personality features related to
extraversion/introversion, and 4 conflict generalization
judgments pitted novel personality features against studied
triples of individuating features. In closing participants were
asked to report what differences they observed between
people who rarely and frequently donated to charities.

preparation for future testing) which ones rarely and
frequently donate to charities. On each learning trial
participants had 10 seconds to judge from an individual’s
description whether the person rarely or frequently donates
to charities. They then saw the person’s actual behavior and
studied it along with the description for a further 10
seconds. In the explain condition participants were
instructed that once they saw the person’s actual behavior
they should explain out loud why the person rarely
(frequently) donates to charities. Participants in the lab were
recorded using a voice recorder while those online were not.
In the anticipated explanation condition participants were
informed that they would later be asked to explain why each
person rarely or frequently donates to charities, but were
free to study as they chose. All participants were therefore
aware that the experimenters expected them to be able to
explain, but only the explain condition was required to do so
during learning.

Table 1: Person descriptions in the experiment consist of
individuating features, pattern-related features (extraverts/
introverts), and irrelevant features. In the misleading pattern
condition, the personality features of the 5th and 10th people
(Kevin and Karen) were switched.
After visual and audio presentation of the instructions,
participants had practice trials on 6 descriptions and then
read and listened to the instructions again. Participants then
encountered four blocks of the 10 person descriptions (a
total of 40 presentations) in which predicted behavior and
studied feedback.
To assess what knowledge was acquired during learning,
participants were presented with subsets of features from the
person descriptions along with novel personality features
and were asked to indicate whether a person with those
features would rarely or frequently donate to charities. They

Results
To examine effects of pattern reliability on learning, the
prediction errors during learning for person descriptions 5
and 10 were analyzed, as they were consistent with the
pattern in the reliable pattern condition, but inconsistent
with it when the pattern was misleading. This prediction
error was subjected to a 2 (Block: 1st, 2nd, 3rd or 4th) x 2
(study condition: explain vs. anticipated explanation) x 2
(pattern type: reliable vs. misleading) x 2 (pattern-behavior
pairing) x 2 (participation context: lab vs. online) mixed
effects ANOVA. A significant block x study condition x
pattern type interaction, F(3, 172) = 3.91, p < 0.01, revealed
that the effect of explaining changed over time. In the
misleading pattern condition, the degree to which explaining
increased errors changed with additional exposure– the
impairment was mitigated over time.
To examine the initial effects of explanation, Figure 1
shows prediction error for the first two blocks as a function
of study condition and pattern type. The results confirm the
predictions of a subsumptive constraints account. The key
predicted interaction of explanation with the reliability of
the pattern was revealed by a significant two way interaction
of study condition and pattern type in a 2 (study condition:
explain vs. anticipated explanation) x 2 (pattern type:
reliable vs. misleading) x 2 (pattern-behavior pairing) x 2
(participation context: lab vs. online) ANOVA, F(1, 172) =

1355

 





5.12, p < 0.05. When the pattern was misleading, explaining
tended to impair learning about the exceptions to the pattern
(t(89) = 1.74, p = 0.085), providing evidence against an
account of explanation’s effects in terms of learning
engagement.
The ANOVA also revealed a significant main effect of
pattern type, F(1, 172) = 38.66, p < 0.001, and a four way
interaction of study type, pattern type, pattern-behavior
pairing and participation context, F(1, 172) = 5.89, p < 0.05.
This appeared to be due to differential effects of explaining
on lab and online participants when learning about the
pattern-behavior pairings. This could be due to differences
in prior knowledge (e.g. concerning charitable behavior and
extraversion/introversion) between the undergraduate
students and online population.




  



   
  




      

Figure 1: Proportion of prediction errors during first two
blocks of learning the descriptions inconsistent with the
pattern, as a function of study condition and pattern type.
As might be anticipated from the changing effects of
explanation, the post-learning measures did not reveal
significant effects of explanation, and are not reported in the
interest of space. The extensive prediction, feedback, and
study exposure of over 40 presentations may have mitigated
the effects of explanation by the end of learning. In realworld contexts explaining may be more likely to foster
persistent and misleading generalizations than in a
laboratory task, as salient feedback on mistaken beliefs is
typically less available.

Discussion
The current experiment provides evidence that engaging in
explanation invokes a subsumptive constraint: Asking
“why?” selectively constrains learners to find general
regularities that underlie or produce the observations
targeted by explanation, going beyond the individuating
features of specific instances to underlying generalizations.
In this experiment, explaining drove the discovery of a
pattern that linked charitable behavior to having an
extraverted versus introverted personality. When reliable
patterns are present, explanation’s selective constraint to
find patterns can drive the discovery of accurate
generalizations. But when patterns are misleading or
spurious, attempts to explain still invoke the constraint to
find patterns, which can then drive the illusory “discovery”

of generalizations that are in fact unreliable and misleading,
and thus impair learning and prediction.
The experiment was designed to address whether
explanation’s effects might be due to an implicit task
demand, an alternative interpretation of a previous study
(Williams et al, 2010), whereby participants may infer from
the fact that the experimenter expects them to explain that
there are patterns present, and so make a conscious decision
to seek these patterns. This experiment provides evidence
against this possibility: even when participants in both the
explain and anticipated explanation conditions were
informed that the experimenter later expected them to
provide explanations, generating explanations during study
enhanced and impaired learning through increased pattern
seeking.
The subsumptive constraints account explains why
explanation has a distinctive and profound impact on
learning, generalization, and conceptual representation. For
both scientists and everyday learners, the drive to explain
rather than merely know or describe fosters true
understanding: discovery of the general principles and laws
that underlie particular observations. The patterns and
regularities discovered through explaining have relevance
beyond particular learning contexts and support future
predictions, reasoning, and problem-solving in novel
contexts. A subsumptive constraint similarly clarifies why
explanations play a key role in the representation of
conceptual knowledge. While the storage of facts,
observations, and instances in memory is important for
representing concepts, the distinctive contribution of
explanations is that they capture unifying generalizations
and regularities which foster a coherent understanding and
provide the basis to flexibly deploy conceptual knowledge
in new situations.
The reported explanation impairment effect shows that
explaining does not impact learning merely by increasing
learning engagement or boosting cognitive processing. We
expect that multiple mechanisms play a role in explanation’s
effects and would not argue that this rules out an effect of
learning engagement. However, if increased processing
does not completely account for the current effects, a more
fruitful question may concern the nature of processing.
Increased attention and motivation could enhance memory
for details, encoding of examples, prediction accuracy, or
discovery of patterns. What does explaining selectively
increase attention to and what exactly does it motivate
people to learn?
The impairments observed when explaining in the
presence of misleading patterns raise pressing issues and
questions. Since explaining the behavior of others drives the
discovery of misleading generalizations rather than simply
learning about the behavior of particular individuals,
engaging in explanation may be a mechanism for forming
stereotypical beliefs. Explaining may promote beliefs that
link behavior to social groups (e.g., introverts rarely donate
to charities) or even produce novel causal generalizations
(e.g., extraverts are generous because they like to interact

1356

with people). Given the ubiquity of explanations, the finding
that explaining encourages people to seek patterns raises
concerns about the illusory discovery of spurious or
misleading generalizations in a broad range of domains:
detecting illusory correlations, student misconceptions in
science education, the formation of conspiracy theories, and
overgeneralization from small samples.
The finding that explaining “why?” drives learners
towards underlying patterns can provide guidance on
educational uses of explanation. The reported impairments
caution that prompts to explain can be counterproductive
(see also Kuhn & Katz, 2009) if students construct spurious
patterns or identify misleading regularities. More successful
explanations may be scaffolded by supplying prior
knowledge that elucidates how observations are instances of
a generalization, or by structuring the to-be-explained
observations to highlight underlying principles. The current
findings also raise the possibility that explaining “why?”
plays a unique role. Many previous studies have examined
spontaneous explanation while thinking aloud, or prompted
explanations for the meaning of a sentence or paragraph (for
a review see Fonseca & Chi, 2010), so that “explaining”
refers to a heterogeneous collection of activities. While the
current experiment suggests that explaining “why?” may
highlight underlying principles, laws, and patterns (see also
Renkl, 1997), self-explaining a sentence or procedure,
explaining “what” a concept is, or “how” a process occurs
may construct different kinds of knowledge or have
differential effects on processes like metacognition.
Given the benefits and costs of the subsumptive
constraints on explanation, examining children’s
development of a sensitivity to this constraint and how it
aids or restricts their learning will be informative. Evidence
for a subsumptive constraint on explanation raises the
question of what the relationship is between explaining and
other cognitive processes such as comparison and analogy,
which also promote discovery of abstract generalizations.
Further work will more precisely characterize the nature of
the subsumptive constraint, such as how prior knowledge
informs which patterns are judged to be subsuming and
explanatory (Williams & Lombrozo, 2010b). The
counterintuitive but revealing strategy of examining both the
beneficial and harmful effects of explanation can shed light
on these and other issues.

References
Amsterlaw, J., & Wellman, H. (2006). Theories of mind in
transition: A microgenetic study of the development of false
belief understanding. Journal of Cognition and Development,
7, 139-172.
Carey, S. (1985). Conceptual Change in Childhood.
Cambridge, MA: Bradford Books, MIT Press.
Chi, M.T.H., de Leeuw, N., Chiu, M.H., LaVancher, C. (1994).
Eliciting
self-explanations
improves
understanding.
Cognitive Science, 18, 439-477.
Chouinard, M. (2007). Children’s questions: a mechanism for
cognitive development. Monographs of the Society for
Research in Child Development, 72, 1-57.

DeJong, G., & Mooney, R. (1986). Explanation-based learning:
An alternative view. Machine learning, 1(2), 145–176.
Fonseca, B.A. & Chi, M.T.H. (2010). Instruction based on selfexplanation. In Mayer, R. & Alexander, P. (Eds.), The
Handbook of Research on Learning and Instruction.
Routledge Press.
Kaplan, A. S., & Murphy, G. L. (2000). Category learning with
minimal prior knowledge. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26, 829-846.
Kitcher, P. (1981). Explanatory Unification. Philosophy of
Science, 48, 507-31.
Kuhn, D., & Katz, J. (2009). Are self-explanations always
beneficial? Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 103,
386–394.
Legare, C.H., Gelman, S.A., & Wellman, H.M. (2010).
Inconsistency with prior knowledge triggers children’s
causal explanatory reasoning. Child Development, 81, 92944.
Malle, B. F. (2004). How the mind explains behavior: Folk
explanations, meaning, and social interaction. The MIT
Press.
McGarty, C., Yzerbyt, V., & Spears, R. (2002). Stereotypes as
explanations: The formation of meaningful beliefs about
social groups. Cambridge University Press.
Mitchell, T. M., Keller, R. M., & Kedar-Cabelli, S. T. (1986).
Explanation-based generalization: A unifying view. Machine
learning, 1(1), 47–80.
Murphy, G. L., & Medin, D. L. (1985). The role of theories in
conceptual coherence. Psychological Review, 92, 289-316.
Pintrich, P. R., & Schunk, D. H. (2002). Motivation in
education: Theory, research, and applications. Merrill
Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Renkl, A. (1997). Learning from Worked-Out Examples: A
Study on Individual Differences. Cognitive Science, 21(1),
1–29.
Sanitioso, R., Kunda, Z., & Fong, G. T. (1990). Motivated
recruitment of autobiographical memories. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 59(2), 229–241.
Siegler, R. S. (2002). Microgenetic studies of self-explanations.
In N. Granott & J. Parziale (Eds.), Microdevelopment:
Transition processes in development and learning (pp. 3158). New York: Cambridge University.
Williams, J. J., & Lombrozo, T. (2010a). The role of
explanation in discovery and generalization: evidence from
category learning. Cognitive Science, 34, 776-806.
Williams, J.J., & Lombrozo, T. (2010b). Explanation constrains
learning, and prior knowledge constrains explanation. In S.
Ohlsson & R. Catrambone (Eds.), Proceedings of the 32nd
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
2912-2917). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Williams, J. J., Lombrozo, T., & Rehder, B. (2010). Why does
explaining help learning? Insight from an explanation
impairment effect. In S. Ohlsson & R. Catrambone
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Wilson, T. D., & LaFleur, S. J. (1995). Knowing What You'll
Do: Effects of Analyzing Reasons on Self-Prediction.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 68(1), 21–35.

1357

