UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Explanation-based Mechanisms for Learning: An Interdisciplinary Approach

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3pd9n2jt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Chi, Michelene
De Jong, Gerald
Legare, Cristine
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Explanation-based Mechanisms for Learning: An Interdisciplinary Approach
Michelene Chi (mtchi@asu.edu)

Gerald DeJong (mrebl@illinois.edu)

Department of Psychology, Arizona State University

Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign

Cristine Legare (legare@psy.utexas.edu)

Tania Lombrozo* (lombrozo@berkeley.edu)
Joseph Jay Williams* (joseph_williams@berkeley.edu)

Department of Psychology, University of Texas
At Austin

Department of Psychology, University of California at Berkeley

Abstract
The significant role of explanation in learning and
generalization is ubiquitous and well documented:
explanation promotes student learning in educational settings,
drives conceptual development in young children, is accorded
a central role in theories of conceptual representation, and has
a long history in artificial intelligence. Despite this, relatively
little is known about the precise mechanisms that underlie
explanation’s effects, and there is a paucity of discourse
between the disciplines of cognitive science that study
explanation. This interdisciplinary symposium brings together
key researchers from education, development, cognitive
psychology and computer science to synthesize the progress
from these disciplines, forging connections between ongoing
research programs to identify promising future directions.
Keywords: explanation, self-explanation, understanding,
learning, transfer, generalization, explanation-based learning

Investigating the processes that foster learning and
generalization is one of the core questions in cognitive
science: how does a child, adult, or computer acquire
knowledge and understanding that is readily generalized to
novel situations, rather than lying inert? Explanation has
been repeatedly shown to play a key role across a range of
core cognitive science disciplines, including education,
cognitive development, cognitive psychology, and artificial
intelligence.
In real-world educational contexts, researchers have
documented a self-explanation effect: whether studying
math, physics or biology, learners who generate
explanations for what they are learning (spontaneously or in
response to prompts) are more likely to acquire accurate
concepts and transfer their knowledge to novel problems
and situations (Chi et al, 1994). Developmentally,
generating explanations for the behavior or reasoning of
others has been shown to foster conceptual change in young
children’s understanding of theory of mind and number
conservation (Wellman & Liu, 2006; Siegler, 2002).
Research in cognitive psychology also invokes
explanation as a powerful force in conceptual representation
and revision, even when explanations are not explicitly
solicited. In particular, theories of conceptual representation
accord a central role to explanation in understanding how
concepts and causal relationships between concepts are
represented, especially in knowledge-rich domains (e.g.
Murphy & Medin, 1985; Lombrozo, 2009). Understanding

how explaining promotes learning can thus shed light on
concept acquisition and causal learning, and in particular the
role of prior knowledge in these processes.
Finally, work on explanation-based learning in artificial
intelligence and machine learning has isolated different
aspects of explanation and formally characterized how these
can support generalization (DeJong & Mooney, 1986;
Mitchell et al, 1986). However, the developments in these
formalisms have not been fully exploited to interpret current
educational and psychological work on explanation and
learning, nor been directed at understanding current findings
and issues in these fields (for a rare exception, see Ahn,
Brewer & Mooney, 1992).
Despite extensive documentation of the powerful effects
of explanation in education and development and the
relevance of explanation and learning to current research,
little is known about why and how explaining exerts its
effects (Lombrozo, 2006). This symposium provides a
timely forum for addressing this gap in current theories by
bringing together researchers to synthesize empirical
findings in education and development, theories and models
from artificial intelligence, and investigation using the
experimental methodology of cognitive psychology.
Michelene Chi synthesizes research in education to give
insight into the nature of self-explanation by contrasting it
with other learning activities. Cristine Legare provides a
developmental perspective on how explanations selectively
guide children’s exploration and learning, particularly of
causal mechanisms. Joseph Williams and Tania Lombrozo
provide a novel account of explanation’s role in
generalization in terms of pattern discovery, drawing on
philosophical theories and methodology in cognitive
psychology. Gerald DeJong presents current machine
learning research on how explanations can integrate
statistical and logical inference.

The constructive nature of self-explanation
Michelene Chi conducted the pioneering work on
explanation in education with seminal papers on the selfexplanation effect. Her talk reviews and synthesizes
research in education to shed light on why self-explanation
is beneficial, through a comparison to other active,
constructive, and interactive learning activities (Chi, 2009).
The constructive nature of explanation is proposed as an

* Denotes organizers.

2756

important factor and provides insight into when explanation
will be most effective in educational settings.

The goal of this symposium is to shed light on the
powerful impact of explanation on learning and
generalization by bringing together leading researchers from
education, cognitive development, cognitive psychology and
machine learning and AI. Four talks and an extended
discussion period by the full panel of presenters (moderated
by the discussant Tania Lombrozo) will synthesize recent
advances in the empirical discoveries and theoretical models
in each discipline, promote cross-fertilization of pertinent
ideas, and identify promising directions for future research.

In search of a mechanism: The unique and
selective benefits of explanation for learning
Cristine Legare reviews evidence that children
preferentially explain events that have the potential to teach
them something new: inconsistency with prior knowledge
triggers children's explanatory reasoning by motivating a
search for underlying causal mechanisms (Legare, Gelman,
& Wellman, 2010) and explaining inconsistent outcomes
guides exploratory, hypothesis-testing behavior (Legare, in
press). She presents recent developmental research
comparing explanation to other cognitive processes such as
exploration and observation (Legare & Lombrozo, under
review) to provide additional evidence that identifying
causal mechanisms is a crucial function of explanation
and provides support for the proposal that explanation has
unique and selective benefits for learning.

References

A subsumptive constraints account of
explanation’s role in generalization
Understanding what explanations are – their structure and
content – can shed light on why explaining supports
generalization. Williams & Lombrozo (2010) draw on
theories from philosophy of science to propose a
subsumptive constraints account, according to which
explaining exerts the selective constraint of driving learners
to find patterns or regularities that underlie or generate
(subsume) what they are explaining. Experiments on
category learning demonstrate the first self-explanation
effect using rigorously controlled artificial materials from
cognitive psychology and provide direct evidence that
explaining “Why?” drives the discovery of abstract
regularities, which then provide the basis for generalization
to novel contexts. The double-edged nature of this constraint
is demonstrated in an explanation impairment effect: if
people seek explanations when only misleading regularities
are present, explaining impairs their learning. This provides
evidence against a primarily motivational or attentional
account of explanation’s effects.

A novel perspective on explanation-based
learning
Gerald DeJong has been an early architect of and major
contributor to machine learning and artificial intelligence
research on explanation-based learning, from its earliest
stages to the present. His talk and current work (DeJong,
2006) explore how explanations may serve as a mechanism
for integrating the strengths of statistical inference – robust
induction despite the uncertainty in empirical observations –
and symbolic and logical reasoning – the representational
and inferential richness obtained from structured
representations supplied by prior or expert knowledge.

Ahn, W., Brewer, W. F., & Mooney, R. J. (1992). Schema
acquisition from a single example. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 18, 391-412.
Chi, M.T.H. (2009). Active-constructive-interactive: a conceptual
framework for differentiating learning activities. Topics in
Cognitive Science, 1, 73-105.
Chi, M.T.H., de Leeuw, N., Chiu, M.H., LaVancher, C. (1994).
Eliciting self-explanations improves understanding. Cognitive
Science, 18, 439-477.
Keil, F.C. (2006). Explanation and Understanding. Annual
Review of Psychology. 57, 227-254.
DeJong, G., & Mooney, R. (1986). Explanation-based learning: An
alternative view. Machine learning, 1(2), 145–176.
DeJong, G. (2006). Toward robust real-world inference: A new
perspective on explanation-based learning. Proceedings of the
Seventeenth European Conference on Machine Learning, (pp.
102-113).
Legare, C.H. (in press). Exploring explanation: Explaining
inconsistent evidence informs exploratory, hypothesis-testing
behavior in young children. Child Development.
Legare, C.H., Gelman, S.A., & Wellman, H.W. (in press).
Inconsistency with prior knowledge triggers children’s causal
explanatory reasoning. Child Development.
Legare, C.H. & Lombrozo, T. (under review). The unique and
selective benefits of explanation for learning in early childhood.
Lombrozo, T. (2006). The structure and function of explanations.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10, 464-470.
Lombrozo, T. (2009). Explanation and categorization: how ''why?''
informs ''what?''. Cognition, 110, 248-253.
Mitchell, T. M., Keller, R. M., & Kedar-Cabelli, S. T. (1986).
Explanation-based generalization: A unifying view. Machine
learning, 1(1), 47–80.
Murphy, G. L., & Medin, D. L. (1985). The role of theories in
conceptual coherence. Psychological Review, 92, 289-316.
Rozenblit, L.R. & Keil, F.C. (2002). The misunderstood limits of
folk science: an illusion of explanatory depth. Cognitive Science,
26, 521-562.
Siegler, R. S. (2002). Microgenetic studies of self-explanations.

In N. Granott & J. Parziale (Eds.), Microdevelopment:
Transition processes in development and learning (pp. 3158). New York: Cambridge University.
Wellman, H. M., & Liu, D. (2007). Causal reasoning as informed
by the early development of explanations. In A. Gopnik, & L.
Schulz (Eds.), Causal learning: Psychology, philosophy, and
computation (pp. 261-279). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Williams, J.J. & Lombrozo, T. (2010). The role of explanation in
discovery and generalization: evidence from category learning.
Cognitive Science, 34, 776-806.

2757

