UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Factors Related to Passage Length: Implications for Second Language Listening
Comprehension

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2pr8m0xc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Bloomfield, Amber
Wayland, Sarah
Blodgett, Allison
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Factors Related to Passage Length: Implications for Second Language Listening
Comprehension
Amber N. Bloomfield (abloomfi@umd.edu)
University of Maryland, College Park
7005 52nd Avenue, College Park, MD 20901

Sarah C. Wayland
University of Maryland, College Park
7005 52nd Avenue, College Park, MD 20901

Allison Blodgett
University of Maryland, College Park
7005 52nd Avenue, College Park, MD 20901

Jared Linck
University of Maryland, College Park
7005 52nd Avenue, College Park, MD 20901

Abstract
Despite its importance in the development of second language
(L2) proficiency, there is little research on listening
comprehension in a second language. Evidence for the role of
most factors that may impact second language listening is
sparse. One practical factor often mentioned in relation to the
difficulty of L2 listening passages is length, but there are
several problems with characterizing the amount of
information in a passage this way. We summarize available
research on the effects of passage length in L2 listening
comprehension and describe the relationship between passage
length and other important factors and highlight areas in need
of more research.
Keywords: listening comprehension; working memory;
second language instruction

Introduction
Listening in a second language (L2) is challenging for a
number of reasons. Listening involves real-time processing,
generally without the option of going back to earlier
sections of the passage the listener may have missed (Buck,
2001; Flowerdew, 1994). Further, while most reading
involves complete control of the rate at which text is
received, control over the speed of delivery for listeners
varies much more widely (Osada, 2004). In addition, in
comprehending spoken language, word boundaries must be
inferred from a variety of lexical and phonological cues
(e.g., Cutler, Dahan, & Van Donselaar, 1997).
These above factors are fundamental qualities of listening.
However, other factors in listening passages are more
variable (e.g., a fast speech rate, presence of infrequent
vocabulary, etc.) such that any given passage may contain
some or none of these qualities. Unfortunately, most second
language (L2) comprehension research has focused on
reading rather than listening because the process of reading

is more easily observed and manipulated (Osada, 2004).
Research findings from reading comprehension often fail to
map fully onto the processes involved in listening
comprehension (Schmidt-Rinehart, 1994) and many factors
relevant for listening comprehension have no analogue in
reading comprehension. For instance, speech may contain
irregular pauses, false starts, disfluencies such as um, and
intonation patterns that can affect comprehension (Shohamy
& Inbar, 1991). The pronunciation of words may also differ
greatly from the way they appear in print and may be
affected by the words with which they are presented:
assimilation results in ten being pronounced tem in the
phrase ten bikes (Crystal, 2003); reductions result in the
phrase I’m gonna go instead of I am going to go (Ito, 2001).
These reductions lessen the amount of lexical information
available and make listening particularly challenging for L2
learners (Ito, 2001).
There remains a great deal that is not known about what
makes listening materials difficult for L2 learners. The lack
of research is particularly problematic for language
instructors who select and create classroom listening
materials and language test developers who must predict the
difficulty of listening materials. Further, readily available or
intuitively appealing factors may not provide the best
characterization of passage difficulty. This paper focuses on
one of these factors in particular: passage length. Because
listening involves real-time processing, the amount of
information presented is often a factor of concern (Alderson,
et al., 2006; Bejar, Douglas, Jamieson, Nissan, & Turner,
2000; Carroll, 1977; Dunkel, 1991; Rost, 2006). Passage
length is described as one aspect of passage complexity
(Rost, 2006). However, there is evidence that passage length
may not be the best way to characterize amount of
information, both in that it is often confounded with other
factors, and because other factors provide a more precise
depiction of information amount. Below, we summarize the

2317

empirical evidence regarding passage length and related
factors and argue that amount of information, as a factor
predicting difficulty in L2 listening comprehension, should
be examined using different measures.

Characterizing amount of information
There are several reasons why an increased amount of
information in a passage may hurt L2 listening
comprehension. First, L2 learners often fixate on
information they have failed to comprehend, investing
additional effort in trying to understand what they missed
(Goh, 2000; O'Malley, Chamot, & Kupper, 1989). Because
listening occurs in real time, listeners may then miss
information that follows. In addition, even if listeners avoid
fixating, they may be unable to comprehend later
information because it relies on the understanding of earlier
information (Goh, 2000). The more information in a
passage, the more likely it is that the listener will miss some
of the information and the greater the amount of information
that relies on the understanding of earlier material. Length
of the passage is also cited by L2 listeners as increasing
their comprehension difficulty (Thompson & Rubin, 1996).
Despite these potential challenges, however, there is
motivation for increasing the length of the passages
presented to L2 learners: for example, shorter passages may
be too short to include important linguistic features, such as
discourse markers (Buck, 2001) and tasks using shorter
passages may fail to represent the type of real-world tasks
with which an L2 learner might be faced, such as listening
to an academic lecture (Carrell, Dunkel, & Mollaun, 2002).
Passage Length
Surprisingly, empirical work in L2 listening
comprehension suggests only a minor role for passage
length (measured as duration or word count). Several studies
have failed to find a significant relationship between length
and test item difficulty or other measures of comprehension
(Freedle & Kostin, 1996; Kostin, 2004; Moyer, 2006;
Nissan, DeVincenzi, & Tang, 1996). A few studies have
found a significant role for length, such that longer passages
were associated with more difficult comprehension items.
However, these studies did not examine the role of length
separately reading and listening (Rupp, Garcia, & Jamieson,
2001), confounded length with the number of
comprehension items (Henning, 1991), or found the effect
only for learners with a higher level of proficiency (Carrell,
et al., 2002). Overall, the evidence that passage length
affects L2 listening material difficulty is underwhelming.
There are several possible reasons for the mixed results in
the literature. The first is that many studies investigating its
role do not directly manipulate length in the listening
materials (Freedle & Kostin, 1996; Kostin, 2004; Moyer,
2006; Nissan, et al., 1996). Rather, these studies use existing
test materials which are coded for particular factors, with
these factors included in regression models predicting the
difficulty of test items. This leaves open the strong
possibility that passages that differed in length also differed

in other important ways that affected L2 listening
comprehension. Other studies involve confounds in the
design of the experiment that make it difficult to interpret
their findings: in Moyer (2006), all short passages were
formal news reports while all longer passages were informal
dialogues. The formality of the language in the news reports
may have made these passages more difficult for the L2
listeners (Shohamy & Inbar, 1991), counteracting any
benefits of their shorter length. In addition, many studies
examining passage length explore a very limited range of
lengths (e.g., the passages included in Kostin, 2004 were all
20 seconds or shorter in duration), possibly not varying
length enough to uncover an effect. These issues indicate a
need to explore passage length in future research with
experimentally manipulated materials in which a broad
range of lengths is presented with other factors (e.g.,
language formality) held constant.
Another reason for the mismatch between research
findings and intuition is that length, in and of itself, may not
the best factor for capturing the amount of information in a
passage. Length can be confounded with speech rate (if
measured in terms of duration) or redundancy (if measured
in terms of word count, or duration if speech rate is held
constant). It is important to consider these factors because
their effects on L2 listening comprehension run counter to
the predicted effect of length: a faster speech rate (which
results in a shorter length) should make listening more
difficult; more redundancy of information, which should
increase length, should decrease listening comprehension
difficulty. In addition, other measures of amount of
information may do a better job both of controlling for these
confounds and of pinpointing the portion of the passage that
is information. Below, we briefly summarize the empirical
support for factors related to passage length.
Redundancy
Redundancy can be defined as the extent to which words
or ideas are repeated within a passage. This repetition can be
exact (e.g., Bread is on sale today. Bread is on sale and
cabbage is, too.), or it may involve more complex, less
salient presentations, such as paraphrasing or elaborating on
previously-stated ideas (Chaudron, 1983). One study found
that more transparent repetition is more consistently
beneficial for L2 listening comprehension across
proficiency groups (Chaudron, 1983). Other studies have
found similar benefits of simple forms of redundancy for L2
listeners of different proficiency levels (Gainer, 1997) and
differing degrees of benefit of less transparent redundancy
for higher and lower proficiency listeners (i.e., elaborations
like The food of the Pennsylvania Dutch Country is very
hearty and delicious. Hearty and delicious food is
nourishing and tasty, Chiang & Dunkel, 1992, p. 354).
Redundancy is necessarily related to passage length as
defined by word count because increasing redundancy in a
passage will naturally increase the word count of the
passage and will also increase duration if speech rate is held
constant. Because increased redundancy is predicted to have

2318

an opposite effect on L2 listening comprehension than does
increased length, the two must be considered in conjunction
when estimating the difficulty of a given passage for an L2
listener. However, as mentioned above, less transparent
forms of redundancy (e.g., elaboration or paraphrase) may
not be as facilitative of L2 listening comprehension, so type
of redundancy should also be considered.
Speech rate
A second factor strongly related to passage length, as
measured by duration, is speech rate. Speech rate is a very
salient aspect of listening materials and its role in L2
listening comprehension is relatively well-studied with
largely consistent results. In general, faster speech rates hurt
L2 listeners (Griffiths, 1990; 1992; Rosenhouse, Haik, &
Kishon-Rabin, 2006) though a slowed speech rate does not
necessarily help (Derwing & Munro, 2001; Griffiths, 1990).
However, it is important to note that listeners may attribute
comprehension difficulties arising from other sources to a
fast speech rate: Moore, Adams, Dagenais, and Caffee
(2007) found that native listeners judged reverberated
speech to be faster than filtered or unfiltered speech despite
a constant speech rate; other studies have found that both
native (Anderson-Hsieh & Koehler, 1998) and L2 listeners
(Cheung [1994] and Dahl [1981] as cited by Tauroza, 2001,
p. 146) perceive heavily accented speech as faster than less
accented speech. These results suggest that professionals
selecting listening materials should take care to rely on
objective measures of speech rate rather than their
impressions of the speech rate in passages.
Passages of equal length in terms of duration may contain
very different amounts of information depending on the
speech rate of the speaker(s). Nor is this the only
consideration: long silent pauses will increase the duration
of a passage without necessarily increasing the content. In
determining the amount of information presented by a
passage, duration may be a poor measure without some
consideration of speech rate and some method of
determining how much of the passage is actually
information rather than pauses. Some measures of speech
rate do take into account pauses. For example, articulatory
rate excludes silent intervals over a given threshold (Robb,
Maclagan, & Chen, 2004). Other measures, such as
syllables per second, control for variation in word length
(e.g., Derwing & Munro, 2001; Kang, Rubin, & Pickering,
2010). Some combination of these measures may be more
desirable than any one alone.
Information density
The last factor to discuss relative to the underlying
features of passage length is not confounded with length,
but rather offers a more specific characterization of
information than word count or duration alone. Information
density describes the proportion of the passage that contains
content or information relative to the total duration or word
count of the passage. The largest amount of variation in this
measure comes from differences in how information is

defined. For instance, Nissan, DeVincenzi, and Tang (1996)
defined information as content words (nouns, verbs,
adjectives, and adverbs), similar to Gilmore’s (2004)
description of words with “independent meaning” (e.g.,
mother versus a). Propositions, defined as the smallest unit
of knowledge that can stand alone as a separate true-false
statement (Dunkel, Henning, & Chaudron, 1993), have also
be used in measures of information density (Rupp et al.,
2001).
Some measures of density also control directly for
redundancy, counting only those words or ideas that have
not previously been presented in the passage in the
calculation of density (e.g., type/token ratio, used by Rupp
et al., 2001). This alternative method of measuring density
may be desirable so long as the type of redundancy is taken
into account: redundant information is only redundant if it is
recognized as such by the listener, so the experimenter may
choose to exclude transparent forms of redundancy from the
calculation of information density but include less
transparent forms. Alternatively, separate measures of
density and redundancy might be included: Bejar, Douglas,
Jamieson, Nissan, & Turner (2000) suggest including both
the ratio of propositions to passage duration and the ratio of
unique propositions to total propositions.
There is considerable evidence that information density
impacts L1 reading comprehension (e.g., Kintsch & Keenan,
1973; Sonnleitner, 2008). However, information density has
not been widely examined in the L2 listening
comprehension literature. In addition, the variation in how
this factor is defined (in terms of content words,
propositions,
unique
propositions,
etc.)
makes
generalization across what studies do exist challenging.
Rupp et al. (2001) found propositional density in L2
listening and reading passages to be a significant predictor
of comprehension item difficulty but they did not
operationalize this factor continuously (i.e., they used highmedium-low categorization for describing density across
passages) and they did not examine the relationship
separately for listening and reading materials, so it is
possible that density was a predictor for difficulty in one
skill but not the other. Buck and Tatsuoka (1998) found that
the proportion of content words to all words surrounding the
information necessary for answering an item correctly
significantly predicted item difficulty for L2 listening
passages. This finding does not necessarily indicate that
proportion of content words to all words in an entire passage
will significantly affect comprehension, however.
While there is only a small amount of empirical evidence
indicating that information density impacts L2 listening
comprehension, information density is a theoretically
appealing measure of amount of information compared with
passage length because it describes the proportion of the
passage that contains actual content. Further, measures that
focus on propositions distinguish between a wordy passage
that contains few ideas and one that contains many ideas,
perhaps even expressed with fewer words. For instance, the
fluffy cat ate the meat contains two propositions, while the

2319

meat was eaten by the cat contains only one proposition
expressed with a higher total number of words. Further,
unlike measures of length, measures of information density
may account for redundancy, although care must be taken in
determining what information is redundant for a given
listener.
However, more research is needed to explore the effects
of density on L2 listening comprehension. Methods of
operationalizing information in informal aural passages
which may contain disfluencies, incomplete sentences, false
starts or other irregularities must be devised to make this
measure usable. The Computerized Propositional Idea
Density Rater (CPIDR, Brown, Snodgrass, Kemper,
Herman, & Covington, 2008), automatically calculates the
number of propositions in English text based on a set of
rules and has a speech mode for addressing transcripts of
spoken English. However, the additional rules implemented
in this mode were made with L1 listening in mind. For
example, the calculation of density excludes like and you
know in those contexts where they are likely to be lexical
fillers. These fillers may not be comprehended as such by
L2 listeners (Voss, 1984; Watanabe, Hirose, Den, &
Minematsu, 2008), and so perhaps should be included in the
calculation of density for these listeners. In addition, the
program is designed to analyze “minimally edited”
transcripts (Brown, et al., 2008, p. 542). Although precisely
what editing is necessary to prepare a transcript for the
program is not specified by Brown et al. (2008), if it
removes filled pauses like um and ah, it may actually
exclude information that is treated as lexical by some L2
listeners who are not familiar with the fillers used in the L2
(Watanabe, et al., 2008). In addition to standardizing the
definition of information in natural L2 speech, methods for
defining information segments in languages other than
English, particularly those with very different syntax or
morphology (e.g., Arabic) need to be described and tested. 1
Not only is extending research on the effects of information
density into other languages of practical use for language
instructors and test developers, but it provides an
opportunity for examining cross-language differences that
may exist for this factor.
A final area in need of further research is to the extent to
which each of the underlying factors involved in calculating
information density interact. Density can remain the same
while the absolute number of ideas increases, so long as a
constant rate of speech is maintained. Conversely, density
can change by altering speech rate, with the number of ideas
held constant. Investigating the relative contributions of the
components of information density will provide a clearer
picture of how this factor affects comprehension.

Amount of information and working memory
Beyond the increased chances for missing information
presented by a passage containing more information overall,
1

A program for calculating information density in French,
modeled after CPIDR, is under development (Covington, 2011).

there is reason to believe that greater amounts of
information may put a strain working memory. Although
most research examining the role of working memory
differences in L2 comprehension has focused on reading
rather than listening (e.g., Harrington & Sawyer, 1992),
there are strong theoretical reasons for believing that
working memory plays a critical role in listening (Engle,
2002). As in reading, listeners must both hold previous
information in working memory while processing incoming
information and integrating the incoming information with
existing knowledge from long-term memory (Payne &
Whitney, 2002). However, listening has the added
complication of requiring real-time processing without the
option of returning to earlier material, which may impose an
additional load on working memory. Further, listening for
L2 learners is unlikely to be fully automatic (Tyler, 2001)
which will create an even greater demand on working
memory (Baddeley, 2007).
Those studies that have investigated the relationship
between individual differences in working memory capacity
and L2 listening comprehension directly have failed to find
significant results (Carrell, et al., 2002; Henning, 1991).
However, one potential issue with these investigations is
that they used a measure of working memory designed to
measure storage capacity (i.e., digit span) rather than
combined storage and processing capacity. This distinction
is important because a meta-analysis over 77 studies found
that the relationship between storage-plus-processing
measures of working memory, such as reading span, and L1
comprehension was considerably stronger than the
relationship between storage-only measures and L1
comprehension (Daneman & Merikle, 1996).
While there are strong theoretical reasons to believe that
an increased amount of information will increase the strain
on working memory for L2 listeners, this is again a situation
where passage length in and of itself may not be the best
measure of information amount. This is particularly true
because of the factors confounded with length and their
likely relationship with working memory load. Redundancy
may be beneficial from a working memory load standpoint
for two reasons: first, re-presenting information will refresh
this information in the listener’s working memory; second,
new information that is fully interchangeable with
information already being stored in working memory will
not need to be stored separately and so should not increase
the storage load. However, the ease with which redundant
information will be recognized as such will depend on the
type of redundancy: more transparent forms, like the exact
repetition of words, will be more likely to ease or at least
not increase the strain on working memory than do less
transparent forms like paraphrase, which may not be seen as
redundant and so will both fail to refresh the earlier
information and will be stored separately.
Speech rate also affects the strain on working memory: a
faster rate provides less time for the L2 listener to process
the input, leading to a greater cognitive load (Rost, 2006).
Because a faster speech rate results in a passage shorter in

2320

duration, predictions for working memory load based on the
overall duration of a passage may not accurately represent
strain imposed on the listener. The manner in which speech
rate is calculated is of concern here, too, because pauses in a
listening passage are believed to provide more processing
time to the listener (Blau, 1990), which should decrease
working memory load. Measures of speech rate that control
for differences in pausing (e.g., articulatory rate, Robb,
Maclagan, & Chen, 2004) may be more predictive of the
load imposed on working memory than are other measures.

Coping with large amounts of information
As mentioned above, there are motivations for presenting
passages with more content to L2 learners so that they may
experience key aspects of the target language (Buck, 2001)
or be prepared for the tasks they will need to perform in the
L2 (Carrell, et al., 2002). There is also an ongoing push to
use authentic materials in teaching second-language
listening skills (Gilmore, 2007). Authentic materials, among
other things, introduce listeners to a more realistic speech
rate than created classroom materials often offer (Rings,
1986). It is important to note, however, that while many
factors such as speech rate suggest that authentic materials
will be more difficult for L2 listeners than created materials,
a study examining differences between authentic and
created dialogues found higher density and less redundancy
in created materials, implying that authentic materials may
actually be easier in certain circumstances (Gilmore, 2004).
There are options available to the language instructor to
ease their students’ comprehension of passages containing
larger amounts of information. First, the passages may be
presented multiple times, providing several opportunities for
the listeners to process the information therein (Field, 2008).
In a sense, playing a passage multiple times is a simple way
of increasing redundancy of information without altering the
actual passage (Cervantes & Gainer, 1992), which may be
desirable particularly when presenting authentic materials.
Playing a passage multiple times can also help overcome
unexpected difficulties in a testing environment, like noise
in the room (Buck, 2001). Research also shows that playing
a passage more than once for L2 listeners improves
comprehension (Berne, 1995; Cervantes & Gainer, 1992;
Gainer, 1997; Lund, 1990; Sakai, 2009), though it may be
more beneficial to higher-proficiency listeners (A. Chang &
Read, 2006; C. S. Chang, 1999). This latter finding makes
sense if the passage contains other complexity-increasing
factors like infrequent vocabulary: hearing an unfamiliar
word more than once will not necessarily lead to its being
understood, and higher-proficiency listeners will have more
extensive L2 vocabularies.
Another method of helping L2 listeners overcome the
demands of a large amount of information is to allow them
to take notes while listening. Unlike playing a passage
multiple times for the listeners, however, notetaking has a
less consistently positive impact on comprehension.
Notetaking is itself a cognitively demanding task (Piolat,
Olive, & Kellogg, 2005) that is even more difficult for L2

listeners (Barbier & Piolat, 2005). Although notetaking can
promote comprehension through providing an available
record of the passage that the listener may consult after the
passage is over, it may interfere with comprehension by
overloading working memory during listening. In line with
these conflicting predictions for the effect of notetaking on
L2 listening comprehension, some studies have found that
notetaking hurts comprehension (Hale & Courtney, 1994)
while others have found that it helps (Carrell, et al., 2002).
One potential determining factor for whether notetaking
helps or hinders comprehension is whether the listener can
make good choices about when to take notes and when to
focus on listening (Lin, 2006).

Conclusion
A lack of empirical research on the factors that impact L2
listening comprehension may lead to a reliance on intuitive
or easily measured qualities of passages like length. We
have described the issues with using passage length to
predict the difficulty of the passage for L2 learners,
including that the evidence for its role in comprehension
difficulty is not strong and that it is confounded with other
factors. We also suggest that information density provides a
more precise picture of amount of information, though this
measure and its components need to be further explored
with regard to L2 listening.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the University of Maryland
Center for Advanced Study of Language with funding from the
Department of Defense. The authors would like to thank our
colleagues at DLIFLC.

References
Alderson, J. C., Figueras, N., Kuijper, H., Nold, G., Takala, S., &
Tardieu, C. (2006). Analysing tests of reading and listening in
relation to the common European framework of reference: The
experience of the Dutch CEFR Construct Project. Language
Assessment Quarterly, 3(1), 3 - 30.
Baddeley, A. (2007). Working memory, thought, and action.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Barbier, M., & Piolat, A. (2005). L1 and L2 cognitive effort of
notetaking and writing. In L. Allal & B. Schneuwly (Eds.),
Proceedings of the Special Interest Group on Writing. Geneva,
Switzerland.
Bejar, I., Douglas, D., Jamieson, J., Nissan, S., & Turner, J. (2000).
TOEFL 2000 listening framework: A working paper. Princeton,
NJ: Educational Testing Service.
Berne, J. (1995). How does varying pre-listening activities affect
second language listening comprehension? Hispania, 316-329.
Blau, E. (1990). The effect of syntax, speed, and pauses on
listening comprehension. TESOL Quarterly, 24(4), 746-753.
Brown, C., Snodgrass, T., Kemper, S., Herman, R., & Covington,
M. (2008). Automatic measurement of propositional idea
density from part-of-speech tagging. Behavior research
methods, 40(2), 540.
Buck, G. (2001). Assessing listening. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ
Pr.

2321

Carrell, P., Dunkel, P., & Mollaun, P. (2002). The effects of
notetaking, lecture length and topic on the listening component
of the TOEFL 2000. Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service.
Carroll, J. B. (1977). On learning from being told. In M. C.
Wittrock (Ed.), Learning & Instruction (2nd ed., pp. 496-512).
Berkeley, CA: McCutchan.
Cervantes, R., & Gainer, G. (1992). The effects of syntactic
simplification and repetition on listening comprehension.
TESOL Quarterly, 26(4), 767-770.
Chang, A., & Read, J. (2006). The effects of listening support on
the listening performance of EFL learners. TESOL Quarterly,
40(2), 375-397.
Chang, C. S. (1999). The effect of repeated listening on different
levels of ESL learners. Paper presented at the The 1st
Conference on Applied English Teaching Taoyuan, Republic of
China.
Covington, M. (2011). Computer Analysis of Speech for
Psychological Research Retrieved January 10, 2011
Crystal, D. (2003). A dictionary of linguistics & phonetics (5th
ed.). Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
Cutler, A., Dahan, D., & Van Donselaar, W. (1997). Prosody in the
comprehension of spoken language: A literature review.
Language and speech, 40(2), 141-201.
Daneman, M., & Merikle, P. (1996). Working memory and
language comprehension: A meta-analysis. Psychonomic
Bulletin and Review, 3(4), 422-433.
Dunkel, P. (1991). Listening in the native and second/foreign
language: Toward an integration of research and practice.
TESOL Quarterly, 25(3), 431-457.
Field, J. (2008). Listening in the Language Classroom. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Flowerdew, J. (1994). Academic Listening: Research Perspectives.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Freedle, R., & Kostin, I. (1996). The prediction of TOEFL listening
comprehension item difficulty for minitalk passages:
Implications for construct validity. Princeton, NJ: Educational
Testing Service.
Gainer, G. (1997). A comparison of the effects of pure repetition
and embedded elaboration on the listening comprehension of
EFL students.
Gilmore, A. (2004). A comparison of textbook and authentic
interactions. ELT Journal, 58(4), 363-374.
Gilmore, A. (2007). Authentic materials and authenticity in foreign
language learning. Language Teaching, 40(2), 97-118.
Goh, C. (2000). A cognitive perspective on language learners'
listening comprehension problems. System, 28(1), 55-75.
Hale, G., & Courtney, R. (1994). The effects of note-taking on
listening comprehension in the Test of English as a Foreign
Language. Language Testing, 11(1), 29-47.
Harrington, M., & Sawyer, M. (1992). L2 working memory
capacity and L2 reading skill. Studies in Second Language
Acquisition, 14(1), 25-38.
Henning, G. (1991). A study of the effects of variation of shortterm memory load, reading response length, and processing
hierarchy on TOEFL listening comprehension item
performance. Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service.
Ito, Y. (2001). Effect of reduced forms on ESL learners’ inputintake process. Second language studies, 20(1), 99-124.
Kintsch, W., & Keenan, J. (1973). Reading rate and retention as a
function of the number of propositions in the base structure of
sentences* 1. Cognitive psychology, 5(3), 257-274.
Kostin, I. (2004). Exploring item characteristics that are related to
the difficulty of TOEFL dialogue items. Princeton, NJ:
Educational Testing Service.

Lin, M. (2006). The effects of note-taking, memory, and rate of
presentation on EFL learners' listening comprehension.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, La Sierra University,
Riverside, CA.
Lund, R. (1990). A taxonomy for teaching second language
listening. Foreign Language Annals, 23(2), 105-115.
Moyer, A. (2006). Language contact and confidence in second
language listening comprehension: A pilot study of advanced
learners of German. Foreign Language Annals, 39(2), 255-275.
Nissan, S., DeVincenzi, F., & Tang, K. L. (1996). An Analysis of
Factors Affecting the Difficulty of Dialogue Items in TOEFL
Listening Comprehension. . Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing
Service.
O'Malley, J., Chamot, A., & Kupper, L. (1989). Listening
comprehension strategies in second language acquisition.
Applied Linguistics, 10(4), 418-437.
Osada, N. (2004). Listening comprehension research: A brief
review of the past thirty years. Dialogue, 3, 53-66.
Payne, J., & Whitney, P. (2002). Developing L2 oral proficiency
through synchronous CMC: Output, working memory, and
interlanguage development. Calico Journal, 20(1), 7-32.
Piolat, A., Olive, T., & Kellogg, R. (2005). Cognitive effort during
note taking. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 19(3), 291-312.
Rings, L. (1986). Authentic language and authentic conversational
texts. Foreign Language Annals, 19(3), 203-208.
Robb, M., Maclagan, M., & Chen, Y. (2004). Speaking rates of
American and New Zealand varieties of English. Clinical
linguistics & phonetics, 18(1), 1-15.
Rost, M. (2006). Areas of research that influence L2 listening
instruction. In E. Uso-Juan & A. Martinez-Flor (Eds.), Current
Trends in the Development and Teaching of the Four Language
Skills (pp. 47-74). New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Rupp, A., Garcia, P., & Jamieson, J. (2001). Combining multiple
regression and CART to understand difficulty in second
language reading and listening comprehension test items.
International Journal of Testing, 1(3), 185-216.
Sakai, H. (2009). Effect of repetition of exposure and proficiency
level in L2 listening tests. TESOL Quarterly, 43(2), 360-371.
Schmidt-Rinehart, B. (1994). The effects of topic familiarity on
second language listening comprehension. Modern Language
Journal, 78(2), 179-189.
Shohamy, E., & Inbar, O. (1991). Validation of listening
comprehension tests: The effect of text and question type.
Language Testing, 8(1), 23-40.
Sonnleitner, P. (2008). Using the LLTM to evaluate an itemgenerating system for reading comprehension. Psychology
Science Quarterly, 50, 345-362.
Thompson, I., & Rubin, J. (1996). Can strategy instruction
improve listening comprehension? Foreign Language Annals,
29(3), 331-342.
Tyler, M. (2001). Resource consumption as a function of topic
knowledge in nonnative and native comprehension. Language
Learning, 51(2), 257-280.
Voss, B. (1984). Slips of the ear. Tübingen, Germany: Gunter Narr
Verlag.
Watanabe, M., Hirose, K., Den, Y., & Minematsu, N. (2008).
Filled pauses as cues to the complexity of upcoming phrases for
native and non-native listeners. Speech Communication, 50(2),
81-94.

2322

