UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Fictional Worlds and Cognitive Science

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9h98p0bd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Canovas, Cristobal Pagan
Gerrig, Richard
Goldstein, Thalia
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Fictional Worlds and Cognitive Science
Cogsci 2011 Symposium
Cristóbal Pagán Cánovas (cpcanovas@um.es)
https://sites.google.com/site/cristobalpagancanovas/
Department of Cognitive Science, Case Western Reserve University
605 Crawford Hall, 10900 Euclid Ave
Cleveland, OH 44106 USA
Tel. +1 2163684753

Keywords: cognition-fiction -literature-performance-narrative.

Thalia Goldstein

Cognitive Science and the Study of Fictionality
Classical computationalism was committed to viewing
cognition in terms of physical symbol systems, using
representational formats akin to numbers, or language. Yet
it is now becoming clear this is at best a very partial model
that cannot account for and is in many cases incompatible
with the emerging evidence from neuroscience.
The study of how the human mind builds and inhabits
intricate fictional worlds has proved to be indispensable to
our understanding of representation, meaning construction,
social cognition, and many other central issues in Cognitive
Science. At the same time, there has been a “cognitive
revolution” in the disciplines traditionally interested in
fictional worlds, like literary studies or art theory. This
symposium presents the latest work of five researchers
studying the relation between fictionality and cognition.
They employ a variety of theoretical and empirical
approaches, and examine fictional worlds in all major
literary genres (narrative, lyric, drama), as well as in other
modalities such as film or virtual interaction in the WWW.

Speakers
Richard Gerrig
Professor of Psycholinguistics, Psychology Department,
SUNY, Stony Brook University. He is the author of
Experiencing Narrative Worlds (Gerrig 1993) and many
other publications on the psycholinguistics of narrative
worlds (see selected references).
Professor Gerrig will outline a participatory perspective
on readers’ experiences of fictional narratives. The
perspective asserts that readers function as side participants
to narrative events: They encode participatory responses as
reactions to characters’ utterances and actions. He will
review empirical projects that illustrate consequences of
reader participation. Those projects demonstrate, for
example, that readers’ preferences for characters’ decisions
structure their experiences of story outcomes. The
participatory perspective illustrates the potential for
cognitive science to illuminate readers’ experiences of
fictional narratives.

Postdoctoral Research Fellow at the Mind and Development
Lab, Department of Psychology, Yale University, with
Professor Paul Bloom. She has authored numerous
publications on the relation between acting, social cognition,
and development (see selected bibliography).
Dr. Goldstein will present on fictionality in dramatic
acting. Acting is a pervasive yet understudied part of
modern life, despite its connections to such diverse areas of
cognitive science as cognitive development, social
cognition, and emotion regulation. Building on experiments
recently conducted in her lab, she will lay out a psychology
of acting, focusing on the cognitive effects of engaging in
modern, realistic acting, why audiences are so absorbed by
acting and how children understanding distinctions between
actor and character.

Cristóbal Pagán Cánovas. Symposium Moderator
Marie Curie Research Fellow, Cognitive Science
Department, CWRU, with Professor Mark Turner. His
project applies research on conceptual integration, spatial
cognition and other areas of Cognitive Science to the study
of narrative patterns in figurative language with affective
meaning (see selected publications).
Dr. Pagán Cánovas will present on generic integration
networks, which constitute cross-cultural cognitive patterns
for the construction of fictional narratives in poetry. These
structures, grounded on spatial cognition from early
development, underlie one of the most typical functions of
the lyric: the expression of emotion through metaphor.

Francis Steen
Associate Professor, Department of Communication
Studies, UCLA. He is the author of numerous publications
on cognitive approaches to literature and art (e.g.
Richardson & Steen 2002, Steen 2005) and to fictional
worlds in computer science and the web (Steen et al. 2006).
He is also the editor of CogWeb: Cognitive Cultural Studies,
a reference site with 20 000 hits per month.
Professor Steen will examine simulations, agency, and
representational formats, in an exploration of what fiction
can tell us about cognition. Narrative provides an avenue for
investigating the representational formats that underlie and

1462

compose cognition. Agency is a central feature of narrative
and fictionality, and a deeper study of agency is essential to
understand core aspects of cognition, from the organizing
principles of action to the grounds of naive cartesianism.
Fiction itself is a form of simulation, a highly complex
cognitive activity that has a deep evolutionary history and
requires a sophisticated cognitive machinery. Much of
human problem solving must be understood from the point
of view of fiction rather than from the constrained
perspective of discursive reasoning.

Vera Tobin
Arnhold Faculty Fellow in Cognitive Approaches to
Literature at the University of California, Santa Barbara.
She has published extensively on cognitive narratology,
especially from the perspective of conceptual integration
theory (see selected publications).
Dr. Tobin will present on the readerly urge to repair
narrative gaps, and thus to revise fictional worlds. It is by
now a commonplace in the study of the mind that humans
are continually constructing narratives in order to impose
meaning and coherence on their memories and their selves.
But these narratives are often partial, temporary, and
internally inconsistent. Meanwhile, research on discourse
processing brings into question the extent to which we
actually construct detailed mental models of fictional worlds
as we read. Detailed meaning construction at the level of
global coherence with regard to an extended discourse or
narrative seems primarily to take place only in the smallest
minority of our most contemplative thinking moments.
Nevertheless, there is strong cultural evidence that people
crave and demand narrative coherence of exactly this sort.

Selected References Authored by the Speakers
Coulson, S. & Pagán Cánovas, C. (Forthcoming).
Understanding Timelines: Conceptual Metaphor and
Conceptual Integration. Cognitive Semiotics.
Gerrig, R. J. (1993). Experiencing narrative worlds. New
Haven: Yale University Press.
Gerrig, R. J., & Rapp, D. N. (2004). Psychological
processes underlying literary impact. Poetics Today, 25,
265-281.
Gerrig, R. J., & Jacovina, M. E. (2009). Reader participation
in the experience of narrative. In B. H. Ross (Ed.), The
psychology of learning and motivation (Vol. 51, pp. 223254). Burlington, MA: Academic Press.
Egidi, G., & Gerrig, R. J. (2009). How valence affects
language processing: Negativity bias and mood
congruence in narrative comprehension. Memory &
Cognition, 37, 547-555.
Goldstein, T.R., & Winner, E. (in press). Enhancing
empathy and theory of mind. Journal of Cognition and
Development.
Goldstein, T.R. & Bloom, P. (2011). The Mind Onstage:
Why Cognitive Scientists Should Study Acting. Trends in
Cognitive Science, 15, 141-142.

Goldstein, T.R. & Winner, E. (2010-2011). Engagement in
Role Play, Pretense and Acting Classes Predict Advanced
Theory of Mind Skill in Middle Childhood. Imagination,
Cognition, and Personality.
Goldstein, T.R. & Winner, E. (2010). A new lens on the
development of social cognition: The study of acting. In
C. Milbrath & C. Lightfoot (Eds.), The Arts and Human
Development. New York: Taylor and Francis.
Goldstein, T.R., Wu, K. & Winner, E. (2010) Actors are
experts in theory of mind but not empathy. Imagination,
Cognition, and Personality, 29, 115-133.
Goldstein, T.R. & Winner, E. (2009). Living in alternative
and inner worlds: Early signs of acting talent. Creativity
Research Journal, 21, 117-124.
Jacovina, M. E. & Gerrig, R. J. (2010). How readers
experience characters’ decisions. Memory and Cognition
38, 753-761.
Pagán Cánovas, C. (Forthcoming). The Genesis of the
Arrows of Love: Diachronic Conceptual Integration in
Greek Mythology. The American Journal of Philology.
Pagán Cánovas, C. (2011). Erotic Emissions in Greek
Poetry: A Generic Integration Network. To appear in
Cognitive Semiotics 6.
Pagán Cánovas, C. (2010). De bebés a poetas: integración
conceptual, cognición espacial y la poesía de las
emociones. ENSAYA’10 Prize for scientific and
humanistic journalism. University of La Rioja, Spain.
Rapp D. N. & Gerrig R. J. (2006). Predilections for
narrative outcomes: The impact of story contexts and
reader preferences. Journal of Memory & Language, 54,
54-67.
Richardson, A. & Steen, F. (Eds. & introduction).
(2002). Special issue, Literature and the Cognitive
Revolution. Poetics Today 23:1.
Steen, F. (2005). The Paradox of Narrative Thinking.
Journal of Cultural and Evolutionary Psychology 3:1, 87105.
Steen, F., Davies, M., Tynes, B. & Greenfield, P. (2006).
Digital Dystopia: Player Control and Strategic Innovation
in The Sims Online. In R. Schroeder & A. Axelsson
(Eds.) Avatars at Work and Play. London, UK: Springer.
Steen, Francis F. (2006). A Cognitive Account of
Aesthetics. In Mark Turner (Ed.). The Artful Mind:
Cognitive Science and the Riddle of Human Creativity.
Oxford University Press. 57-71.
Tobin, V. & Oakley, T. (In press). Attention, Blending, and
Suspense in Classic and Experimental Film. In R.
Schneider & M. Hartner (Eds.) Blending and the Study of
Narrative. Berlin: de Gruyter.
Tobin, V. (2009). Cognitive Bias and the Poetics of
Surprise. Language and Literature 18.2.
Tobin, V. (2006). Ways of Reading Sherlock Holmes.
Language and Literature 16.1. Winner of the 2006
Poetics and Linguistics Association (PALA) Prize.

1463

