UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Finding the Cause: Examining the Role of Qualitative Causal Inference through Categorical
Judgments

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7b07k1tx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Pacer, Michael
Ahn, Woo-Kyoung

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Finding the Cause: Examining the Role of Qualitative Causal Inference through
Categorical Judgments
Michael Pacer (mpacer@berkeley.edu)

Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
Woo-kyoung Ahn (woo-kyoung.ahn@yale.edu)

Department of Psychology, Yale U., 2 Hillhouse Ave
New Haven, CT 06520
Abstract
Previous work showed that people‟s causal judgments are
modeled better as estimates of the probability that a causal
relationship exists (a qualitative inference) than as estimates
of the strength of that relationship (a quantitative inference).
Here, using a novel task, we present experimental evidence in
support of the importance of qualitative causal inference. Our
findings cannot be explained through the use of parameter
estimation and related quantitative inference. These findings
suggest the role of qualitative inference in causal reasoning
has been understudied despite its unique role in cognition.
Further, we suggest these findings open interesting questions
about the role of qualitative inference in many domains.
Keywords: Causal
Categorization

Reasoning,

Qualitative

Inference,

Qualitative and Quantitative Causal Inference
Studies have distinguished between two types of causal
inferences: qualitative inferences (“whether an event X is or
is not a cause of Y”) and quantitative inferences (“to what
extent is X a cause of Y”; Griffiths & Tenenbaum, 2005;
Waldmann & Martignon, 1998). Causal reasoning has been
traditionally construed as making quantitative inferences of
causal strengths (e.g., Cheng, 1997; Rescorla & Wagner,
1972), in which data on presence or absence of two events 1
are used to estimate parameters, which describe the degree
of a relationship between the cause and effect.
Within this causal strength paradigm, qualitative
inferences are made by assessing the parameter estimates
relative to a threshold. If the estimate is above that
threshold, then it is a cause; if it is below, then it is not a
cause. Such an approach casts qualitative causal inference as
a process dependent upon quantitative inference. In the
current study, we demonstrate that qualitative causal
inference may play an important role such that people will
make judgments which conflict with the judgments
warranted by quantitative inference.

Quantitative and Non-Quantitative Data in Causal
Inference
While quantitative data can be used in making qualitative
1
We refer to the type of information captured in simple
contingency tables as quantitative information.

causal inferences of whether one event causes another, nonquantitative data2 can also be used in making qualitative
inferences. Previous studies (e.g., Griffiths & Tenenbaum,
2005; 2009; Kuhn 1997; Waldmann & Martignon, 1998)
have proposed that qualitative inference utilizes information
such as intuitive theories (e.g., an inductive bias such as
“novel foods may have unusual causal features, but common
foods do not”), temporal information (e.g., events exert their
influence on the future, not the past), or explicit claims (e.g.,
“X causes Y and Z”).
For instance, if a person‟s lips turn green after eating a
novel fruit, she may conclude from this single observation
that the fruit caused the discoloration. However, it is
unlikely that she will infer that the symptoms caused her to
eat the fruit or that a fruit with which she had a great deal of
experience (e.g. an apple) caused it. Additionally, if no
abnormal symptoms present after eating the novel fruit, she
may not think the fruit has any unusual causal features. Low
probability events (e.g. green lips) prompt people to seek
out causal explanations (e.g., Weiner, 1985), and if there is a
novel, preceding event, that event may be identified as the
cause even if quantitative data do not support that inference
(e.g., Hilton & Slugoski, 1986; Kahneman & Miller, 1986).

The Role of Qualitative and Quantitative Inference
What remain unknown are details of how qualitative and
quantitative inferences interact with one another (Griffiths
& Tenenbaum, 2009), or whether one is more fundamental
to inference generally. Previous work on causal inferences
could be thought of as assuming that quantitative causal
inferences are more fundamental, with qualitative inferences
generally treated as an afterthought to be computed using a
threshold and prior quantitative inferences.
Griffiths and Tenenbaum (2005) took another approach.
Rather than estimating a single value for the strength of the
causal relationship, Griffiths & Tenenbaum‟s model asks
“whether or not a causal relationship exists” (i.e. a
qualitative inference). In order to answer this, their model
uses a large number of possible values for the strength of the
causal relationship. In this way, their model gives the
probability of the existence of a causal relationship without
2
By non-quantitative we simply mean any type of data that
cannot be captured in a simple contingency table.

1412

making assumptions about its strength. Peoples‟ judgments
of causal strength actually better fit this type of qualitative
model than previous quantitative ones (but see, Lu, Yuille,
Liljeholm, Cheng & Holyoak, 2008). Like Griffiths and
Tenenbaum, we argue that qualitative causal inference is
important, perhaps fundamental to causal cognition, but our
hypothesis includes no assumptions associated with any
particular model.
We developed a paradigm which allows us to determine
whether qualitative or quantitative inference is more
predominantly used. The paradigm utilizes categorization
judgments to infer participants‟ causal inferences, based on
studies showing that background knowledge about causal
features of category members determine categorization (e.g.,
Ahn, 1999; Ahn, Kim, Lassaline, & Dennis, 2000; Rehder
& Hastie, 2001). We developed a novel problem in which
different categorical judgments would be made depending
on whether people engage in quantitative or qualitative
causal inference. Participants‟ judgments can be used to
determine which inference people used, as explained below.
In our experiments, participants read about two groups of
ten people. One group ate mushrooms from Bag A, and nine
people became sick, and one did not. The other group ate
mushrooms from Bag B, and one person became sick and
nine people did not.
Then participants read of a third group of ten people (Bag
X group, henceforth), who after eating mushrooms either
from Bag A or Bag B, five people became sick and five did
not. Participants were asked from which of the two bags
(Bag A or B) they thought the Bag X group likely ate.

Predictions of a Quantitative Approach
Formally, we treat this by comparing the probability of
two hypotheses conditional on a set of data. We can use
Bayes‟ rule (i.e. posterior
likelihood*prior, or P(H|D)
P(D|H)*P(H)) to calculate the posterior odds of the two
hypotheses given the known data. For our particular
problem the equation (1) looks as follows 3:
(

)

(

|

) (

)

(

)

(

|

) (

)

( )

Then to continue with our calculations we need to find the
likelihoods for both hypotheses (Bag A and Bag B). We
assume there is a unique, unknown value for the probability
of an event (e) given some cause (ci) (p(e|ci)), which can be
estimated (p^(e|ci)).4 In this scenario, p(e|ci) is the probability
of getting sick given that the person ate a mushroom from
Bag i. We estimate p^(e|ci) using maximum likelihood
Where Bag A and Bag B are the events where the Bag X group
ate from Bag A and Bag B, respectively, DX is the data from the
Bag X group (i.e. that 5 people got sick and 5 people did not get
sick), and DA,B is the data from the Bag A and B groups,
4
Other models of quantitative causal inference (e.g. P (Cheng
& Novick, 1992) and Power–PC (Cheng, 1997)) also estimate
3

p^(e|ci) with MLE.

estimation (MLE) . Under these assumptions, the
probability of someone getting sick given that they ate from
Bags A and B are, respectively, p^(e|cA) = .9 and p^(e|cB) = .1.
Then if we treat the incidence of each person getting sick
as an independent random variable, conditional on the
person haven eaten from Bag i, our likelihood function is
distributed as a Bin(10, p^(e|ci)). Under these assumptions,
the odds-likelihood equation is (2):
(

|

)

( )

(

)

(

|

)

( )

(

)

( )

That is, the likelihoods are equal to one another.
Because of this equality, we can surmise that, under this
model, if we are to predict any preference for one
hypothesis over another (i.e. not saying that Bag X is
equally likely to be either Bag A or B), then this preference
must derive from the prior. Since an equal number of people
ate from each bag originally, it is reasonable to say that the
priors are equal (i.e. P(Bag A) = P(Bag B)). There seems
little reason to assume a priori that people are more likely to
eat from either bag5. Using this model and its assumptions,
the posterior prediction is that the probabilities that the
people who ate from Bag X actually ate from Bag A or B
are equal (i.e. P(Bag A|DA,B,X) = P(Bag B|DA,B,X)).

Predictions of a Qualitative Approach: the
Importance of Qualitative Inference Hypothesis
The model above is one with strong ties to the tradition
of quantitative causal inference, in that it uses MLE to
estimate parameters used in its predictions and that it
effectively assumes the existence of a causal relationship
between at least one of the bags and getting sick 6. The
alternative hypothesis we wish to propose emphasizes the
importance of qualitative inference (IQI).
Generally put, our hypothesis is that, qualitative causal
inference (i.e. inference whether or not a cause exists) can
play a unique role in judgment not able to be described by
quantitative inference. In this case, we predict that
participants will prefer to say those from group X are more
likely to have eaten from Bag A than B.
In group A, nine of ten people became sick; this seems to
be a fairly low probability event. This potentially suggests
that there is some explanation, likely a causal one, for this
anomaly. The common cause principle (Reichenbach, 1956)
suggests that people would prefer in this case to appeal to a
common cause instead of multiple causes varying over nine
people. The common property across the nine people in this
scenario is eating mushroom. Thus, people would infer that
the mushroom had the causal feature of causing sickness.
As a result, mushrooms from Bag A are categorized as
being causes of sickness; this is a qualitative inference.
On the other hand, of those who ate mushrooms from bag
5

Even non-equal priors would predict no differences between
conditions if the quantitative data are held constant.
6
This assumption comes from allowing that p
^ (e|cA) ≠ p^(e|cB).

1413

B, only one of the ten became sick. This is more probable to
have occurred just incidentally in the world than nine of ten
becoming sick. People do not need to search for a causal
explanation including a common cause, since only one
person became sick. As a result, people will be less likely to
include “causes sickness” as a feature of mushrooms from
Bag B; this too is a qualitative inference.
Now, consider the group who ate from the unknown Bag
X. Five of these ten individuals became sick. This event, as
in the case of Bag A, is rather unusual. It may even suggest
that some underlying common cause for all five people‟s
sicknesses. People may infer that the mushrooms from Bag
X had the same feature of causing people to fall ill. Since
only Bag A had been inferred to contain mushrooms with
this property, people would conclude that Bag X is more
likely to be Bag A. This judgment contradicts judgments
based solely on quantitative inference, and we argue that it
arises because of the inference that Bag A and Bag X share
a qualitative causal feature.
Note, however, that according to IQI, if Bag B were to
also share a causal feature with Bag X, then both Bags A
and B would be judged to be equally likely to be Bag X.
This can be accomplished by creating a new causal feature,
which Bags B and X share, but which A does not. For
example, we alter the scenario so that the people who do not
get sick instead become high. That is, instead of 1 of the
people who ate from Bag B becoming sick and 9 of them
not becoming sick, 1 becomes sick and 9 become high. This
change extends to those who did not get sick when eating
from Bags X and A – of those who ate from Bag X, 5
became sick and 5 became high, and of those who ate from
Bag A, 9 became sick and 1 became high. In such a
scenario, the IQI hypothesis would predict the same thing as
the quantitative model (assuming equal priors): no
preference for either bag. Because these scenarios
effectively discriminate our hypotheses, we use them in
Experiment 1.

Experiment 1
Method
One hundred twenty Yale University undergraduates
participated in exchange for candy. Participants received
one of the two stimuli, as illustrated in Figure 1. In each
stimulus, participants read about two bags of mushrooms,
which contained one type of mushrooms. One group of 10
people ate mushrooms from each bag, and participants were
told the events that occurred to the members of each group.
They were then told about a new group of 10 individuals
who ate from only one of the two bags (Bag X). They were
given information about these individuals (e.g. “5 got sick
and 5 did not get sick”). Last, they were asked to estimate
either the likelihood that Bag X was Bag A, or the
likelihood that Bag X was Bag B. Varying the question in
this way controls for any potential biases inherent in the
scale. Participants made a vertical mark on a line denoting
the likelihood of the hypotheses, from 0 to 100%.

Suppose that there are two bags of mushrooms Bag A and
Bag B. In the first bag there are only mushrooms of type A,
and in the second bag there are only mushrooms of type B.
If nothing is said about an effect, you can assume there was
no effect.
When 10 people ate mushrooms from Bag A, 9 got sick and
1 did not get sick [got high].
When 10 people ate mushrooms from Bag B, 1 got sick and
9 did not get sick [got high].
Now, 10 more people ate mushrooms from only one bag,
either Bag A or Bag B.
5 got sick and 5 did not get sick [got high].
What is the likelihood that these 10 people ate from Bag A
{Bag B}? Please indicate by marking a vertical line (“|”) on
the scale below.

Figure 1: Scenario used in Experiment 1, 1-effect, Bag A
condition, with the differences to the 2-effect condition in
brackets (“[]”) and the Bag B condition in curly brackets
(“{}”).
Participants‟ marks on the response line were converted into
numbers ranging from 0 to 100 by measuring the distance of
the mark from the left anchor of the line.
There were two conditions, 1-effect and 2-effect. In the 1effect condition, one type of effect was either present or
absent (i.e., people got sick or did not get sick). In the 2effect condition, stimuli were the same except that “did not
get sick” was replaced with “got high,” resulting in two
types of effects – getting sick and getting high. To sum, the
study was a 2 (Question: Bag A or Bag B) × 2 (Condition:
1-effect vs. 2-effect) between-subjects design.

Results
Figure 2 summarizes the results. A 2 (Condition: 1-effect,
2-effect)  2 (Question: Bag A or Bag B) ANOVA found a
significant interaction, F (1,116) = 4.42, MSE = 1591.40, p
< .05, but there were no significant main effects of either
Condition, F (1,116) = 2.45, MSE = 880.20, p > .1, or
Question, F (1,116) = 1.80, MSE = 648.68, p > .1. Planned
comparisons showed that in the 1-effect condition, mean
likelihood ratings for Bag A (53.3%, SD = 11.67) were
greater than those for Bag B (41.3%, SD = 21.06), t (58) =
2.72, p <. 01, d = .70. In the 2-effect condition, however,
there was no significant difference, t (58) = .49, p > .6 (Bag
A: M = 51.4%, SD = 20.03; Bag B: M = 54.0%, SD = 21.42).
These results contradict the quantitative model and
support the IQI hypothesis in two ways. First, the
quantitative model predicted that in the 1-effect condition,
participants should give equal likelihood ratings between
Bag A and Bag B. Yet, as predicted by the IQI hypothesis,
they gave higher likelihood ratings to Bag A. According to
IQI hypothesis, this result was obtained because Bag A
shared a causal feature with Bag X. Second, the quantitative
model predicted no difference between the 1-effect and 2-

1414

effect conditions, as the quantitative data are identical. Yet,
people gave higher ratings to Bag A only in the 1-effect
condition and not in the 2-effect condition. The IQI
predicted no difference in preference for the two bags in the
2-effect condition because both Bags A and B have causal
features that Bag X has.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 replicates the findings of Experiment 1
using different manipulations. We developed a new
condition to compare to the 1-effect condition from
Experiment 1. This new condition, called 2-cause condition,
is exactly like the 1-effect condition, except that we
explicitly state that mushrooms within both bags contain
chemicals known to cause sickness.
Because the amount or potency of the chemicals is not
mentioned, the quantitative model would still predict no
preference for either Bag A or B in the 2-cause condition,
just as in the 1-effect condition. The IQI hypothesis predicts
that in the 2-cause condition participants should be more
ambivalent about Bag X‟s identity, making participants
more prone to think that the two bags are equally likely.
Thus, the quantitative model predicts no difference between
1-effect and 2-cause conditions, whereas the IQI hypothesis
predicts that preference for Bag A would be obtained only
in the 1-effect condition.

Method
We recruited one hundred three participants through
Craigslist. They participated in an online survey using
Qualtrics®, with the option of entering a lottery for a $20
gift certificate to an online store.
There were two conditions, using either 1-effect or 2cause scenario. The 1-effect scenario was the same as in
Experiment 1. The 2-cause scenario was the same as the 1effect scenario except that after the first two sentences, the
following was inserted:
Mushrooms of type A contain Adelosinol, mushrooms
of type B contain Blemosine. Adelosinol and
Blemosine are known to cause people to become sick.
Instead of asking participants to give a scalar response,
we gave participants a 3-alternative-forced-choice question
(“Please choose whichever bag you think that it is most
likely that these 10 people ate from.”), with the answer
choices of “Bag A”, “Bag B”, or “Both bags are equally
likely.” That is, we explicitly provided an option for “both
bags are equally likely” instead of inferring this choice from
a scalar response. This way, we highlighted to participants
that both bags could be equally likely, as predicted by the
quantitative model. Yet, the IQI hypothesis predicted the
preference for this option only in the 2-cause condition.

Results
Figure 3 depicts the proportion of each option chosen by
condition. Although the stimuli differed only minimally,
participants‟ responses were significantly different between
the two conditions, 2 (2, N = 103) = 6.58, p < .05,  = .25.

Figure 2: Mean Likelihood Judgments with SE bars in
Experiment 1.
Given that the quantitative information was exactly the same
across scenarios, this finding is unexplainable using our
quantitative model.
More importantly, we can verify the IQI predictions using
a 2-Goodness of Fit Test to compare the proportion of
responses within conditions to an uninformed random
response (i.e. each choice being chosen one-third of the
time). The IQI predicts that the most frequent response in
the 1-effect condition would be Bag A, and this was the case
(“Bag A” chosen 49%, 2 (2, N = 51) = 8.59, p < .05,  =
.41). The IQI predicts that in the 2-cause condition,
however, the most frequent response would be “both bags
are equally likely”; this too was the case (“Both bags”
chosen 56%, 2 (2, N = 52) = 12.04, p < .005,  = .48). Thus
both predictions of the IQI hypothesis are fulfilled.

100%
90%
80%
70%

Both bags are
equally likely
Bag B is more
likely
Bag A is more
likely

60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
1-effect 2-cause

Figure 3: Proportion of times participants in Experiment 2
chose each option in response to the prompt “Please choose
whichever bag you think that it is most likely that these 10
people ate from.”

1415

Discussion
Two experiments pitted the predictions of two hypotheses
for predicting participants‟ categorization judgments against
one another. One model uses MLE to make quantitative
inferences based on quantitative information specified in the
scenarios, just as many models of causal induction estimate
parameter values of causal strengths based on quantitative
information. However, the IQI hypothesis uses qualitative
inferences about objects‟ causal features to guide judgment.
Participants‟ categorization judgments better fit the
predictions made by the hypothesis that emphasizes the role
of qualitative inference than those made by the model that
considered only quantitative inference.
Assuming that equal priors for people choosing to eat
from Bag A and B 7, the quantitative model predicts no
differences in participants‟ judgments across all experiments
and conditions. Particularly, it predicts that participants
should claim that Bag X is equally likely to be either Bag A
or Bag B. This model is unable to explain any of the
differences found between the conditions, or the general
preference for Bag A (or against Bag B) found in both
studies‟ 1-effect conditions.
However, the results match the predictions made by our
instantiation of the IQI hypothesis. Participants in the 1effect conditions expected that Bag X was more likely to be
Bag A than Bag B. The IQI predicted this due to the
inference of a causal feature shared by Bags X and A that
Bag B lacked. On the other hand, in both the 2-effect and 2cause conditions, participants judged that the bags were
equally likely. The IQI predicted these results because
participants presumably made qualitative inferences that
Bag X shared a causal feature with both Bags A and B. By
using a forced choice paradigm in Experiment 2‟s 2-cause
condition, we were able to establish not only that
participants lacked a preference for Bag A or B, but that the
option, “both bags are equally likely,” was indeed
participants‟ most preferred response, the strongest possible
prediction made by our hypothesis. Every prediction made
by the IQI hypothesis obtained.
Previous evidence supporting the idea that qualitative
causal inferences are not merely a function of quantitative
inference and a threshold was limited to causal judgment
tasks, specifically to how well different models fit
participants‟ responses in these tasks (Griffiths &
Tenenbaum, 2005; Lu et al., 2008). The experiments
presented here go one step further and investigate the role of
qualitative causal inference in other cognitive processes,
using its effects on a categorization judgment (i.e., should
Bag X be categorized as Bag A or B?) to infer its presence.
The current studies demonstrate not only that qualitative
causal inference can result in judgments that contradict the
judgments suggested by quantitative inference, but that
qualitative causal inferences play a larger role in cognition
than previously suspected. Still, there is much yet to be
7
If priors were unequal, this would have predicted a systematic
bias for Bag A or B that did not change across conditions.

learned about the complete role of qualitative inference in
reasoning.

Future Work
There are many open questions in relation to precise
relationship between qualitative and quantitative causal
inferences and how they affect other cognitive processes.
What other types of judgments and inferences rely on
qualitative inference independent of quantitative inference?
What is the time course of these inferences? For example,
are qualitative inferences judged first, only to estimate the
strength of the relationship later? Does use of one type of
inference differentially affect causal learning, especially
with regards to active data search and planned intervention?
What is the underlying computation that is driving our
effects? Bayesian models of qualitative causal inference
exist (Griffiths & Tenenbaum, 2005; 2009), however, much
work is still needed before we understand how to include
qualitative inferences into hypotheses tests as in (1). For
instance, the task used in the current study did not provide
all information required to derive predictions of existing
quantitative models of causal induction, namely, frequencies
of all four cells in a contingency table. Extensions of our
studies which provide this data will allow the testing of
various models‟ predictions. Discovering the roles played
by qualitative and quantitative inference is an important part
of all inferential tasks, and as such advances on this problem
may have wide implications for cognition generally
(Griffiths & Tenenbaum, 2009).
Inferential tasks are notoriously difficult and even young
children are skilled inferential learners. Perhaps the use of
qualitative inference bestows unique advantages when one
is learning. And these advantages might change over
development as one gains more experience and data. For
example, learners (e.g. children) use qualitative inference to
guide their exploratory behavior by focusing first on
gathering information about objects with unknown causal
structure (Gweon & Schulz, 2008), only to estimate precise
parameters later.
There are theoretical similarities between the qualitative
inference of hidden causal features as we discuss them here
and essentialism, which some argue plays an integral role in
categorization (Gelman, 2003). For instance, a raccoon
transformed to look like a skunk which then shares many
surface features with the category “skunk” is still classified
as a raccoon presumably because of people‟s qualitative
inference to the hidden essence (Keil, 1989). One might
consider these surface features “quantitative data”. Then,
this task similarly pits inference which considers only
quantitative data (something related to quantitative
inference as we discuss it) against qualitative inference.
Under this perspective, these essentialist judgments could be
thought to be in line with our hypothesis that qualitative
inference sometimes overrides quantitative inference in
guiding judgment.
Essentialism has been implicated as a process relevant to
many different domains of reasoning (Gelman, 2003). Thus

1416

if the sorts of qualitative inferences we discuss here are
related to essentialism, qualitative causal inference may play
a role in many domains. Yet, what role it plays in each
domain may vary. Thus further investigation into how the
role of qualitative inference changes across domains may
prove very fruitful.

Conclusions
Our experiments use categorical judgments to explore the
roles of qualitative and quantitative causal inference. We
test the predictions of one computational model using MLE
to estimate parameters in the spirit of traditional models of
quantitative inference against the predictions of a hypothesis
that suggests people infer causal features in objects and will
use these qualitative inferences in later categorization
judgments. This hypothesis suggests that qualitative
inference plays an important, unique role in cognition. The
results support the notion that qualitative inference can
result judgments that conflict with the judgments suggested
by quantitative inference.
Because of the generality of the problem of inference, and
the potential role of qualitative inference in other inferential
tasks, there is need for further study of the role of qualitative
inference in many varieties of cognitive processes.

Acknowledgments
Many thanks to Benjamin Rottman and Joshua Tenenbaum
for commentary on the project, and Elizabeth Seiver, Chris
Holdgraf, and Caren Walker for comments on a draft of this
paper. This research was supported in part by a National
Institute of Health Grant MH57737 given to the second
author.

References
Ahn, W. (1999). Effect of Causal Structure on Category
Construction. Memory & Cognition, 27, 1008-1023
Ahn, W., Kim, N. S., Lassaline, M. E., & Dennis, M. J.
(2000). Causal status as a determinant of feature
centrality, Cognitive Psychology, 41, 361-416.
Cheng, P.W. (1997). From covariation to causation: A
causal power theory. Psychological Review, 104, 367405.
Cheng, P. W., & Novick, L. R. (1992). Covariation in
natural causal induction. Psychological Review, 99, 365382.
Gelman, S. A. (2003). The essential child: Origins of
essentialism in everyday thought. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Gopnik, A. & Schulz, L. (eds.) (2007) Causal learning:
Psychology, philosophy, and computation. New York:
Oxford University Press
Griffiths, T.L., & Tenenbaum J. (2005). Structure and
strength in causal induction. Cognitive Psychology, 51,
334-384.
Griffiths, T. L., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2009). Theory-based
causal induction. Psychological Review, 116, 661-716.

Gweon, H., & Schulz, L. (2008). Stretching to learn:
Ambiguous evidence and variability in preschoolers'
exploratory play. Proceedings of the 30th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 570-574.
Hilton, D. J., & Slugoski, B. R. (1986). Knowledge-based
causal attribution: The abnormal conditions focus model.
Psychological Review, 93, 75-88.
Kahneman, D., & Miller, D. T. (1986). Norm theory:
Comparing reality to its alternatives. Psychological
Review, 93, 136-153.
Keil, F. C. (1989). Concepts, kinds, and cognitive
development. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kuhn, D. (1997). Is good thinking scientific thinking? In D.
R. Olson & N. Torrance (Eds.), Modes of
thought: Explorations in culture and cognition (pp. 261281). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Liljeholm, M. & Cheng, P.W. (2009). The influence of
virtual sample size on confidence and causal strength
judgments. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 35(1:1) 157–172.
Lu, H., Yuille, A. L., Liljeholm, M., Cheng, P. W., &
Holyoak, K. J. (2008). Bayesian generic priors for causal
learning. Psychological Review, 115, 955-982.
Marr, D. (1982). Vision: A computational investigation into
the human representation and processing of visual
information. Henry Holt & Company.
Rehder, B. & Hastie, R. (2001). Causal knowledge and
categories: The effects of causal beliefs on categorization,
induction, and similarity. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 130, 323-360.
Rescorla, R. A., & Wagner, A. R. (1972). A theory of
Pavlovian conditioning: Variations in the effectiveness of
reinforcement and nonreinforcement. In A. H. Black &
W. F. Prokasy (Eds.), Classical conditioning II: Current
research and theory (pp. 64-99). New York, NY:
Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Reichenbach, H. (1956). The Direction of Time. University
of California Press, Berkeley.
Waldmann, M. R., & Martignon, L. (1998). A Bayesian
network model of causal learning. In M. A. Gernsbacher
& S. J. Deny (Eds.), Proceedings of the 20th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 11021107). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Weiner, B. (1985). „Spontaneous‟ causal thinking.
Psychological Bulletin, 97, 74-84.

1417

