UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Funding Opportunities for Cognitive Scientists through the Institute of Education Sciences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1sx6r4dv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Author
Sussman, Amy

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Funding Opportunities for Cognitive Scientists through the
Institute of Education Sciences
Amy L. Sussman (amy.sussman@ed.gov)
Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education
555 New Jersey Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20208 USA

Keywords: Education; learning; academic achievement;
grants; government agency

The Institute of Education Sciences (IES) provides
opportunities for researchers to bring their knowledge of
cognitive science and learning to bear on education practice.
This poster describes the funding opportunities available
through both the National Center for Education Research
(NCER) and the National Center for Special Education
Research (NCSER). The presentation will also include
information about the requirements for proposed research
projects.
Although cognitive science has generated new and
important knowledge on how people learn over the last 30
years, most of these research principles have not been
incorporated into education practice. Two IES programs
that focus on the application of fundamental knowledge of
learning to education may be of particular interest to the
Cognitive Science Society membership. NCER’s
“Cognition and Student Learning” aims to establish a
scientific foundation for education by building on
theoretical and empirical advances in cognitive science and
applying them to education practice with the goal of
improving student learning and academic achievement.
NCSER’s “Cognition and Student Learning in Special
Education” seeks to apply recent advances in cognitive
science to improve developmental outcomes for infants and
toddlers with or at risk for disabilities and learning for
students with or at risk for disabilities. Through each of
these programs, the Institute supports research that utilizes
cognitive science to develop, implement, and evaluate
approaches intended to improve teaching and learning in
authentic education settings.
In general, research funded by the Institute focuses on
improving learning and academic achievement, as well as
reducing the achievement gap between high- and lowperforming students and increasing access to postsecondary
education. The Institute funds research in a variety of
ongoing and new grant programs relevant to cognitive
processes in typical students and children with disabilities.
Topics include autism spectrum disorders; reading, writing,
and language development; mathematics and science
education; early learning and intervention; education
technology; and others. In addition to the development and
evaluation of effective education programs, IES funds
research that explores the underlying processes that may be
enhancing or inhibiting learning outcomes, identifies the
relations between education outcomes and malleable factors,

and examines the conditions that may mediate or moderate
these relations. There are also funding opportunities for
post-doctoral training grants, as well as Research and
Development Centers that focus on specific topics in need
of more research.
A number of members of the Cognitive Science Society
have received funding from the Institute of Education
Sciences. This poster presentation is intended as an
opportunity for other members to learn more about the
programs funded by the Institute and to encourage interested
investigators to apply their research skills to the
improvement of education and student achievement.
Dr. Amy Sussman, Program Officer for the Cognition
and Student Learning in Special Education program, will be
available to discuss the Institute’s research programs with
potential applicants.

1879

