UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Generics Are a Cognitive Default: Evidence From Sentence Processing

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8t61q5g6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Meyer, Meredith
Gelman, Susan A.
Stilwell, Sarah M.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Generics Are a Cognitive Default: Evidence From Sentence Processing

Meredith Meyer (mermeyer@umich.edu), Susan A. Gelman (gelman@umich.edu),
and Sarah M. Stilwell (stilwell@umich.edu)
Department of Psychology, 530 Church Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1043 USA

Abstract

sentence Dogs have four legs as Most dogs have four legs,
sets quantified by most similarly do not equate to the
referents of generics. Consider, for instance, that although
Sharks attack swimmers is often judged as acceptable, Most
sharks attack swimmers is not. Generics are thus not
reducible to quantifiers conveying statistical prevalence
(e.g., Cimpian, Gelman, & Brandone, 2010).
Noting these sorts of distinctions, most semantic analyses
impute qualitative differences between generic and
quantified reference (Carlson, 2010; Leslie, 2008) and reject
earlier quantificational analyses treating generics as if they
contained implicit quantification (e.g., Clark, 1973).
Generics instead are kind-referring (Carlson, 2010), and as
such, they allow speakers to discuss entirely abstract
concepts rather than sets of individuals. That is, kinds have
no direct real-world instantiation, but rather are mental
representations, and generics are the linguistic means of
referring directly to these representations.

We tested the hypothesis that generics (e.g., Dogs have four
legs) are a cognitive default, thereby allowing faster and less
effortful processing in comparison to quantified noun phrases
(e.g., all dogs). Participants judged sentences containing
either generics or universally-quantified noun phrases as true
or false. Under time pressure, participants treated universallyquantified noun phrases as if they were generics (e.g.,
responding true to All dogs have four legs, despite the
existence of three-legged dogs). Participants also took longer
to respond to sentences with universal quantifiers vs.
generics. Data thus support a generics-as-default account.
Keywords:
processing.

generics;

quantifiers;

concepts;

sentence

Introduction
Generic noun phrases, or generics (e.g., Giraffes have long
necks) refer to kinds rather than specific individuals (e.g.,
Those giraffes have long necks). Due to their unique
semantic and conceptual attributes, generics have attracted
attention in fields as diverse as philosophy, linguistics, and
psychology (Gelman, 2003; Leslie, 2008; Pelletier, 2010).
Still, little is known about how generics are represented and
accessed cognitively. In the current study, we examined one
contemporary proposal that to date has received little direct
empirical support, namely the idea that generics are a
cognitive default (though see Leslie, 2008, for a theoretical
and philosophical treatment).
In broad form, the generics-as-default proposal holds that
the referents of generics are early-acquired and easily
accessible, and therefore that generics present few cognitive
processing demands to speakers. Additionally, the proposal
holds that processing quantified sets (e.g., all Xs, most Xs)
requires more effort and draws on more sophisticated and
later-developing mechanisms.
An important assumption of the generics-as-default
account is the claim that generics are fundamentally distinct
from noun phrases marked by explicit quantifiers such as all
or most. Note the contrast, for instance, between Dogs have
four legs and All dogs have four legs. Whereas only one
three-legged dog is needed to falsify the claim that fourleggedness applies to all dogs, generics allow for
counterexamples; despite the occasional three-legged dog
you may have encountered, the statement Dogs have four
legs remains acceptable. Further, while one might recast the

Support for the Generics-as-Default Position
Recognizing the fundamental distinction between generics
and quantified sets, the generics-as-default position further
characterizes generics as referring to cognitively basic kindbased representations. The proposal draws empirical support
from a number of observations. First, generics are
ubiquitous; they have been found in every human language
that has been studied (e.g., Gelman & Tardif, 1998; GoldinMeadow, Gelman, & Mylander, 2005). However, there is no
explicit word or morpheme in any language that
unambiguously expresses genericity (e.g., Carlson, 2010;
Leslie, 2008); instead, generics are typically signaled by a
lack of marking, a pattern consistent with how default or
stereotypical concepts are expressed in language (e.g.,
Levinson, 2000).
Second, despite the impoverished marking of generics,
they are acquired early in development. Corpus-based
studies of English-speaking children, for example, suggest
that children start to produce generics at about age 2½ years
(Gelman et al., 1998), at about the same time they acquire
relevant linguistic markings needed to express these forms
and distinguish them from particular and/or quantified
forms (e.g., nouns modified by determiners or quantifiers)
(Gelman, 2004). As well, young children often have
difficulty in comprehending quantifiers such as all and

913

some, and make errors suggesting that at first they interpret
quantified reference as generic, only later acquiring
comprehension of the quantifier. For instance, when threeyear-old children were asked whether properties (e.g., being
hot) were true of all members of a set (e.g., all fires), some
members of a set (some fires), or of the generic kind (fires),
they tended not to differentiate among the three forms,
instead responding with patterns similar to those observed
within four-year-old children's and adults' responses to those
items featuring generic forms (Hollander, Gelman, & Star,
2002).
The observations outlined above are consistent with a
generics-as-default account. However, it is only recently
that the generics-as-default position has been put to the test
in empirical psycholinguistic studies. In one recent study,
Leslie and Gelman (2011) demonstrated that for both
preschool-aged children and adults, quantified statements
were more often misremembered as statements about
generics than vice versa. For instance, after learning All cats
sweat through their paws, both child and adult participants
were likely to report having heard Cats sweat through their
paws after a short (four-minute) delay. The reverse error,
however, was rarely observed, suggesting that generic
representations are robust in memory and resilient against
distortion.

presented first in isolation, followed by the predicate in
isolation.)
Our main comparison of interest was thus between
processing of sentences that we expected would be judged
true in generic form (e.g., Dogs have four legs) and false in
universally-quantified form (e.g., All dogs have four legs).
We called these sentences wide-scope, since, for instance,
most but not all dogs have four legs. We also included
sentences of two other types of scope. First, we asked
participants to judge full-scope sentences, i.e., sentences for
which the predicate would likely be judged true of all
instances as well as the generic kind (e.g., All
giraffes/Giraffes have long necks). These sentences were
included for two reasons. First, they required participants to
sometimes respond true for universally-quantified
sentences, minimizing the concern that participants would
simply learn a rule that universally-quantified sentences
were always false in this experiment. Second, we also had
theoretically-motivated predictions regarding participants'
accuracy and response time for these items. Namely,
although we did not predict differences in accuracy between
responses to generic and universally-quantified sentences
(since if participants defaulted to a generic reading, they
should still respond true to a universally-quantified
sentence), we did predict differences in response time.
Specifically, we predicted that verifying a generic full-scope
sentence would take less time than verifying a universallyquantified full-scope sentence, since default generic
representations should be more easily and quickly accessed
than quantified sets.
Finally, we also included irrelevant-scope sentences, i.e.,
sentences that we expected would be judged false in both
universally-quantified and generic form, e.g., All squirrels/
Squirrels have beaks. Including irrelevant-scope sentences
also served two separate purposes. First, it required
responses of false to sentences containing generics,
minimizing the concern that participants would simply learn
a rule that generic sentences were always true in this
experiment. Second, these items provided us a baseline
measure of how much time was required to falsify a
sentence in our experiment. Recall that one of our main
predictions was that falsifying a universally-quantified
wide-scope sentence (e.g., All dogs have four legs) would
take longer than verifying a generic wide-scope sentence
(e.g., Dogs have four legs). Since language processing
studies consistently demonstrate a time advantage for
verification over falsification (e.g., Carpenter & Just, 1975),
simply demonstrating longer processing for All dogs have
four legs could be explained by this basic verification
advantage rather than faster access to generic
representations. However, if participants were slower to
falsify All dogs have four legs over and above the time it
took to falsify irrelevant-scope sentences, this would
suggest that the increase in time was due to some other
processing demand aside from that required by mere
falsification. (See Table 1 for sample sentences.)

Overview of the Current Study
The current study focuses on real-time processing of
sentences containing generic and quantified noun phrases.
This approach has the advantage of testing predictions
regarding on-line comprehension of generics derived from
the generics-as-default position, and to our knowledge is the
first study to directly examine this type of processing.
The basic logic behind the current study is this: If
generics are default, it should be easier to judge that a
property is characteristic of a generic kind (e.g., dogs) than
of a quantified set (e.g., all dogs). We expected this generic
advantage to be especially apparent when participants were
asked to make their judgments under time pressure. That is,
when speeded, we expected participants to have the most
difficulty in processing quantified sets, reflected by
participants' treating quantified statements as if they
contained generics--in other words, answering based on the
more accessible representation (the generic kind). For
instance, when judging the sentence All dogs have four legs,
we expected speeded participants to be more likely to
default to a judgment about the generic dogs, and thus
respond that this sentence is true. We also predicted that
response times would reflect the effort required to process a
generic vs. a quantified noun phrase; that is, the time
participants took to judge All dogs have four legs would be
longer than the time required to judge Dogs have four legs.
(To eliminate the problem of universally-quantified
sentences always being longer in length, and thus predicted
to require more time to process, noun phrases were always

914

Table 1: Sample Sentences by Scope and Form
Scope

Sentence* in Universally
Quantified Form

Predicted

Sentence* in Generic Form

Response**

Predicted
Response**

Irrelevant

All squirrels have beaks

FALSE

Squirrels have beaks

FALSE

Full

All giraffes have long necks

TRUE

Giraffes have long necks

TRUE

Wide

All dogs have four legs

FALSE

Dogs have four legs

TRUE

* Subject noun phrases were presented in isolation, followed by predicates. Participants responded once the predicate appeared.
** Participants' responses that matched predicted responses were considered accurate; responses that mismatched predicted responses
were considered inaccurate.

of universally-quantified and generic forms within each
scope type.

Method
Participants

Procedure

Thirty-three
undergraduate
students
(19
female)
participated. Data from one individual were excluded
because average response time was more than 2.5 SDs
above the group mean, leaving a final total sample of 32.

Sentences were presented on E-Prime v. 2.0.8.22. For
each sentence, the noun phrase appeared in the center of the
screen in isolation for 2000 ms.. Immediately after, the
predicate appeared in isolation. (Noun phrase and predicate
were presented separately so as to avoid a systematic
increase in response time for the sentences containing the
universally-quantified forms, as these included one
additional word relative to the generic forms [all].)
Participants judged whether each sentence created by a
given noun phrase and its predicate was true or false by
pressing the appropriate key. Half the participants were
instructed to answer as quickly as possible (speeded
condition), whereas the other half of participants were told
that they could take as long as they wanted (unspeeded
condition). Response key locations for true and false were
counterbalanced across participants. Participants were not
given feedback for either correct or incorrect answers; every
response was simply followed by a 1000 ms blank screen
and then the next trial.

Materials
Participants judged a main set of 44 sentences (Set 1) as true
or false. Each sentence contained a noun phrase and a
predicate. Universally-quantified vs. generic noun form was
within-subjects, i.e., within the set, half the sentences
referred to universally-quantified referents (i.e., all + noun +
-s), while the other half referred to generic categories (i.e.,
noun + -s). Universally-quantified and generic forms were
grouped in two separate blocks. We also created three
practice sentences that did not refer to either a generic or a
quantified set. Participants responded to these sentences
before the main set to acquaint themselves with the task.
We created three additional versions of the main set for
counterbalancing purposes. Specifically, for each noun, Set
2 used the noun form that was different from Set 1 (e.g., Set
1 used the generic dogs, whereas Set 2 used the universallyquantified all dogs). Thus, across subjects, every noun
appeared in both generic and universally-quantified form an
equal number of times. Sets 3 and 4 reversed block order of
presentation from Sets 1 and 2, such that half the
participants responded to the generic block first, and the
other half to the universally-quantified block first.
In addition to varying in noun form (universallyquantified vs. generic), sentences also varied along scope.
As described above, we expected participants to falsify
irrelevant-scope sentences in both universally-quantified
and generic form, and to verify full-scope sentences in both
universally-quantified and generic form. Finally, we
predicted that wide-scope sentences would be judged false
in universally-quantified form but true in generic form. Each
participant responded to 12 irrelevant-scope, 16 full-scope,
and 16 wide-scope sentences, and there were equal numbers

Results
Accuracy Analysis
We performed a mixed between-within 2 (speed condition:
speeded vs. unspeeded) x 2 (noun form: universallyquantified vs. generic) x 3 (scope: irrelevant vs. full vs.
wide) ANOVA on accuracy (i.e., degree to which responses
matched the predicted true vs. false responses), with speed
condition as the between-subjects variable, and noun form
and scope as within-subjects variables.
The ANOVA yielded main effects for speed condition
(F(1, 30) = 4.11, p = .05), noun form (F(1, 30) = 31.12, p <
.001), and scope (F(1.51, 45.28) = 39.19, p < .001). These
main effects were qualified by two two-way interactions:
Noun form x speed condition (F(1, 30) = 8.94, p = .006) and
noun form x scope (F(1.31, 39.38) = 10.53, p = .001).

915

These interactions were further qualified by the predicted
three-way speed condition x noun form x scope interaction
(F(1.31, 39.38) = 8.10, p = .004, ηp² = .27). No additional
significant main effects or interactions were observed.
(Greenhouse-Geisser corrected statistics are reported due to
violations in sphericity.)
To further explore the nature of the three-way interaction,
we used Bonferroni-corrected paired t-tests to compare
accuracy on universally-quantified vs. generic form
sentences within scope and speeded vs. unspeeded
conditions. The only significant difference was, as
predicted, in the speeded wide-scope condition, with
accuracy higher for sentences containing generics (M =
89.84%, SD = 11.38) than for sentences containing the
universal quantifier all (M = 55.47%, SD = 25.40), t (15) =
5.97, p < .001, Cohen's d = 1.74 (Figure 1).

predicted three-way speed condition x noun form x scope
interaction, F (1.58, 45.89) = 7.17, p = .004, ηp² = .26).
(Greenhouse-Geisser corrected statistics are reported due to
violations in sphericity.)
We explored this three-way interaction using Bonferronicorrected paired t-tests, comparing response times to
sentences containing universally-quantified vs. generic
forms within each scope and speed condition. No
differences were observed for sentences with irrelevant
scope (ps > .05). For full-scope sentences, participants were
faster to respond to sentences containing generic vs.
universally-quantified forms in both speeded (Mgeneric =
931.32 ms, SD = 253.93 vs. Muniversally-quantified = 1057.06 ms,
SD = 219.94; t (15) = 5.01, p < .001, Cohen's d = 1.35) and
unspeeded conditions (Mgeneric = 1427.91 ms, SD = 208.52;
Muniversally-quantified = 1842.39 ms, SD = 572.54; t (15) = 5.50,
p < .001, Cohen's d = 2.78). Finally, for wide-scope
sentences, there were no differences in response times for
generic vs. universally-quantified sentences in the
unspeeded condition (p > .05), but when speeded,
participants were faster to respond to generic sentences (M
= 900.05 ms, SD = 204.03) vs. universally-quantified
sentences (M = 1065.71 ms, SD = 180.57, t (14) = 4.62, p <
.001, Cohen's d = 1.11) (Figure 2).
A final Bonferroni-corrected paired t-test compared
response times for universally-quantified speeded widescope vs. irrelevant-scope sentences. This was done to
establish that the difference between the speeded generic
and universally-quantified wide-scope sentences described
above was not attributable merely to the demands required
by "mere falsification". As expected, the time speeded
participants took to falsify irrelevant-scope universallyquantified sentences (M = 950.64 ms, SD = 158.51) was less
than the time to falsify wide-scope universally-quantified
sentences (M = 1065.71 ms, SD = 180.57), t (14) = 3.07, p =
.008.

Response Time Analysis
We analyzed response times for correct responses. Response
times that were outside 2.5 standard deviations of an
individual's mean time were removed. Due to positive skew,
we log-tranformed the data. Analyses were conducted on
these transformed data, but raw means (in milliseconds) are
provided for ease of interpretation. For comparisons
involving response times to wide-scope sentences, data from
one individual were excluded due to all responses within
this condition being either incorrect or being outliers
(resulting in no data for that cell).
We used a mixed-between 2 (speed condition: speeded vs.
unspeeded) x 2 (noun form: universally-quantified vs.
generic) x 3 (scope: irrelevant vs. full vs. wide) ANOVA to
examine response times. Main effects were observed for
speed condition (F (1, 29) = 56.84, p < .001), noun form (F
(1, 29) = 35.13, p < .001), and scope (F (2, 58) = 15.73, p <
.001). These main effects were qualified by two two-way
interactions: Noun form x scope (F (1.58, 45.9) = 12.31, p <
.001) and scope x speed condition (F (1.88, 54.50) = 8.45, p
= .001). Finally, these in turn were qualified by the

Figure 1: Accuracy (%) within scope, speed, and
noun form condition

Figure 2: Correct response times (ms) within scope,
speed, and noun form condition

916

Discussion

quantifiers relative to generics. For instance, recall the
comparison between the sentences Most sharks attack
swimmers and Sharks attack swimmers described earlier.
The latter sentence has been proposed as a subtype of
generic reference, in which dangerous and highly salient
properties may be acceptably predicated of a generic kind,
even if that property is true of only a minority of instances
(e.g., Khemlani, Leslie, & Glucksberg, 2009; Leslie, 2008).
Here again, we would also expect that responding to a
predicate that follows a most-quantified noun phrase would
take longer than responding to the same predicate following
a generic noun phrase. A study including such items is
currently underway. One intriguing possibility is that
participants' verification time for these "rare-but-dangerous"
generics will be even faster than for the wide- and full-scope
generics featured in the current study, suggesting robust
connections between salient dangerous qualities and the
kinds that possess them.
It will also be instructive to research distinctions between
generics and non-quantified reference such as definite
reference (e.g., the dogs). A small amount of
neurophysiological work supports the idea that there are
qualitative distinctions between generics and this type of
noun phrase, making further investigations into underlying
cognitive mechanisms an inviting possibility. Namely,
Prasada and colleagues have conducted ERP studies
comparing processing for sentences containing generic
kind-referring terms (e.g., Grass is green) vs. sentences
containing definite reference (e.g., The grass is green). In
this study, the authors found larger N400 responses to kindreferring generics. Although the precise reason for the
differences could not be established in the study, the authors
speculate that a generic's reference to concepts within
semantic memory likely recruits different processes for
understanding (as opposed to the referents of definite noun
phrases, which depend on discourse and contextual
considerations for comprehension) (Prasada et al., 2008).
Finally, it will also be useful to extend the current study to
a developmental population. Given that generics appear to
be acquired early relative to comprehension of quantifiers,
and further that preschool-aged children's errors in
comprehending quantifiers suggest an early bias toward
generic representation (e.g., Hollander, Gelman, & Star,
2002), it stands to reason that children might also display
some of the same processing styles observed in adults in the
current study. One possibility regarding the developmental
trajectory on our task is that children will start out making
errors consistent with a generic default bias in both speeded
and unspeeded conditions, with errors in comprehending
quantifiers showing a decrease across development in the
unspeeded condition (that is, more closely approximating
the pattern displayed by adults). Adapting the current
methodology to one more suitable for children will be an
important future pursuit (e.g., having sentences presented
out loud rather than appearing on a screen, providing
children with button boxes for their responses, using simpler
items, etc.).

Summary
Results from both accuracy and response time analyses were
consistent with our predictions, supporting a generics-asdefault account. Specifically, speeded participants were
more likely to treat universally-quantified noun phrases as if
they were generics, reflected by decreased accuracy in
processing wide-scope sentences containing universal
quantifiers (e.g., All dogs have four legs). That is, when
asked to report whether a sentence that acceptably
characterizes a generic kind but does not hold true for all
members of a kind, participants were likely to make
judgments consistent with their knowledge of generics, for
example responding true to All dogs have four legs. The fact
that this decrement in accuracy was absent in the nonspeeded condition further argues in favor of a generics-asdefault argument, as the spared performance in that
condition establishes that participants are capable of
interpreting
the
universally-quantified
sentences
appropriately (i.e., recognizing the existence of
counterexamples that falsify the sentences), just so long as
they are not pressured to respond quickly.
Response times were also consistent with the generics-asdefault position. In cases when speeded participants falsified
universally-quantified wide-scope sentences (e.g., saying
false to All dogs have four legs), it took longer than
verifying the generic equivalent (i.e., saying true to Dogs
have four legs); further, this falsification also required time
above and beyond that required for "mere falsification" (i.e.,
falsifying irrelevant-scope universally-quantified sentences,
e.g., All squirrels have beaks). Finally, participants also
took longer to verify universally-quantified full-scope
sentences (e.g., All giraffes have long necks) vs. the generic
alternative (Giraffes have long necks), despite the ultimate
response of true being identical for both types of sentences,
and despite noun phrases being presented separately from
predicates to eliminate the confound of universallyquantified noun phrases being longer in length. The fact that
the difference was observed not just in the predicted
speeded condition, but also in the unspeeded condition, is
entirely consistent with a generics-as-default account. We
speculate that even when unspeeded, participants were
likely hesitant to endorse the veracity of the universallyquantified sentences because they were trying to think of
plausible counterexamples (although they eventually did
tend to respond true, as predicted), whereas they were
relatively fast to respond to the generic version based on
their default generic representations.

Future Directions
Several outstanding questions still remain that create
opportunities for future research. Most importantly, the
current study was restricted to comparisons between
generics and universally-quantified noun phrases; however,
to demonstrate that generics are a cognitive default, it will
be important in the future to examine the processing of other

917

The cognitive underpinnings of generics remain a
fascinating topic for future studies. In the current paper, we
demonstrated that people are more easily able to access
generic representations in comparison to universallyquantified sets, suggesting that generics exist as a cognitive
default. We thus provide some of the first direct
psycholinguistic evidence in support of a generics-as-default
position, underscoring the importance of further examining
the interface between language and kind-based
representations.

Gelman, S. A., Coley, J. D., Rosengren, K., Hartman, E., &
Pappas, T. (1998). Beyond labeling: The role of parental
input in the acquisition of richly structured categories.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development, Serial No. 253, Vol. 63.
Gelman, S. A., & Tardif, T. Z. (1998). Generic noun phrases
in English and Mandarin: An examination of childdirected speech. Cognition, 66, 215-248.
Goldin-Meadow, S., Gelman, S. A., & Mylander, C. (2005).
Expressing generic concepts with and without a language
model. Cognition, 96, 109-126.
Hollander, M. A., Gelman, S. A., & Star, J. (2002).
Children’s interpretations of generic noun phrases.
Developmental Psychology, 38, 883–894.
Khemlani, S., Leslie, S. J., & Glucksberg, S. (2009).
Generics, prevalence, and default inferences. In
Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, Amsterdam, Cognitive Science
Society.
Leslie, S. J. (2008). Generics: Cognition and acquisition.
Philosophical Review, 117, 1-47.
Leslie, S. J., & Gelman, S. A. (2011). Quantified statements
are recalled as generics: Evidence from preschool
children and adults. Unpublished ms., Princeton
University.
Levinson, S. C. (2000). Presumptive meanings. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Pelletier, F. J. (2010). Kinds, things, and stuff: Mass terms
and generics. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Prasada, S., Salajegheh, A., Bowles, A., & Poeppel, D.
(2008). Characterizing kinds and instances of kinds: ERP
reflections. Language and Cognitive Processes, 23, 1-15.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by award # BCS-0817128 to
the second author from the National Science Foundation.

References
Carlson, G. (2010). Generics and concepts. In F. J. Pelletier
(Ed.), Kinds, things, and stuff. New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.
Carpenter, P., & Just, M. A. (1975). Sentence
comprehension: A psycholinguistic model of sentence
verification. Psychological Review, 82, 45-73.
Cimpian, A., Gelman, S. A., & Brandone, A. C. (2010).
Theory-based considerations influence the interpretation
of generic sentences. Language and Cognitive Processes,
25, 261-276.
Clark, R. (1973), Prima facie generalisations. In G. Pearce
& P. Maynard (Eds.), Conceptual change. Dordrecht:
Reidel.
Gelman, S. A. (2003). The essential child: Origins of
essentialism in everyday thought. New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.
Gelman, S. A. (2004). Psychological essentialism in
children. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 404–409.

918

