UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Generalization to Novel Consonants in Artificial Grammar Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/06r4s9d6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Author
Finley, Sara

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Generalization to Novel Consonants in Artificial Grammar Learning
Sara Finley (sfinley@bcs.rochester.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Meliora Hall, University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627 USA
Abstract
While theoretical phonologists rely on abstract phonetic
features to account for the variety of phonological patterns
that exist in the world’s languages, it is unclear whether such
abstract representations bear psychological reality. Previous
research has shown that learners in artificial grammar
learning experiments are able to generalize a newly learned
phonological pattern to novel segments, suggesting that
learners are able to form abstract, feature-based
representations. However, conflicting results suggest that this
level of abstraction may be restricted to vowels, rather than
consonants. The present experiment extends previous findings
on generalization to novel segments in vowel harmony to an
analogous pattern, consonant harmony. We show that learners
fail to generalize to novel consonants in consonant harmony,
but succeed at generalization to novel consonants in a general,
consonant deletion pattern. Implications for the role of
distinctive phonetic features in phonological learning are
discussed.
Keywords:
phonology.

statistical

learning,

consonant

harmony,

Phonetic Features in Phonology
Phonological processes are systematic patterns of sounds
that govern the way words and phrases may sound in
different languages. Typically, descriptive accounts of these
patterns involve abstract, phonetic features to characterize
the regularities of the sound patterns. Vowel and consonant
harmony is characterized by agreement for a particular
vowel/consonant feature value. For example, in back vowel
harmony (which occurs in several languages such as
Finnish, Hungarian, and Turkish (van der Hulst & van de
Weijer, 1995)), if the first vowel of a word bears the feature
[back] (e.g., [o, u]), all vowels of the word must also bear
the [back] feature. The most concise description of vowel
and consonant harmony makes use of distinctive phonetic
features such as [back].
There are two ways in which phonological processes can
be described without the use of distinctive features. The first
is to characterize phonological patterns in terms of the
individual segments involved. While this can describe the
data, such an analysis misses the generalization that the
vowels involved in harmony are not from arbitrary sets, but
phonetically similar units. A second option is to characterize
the phonological pattern in terms of an exemplar network.
This exemplar network would contain a specialized model
of similarity that would be used to capture the generalization
about the feature involved in the phonological process
without specific reference to features (Pierrehumbert, 2001).
Such exemplar networks can describe the same

phonological processes that make use of features, but are
more complex than a feature-based representation because
exemplar models require networks of association between
all spoken and heard tokens, as well as an algorithm for
computing similarity between exemplars.
Previous attempts at providing evidence for the
psychological reality of distinctive phonological features
have brought mixed results. Using the artificial grammar
learning paradigm, researchers trained participants on a
novel phonological pattern with a limited sound inventory
(e.g., four vowels of a six-vowel inventory). At test, these
participants were given items that contain sounds not
included in the exposure inventory (e.g., the two vowels
held-out of the six-vowel inventory). If learners extend the
newly learned phonological pattern to the novel segments, it
suggests that they learned the pattern in terms of distinctive
phonological features. If they fail to extend the pattern to the
novel sounds, it suggests that the learners used some other
representation to encode the novel pattern (e.g., based on
segment-specific representations). When participants were
exposed to a novel phonological pattern involving vowels
(e.g., vowel harmony), there was significant generalization
to the novel vowels (Chambers, Onishi, & Fisher, 2010;
Finley & Badecker, 2009; Skoruppa & Peperkamp, 2011).
However, when participants were exposed to a phonological
pattern involving generalization to novel consonants,
learners failed to generalize (Peperkamp & Dupoux, 2007;
Peperkamp, Le Calvez, Nadal, & Dupoux, 2006).
There are several important differences between the
studies that did not show generalization to novel segments
and the studies that did. Finley and Badecker (2009) and
Skoruppa and Peperkamp (2011) used a process that
involved vowels, while Peperkamp and Dupoux (2007)
trained participants on a process involving intervocalic
voicing in obstruent consonants (that applied either only to
stops or only to fricatives). It is possible that vowel
representations are more amenable to feature-based
generalization than consonant representations. There are
several reasons why this might be true. The acoustic space
of vowels is more variable and continuous than the acoustic
space of consonants, which are represented in a more
discrete manner. In addition, there is evidence that
consonants are processed differently than vowels. Nespor
and colleagues have argued that vowels tend to have a more
grammatical function, while consonants tend to have a more
lexical function (Bonatti, Pena, Nespor, & Mehler, 2005;
Toro, Bonatti, Nespor, & Mehler, 2007; Toro, Shukla,
Nespor, & Endress, 2008).
Another possibility for the mixed results on generalization
to novel segments is that all three studies used relatively

3268

different methods for training and testing participants.
Skoruppa and Peperkamp (2011) exposed participants to the
harmony pattern via listening to a story spoken in a novel
accent (Maye, Aslin, & Tanenhaus, 2008). This highly
implicit training procedure may have helped learners form
abstract representations for the phonological pattern. While
Finley and Badecker (2009) and Peperkamp and Dupoux
(2007) both used artificial grammar learning paradigms,
there are several important differences between the two
studies. Specifically, participants in Peperkamp and Dupoux
(2007) were trained via a picture-naming task that required
participants to map form and meaning, while participants in
Finley and Badecker (2009) were trained only on sound
forms with no semantic representations. Using purely
phonological representations may have made the task
slightly easier and thereby made generalization to novel
segments easier.
In order to better understand why previous studies have
failed to show generalization to novel consonants, we
replicated Finley and Badecker (2009) with consonant
harmony. If the differences between Finley and Badecker
(2009) and Peperkamp and Dupoux (2007) are merely
methodological, then participants should generalize to novel
consonants in consonant harmony, when trained and tested
in a manner identical to Finley and Badecker (2009). If
feature-based generalization is based more on the
representation of consonants and vowels, and the nature of
the specific phonological process, learners will not
generalize to novel consonants in consonant harmony.

Participants were divided into three conditions: (Voiceless)
Labial Hold-Out, and (Voiceless) Coronal Hold-Out, and a
matched Control condition (half of participants were
matched to the Coronal Hold-Out condition, and the other
half were matched to the Labial Hold-Out condition).

Experiment 1

Voiceless Coronal Hold-Out Condition Participants in the
Voiceless Coronal Hold-Out condition were given the same
types of training items as participants in the Voiceless
Labial Hold-Out Condition, except that the stem items were
drawn from the set [p, f, b, v, z, d], and, the voiceless
coronal sounds [s/t] were not presented in training.
The test items were similar to those given to the Labial
Hold-Out Condition, except that the New Consonant items
contained [s/t].

Participants
All participants were adult native speakers of English with
no previous participation in any experiment involving
reduplication. Forty-eight University of Rochester students
and affiliates were paid $10 for their participation.

Design
The design of the experiment mirrored Finley and Badecker
(2009) as closely as possible. Participants in the critical
(trained) conditions were exposed to a consonant harmony
pattern. The consonant harmony pattern was based on the
feature [+continuant]. This feature distinguishes between
stops [d, t, b, p] and fricatives [z, s, v, f]. Participants were
exposed to the pattern via pseudo-morphophonological
alternations in which a harmonic stem (CVCV) was
followed by a harmonic suffixed item (CVCV-bi or CVCVvi). The suffix was either [bi] or [vi], depending on the
nature of the consonants in the stem were stops (triggering
[bi]) or fricatives (triggering [vi]).
While consonant harmony based on the continuant feature
is not common among consonant harmony languages
(Hansson, 2001), the continuant feature was chosen
because the English sound inventory has several stopfricative contrasts, making it relatively easy to design an
experiment that tests for generalization to novel consonants.

Voiceless Labial Hold-Out Condition Participants in the
Labial Hold-Out condition were exposed to 24 pairs of
stem, stem+suffix items (repeated five times each), in which
the first item contained a CV.CV word, and the second item
repeated the first word followed by the [-bi]/[-vi] suffix. All
words obeyed the continuant harmony pattern; half the
items contained stops only and took the suffix [-bi], while
the other half of the items contained only fricatives and took
the suffix [-vi]. Training items contained stops and
fricatives from the set [s, t, b, v, z, d]. Specifically, the
voiceless labial sounds [f/p] were not presented in training.
Following exposure, participants were given a twoalternative forced choice task with 36 items, from three
different conditions of test items. 12 of the items were found
in the training set (Old Items), 12 items were not found in
the training set, but contained the same consonants and
vowels as in the training set (New Items), and 12 of the
items contained the held-out sounds [f/p] (New Consonant
Items). The test items were of the form CVCV-vi vs.
CVCV-bi with [-vi] and [-bi] counterbalanced for order of
presentation, (e.g., [bobobi] vs. *[bodevi]). Participants
were told to select the pair of words that best represented the
language they had heard prior to the test.

Control Conditions Two Control conditions were created
in the same manner as Finley and Badecker (2009), one
matched to the Labial Hold-Out condition, and a second
matched to the Coronal Hold-Out condition. Participants in
the Control condition were given items that would not
reflect consonant harmony. The items were a mix of stems
that contained harmonic items (those found in the training
set for the matched critical condition) and disharmonic
items (which were different from the matched critical
condition). There were no suffixed items. At test,
participants were given the same items as those in the
matched critical conditions. While all items are technically
‘new’ (as no suffixed items appeared in training), all
classifications are based on the critical conditions.

3269

Materials

memorize the words they heard. Following exposure,
participants were given instructions for the test items.
Participants were told that they would hear two words. One
word was from the language they had just heard, and the
other word was not from the language they had heard; if
they believed the first word was from the language, they
were instructed to press the ‘a’ key; if they believed the
second word was from the language, they were instructed to
press the ‘l’ key.

A female native English speaker produced all spoken
linguistic materials. All items were recorded in a soundattenuated booth. The speaker had no knowledge of the
design or purpose of the experiment. All spoken stimuli
contained only CV syllables. Consonants were drawn from
the set: /p, t, b, d, s, z, v, z/ and vowels were taken from the
set /e, i, o, u/. Care was taken so that all of the stimuli were
non-words in English. Examples of training stimuli can be
found in Table 1.

Results
Proportion of correct responses for all conditions are given
in Figures 1 and 2.

Table 1: Training Items.
Voiceless Coronal
Hold-Out
vozo, vozovi
sezi, sezivi
didu, didubi
bupo, bupobi

Voiceless Labial
Hold-Out
vusi, vusivi
sezi, sezivi
didu, didubi
tute, tutebi

Test stimuli were recorded in the same manner as training
stimuli. There were 36 test items, 12 containing pairs of
words that appeared in training (Old Items), 12 containing
items not heard in training (New Items), and 12 items
containing consonant sounds that did not appear in training
(New Consonant Items). Items appearing in the New Items
were drawn from the same set of consonant and vowels as
the training stimuli. Examples of test stimuli are provided in
Table 2.
Table 2: Test Items.
Voiceless Coronal
Voiceless Labial
Hold-Out
Hold-Out
Old Items
*diduvi vs. didubi
*diduvi vs. didubi
vozovi vs. *vozobi vusivi vs. *vusibi

Labial Hold-Out We compared the Labial Hold-Out
Training condition (mean = 0.64, CI ± 0.084) with the
matched Control condition (mean = 0.48, CI ± 0.043) via a
2X3 mixed-design ANOVA. There was a significant effect
of training (F(1,22) = 14.30, p < 0.01). There was
significant effects of test item (F(2,44) = 4.69, p < 0.05),
which was carried by the fact that correct responses to Old
and New items were correct more often than responses to
New Consonant test items (F(1,22) = 6.83, p < 0.05). There
was also a significant interaction (F(2,44) = 4.23, p < 0.05),
which was carried by a significant difference between New
and New Consonant Items in the Labial Hold-Out condition
(t(11) = 3.32, p < 0.01), but not in the Control condition
(t(11) = 0.38, p = 0.71).
To test for generalization to novel consonants, we
compared the New Consonant test items between the Labial
Hold-Out (mean = 0.50, CI ± 0.13) and the Control (mean =
0.48, CI ± 0.082) conditions. There was no significant
difference (t(22) = 0.30, p = 0.76), suggesting that
participants failed to generalize to novel consonants.

New Items
*dibovi vs. dibobi
sesivi vs. *sesibi
zifuvi vs. zifubi
*botevi vs. botebi
New Consonant Items
susovi vs. susobi
fefuvi vs. *fefuvi
*tetivi vs. tetibu
*pepivi vs. pepibi

Procedure
All phases of the experiment were run in Psyscope X
(Cohen, MacWhinney, Flatt, & Provost, 1993). Participants
were given both written and verbal instructions, and were
debriefed upon completion of the experiment (which took
approximately 20 minutes for participants in the trained
conditions, and 10 minutes for participants in the Control
condition).
All participants were told that they were to be listening to
pairs of words from a language they had never heard before.
They were informed that there would be questions about the
language following exposure, but that they need not

Figure 1: Coronal Hold-Out Results.
Coronal Hold-Out We compared the Coronal Hold-Out
Training (mean = 0.67, CI ± 0.13) condition with the
matched Control condition (mean = 0.42, CI ± 0.056) via a
2X3 mixed-design ANOVA. There was a significant effect
of training (F(1,22) = 16.61, p<0.01), suggesting that
participants learned the harmony pattern. There were no

3270

significant effects of test item (F<1). There was a significant
interaction (F(2,44) = 7.35, p < 0.01), which was carried by
a significant difference between New and New Consonant
Items in the Coronal Hold-Out condition (t(11) = 2.46, p <
0.05), but not in the Control condition (t(11) = 1.60, p =
0.14).
To test for generalization to novel consonants, we
compared the New Consonant test items between the
Coronal Hold-Out (mean = 0.56, CI ± 0.12) and the Control
(mean = 0.49, CI ± 0.098) conditions. There was no
significant difference (t(22) = 1.26, p = 0.22), suggesting
that participants failed to generalize to novel consonants.

Figure 1: Coronal Hold-Out Results.
Overall Participants were unable to generalize to novel
consonants in the consonant harmony pattern, either for
novel coronal consonants or novel labial consonants. This
failure is not due to a general failure to learn the harmony
pattern, as participants were successful in learning the
harmony pattern for segments that they were exposed to
during training.

Discussion
While Finley and Badecker (2009) showed that adult
English-speaking learners of a vowel harmony language
generalize to novel segments following brief exposure,
participants in the present experiment failed to generalize to
novel segments in consonant harmony. There are several
possible explanations as to why participants might
generalize to novel vowels in vowel harmony but not novel
consonants in consonant harmony. First, representations of
consonants are very different from representations of
vowels. Vowels have a relatively small number of
distinctive features (height, rounding, tense, back), while
consonants can have several different distinctive features
involving both place and manner. The large number of
features required to characterize consonants makes it
possible to form natural classes of a very small set of
consonants. The consonant harmony pattern in the present
experiment (as well as the voicing pattern used in
Peperkamp and Dupoux, 2007) only involved a select set of
stops and fricatives, which is a relatively limited set of
segments.

While natural classes typically involve traditional
distinctive features, there are rules that apply to sets of
consonants that do not form a natural class. This means that
it is possible that learners inferred that the consonant
harmony pattern applied to a restricted class of segments
that excluded the ‘held-out’ consonants. This is much more
likely to occur for consonants than for vowels because the
nature of consonants allows for a large number of small,
very specific constraints to form a natural class (e.g.,
coronals and voiced labials). This is more difficult with
vowels that are represented in a continuous F1/F2
dimension that do not have many features to begin with.
Given that the consonant harmony pattern was highly
unnatural, it is likely that learners were more willing to
assume a disjoint natural class for the harmony pattern.
Nespor and colleagues have found that speakers process
vowels differently from consonants (Bonatti, et al., 2005;
Toro, et al., 2007; Toro, et al., 2008). They hypothesize that
consonants are processed in terms of lexical content, while
vowels are processed in terms of their grammatical function.
If learners are biased to process phonological patterns
involving consonants in terms of lexical processing rather
than grammatical function, learners may be more likely to
infer a more select, strict classification of a consonant
harmony process than a vowel harmony process.
Given that learners were unable to generalize to novel
consonants in consonant harmony, there is a question of
whether learners can generalize to novel consonants after
learning any novel pattern involving consonants, even a
highly general one. If learners are given a process that
applies to all consonants, such as an across-the-board
deletion process, then it is likely that learners will generalize
to the novel consonant.
In Experiment 2, we exposed learners to a highly general
phonological process that does not require representation of
specific feature values (deletion). In a consonant deletion
rule, a constraint against two adjacent consonants causes
one of the consonants (typically the first one) to delete
(Wilson, 2001). Because the constraint is general against all
consonants, and does not involve specific features or feature
pairs, it is more likely that learners will form a general rule
that applies to all consonants. In Experiment 2, we test for
generalization to novel consonants in consonant deletion.

Experiment 2
Participants
All participants were adult native speakers of English with
no previous participation in any experiment involving
consonant deletion. Twenty-six University of Rochester
undergraduate students and affiliates were paid either $10 or
$5 for their participation (participants in the No-Training
Control condition were paid $5).

Design
The design of Experiment 2 mirrored Experiment 1 in that
participants were exposed to a phonological pattern based

3271

on pseudo morpho-phonological alternations. In Experiment
2, the phonological pattern was a consonant deletion pattern
that was presented to participants in sets of three words: A,
B, and AB (a combination of A and B). The words in A, and
B were of the form CVC and the combined AB form deleted
the final consonant of the A word (e.g., biv mop, bimop).
The deleted consonant was always a fricative or a nasal
from the set /s, z, v, z, f, m, n/, and never a stop consonant.
Following exposure, participants were given a twoalternative forced choice task with 30 items, of the same
types as Experiment 1: Old Items, New Items, and New
Consonant Items. In New Consonant Items, the deleted
item was always a stop consonant /p, t, k, b, d, g/.
Participants were told to select the pair of words that best
represented the language they had heard prior to the test.

We compared the Trained Condition (mean = 0.98, CI ±
0.012) to the No-Training control condition (mean = 0.63,
CI ± 0.11) via a 2X3 mixed-design ANOVA. There was a
significant effect of training (F(1,24) = 44.98, p < 0.0001),
suggesting that participants learned the deletion pattern.
There was no significant effect of test item (F(2,48) = 1.44,
p = 0.25), and no interaction (F(2,48) = 2.00, p = 0. 14).
We also compared the Training (mean = 0.96, CI ± 0.039)
and the Control (mean = 0.63, CI ± 0.15) conditions
specifically for the New Consonant Items, in order to assess
generalization to novel consonants. There was a significant
difference between the Control and the Trained conditions
(t(24) = 4.74, p < 0.0001), suggesting generalization to the
novel consonants.

Discussion

Materials

Participants were able to generalize to novel consonants in
the consonant deletion pattern. This suggests that
generalization to novel consonants can be achieved if the
pattern in question is highly general.

Spoken materials were produced by a female native English
speaker in a sound-attenuated booth. The speaker had no
knowledge of the design or purpose of the experiment.
Consonants were drawn from the set: /p, t, k, b, d, g, s, z, v,
z, f, m, n/ and vowels were taken from the set /a, e, i, o, u/.
Care was taken so that all of the stimuli were non-words in
English. Examples of training stimuli can be found in Table
3, below.

General Discussion

Table 3: Experiment 2 Training Items.
A (CVC)
pim
fev
buf

B (CVC)
bop
sof
ven

AB (CVCVC)
pibop
fesof
buven

Procedure
The procedure of Experiment 2 was identical to Experiment
1, except that participants in Experiment 2 were told that
they were listening to words in sets of three, and the third
word would be a combination of the first two words (just as
‘tooth’ and ‘brush’ combine to form ‘toothbrush’).

Results
Proportion of correct responses for all conditions are given
in Figure 3.

Figure 3: Results.

This paper explored the situations in which learners are able
to generalize to novel consonants in an artificial grammar
learning experiment. Previous artificial grammar learning
experiments have shown that adult learners can generalize
to novel vowels (Chambers, et al., 2010; Finley &
Badecker, 2009; Skoruppa & Peperkamp, 2011), but not
novel consonants (Peperkamp & Dupoux, 2007; Peperkamp,
et al., 2006). Experiment 1 ruled out the possibility that the
difference between vowels and consonants was purely
methodological. Using an identical paradigm to Finley and
Badecker (2009), we exposed learners to a consonant
harmony pattern, and then tested generalization of that novel
consonant harmony pattern; learners did not extend the
harmony pattern to novel consonants. The methods for
consonant harmony learning were identical to those used in
previous vowel harmony learning experiments, and the
consonant harmony pattern was parallel to the vowel
harmony learning paradigm. Therefore, one must conclude
that the representations of the consonant harmony pattern
were subject to different constraints than vowel harmony.
Because vowel harmony typically involves all the vowels in
the inventory (excluding only a small subset of vowels), but
consonant harmony typically only involves a small subset of
consonants (e.g., sibilant consonants), and excludes a large
number of consonants in the language, consonant harmony
patterns are much more likely to be restricted to a small,
relatively idiosyncratic set of consonants. This may lead
learners to form a restrictive set of consonants that follow
the consonant harmony pattern, leading to a failure to
generalize to novel consonants.
If generalization to novel consonants depends on a
phonological pattern that applies to a large set of
vowels/consonants, consonant harmony may not be the most
ideal case. In Experiment 2, we tested learners’ ability to
generalize novel consonants to a highly general deletion

3272

pattern. In this pattern, the first consonant of a pair of
adjacent consonants was deleted. During training, the
deleted item was always a fricative. At test, learners
generalized to stops, which had not participated in the
deletion process. Participants generalized to the novel stops,
suggesting that the learners had formed a general
representation of the deletion process.
The results of the present set of experiments demonstrate
that the level of generality of representation depends largely
on the type of process in question. A consonant harmony
pattern that requires agreement between pairs of stops and
fricatives is highly specific, and therefore subject to specific
interpretation. Deletion, however, is highly general,
applying to all consonants, and is therefore subject to a
highly general interpretation.
The high degree of specificity found in patterns in
consonant harmony is consistent with the theories of vowels
and consonants put forth by Nespor and colleagues
discussed above (Bonatti, et al., 2005; Toro, et al., 2007;
Toro, et al., 2008). One reason that processes involving
consonants tend to carry more lexical information is that
there is a much higher degree of variation among
consonants than vowels. This means that patterns involving
consonants should be more likely to be subject to specific
representations compared to vowels, which vary on a
smaller number of dimensions compared to consonants.

Conclusions
While previous experiments investigating feature-based
generalization in consonants have failed to show
generalization to novel consonants, the present study
demonstrated for the first time that learners can generalize
to novel consonants when the phonological pattern is highly
general. Learners of a novel consonant deletion pattern were
able to generalize to consonants that had not previously
undergone deletion. However, when exposed to a highly
specific consonant harmony pattern, learners failed to
generalize to novel consonants. This suggests that learners
are able to form highly general representations for novel
phonological patterns when these patterns apply to a wide
range of consonants/vowels.

Acknowledgments
The author would like to thank three anonymous reviewers,
Patricia Reeder, Elissa Newport, Neil Bardhan, and
members of the Aslin-Newport Lab. In addition, we would
like to thank Carrie Miller, Kelly Johnston, Emily Kasman,
and Anna States for help in stimuli creation and data
collection. I assume all responsibility for any errors.
Funding was provided by NIH Grants DC00167 and
T32DC000035.

role of consonants and vowels in continuous speech.
Psychological Science, 16, 451-459.
Chambers, K., Onishi, K. H., & Fisher, C. (2010). A vowel
is a vowel: Generalization to newly learned phonotactic
constraints to new contexts. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 36(3),
821-828.
Cohen, J. D., MacWhinney, B., Flatt, M., & Provost, J.
(1993). PsyScope: A new graphic interactive environment
for designing psychology experiments. Behavioral
Research Methods, Instruments and Computers, 25, 257271.
Finley, S., & Badecker, W. (2009). Artificial grammar
learning, and feature-based generalization. Journal of
Memory and Language, 61, 423-437.
Hansson, G. O. (2001). Theoretical and typological issues
in consonant harmony. Ph.D. dissertation, University of
California, Berkeley, Berkeley.
Maye, J., Aslin, R. N., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2008). The
weckud wetch of the wast: Lexical adaptation to a novel
accent. Cognitive Science, 32, 543-562.
Peperkamp, S., & Dupoux, E. (2007). Learning the mapping
from surface to underlying representations in artificial
language. In J. Cole & J. I. Hualde (Eds.), Laboratory
Phonology 9 (pp. 315-338).
Peperkamp, S., Le Calvez, R., Nadal, J.-P., & Dupoux, E.
(2006). The acquisition of allophonic rules: Statistical
learning with linguistic constraints. Cognition, B31-B41.
Pierrehumbert, J. (2001). Exemplar dynamics: Word
frequency, lenition and contrast. In J. L. Bybee & P.
Hopper (Eds.), Frequency effects and emergent grammar
(pp. 137-157). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Skoruppa, K., & Peperkamp, S. (2011). Adaptation to novel
accents: Feature-based learning in context-sensitive
phonological regularities. Cognitive Science, 35(2), 348366.
Toro, J. M., Bonatti, L., Nespor, M., & Mehler, J. (2007).
Finding words and rules in a speech stream: Functional
differences
between
consonants
and
vowels.
Psychological Science, 19(2), 137-144.
Toro, J. M., Shukla, M., Nespor, M., & Endress, A. (2008).
The quest for generalizations over consonants:
Asymmetries between consonants and vowels are not the
by-product of acoustic differences. Attention Perception
and Psychophysics, 70(8), 1515-1525.
van der Hulst, H., & van de Weijer, J. (1995). Vowel
harmony. In J. Goldsmith (Ed.), The handbook of
phonological theory (pp. 495-531). Oxford: Blackwell.
Wilson, C. (2001). Consonant cluster neutralisation and
targeted constraints. Phonology, 18, 147-197.

References
Bonatti, L. L., Pena, M., Nespor, M., & Mehler, J. (2005).
Linguistic constraints on statistical computations: The

3273

