UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Generalized Event Knowledge in Logical Metonymy Resolution

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6hr7g3k5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Zarcone, Alessandra
Pado, Sebastian

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Generalized Event Knowledge in Logical Metonymy Resolution
Alessandra Zarcone (alessandra.zarcone@ims.uni-stuttgart.de)
Institut für Maschinelle Sprachverarbeitung, Universität Stuttgart, Azenbergstr. 12
70174 Stuttgart, Germany

Sebastian Padó (pado@cl.uni-heidelberg.de)
Seminar für Computerlinguistik, Universität Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 325
69120 Heidelberg, Germany
Abstract

metonymic contexts. Being part of the mental lexicon, qualia
are supposed to model linguistic knowledge – in opposition to
world knowledge and pragmatic inferences. Psycholinguistic
work has identified experimental correlates for the lexical
hypothesis (see Pylkkänen and McElree (2006) for a review),
however processing studies have focused predominantly on
the existence (or non-existence) of the type mismatch and have
largely ignored the question of the range of CEs accessible to
metonymic interpretation.
It is clearly plausible to assume that we associate some sort
of event knowledge with lexical items referring to entities, and
that this knowledge is part of our mental lexicon. However, the
particular account provided by the lexical hypothesis seems to
undergenerate the range of potential interpretations for logical
metonymy. Consider the following examples:

The interpretation of logical metonymies like begin the book
has traditionally been explained by assuming the existence
of complex lexical entries containing information about event
knowledge (qualia roles: reading the book/writing the book).
Qualia structure provides concrete constraints on interpretation,
which are however too rigid to be cognitively plausible. We
suggest generalized event knowledge as an alternative source
of interpretation. Results from a first self-paced reading experiment, where we capitalize on the verb-final word order
in German subordinate phrases to create rich expectations for
events, are presented to support this hypothesis. Consequences
of this hypothesis for the interpretation logical metonymies are
(a), it is primarily driven by pragmatic and world knowledge;
(b), it may use the same (rather than distinct) mechanisms and
resources as general incremental sentence comprehension does.
Keywords: Logical metonymy; generalized event knowledge;
qualia structure; self-paced reading.

Logical metonymy: lexicon vs. pragmatics
Logical metonymy is a phenomenon where an eventsubcategorizing verb is combined an apparently incompatible
object-denoting nominal object (John began the book, Mary
enjoyed the beer). The interpretation of logical metonymy involves the integration of an implicit event (covert event or CE:
John began the book → John began reading the book; Mary
enjoyed the beer → Mary enjoyed drinking the beer). This
process has proven to be a topic of enduring interest to different language research communities: on the theoretical side,
as a challenge to the compositionality principle in meaning
construction (Partee, ter Meulen, & Wall, 1993); and on the
psycholinguistic side, due to its link to increased processing
costs (McElree, Traxler, Pickering, Seely, & Jackendoff, 2001;
Traxler, Pickering, & McElree, 2002).
In theoretical linguistics, where logical metonymy has been
investigated notably by Pustejovsky (1995) and Jackendoff
(1997), an account has been offered which we call the “lexical
hypothesis”: Logical metonymy is a type mismatch between
the (semantic) subcategorization of a metonymic verb for an
event and the entity denoted by the object on the other side,
which requires the integration of an event to be resolved.1 The
event is retrieved from the lexical entry of the object: each
noun is associated with a complex structure (qualia structure)
in the mental lexicon. It notably contains an “agentive quale”
(the event that brings about the object) and a “telic quale” (the
main purpose of the object), which can be retrieved as CEs in

1. My goat eats anything. He really enjoys your book.
(→ eating)
(Lascarides & Copestake, 1998)
2. John is a famous wrestler. He really enjoys a good fight.
(→ fighting)
3. John is a wrestling fan. He really enjoys a good fight.
(→ watching)
Sentence 1 cannot be accounted for, since the qualia structure
for book does not include eating. For sentences 2 and 3, we
can probably assume that the nominal entry for fight lists both
interpretations: fighting as the agentive quale, and watching
as the telic quale, but it is difficult to imagine how the lexical
knowledge provided by qualia can “select” the role played by
the agent (wrestler, fan) in selecting one CE interpretation.
An alternative approach, which we call the “pragmatic hypothesis” (Fodor & Lepore, 1998; Asher, 2010), argues that
metonymy resolution is driven by dynamic inferences based
on context and world knowledge rather than static lexicon
entries. This take on metonymy grounds the retrieval of a CE
in a post-access inferential process which would have a later
onset than lexical access. This is an attractive hypothesis that
combines well with insights about human language processing
in general, and has been verified experimentally (De Almeida
& Dwivedi, 2008; Almeida et al., 2009). However, it currently
lacks a concrete characterization of the type and organization
of knowledge involved in metonymy interpretation.
The aim of this paper is contribute to making the pragmatic
hypothesis more precise by investigating metonymy in the context of the recent framework generalized event knowledge, or

1 The term ’metonymy’ is used since the coercion of the object
into an event is seen as an extension of its meaning.

944

GEK (McRae & Matsuki, 2009), according to which inferential world knowledge should be generally and easily accessible.
We present an self-paced reading experiment that bears out the
prediction of GEK, namely a facilitation effect for metonymic
constructions that are typical rather than just plausible. Our
analysis of the items reveals that we see facilitation also for
items which are cannot be straightforwardly explained in terms
of qualia roles. Our conclusion is that in metonymy interpretation, like in other sentence comprehension processes, world
knowledge plays an early and crucial role.

though: There is no distinction between linguistic and world
knowledge. GEK is activated immediately, providing a rich
source for expectations in language comprehension.
Using GEK to account for logical metonymy has several
advantages: it overcomes the rigidity of a qualia-based account, provides a more dynamic model of CE interpretation,
and allows us to place logical metonymy interpretation in a
broader frame of phenomena of incremental interpretation.
The remainder of the paper presents the results of a self-paced
reading study on German, aimed at evaluating the contribution
of the GEK model to metonymy resolution.

Generalized Event Knowledge

Experiment

There is solid experimental evidence that language understanding makes extensive use of global plausibility information, expectations and event knowledge, such as plausible upcoming
input (e.g. Altmann and Kamide (1999)). McRae and Matsuki (2009) established that speakers make use of prototypical
knowledge about events (Generalized Event Knowledge, GEK,
McRae and Matsuki (2009)) when rapidly building expectations. Generalized event knowledge is assumed to be built
from first and second-hand experience: for instance, we learn
that a scenario of washing hair typically includes a shampoo,
a sink, a bathroom, and happens indoor; a scenario of washing
car would include different elements (an outdoor environment,
a hose). GEK assumes that such scenarios are available in our
memory and can be cued by linguistic input, e.g. “action verbs
as well as nouns referring to agents, patients, instruments, locations, and events” (McRae & Matsuki, 2009). Consider the
following examples from Matsuki et al. (2011):

As explained above, metonymic verbs alternate between a VObj subcategorization frame, where the event remains covert
(begin the beer), and a V-Ving-Obj subcategorization frame,
where the event is realized begin drinking the beer. We will
call these variants the short variant and the long variant.
Our precise hypothesis about the role of GEK in metonymy
resolution is as follows: In the short variant of metonymic
constructions, the context of the metonymic verb (notably
its arguments, the subject and the object) will tap into the
GEK scenario associated with the arguments and produce the
expectations that constitute the reader’s understanding of the
covert event at the end of the sentence. Similar to Matsuki
et al. (2011), we predict that GEK can lead to a facilitation
effect: reading latencies for typical (and thus expected) events
will be lower than for untypical, but still plausible, events. We
will test this hypothesis with a self-paced reading task.
While this hypothesis is not easily testable on short-variant
metonymic constructions, where the CE is missing by definition, the long variant provides the understood event, whose
reading time can be measured. In English, word order poses
another problem: The event (e.g. drinking) appears before the
object. Thus, there is no point in the incremental interpretation of a long-variant sentence at which the same combined
context expectations (subject and object) exist that we have
at the end of the short variant. The situation is different in
German, where word order in subordinate clauses is verb-final.
As the following examples show, the short variant and the
long variant can be identical, both consisting of the sequence
subject - metonymic verb - object, the difference being that the
long variant continues with the overtly realized verb.

1. Donna used the hose to wash her filthy car (typical)
2. Donna used the shampoo to wash her filthy hair (typical)
3. Donna used the shampoo to wash her filthy car (atypical)
4. Donna used the hose to wash her filthy hair (atypical)
The instruments hose and shampoo narrow down the range
of “typical” washing scenarios and thus typical patients. In the
sentences where these expectations are met (1 and 2: hose →
car and shampoo → hair), facilitation (shorter reading times
and eye fixations) are observed compared to 3 and 4, where
the expectations are not met.
The main claims of the GEK model are: 1) words in isolation immediately activate GEK; 2) words can rapidly combine
in sentences to cue specific concepts that are relevant to GEK
scenarios; 3) syntactic cues modulate expectations for certain
aspects of GEK; 4) GEK can immediately modulate expectations for syntactic structure (McRae & Matsuki, 2009).

1. Peter begann das Bier. (short variant)
Peter began the beer.
2. Peter begann das Bier zu trinken. (long variant)
Peter began the beer to drink.

Event Knowledge and Logical Metonymy

This observation was used before by Lapata, Keller, and
Scheepers (2003) for a cloze completion task to study the interpretation of metonymy, and provides further motivation for
our decision to study metonymy within the context of general
incremental sentence comprehension.2 Adapting the paradigm

We propose GEK as as alternative theory to explain the interpretation of logical metonymy. The major architecture of the
interpretation (retrieval of an event from nominal knowledge)
process can remain the same, because both GEK and qualia
structure link objects to associated events. Beyond this similarity, the picture suggested by GEK is considerably different,

2 The parallelism between short and long variants breaks down for
prefix verbs, where the prefix follows the NP for the short variant.

945

from McRae, Hare, Elman, and Ferretti (2005) for German,
we evaluate our hypothesis on a setup with two conditions:

From the initial list of 50 patients we extracted 24 patients
with 2 events each, and per each event we selected one of the
best agents, obtaining 48 agent-event-patient typical triplets.
48 atypical triplets were obtained by crossing agents between
the two events in the atypical triplets, as shown in Table 1.

1. Der Konditor begann die Glasur aufzutragen. (typical)
The baker
began the icing to spread.
2. Das Kind begann die Glasur aufzutragen. (atypical)
The child began the icing to spread.

Table 1: Triplets for Glasur

In condition 1 (typical condition), the interaction of agent and
patient should cue the upcoming event, in condition 2 (atypical
condition), the upcoming event is not cued by the combination
of agent and patient. We expect longer reading times for the
target event in the atypical condition.

typical
triplet

Creation of Materials

atypical
triplet

Earlier offline work (Lapata et al., 2003; Zarcone & Padó,
2010) has established that the range of interpretations for
metonymy is larger than predicted from qualia structure. For
example, in an experiment in Zarcone and Padó (2010), we
obtained the following six interpretations for the metonymic
construction start the portrait: paint, draw, critique, hang,
model, sketch, admire, pose for, review. We created the materials for this experiment to instantiate a broad range of CE
interpretations, using two norming studies. Such ranges of
events cannot be mapped onto a small set of qualia roles. Consequently, the prediction of the lexical hypothesis would be
that the majority of CEs should not be expected, and that there
should be no general facilitation effect. From a GEK perspective, on the other hand, we expect facilitation exactly if the CE
is typical for the realized subject/object combination.
Norming. Following McRae et al. (2005), we collected
thematic-based event generation norms for 50 entities. We collected the norms through a crowdsourcing platform, Amazon
Mechanical Turk, which offers fast access to native speaker
intuitions with high reliability (Snow, O’Connor, Jurafsky, &
Ng, 2008). We asked participants to generate verbs in response
to typical patients (“list the things that these objects have done
to them”). For each item, space was provided for 10 responses;
no time limit was imposed. Each item was presented to an
average of 20 German participants. Geographic origin was
controlled by IP address checking. For each item, we chose
four events from those named early by many participants, ensuring that the four events refered to different scenarios. For
example, the four events selected for Auto (car) were fahren
(drive), reparieren (fix), verkaufen (sell), waschen (wash).
In order to select the type of agents that could cue one
or the other type of event, we went on to collect thematicbased agent generation norms. We paired each patient to the
infinite form of the four selected verbs for it, resulting in 200
noun-verb pairs. We again chose a crowdsourcing approach,
asking participants to generate agents in response to typical
events (“list who typically performs these actions”). For each
item, space was provided for 10 responses; no time limit
was imposed. An average of 10 participants from Germany
responded to each item. For each item, we selected the four
agents that were given by most participants early on.

Agent
Konditor
baker
Kind
child
Kind
child
Konditor
baker

Patient
Glasur
icing
Glasur
icing
Glasur
icing
Glasur
icing

Event
auftragen
spread
essen
eat
auftragen
spread
essen
eat

Assembling the materials. We turned the 96 triplets from
the second norming study into 96 long-variant metonymic sentences by embedding them as verb-final subordinate sentences
under metonymic main verbs:
1.(a) Der Konditor begann die Glasur aufzutragen. (typical)
The baker
began the icing to spread.
(b) Das Kind begann die Glasur zu essen. (typical)
The child began the icing to eat.
2.(a) Das Kind begann die Glasur aufzutragen. (atypical)
The child began the icing to spread.
(b) Der Konditor begann die Glasur zu essen. (atypical)
The baker
began the icing to eat.
There does not seem to be an operative definition of
metonymic verbs, but a fairly stable set of verbs that are often used by psycholinguistic studies on metonymy. We used
the following verbs: anfangen (to start), aufhören (to finish),
beginnen (to begin), beginn, ertragen (to endure), genießen
(to enjoy), hassen (to hate), probieren (to try), vermeiden (to
avoid), verschieben (to postpone), versuchen (to attempt).
The metonymic verb was identical among the sentences that
featured the same patient. The sentences continued after the
target verb with another coordinated or subordinated sentence
(und/and . . . or weil/because . . . ; cf. Table 3). Two lists were
created to minimize overlapping between sentences with respect to agents and target verbs: for each of four sentences
featuring the same patient, the two typical sentences were put
in one list and the two atypical ones in the other list. Each list
contained 24 typical sentences, 24 atypical ones and 72 fillers
for a total of 120 sentences. Yes/no comprehension questions
were created for each sentence pair. The proportion of “yes”
and “no” responses were matched between the lists.
Sensibility verification. In order to check that the atypical
triplets were, although not typical, still sensible (i.e., did not
violate any selectional restriction), we collected plausibility
ratings for our materials. We again used a crowdsourcing
platform. Participants were asked to rate material sentences

946

ing prior work, we examined the effect of typicality in each
region through by-subject (F1) and by-item (F2) analyses of
variance. Table 3 presents mean reading latencies and the
associated F−statistics. No significant differences were found
between typical and atypical conditions at the patient noun position (Glasur), which was expected since the sentences were
identical across conditions up to this point. We found a main
effect of typicality at the target verb position (aufzutragen).
As shown in Figure 3(b), events were read 35 ms faster
when cued by the Agent-Patient combination (KonditorGlasur) than when not cued (Kind-Glasur). Differences after
the event (und fing...) did not reach significance.

Table 2: Mean ratings from Norming study 3
group
nonsensical fillers
metonymical sentences
base sentences

atypical

typical

2.85
2.61

4.12
4.71

1.44

according to their plausibility on a five-point Likert scale. We
presented the 96 sentences both in their long-variant version
(Das Kind begann die Glasur zu essen, The child began eating
the icing) and as non-metonymical base sentences (Das Kind
aß die Glasur, The child ate the icing), complemented by
52 sentences violating selectional restrictions (nonsensical
fillers, e.g. Die Gitarre ging ins Kino, The guitar went to the
cinema). The 148 sentences were presented in randomized
order. An average of 10 participants from Germany responded
to each item, no time limit was imposed. Agreement was high
(Krippendorff’s α = 0.73).
Table 2 lists the resulting mean ratings. Our analysis found
that 1) both the pairwise differences between the atypical and
the typical sentences (Wilcoxon rank sum test: W = 39767,
p < 0.0001) and between the atypical sentences and the nonsensical fillers (W = 198448.5, p < 0.0001) were significant
among the base sentences; 2) both the pairwise differences
between the atypical and the typical sentences (W = 4098,
p < 0.0001) and between the atypical sentences and the nonsensical fillers (W = 210052, p < 0.0001) were significant
among the metonymical sentences as well, which supports our
intuition that our materials for the atypical condition make
sense, and yet differ in plausibility from those in the typical
condition; 3) there was a significant correlation between between the ratings of metonymical and base sentences (ρ = 0.8,
p < 0.01), supporting our intuition of the strong link between
the interpretation of metonymical and base sentences.

General discussion
The self-paced reading experiment was designed to evaluate
the role played by generalized event knowledge (GEK) in the
interpretation of logical metonymies, and specifically the recovery of covert events (CEs). The manipulation of the subject
and object influenced reading latencies at the sentence-final
target verb position, leading to significantly shorter reading latencies for the typical condition than for the atypical condition.
This finding indicates that GEK can predict highly plausible
covert events in metonymy interpretation. Compared to traditional qualia-based accounts of metonymy, the GEK model
supports a larger number of interpretations that is essentially
determined by the plausibility of different events in a given
context as determined by subject-object pairs.
This effect should not be considered an effect of semantic anomaly of the atypical condition, because the sentences
in the atypical condition are never anomalous; however, the
sentences in the typical condition were highly predictable.
Matsuki et al. (2011) make a point about the difference between what is typical (predictable) and what is only very
plausible: both very predictable sentences and very plausible
sentences can yield high plausibility ratings, but production
norms can tap into our knowledge of what is typical (and
therefore predictable). Our study aimed at evaluating the contribution of GEK to metonymy resolution: ultimately, it is our
knowledge about typical events (GEK) which leads us when
building expectations about upcoming linguistic input.
Note that our experiment does not contrast, as usual in
studies on metonymy, a condition involving coercion with a
non-coercive control condition. We use a construction where
a metonymical construction appears in the course of standard
incremental sentence processing. In this manner, we sidestep
the thorny issue of how crucial type coercion is in metonymical interpretation, a topic of much debate (Traxler, Pickering,
& McElree, 2002; De Almeida & Dwivedi, 2008), and focus
on the role of plausibility in interpretation. At first glance, our
results seem to contradict those of Frisson and McElree (2008),
who emphasize event integration (rather than the search for
interpretation) as the source of longer reading times. However,
we believe that the actual experimental findings of Frisson
and McElree and ours are compatible: First, their study identified a stable main effect of “preference” (the existence of

Method
Participants Thirty students of Universität Stuttgart volunteered to participate in the experiment and were paid for their
participation. All the participants were native speakers of
German and had normal or corrected-to-normal vision.
Procedure The sentences were presented using a one-wordat-a-time moving-window self-paced reading paradigm (Just,
Carpenter, & Wooley, 1982). Each trial began with strings
of dashes on the screen, with each non-space character of the
sentence replaced by a dash. Participants pressed a button
to the reveal a word and revert the previous word to dashes.
Reading latencies for each word were recorded. Participants
were allowed to take two breaks during the experiment, one
after the first third of sentences and one after the second third.

Results
All participants scored better than 75% correct on the comprehension questions (M = 88%, SD = 0.04). We analyzed a
window of one word before the target verb and three words
after. Reading latencies above 3000 ms or below 200 ms were
excluded from the analysis (13% of the data points). Follow-

947

Latency (ms)
Difference (ms)
F−test

atypical
typical
F1 (1, 29)
F2 (1, 47)
p1
p2

target V
aufzutragen
spread
590
555
35
4.65
4.15
0.039
0.047

V+1
und
and
485
478
7
<1
<1
0.56
0.67

V+2
fing
began
427
431
-4
<1
<1
0.80
0.82

V+3
mit
with
423
436
-13
1.17
1.74
0.29
0.19

550

Patient
Glasur
icing
445
452
-7
<1
<1
0.6
0.45

atypical
typical

500

Words (example)

450

Position

Mean reading latency (ms)

Table 3: Results of the self-paced reading experiment: Reading Latencies in ms, F statistics, and plot

Patient

Target V

V+1

V+2

V+3

Position

Table 4: Differences among material sentences
Patient
Diamant
Diamant
Geschenk
Geschenk
Glasur
Glasur
Haus
Haus
Pizza
Pizza

Target V
schmuggeln
schleifen
auspacken
einpacken
auftragen
essen
verkaufen
bauen
backen
liefern

Atypical Agent
Juwelier
Dieb
Verkäuferin
Geburtstagskind
Kind
Konditor
Maurer
Maklerin
Pizzabote
Koch

Typical Agent
Dieb
Juwelier
Geburtstagskind
Verkäuferin
Konditor
Kind
Maklerin
Maurer
Koch
Pizzabote

one strongly prefered interpretation), comparable to our main
effect of plausibility. Second, we interpret the absence of an
interaction between preference and coercion in their data as
evidence that metonymical constructions adds some “baseline load” to processing but are otherwise subject to the same
plausibility-driven interpretation processes that we posit.
We now take a closer look to the reading times for those
items showing the largest differences between the typical
and the atypical condition (Table 4). For a lexical item like
Geschenk (package) the agent Geburtstagskind (birthday child)
cues an event type where packages are typically unwrapped
(auspacken), not wrapped. On the other hand, if the package is
mentioned together with the agent Verkäuferin (saleswoman),
a typical event involves packages to be wrapped (einpacken)
by saleswomen, not unwrapped. A similar pattern was yielded
in the case of other Patient (e.g. Haus (house): verkaufen
(sell), typical agent Maklerin (real estate agent); bauen (build),
typical agent Maurer (bricklayer)).
As for Pizza, its agentive quale could easily be considered
to be backen (bake) - but its qualia structure (agentive quale:
bake; telic quale: eat) can not account for faster reading latencies of liefern (deliver). For almost half of our items (50 of
96), the event does not refer to the agentive or the telic quale of
the object, but some event typically associated with the object.
The facilitation effect does not always appear to be symmetrical. Consider the event schmuggeln (smuggle) cued by
Diamant: a clear facilitation effect is shown with the typical
agent Dieb (thief) in comparison to the atypical agent Juwelier
(jeweler). In contrast, the target verb schleifen (cut) is cued
by the typical agent Juwelier. Our interpretation is that the

Atypical
559
504
769
743
754
627
706
618
661
554

Typical
489
610
609
686
622
466
546
562
533
434

Difference
70
-106
160
57
132
161
160
56
128
120

combination “jeweler+diamond” opens up too many different
scenarios (“cut a diamond”, but also “sell a diamond”, “buy a
diamond”, “have a diamond stolen”) for “cut” to be preferred.
Qualia structures intend to capture a default interpretation
of a metonymy in a neutral context: a “generic purpose” for
the telic quale and “the event that brings the given object
into existence” for the agentive quale, and previous work by
Lapata et al. (2003) did not go beyond these two qualia roles
(the study manipulated subjects cueing either one or the other
role). In contrast, literature on affordances and experimental
work in cognitive linguistics (Glenberg & Robertson, 2000;
Gibbs, 2003) showed that affordances structures (“the possible
actions that can be done to an object by a person”) can provide
a dynamic framework to account for context effects. For
example, “the affordances of a chair include those of sitting on,
or using to hold off a snarling lion, but they cannot ordinarily
be meshed with the goal of propelling oneself across a room”.

Conclusions
The “lexical hypothesis”, which explains the interpretation
of logical metonymy in terms of the object’s qualia structure,
provides a specific and falsifiable model of the recovery of
covert events. Unfortunately, the rigidity of the qualia structure cannot accomodate the role of intra-sentential context
and for the general flexibility of metonymy. The alternative
provided by the “pragmatic hypothesis” accounts for this flexibility, but often fails to define clearly what cognitive resources
come into play when processing logical metonymy and how
these resources differ from lexical knowledge. Research on
affordances and generalized event knowledge provides a fer-

948

tile framework to specify and to explore the processes behind
logical metonymy interpretation.
To our knowledge, we have presented the first experimental study on logical metonymy that used generalized event
knowledge to generate hypotheses about the interpretation of
logical metonymy. We capitalized on Lapata et al.’s (2003)
assumption that the same cognitive resources are involved
when recovering a CE of a “short variant” metonymy such as
Das Kind begann mit der Glasur (The child began the icing)
as in building expectations about the event in a “long variant”
metonymy such as Das Kind begann die Glasur zu essen (The
child began eating the icing). This assumption allowed us
to use verb-final word order in German provided to test the
hypothesis, since the target event could be cued by the preceding agent-patient pair. We found that the interaction of agent
and patient did in fact cue the upcoming event in the typical
condition, leading to shorter reading times for the target verb
compared to the atypical condition.
Our result suggests that logical metonymy can be accounted
for “pragmatically”, by a generalized event knowledge-based
account. We will address an alternative explanations for the
difference between the typical and the atypical condition,
namely a semantic priming effect between the agent and the
event (although, as observed by Matsuki et al. (2011); Murray (2006); Rayner, Warren, Juhasz, and Liversedge. (2004),
this effect should diminish across intervening words). Our
ultimate goal is to investigate to what extent metonymy can
be understood as “just another” instance of normal, incremental sentence comprehension. For this purpose, we plan
computational modelling studies on our own and existing
experimental datasets to assess the ability of corpus-based
plausibility models to account for cognitive measurements of
logical metonymy interpretation (Lapata et al., 2003).

not modulated by competition: Evidence from eye movement. JEP: LMC, 34, 1–11.
Gibbs, R. W. (2003). Embodied experience and linguistic
meaning. Brain and Language, 84, 1–15.
Glenberg, A., & Robertson, D. (2000). Symbol grounding and
meaning: A comparison of highdimensional and embodied
theories of meaning. JML, 43, 379–401.
Jackendoff, R. (1997). The architecture of the language
faculty. MIT Press.
Just, M., Carpenter, P., & Wooley, J. (1982). Paradigms and
processes in reading comprehension. JEP: G, 111, 228–
238.
Lapata, M., Keller, F., & Scheepers, C. (2003). Intra-sentential
context effects on the interpretation of logical metonymy.
Cognitive Science, 27(4), 649–668.
Lascarides, A., & Copestake, A. (1998). Pragmatics and word
meaning. Journal of Linguistics, 34, 387–414.
Matsuki, K., Chow, T., Hare, M., Elman, J. L., Scheepers, C.,
& McRae, K. (2011). Event-based plausibility immediately
influences on-line language comprehension. JEP: LMC. (In
press)
McElree, B., Traxler, M. J., Pickering, M. J., Seely, R. E., &
Jackendoff, R. (2001). Reading time evidence for enriched
composition. Cognition, 78, B17-B25.
McRae, K., Hare, M., Elman, J. L., & Ferretti, T. R. (2005).
A basis for generating expectancies for verbs from nouns.
Memory and Cognition, 33, 1174–1184.
McRae, K., & Matsuki, K. (2009). People use their knowledge
of common events to understand language, and do so as
quickly as possible. Language and Linguistics Compass,
3/6, 1417–1429.
Murray, W. S. (2006). The nature and time course of pragmatic
plausibility effects. JPR, 35, 79–99.
Partee, B. H., ter Meulen, A., & Wall, R. E. (1993). Mathematical Methods in Linguistics. Kluwer.
Pustejovsky, J. (1995). The generative lexicon. MIT Press.
Pylkkänen, L., & McElree, B. (2006). The syntax-semantic
interface: On-line composition of sentence meaning. In
Handbook of Psycholinguistics (p. 537-577). Elsevier.
Rayner, K., Warren, T., Juhasz, B. J., & Liversedge., S. P.
(2004). The effect of plausibility on eye movements in
reading. JEP: LMC, 30, 1290–1301.
Snow, R., O’Connor, B., Jurafsky, D., & Ng, A. (2008). Cheap
and fast - but is it good? Evaluating non-expert annotations
for natural language tasks. In Proc. EMNLP 2008 (pp. 254–
263). Honolulu, Hawaii.
Traxler, M. J., Pickering, M. J., & McElree, B. (2002). Coercion in sentence processing: evidence from eye-movements
and self-paced reading. JML, 47, 530-547.
Traxler, M. J., Traxler, M. J., McElree, B., Williams, R. S.,
& Pickering, M. J. (2002). Context effects in coercion:
Evidence from eye-movements. JML, 53, 1–25.
Zarcone, A., & Padó, S. (2010). "I like work: I can sit and
look at it for hours" – Type clash vs. plausibility in covert
event recovery. In Proc. VERB 2010 workshop. Pisa, Italy.

Acknowledgments. We acknowledge the support of
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) for the project D6
in Sonderforschungsbereich (SFB) 732 at Stuttgart University.

References
Almeida, R. G. de, Riven, L., Manouilidou, C., Lungu, O.,
Dwivedi, V., Jarema, G., et al. (2009). Coercion effects are
pragmatic: fMRI and behavioral evidence. Poster presented
at the 15th AMLaP. Barcelona, Spain.
Altmann, G. T. M., & Kamide, Y. (1999). Incremental interpretation at verbs: Restricting the domain of subsequent
reference. Cognition, 73, 247–264.
Asher, N. (2010). Lexical meaning in context. Cambridge
University Press.
De Almeida, R. D., & Dwivedi, V. D. (2008). Coercion without lexical decomposition: Type-shifting effects revisited.
Canadian Journal of Linguistics, 53(2/3), 301–326.
Fodor, J. A., & Lepore, E. (1998). The emptiness of the
lexicon: Reflections on James Pustejovsky’s The Generative
Lexicon. Linguistic Inquiry, 29(2), 269–288.
Frisson, S., & McElree, B. (2008). Complement coercion is

949

