UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Graded structure in adjective categories

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8cp607n4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
De Deyne, Simon
Voorspoels, Wouter
Verheyen, Steven
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Graded structure in adjective categories
Simon De Deyne (simon.dedeyne@psy.kuleuven.be)a
Wouter Voorspoels (wouter.voorspoels@psy.kuleuven.be)a
Steven Verheyen (steven.verheyen@psy.kuleuven.be)a
Dan Navarro (daniel.navarro@adelaide.edu.au)b
Gert Storms (gert.storms@psy.kuleuven.be)a
a

University of Leuven, Department of Psychology, Tiensestraat 102, 3000 Leuven, Belgium
b University of Adelaide, School of Psychology, 5000 Adelaide, Australia
Abstract

adjectives are highly polysemous. Their meaning often depends on the context in which they are used. Small, for example, has a different meaning when it modifies elephant than
when it modifies fly. Third, it is not clear how to derive a similarity structure for adjectives, since one of the most successful
approaches for nouns based on a feature generation task has
no analog for adjectives. Finally, and perhaps most challenging for traditional models of representation, is the presence
of antonomy: the basic relation of many adjective pairs appears to be one of opposition (e.g., fast-slow, hot-cold)1 . It is
not immediately clear how antonomy can be reconciled with
theories of category representation that rely on a summary
representation such as prototypes. For instance, if we assume
that hot and cold are a-similar, but both typical adjectives to
describe a temperature, it is not clear how to derive an average representation of this category representation in which a
different word to describe temperature can be highly typical
and similar to both hot and cold at the same time.

In contrast to nouns, little is known about the graded structure
of adjective categories. In this study we investigate if adjectives categories show a similar graded structure and explain it
using a similarity-based account. The results show a reliable
graded structure which is adequately explained by two formal
models based on prototypes and exemplars, therefore generalizing the model performance from concrete nouns to adjectives. Finally, we show the attention weights of these models
deal with the additional challenge of antonymy in adjectives
and discuss the findings in the light of alternative accounts that
do not rely on item-similarity.
Keywords: concepts; adjectives, typicality, antonymy, GCM,
prototypes.

Research on natural language concepts generally focuses
on object categories; that is, words, most often nouns, that refer to concrete objects such as cats, bat, apples and coconuts.
Category members vary in typicality, with cats being more
typical mammals than bats for example, and one of the most
robust effects across a wide range of tasks is a processing advantage for typical items. This effect is thought to reflect a
graded category structure, with the gradations corresponding
to the degree that concept features are shared between category members (Rosch & Mervis, 1975).
Surprisingly, no attempt has been undertaken to establish
whether a similar structure exists for adjectives. Filling this
void is crucial, since understanding adjective meanings is
central to understanding natural language representations as
a whole. It is natural to expect some similarities to exist: adjective and noun concepts are intimately related, since adjectives convey information about the shape, color, taste, etc. of
the nouns they modify and nouns in their turn restrict the intended sense of the adjectives. Moreover, it is often adjectives
that are used in models of representation of object categories
to denote features. With this in mind, we aim to tackle the
adjective domain in a way that is similar to the way object
categories have been approached.
Despite the similarities, the shift from nouns to adjectives
poses new challenges. First, adjectives differ from nouns because there is no hyponymic relationship. In other words, the
IS-A relationship is undefined for adjectives without specifying a noun domain they might modify (Gross & Miller, 1990;
Murphy & Andrew, 1993). For instance, one can reflect on
different adjectives to describe a feeling, and some of these
adjectives might be better examples than others, but no adjective can be considered to be a superordinate. Second, most

The aim of this study is to investigate the extent to which
the graded structure that exists with nouns is replicated in adjectives. To this end, we apply well-studied formal models
of typicality that have been previously used for noun categories. In the following sections, we first describe categories
for adjectives that can be used to study graded structure. The
findings of this task are used to obtain a direct measure of
graded structure by asking participants to judge the typicality
or goodness of the exemplar for a category. These data allow
us to answer the question whether a reliable graded structure
can be identified. Given the presence of such a structure, we
look for possible accounts. According to the structural view,
the category gradient is a consequence of the similarity of
the items in the set. We test this view by implementing both
an exemplar and prototype model to account for the obtained
structure and investigate how they handle antonymy relationships. We end with a brief discussion on other, non-similarity
based approaches and possible lines of further improvements
to the present approach.

1 Antonymy has a more restricted meaning than opposition (e.g.,
Cruse, 2004), but for the current purposes, we will make no further
distinction.

249

Experiment 1: Categories of Adjectives

negative connotations (e.g., young, old).

Since it is not immediately obvious how adjectives are organized in categories, a number of categories will be used, aiming to cover psychologically interesting domains related to
abstract entities, objects, the senses, and person and emotion
properties. These organizing principles were chosen to capture a large variety of categories in terms of the nouns they
can modify and their abstractness.
Consistent with previous work using nouns (e.g., Ruts et
al., 2004), we propose a method where participants generate
exemplars for each of the categories, as a method for approximating a natural language category. To reduce the intrusion of
qualitative judgments (e.g., good and bad), specific modifiers
were used. For example, adjectives for description of a work
of art were used instead of simply asking subjects to generate adjectives used for artworks. Since adjectives are often
polysemous, an indication of the noun domain they modified
was provided where applicable. In other words, instead of
asking persons to generate adjectives for objects or persons,
they were asked to generated adjectives to describe the shape
of an object or the appearance of a person.

Results and discussion
The responses for the different participants were summarized
by tabulation for each category. The counts indicated considerable variation among the number of adjectives generated
for a specific category, ranging from 183 for degree of certainty to 415 for color of an object. The count distributions
of the types were positively skewed with on average 65% of
the types being generated more than once. The results also
showed that out of 1918 adjective types, 594 adjectives were
generated for more than one category. This indicates the polysemous nature of these words.
Despite the instructions asking for descriptive adjectives
for certain categories, qualitative judgments such as good
and bad occurred in many categories such as description of
weather conditions or description of the taste of food.

Experiment 2: Typicality of Adjectives
Method
Participants Twenty-seven female and ten male volunteers
were paid C8/hour. Their ages ranged from 19 to 29 years
(M = 23). All participants were native Dutch speakers.

Method

Stimuli and materials Twelve categories from the initial
set of 22 categories described in the previous task were retained for the typicality judgment study. These categories
were selected so as to cover the proposed adjective domains,
while avoiding the inclusion of similar categories. In addition
categories with only a small number of exemplars (e.g., departure from a norm) or categories containing an adjective in
its name (e.g., degree to which something is difficult or hard)
were also not included. For each category, 30 adjectives were
sampled to cover the entire range of the production frequencies2 . Note that some adjectives like good and bad were included in multiple categories.

Participants Thirty-nine volunteers (32 of them female and
7 male) were paid C8/hour. Their ages ranged from 19 to 57
years (M = 23). All participants were native Dutch speakers.
Stimuli and materials The stimuli consisted of twenty-two
adjective category descriptions that can be used to describe
abstract properties (a quality judgment, description of a quantity, degree to which something is difficult or hard, degree of
certainty, description of weather conditions, departure from
a norm), object properties (description of a landscape, appreciation of a work of art, description of a work of art, the
shape of an object, the value of an object, the position of objects), sensorial properties (description of music, description
of the taste of food, the color of objects, temperature, the feel
of an object) or person and emotion properties (description of
someone’s character, description of a person’s appearance,
description of the sound of someone’s voice, description of
intelligence, description of a mood).
Four different subsets of these descriptions were constructed, each consisting of 11 categories. Two restrictions
were imposed, to prevent related categories co-occurring in
the same permutation. These restrictions were applied to two
category pairs (1) appreciation of a work of art and description of a work of art and (2) the description of music and the
description of the sound of someone’s voice.

Procedure The participants were asked to fill in an online
questionnaire in which they were asked to indicate how good
an example each adjective was of the category mentioned on
the screen. This was done by providing ratings on a sevenpoint Likert-scale ranging from 1 (a very bad example) to 7
(an excellent example). Every participant rated the typicality of all the exemplars of every category. The order of the
categories and the items within the category were completely
randomized for each participant.

Results and discussion
The reliability of the typicality judgments for each of the
categories was estimated using the split-half correlation with
Spearman-Brown correction. Nine categories were found to
be very reliable (rsplithal f > .90). The categories description
of quantity, description of a work of art and description of a
person’s character were only slightly less reliable. For these
categories the values were respectively .83, .85 and .89.

Procedure Every participant filled in an Excel-file containing 11 sheets. Each sheet consisted of the name of a category
and 24 blank lines for filling in words. Participants were instructed to generate as many adjectives as they could think of
in the allotted space. Two examples were given for the category of adjectives used to describe buildings and phases in
life. The examples included both adjectives with positive and

2 All

250

data are available upon request.

Constructing a psychological space

The selection of category members across the range of
the generation frequency distribution resulted in categories
with variability in the degree in which a graded structure was
present (mean SD = .77, minimum SD = .56 for description
of someone’s character and maximum SD = 1.30 for color
of an object). We also confirmed the validity of the exemplar
selection procedure based on the generation frequency by calculating the correlations between the log-transformed generation frequencies and the mean typicality judgments. The average correlation was r = .57 and ranged between rmin = .29
(description of a mood) and rmax = .80 (shape of an object).
Although somewhat lower in strength, this confirms previous
findings that show a positive correlation between the number of times an item is generated as a category member and
typicality (Barsalou, 1985).

Feature-based similarity measures have been very successful in predicting conceptual data including typicality judgments (Dry & Storms, 2009). Since adjectives often correspond to concept-features, standard feature listing tasks used
for concrete nouns cannot be applied. However, previous
studies have shown that word association data captures the
semantic representation among a wide range of concepts well
(De Deyne, Peirsman, & Storms, 2009). To derive a similarity space from word associations, updated norms of the data
described in De Deyne and Storms (2008) were used. The
meaning of each adjective is represented by the association
response distribution which encodes the number of time a
certain association was generated to the adjective cue. Using these distributions, similarity indices were derived in a
manner identical to that in De Deyne et al. (2009). First the
counts were transformed using a t-score measure of concordance following a proposal by Church, Gale, Hanks, and Hindle (1991). Next, the similarity between two adjectives was
calculated using the cosine measure. This was done for all
adjective combinations in a category. The multidimensional
representations underlying the GCM and the CPM were constructed for each of the twelve categories by varying the number of dimensions from 2 to 6. Following Kruskal (1964),
solutions with stress-values exceeding .10 are not considered
for further analyses. Using this criterion to select the lowest
dimensionality resulted in dimensionalities with a mode of 4
(see Table 1). Two examples of these spaces using 2 dimensions are shown in Figure 1.

Modeling Adjective Categories
The experimental data clearly show that a reliable, graded
structure exists for these concepts. To model this structure,
we consider two prominent theories that have been applied
successfully to object categories. The exemplar view states
that a category is represented as a collection of all its previously encountered members (e.g., Medin & Schaffer, 1978).
According to the prototype view on the other hand, categories
are represented by an abstract summary or a prototype (e.g.,
Rosch, Simpson, & Miller, 1976). We will briefly describe
the models we used to implement these fundamental views
on representation and their account of typicality.

Exemplar and prototype models
In this study, we make use of the Generalized Context Model
(GCM; Nosofsky, 1986) and the Central Prototype Model
(CPM; Minda & Smith, 2010). Both are similarity based
models in which the psychological distance between two
items i and j is given by
!1
K

di j =

∑ wk |xik − x jk |r

Performance of the models
The GCM and CPM models were fit by optimizing the correlation between the predicted typicality and the observed typicality for each category consisting of 30 members separately.
The results are shown in Table 1. For both the GCM as the
CPM, all correlations were significant at the .01 level (onetailed t). The strength of the correlations varied depending on
the categories and ranged from moderate to high for all categories. The correlations indicate a slight advantage for the
GCM but this was only found to be statistically significant for
a quality judgment, Z = 1.90, p < .05 (Meng, Rosenthal, &
Rubin, 1992). The general pattern of results was consistent
across the tested dimensionality range.
To ensure that these results were not due to flexibility in
(over)fitting the free parameters to the data, we performed
a permutation test. This test consisted of permuting the observed typicality values a 1.000 times and finding the optimal
prediction of both models. If the free parameters in the model
are able to capture every pattern to the same extent, we would
expect optimal correlations for the permuted data sets that are
within the same range as the correlations in Table 1. This was
not the case. Averaged over categories, the correlation was
r = .31 (rmin = .20, rmax = .40) which is considerably lower
than the observed ones.

r

(1)

k=1

where xik and x jk are the coordinates of exemplars i and j on
dimension k, wk is the attention weight granted to dimension
k and K is the number of dimensions. In this study, the parameter r was fixed at 2 to correspond to Euclidean distances
which are more appropriate for integral dimensions (Shepard,
1964). The similarity is then defined:
ηi j = exp(−cdi j )

(2)

where c is the scaling parameter which determines the contribution of similarity as points become more distant in space.
In the exemplar model, the typicality of an item is assessed
by summing the items similarity to all other exemplars. In the
prototype model, typicality is assessed by measuring the similarity to a “prototypical” item located at the centroid which
is calculated by averaging across the K coordinates of all category members. For both models, the free parameters consist
of K − 1 dimension weights and the parameter c.

251

a quality judgment, stress = 0.20
sturdy

color of an object, stress = 0.22
0.3

terrible

0.4

ugly

0.2
0.3
wrong
Dimension 2

0.2

0.1
negative

bad
great
positive
sublime
insufficient
good
fantastic excellent
average
marvelous
0
outstanding
inferior
perfect
−0.1
sufficient
poor
qualitative2 qualitative1
moderate
−0.2
efficient
many
−0.3 valuable
durable

0

0.1

−0.4

useable
−0.3 −0.2 −0.1
0
0.1
Dimension 1

worthless
0.2

0.3

blurry
−0.1

pink
violet
orange
bright
faded
purple2
green
beige
ocher
red
gray
yellow
ashgray
light blue
dark

−0.2

black

white

dark

−0.3

blue

light

golden

silver

cold

−0.4
−0.4

0.4

beautiful

lilac
purple1
brown

awful

amazing

khaki

−0.2

0
Dimension 1

0.2

0.4

Figure 1: Multidimensional scaling solutions for two adjective categories showing the two most important dimensions. The
marker size for each adjective reflects its judged typicality.
The issue of antonymy suggests an interesting application
of the CPM and the GCM, since the adjective valence should
not affect how typical an adjective is for the category. If
the hypothesis is correct, we should expect the attentional
weights for a stimulus dimension that corresponds to valence
to be low in categories characterized by antonymy relations.
To test this hypothesis, we used valence judgments collected in a previous study, in which participants were asked
to indicate on a seven-point scale whether a word evoked a
negative or a positive feeling (Verheyen, De Deyne, Linsen,
& Storms, 2011). As illustrated in the left plot in Figure 1,
high typicality ratings can be found at both extremes of the
first dimension, which largely reflects valence. Moreover, this
valence itself did not correlate with any of the typicality ratings except for color of an object category (r = .52, p < 0.1,
two-tailed t). Despite the lack of correlation with typicality
ratings, Table 2 shows that the valence ratings tended to correlate most strongly with dimension 1 in the MDS solutions4 ,
and was significant for 10 of the 12 categories. The comparison between the weight w for this dimension and the dimension with the highest weight identified by the model (see kmax
and wmax , for the dimension number and the weight) shows
that the importance of the valence dimensions were downweighted by the model for all categories except descriptions
of a quantity. While not necessarily intuitively obvious, the
flexibility offered by dimensional attention weights explains
why the models can account for antonymy-free typicalities
using antonymy-rich similarity representations.

Table 1: GCM and CPM correlations based on K dimensional
MDS solutions.
n = 30
a quality judgment
a quantity
weather circumstances
landscape
artwork
shape of an object
taste of food
color of an object
feeling of an object
someone’s character
person’s appearance
mood

K
4
4
4
5
6
4
6
5
6
5
5
4

stress
0.095
0.096
0.097
0.097
0.086
0.099
0.081
0.098
0.086
0.087
0.089
0.069

GCM
.85
.78
.76
.62
.78
.77
.68
.74
.57
.49
.79
.72

CPM
.82
.73
.76
.49
.76
.64
.63
.72
.55
.51
.78
.76

Novel insights from the models
For a model to truly be useful, it should not only fit data well;
it should also teach us something new about the data. In this
case, it is important to consider the values of the parameters
to understand how the psychological distances affect the predicted typicalities. Most interesting in this respect are the dimensional weights. Unlike nouns, adjectives are often characterized by the presence of antonymy relationships. In terms
of similarity of meaning, words like valuable and worthless
are clear opposites and should be distal in an MDS space.
At the same time, these concepts are semantically closely related. They differ in terms of valence but might be similar on
all other dimensions. The quality judgment category provides
the clearest example of antonymy effects. Indeed, as shown
in Figure 1, the first dimension distinguishes the adjectives in
terms of connotation or valence3 .

Comparison to other accounts
Typicality can also be due to factors other than those tied to
an underlying similarity-based structure. According to the
concept accessibility view (e.g., Janczura & Nelson, 1999),
strong associates for focal concepts like good and bad.
4 Although the statistical model in MDS does not require it, the
nature of MDS algorithms tends to ensure that dimension 1 explains
the largest share of the variance in the similarity data: this occurred
for 11 out of 12 categories.

3 Interestingly, good and bad and black and white are not at the
extremes of this dimension but much more similar. This is most
likely an artifact of the association data, since opposites tend to be

252

tives for the majority of the categories used in this study.
For instance, in describing a person’s appearance, one could
count how many times certain adjectives are used to modify
the noun person or consider nouns at a more basic level such
as girl or cowboy. Such an approach is still ill-defined since
no distinction can be made between other person characteristics such as a person’s status, character,etc. Second, generation frequencies are often considered a dependent measure
themselves (e.g., Dry & Storms, 2009) since they could depend on the underlying similarity structure of the concepts
involved. Although beyond the scope of this paper this topic
clearly merits additional attention in future research.

Table 2: Maximum correlations r between valence ratings and dimensions scores with corresponding dimensional
weights w and maximal weights wmax found for kmax dimensions.
category
n
r k
w kmax wmax
a quality judgment
12 .83 1 0.01
4 0.75
a quantity
15 .86 1 0.72
1 0.72
weather circumst.
18 .65 1 0.18
3 0.28
landscape
14 .80 1 0.38
2 0.62
artwork
20 .66 2 0.08
1 0.37
shape of an object
24
– –
–
4 0.47
taste of food
19 .55 2 0.28
1 0.58
color of an object
21 .78 1 0.02
3 0.97
feeling of an object
21
– –
–
5 0.59
someone’s character 16 .95 1 0.07
2 0.54
person’s appearance 22 .58 2 0.03
3 0.56
mood
18 .96 1 0.39
3 0.55

Discussion
Adjective categories, just like noun categories, show a reliable graded structure. This structure was successfully explained using two formal similarity-based models based on
exemplars (GCM) and prototypes (CPM). The application of
the exemplar and prototype model was not only successful,
it also gave us additional insight in the role of antonymy in
adjectives.
To further validate our results for adjectives, we compared the performance of the GCM and CPM with the wellstudied domain of noun concepts. Voorspoels, Vanpaemel,
and Storms (in press) applied the GCM and CPM models to
nouns referring to animals and artifacts. The results in this
study showed that the GCM model obtained correlations with
rated typicality of .65 for animals and .76 for artifacts. Moreover, the average correlations of .71 for the GCM and .68 for
the CPM model indicate that the present results are both similar in terms of magnitude and relative performance of the
models. This is remarkable given the domain differences and
the fact that the similarity space in Voorspoels et al. (in press)
was derived from participant-generated semantic features restricted to a particular domain, rather than word associations
which do not incorporate domain restrictions. Given these encouraging results, we also considered related models. From a
theoretical point of view, formal models based on ideals such
as recently proposed by Voorspoels et al. (in press) could
be of interest given that the adjective classes described here
might share some similarity to the ad hoc goal-derived concepts for which an ideal-based account is preferred (Barsalou, 1985). However, preliminary results showed that an
ideal-based approach performed worse than the basic GCM
or CPM model. Within the same formal framework, the notion of contrasting categories might also prove to be valuable,
since it would allow to penalize polysemous adjectives occurring within different domains. Additional preliminary results
did not fit the data as well as the basic GCM and CPM models. Future research is needed to uncover why these models
fail when applied to adjectives.
Apart from experimenting with models, other improvements might involve deriving the structural representations
for adjectives differently. For instance, one could also opt
to implement a more text-based model to derive a similarity
space. A promising approach is the use of models that derive

typicality judgments do not depend on shared features or similarity between category members but reflect how easy it is
to retrieve category members due to factors such as the preexisting associations with the category, word frequency, or familiarity with the concept. When the concepts that are studied correspond to adjectives, similar factors could explain a
graded structure.
One of these alternative explanations is based on the observation that adjectives like cold or bitter have multiple related senses. Since their meaning differs depending on the
nominal context, one could assume that highly polysemous
adjectives would be perceived to be less typical. As part of
a large scale norming study on adjectives, Verheyen et al.
(2011) asked participants to indicate in how many different
contexts an adjective could be used. These context variability ratings were correlated with rated typicality, in order to
investigate the role of polysemy. Context variability did not
correlate significantly with the typicality ratings of any of the
categories (all p > 0.5, one-tailed t) except for shape of an
object, r = −.34, p < 0.5.
Previous studies show that typicality increases as exemplars become more familiar (e.g., Hampton & Gardiner,
1983; Malt & Smith, 1982). To investigate if this is the case,
we also correlated word frequency and familiarity with the
typicality judgments. Word lemma frequencies were obtained
from the CELEX lexical database (Baayen, Piepenbrock, &
van Rijn, 1993), while familiarity ratings were taken from
Verheyen et al. (2011). Both the log-transformed lemma
frequencies and subjective frequency measured by familiarity did not correlate significantly with the typicality ratings of
any of the categories (all p > .05, one-tailed t).
A final possibility is that typicality simply reflects how often a certain adjective is used as a modifier of the category
concept. There are at least two problems with this view. First,
since the category concepts are defined at a more abstract superordinate level, it is not clear how to retrieve pre-existing
associations between the category description and the adjec-

253

specific syntactic dependencies from text (Padó & Lapata,
2007). We explored this possibility but found that antonymy
relations are not encoded as clearly as in the association data
and cannot be discounted as easily by the models. This can
be attributed to the fact that adjectives often modify nouns to
incorporate new information, in a sense that they indicate a
departure from the implicit default values. Thus, people will
not often combine the adjective yellow with banana, while
the collocation red bananas occurs more frequently than what
can be expected from their occurrence in the environment.
Moreover, there are other lexical reasons why people prefer some adjective-noun combinations over others. As noted
by Cruse (2004) the fact that a combination such as spotless
kitchen is more acceptable than spotless taste does not seem
to depend on the meaning of the individual words. These observations support the idea that the success of our approach
hinges on the use of association data since these data reflect
more of the underlying semantic properties and are less biased by syntactic or lexical constraints.
Ultimately, nouns and adjectives will need to be integrated
in a single semantic framework. Our study showed that
this framework will have to incorporate flexibility towards
antonymy in explaining graded structure of adjectives. While
this endeavour provides a challenge for many years to come,
it will broaden our understanding of natural concepts including nouns as well.

Dry, M., & Storms, G. (2009). Similar but not the same:
A comparison of the utility of directly rated and featurebased similarity measures for generating spatial models of
conceptual data. Behavior Research Methods, 41, 889-900.
Gross, D., & Miller, K. (1990). Adjectives in WordNet. International Journal of Lexicography, 3, 265-277.
Hampton, J. A., & Gardiner, M. M. (1983). Measures of
internal category structure: A correlational analysis of normative data. British Journal of Psychology, 74, 491-516.
Janczura, G. A., & Nelson, D. L. (1999). Concept accessibility as the determinant of typicality judgments. The American Journal of Psychology, 112, 1-19.
Kruskal, J. (1964). Nonmetric multidimensional scaling: a
numerical method. Psychometrika, 29, 115-129.
Malt, B. C., & Smith, E. E. (1982). The role of familiarity in
determining typicality. Memory & Cognition, 10, 69-75.
Medin, D., & Schaffer, M. (1978). Context theory of classification learning. Psychological Review, 85, 207-237.
Meng, X. L., Rosenthal, R., & Rubin, D. B. (1992). Comparing correlated correlation coefficients. Psychological Bulletin, 111, 172-175.
Minda, J., & Smith, J. (2010). Formal approaches in categorization. In E. Pothos & A. Wills (Eds.), (chap. Prototype
models of categorization: basic formulation, predictions,
and limitations.). Cambridge University Press: Cambridge,
UK.
Murphy, G. L., & Andrew, J. M. (1993). The conceptual
basis of antonymy and synonymy in adjectives. Journal of
Memory and Language, 32, 301-319.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1986). Attention, similarity, and the
identification-categorization relationship. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 115, 39-57.
Padó, S., & Lapata, M. (2007, June). Dependency-Based
Construction of Semantic Space Models. Computational
Linguistics, 33, 161–199.
Rosch, E., & Mervis, C. B. (1975). Family resemblances:
Studies in the internal structure of categories. Cognitive
Psychology, 7, 573-605.
Rosch, E., Simpson, C., & Miller, R. S. (1976). Structural
Bases of Typicality Effects. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 4, 491-502.
Ruts, W., De Deyne, S., Ameel, E., Vanpaemel, W., Verbeemen, T., & Storms, G. (2004). Dutch norm data for
13 semantic categories and 338 exemplars. Behaviour Research Methods, Instruments, and Computers, 36, 506–
515.
Shepard, R. N. (1964). Attention and the metric structure of
the stimullus space. Journal of Mathematical Psychology,
1, 54-87.
Verheyen, S., De Deyne, S., Linsen, S., & Storms, G. (2011).
Lexical and semantic norms for 1,000 Dutch adjectives.
(Unpublished manuscript)
Voorspoels, W., Vanpaemel, W., & Storms, G. (in press). A
formal Ideal-based Account of Typicality. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a research grant funded by the Research
Foundation - Flanders (FWO) to the first author and by the interdisciplinary research project IDO/07/002 awarded to Dirk Speelman,
Dirk Geeraerts, and Gert Storms. Dan Navarro was supported by an
Australian Research Fellowship (ARC grant DP0773794).

References
Baayen, R. H., Piepenbrock, R., & van Rijn, H. (1993). The
CELEX lexical database [CD-ROM]. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania, Linguistic Data Consortium.
Barsalou, L. W. (1985). Ideals, central tendency, and frequency of instantiation as determinants of graded structure
in categories. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 11, 629–654.
Church, K., Gale, W., Hanks, P., & Hindle, D. (1991). Lexical Acquisition: Exploiting On-Line Resources to Build a
Lexicon. In U. Zernik (Ed.), (p. 115-164). Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Cruse, D. A. (2004). Meaning in language: An introduction to semantics and pragmatics. (2 ed.). Oxford: Oxford
University Press: Oxford: Oxford University Press.
De Deyne, S., Peirsman, Y., & Storms, G. (2009). Sources
of semantic similarity. In N. Taatgen & H. van Rijn (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 31th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (p. 1834-1839). Austin, TX: Cognitive
Science Society.
De Deyne, S., & Storms, G. (2008). Word associations:
Norms for 1,424 Dutch words in a continuous task. Behavior Research Methods, 40, 198-205.

254

