UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How Reading Goals and Rhetorical Signals Influence Recipients’ Recognition of
Intertextual Conflicts

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8wg6f99k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Stadtler, Marc
Scharrer, Lisa
Bromme, Rainer

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How Reading Goals and Rhetorical Signals Influence Recipients’ Recognition of Intertextual
Conflicts
Marc Stadtler (marc.stadtler@uni-muenster.de)
Lisa Scharrer (lisa.scharrer@uni-muenster.de)
Rainer Bromme (bromme@uni-muenster.de)
Institute for Psychology, University of Münster, Fliednerstrasse 21, 48149 Münster, Germany

Abstract
Becoming aware of conflicting information is an integral part
of comprehending multiple documents on a scientific issue.
We examined whether memory for conflicts and its
application in an essay task could be enhanced by a
combination of reading goals and text signals. Two highcoherence-orienting reading goals (reading to write a
summary or an argumentation) were contrasted with a low
coherence-orienting goal (composing a list of key words).
Moreover, for half of the participants texts contained
rhetorical connectors signaling the existence of conflicts,
whereas the other half did not. A total of 184 undergraduates
read multiple documents on a controversial medical issue. As
expected, reading with high-coherence goals facilitated
conflict recognition more than a low-coherence goal. The
facilitative effect of signaling was particularly pronounced in
the summary group. Moreover, participants in the signalingcondition and in the high-coherence goal conditions wrote the
most integrated essays subsequent to reading.
Keywords:
multiple
document
literacy;
reading
comprehension; reading online; task effects; signaling

Introduction
Comprehending multiple documents on a scientific issue is
a common task in modern information societies. Especially
with the advent of the internet as today’s primary resource
of scientific information, accessing a variety of
heterogeneous documents with a specific goal in mind has
become a frequent reading situation. This holds both for
informal learning (e.g., when laypersons conduct an internet
search to support a knowledge-based decision) and for
institutionalized learning contexts, such as in school or
university settings (e.g., when searching a variety of onlinedocuments to complete a task assignment).
However, scientific information is usually tentative and
evolving in nature and authors frequently disagree on at
least some points of a scientific issue. Hence, we contend
that becoming aware of conflicts between sources is an
integral part of comprehending scientific information from
multiple documents. This presupposes that readers do not
treat the texts they read as isolated chunks of information.
Rather, they have to integrate information across documents
trying to establish cross-textual coherence. This, however,
can be a major cognitive endeavor (Wineburg, 1991).
Whereas within-text integration is usually facilitated by the
author, e.g. through presenting arguments in an orderly
fashion or by using linguistic devices to disclose the
relationship between ideas, the responsibility of establishing

cross-textual coherence mainly resides with the reader.
Previous research gives rise to some skepticism about the
mastery of the skills required to comprehend multiple
documents by readers of different age levels (Wineburg,
1991). Therefore, it is both of practical as well as of
theoretical importance to identify factors that lead readers to
establish strong intertextual connections.
Against this background, the present study aimed to
broaden our understanding of multiple document
comprehension by examining the joint effects of two factors
that are supposed to enhance a reader’s ability to integrate
conflicting information from multiple sources: the goals a
reader adopts and rhetorical connectors, which signal
intertextual relationships.

The Influence of Reading Goals on Text
Comprehension
Until now, only a few studies have investigated the
influence of reading goals on the processing of multiple
documents. In the context of single text comprehension,
however, reading goals have been identified as one of the
most influential determinants of text processing
(McCrudden & Schraw, 2007). Reading goals activate
mental schemata, which provide readers with guidance in
determining which chunk of information may be most
relevant and thus should be incorporated into the
macrostructure of a text representation (McCrudden &
Schraw, 2007). With respect to multiple documents
comprehension, reading goals might be especially
influential because they additionally serve as a frame of
reference when readers decide which level of coherence is
needed in terms of a functionally adequate text
representation (Tapiero, 2007). That means that depending
on their respective task, readers decide whether they are
satisfied with forming local coherence (e.g., at the level of a
single paragraph in simple fact-finding tasks) or whether
they seek to establish global coherence, including
intertextual relationships. The preliminary evidence
available suggests that to accomplish global coherence at
the intertextual level, tasks are beneficial that require
students to connect different units of information (e.g.,
Bråten & Strømsø, 2010; Cerdán & Vidal-Abarca, 2008;
Rouet, Vidal-Abarca, Erboul, & Millogo, 2001; Wiley &
Voss, 1999). Especially the task of reading to write an
argumentation has proven to promote processes of
comparing and integrating information across sources
(Bråten & Strømsø, 2010; Cerdán & Vidal-Abarca, 2008;

1346

Wiley & Voss, 1999). This fosters the formation of a highly
integrated mental representation of the contents readers are
dealing with, while at the same time prompting readers to
spot differences in the argumentations of different authors.
In addition, Gil, Bråten, Vidal-Abarca, and Strømsø (2010)
demonstrated that the somewhat less demanding task of
reading to write a summary can be at least equally
beneficial, especially for readers with low prior knowledge.
This may be because writing a summary also orients reader
toward establishing global coherence, requiring them to
form a generalized macrostructure out of contents integrated
from different sources.
However, until now, the question of whether reading
goals influence the comprehension and integration of
conflicting information has not been sufficiently
investigated. In most of the aforementioned studies,
information that had to be integrated complemented one
another. Hence, the question as to whether readers become
aware of intertextual conflicts was not at the core of
previous studies. This difference is not trivial, because
research has revealed that readers expecting a more or less
consistent discourse often hesitate to accept conflicts and do
not integrate them into their mental representation,
accordingly (Otero, 2002). Hence, the task of integrating
conflicting information may be even more demanding for
readers compared to the integration of undisputed
information. Thus, the first aim of our study was to fill this
gap and extend our knowledge about the role of reading
goals in multiple document comprehension to the
comprehension of conflicting scientific information.

The Influence of Rhetorical Connectors on the
Comprehension of Conflicting Information
In addition to contextual factors, such as reading goals,
factors on the side of the text are likely to exert an influence
on readers’ propensity to integrate information across texts.
For instance, Perfetti (1997) argued that signaling the
rhetorical structure to readers through rhetorical connectors,
such as “in contrast to” or “in line with”, should facilitate
forming a mental representation of intertextual relationships.
Conversely, to the extent that linguistic markers are missing,
readers have to infer intertextual relationships without the
author’s explicit support. Research on comprehending single
documents has indeed shown that text signals, such as
headings, exert a strong influence on readers’ text
processing, and the related text comprehension products
(e.g., Hyönä, Lorch, & Kaakinen, 2002). According to the
theory of signaling put forward by Lemarié, Lorch, Eyrolle,
and Virbel (2008), however, signaling effects on textprocessing should depend on the relevance of the signaled
information to the readers' goals. That is why we assume
that rhetorical connectors should be particularly influential
when readers pursue the goal to establish intertextual
connections.
Hence, the second aim of our study was to examine the
effect of linguistic markers explicating the rhetorical
structure between authors’ arguments on the comprehension

of conflicting multiple documents. More specifically, we
sought to find out whether such an effect would depend on
the reading goal pursued by a recipient.

The Present Study
Given this theoretical orientation, we set out to contrast two
reading goals that have a strong focus on global coherence
formation (reading to write a summary/ reading to write an
argumentation) with a reading goal that only requires to
form local coherence (reading to create a list of key words
that can be used as social tags). The latter task should cause
readers to focus more on single words at the text surface
without devoting attention to macro-structural argument
chains and cross-textual differences.
Our hypothesis was that readers are better at detecting
intertextual conflicts when reading to write an
argumentation and reading to write a summary compared
with reading to compose a list of key words. The advantage
of the two high coherence-orienting reading goals over the
low coherence-orienting reading goal of composing a list of
key words should also be observable in a written essay, in
which readers are required to communicate their knowledge
about intertextual conflicts.
Against the background of the reviewed research, we
furthermore explored whether reading to write an
argumentation would lead to a better detection of
intertextual conflicts than pursuing a summary task. This
hypothesis is motivated by the assumption that in addition
to causing readers to focus on the formation of global
coherence, an argumentation task more directly requires
readers to identify inconsistencies between different
accounts of the same situation.
Furthermore, we expected a beneficial effect of signaling
conflicts through rhetorical connectors in terms of conflict
detection. Rhetorical connectors that signal intertextual
conflicts should primarily affect conflict detection in readers
who pursue coherence-oriented reading goals. The
facilitative effect of rhetorical connectors should be less
pronounced when readers pursue a low coherence-oriented
reading goal, for which information about conflicts should
be less relevant.

Method
Participants and Design
One hundred eighty-four undergraduates with different
majors at a German university participated in the study
(67% female, mean age = 22.99 years, SD = 3.68). Four
outliers, whose values on the dependent variables exceeded
a critical distance of 2.5 SD from the respective group mean,
were dropped from analyses to rule out their distorting
effect on statistics (Tabachnick & Fidell, 2001). This left us
with a sample of 180 participants (67% female, mean age =
23.07 years, SD = 3.68). To ensure participants’ lay status, a
prior knowledge test about the topic of the documents to be
read (cholesterol) was administered before reading; none of

1347

the participants answered more than 60% of the questions
correctly.
Participants were randomly assigned to one of six
experimental groups following a three (reading goals) * two
(signaling) between-subjects design. They were instructed to
read either in order to write (1) an argumentation, (2) a
summary or (3) a list of key words.

Text Materials
Nine websites that revolved around the topic cholesterol
were presented as the homepages of different medical
doctors and were accessible on a computer screen via a list
of hyperlinks. Documents were controlled for length (M =
309 words, SD = 11.28), comprehensibility, credibility and
perceived author expertise. In sum, six of the documents
contained three intertextual conflicts, each of which
consisted of two opposing claims. Each claim was only
mentioned in one of the documents. The conflicts dealt with
the questions (a) whether there is a unitary threshold value
for cholesterol, (b) whether high cholesterol can be lowered
with a certain group of drugs called statins and (c) whether
separate values for HDL and LDL are reliably indicated by
a quick test. The rest of each document comprised nonconflicting and non-redundant information; the three
remaining documents contained only filler information.
In the signaling conditions, the conflicting claims were
introduced by rhetorical connectors signaling the existence
of an opposing stance. For instance, one of the sources
contained the claim: “In contrast to what some health
professionals hold, the cholesterol level can be lowered with
statins.” (NB there was no underlining in the original
materials). The claim was contradicted by another source:
“Contrary to what some health professionals argue, statins
cannot lower the cholesterol level.”

Covariates
To be able to trace back differences in comprehension
unequivocally to our experimental manipulation, we decided
to control for the potential effects of a series of readerrelated variables that have been shown to be influence
learning from (electronic) texts in previous research. We
ascertained data on participants’ interest in the topic
cholesterol (measured with a self-developed three-item
questionnaire, Stadtler, 2006), participants’ need for
cognition (Bless et al., 1994), need for cognitive closure
(Webster & Kruglanski, 1994) and epistemic beliefs
regarding the domain medicine (Stahl & Bromme, 2007) (all
Cronbach’s alphas ranging from .53 to .91). Furthermore,
we assessed participants’ topic knowledge prior and
subsequent to reading the text materials, with a 9-item
multiple choice test on the topic cholesterol (Cronbach’s
alpha = .48).

Dependent Variables

intertextual conflicts, an intertextual conflict verification
task was administered. In total, the test consisted of 48
items, which were (a) two paraphrases for each textproposition that stood in conflict with a proposition from
another text (resulting in 12 items, α = .76), (b) paraphrases
of text-propositions that were not in conflict with a
proposition from any other text (12 items, α = .62), (c)
propositions on the topic of cholesterol, that were not
included in the set of documents, but stood in conflict with
one of the text propositions (12 items, α = .75) and finally
(d) propositions on the topic of cholesterol that were neither
included in the set of documents nor stood in conflict with
any one of the text propositions (12 items, α = .63). Each
item consisted of two questions which required participants
to indicate both whether the set of documents contained the
given stimulus item, and whether it contained a proposition
that stood in conflict with the given proposition. Participants
only received a point, if they answered both questions
correctly. A coefficient of memory for conflicting
information was calculated by subtracting the proportion of
false positives (calculated from type (b) and type (c)
paraphrases) from the proportion of correctly answered type
(a) items. Thus, the resulting index reached from -1 to 1,
with the value 1 indicating a perfect detection performance.
Application of knowledge about conflicting information
in a communication task After the reading phase, all
participants (i.e. independent from their initial reading task)
were asked to write an essay to a fictitious friend who has
been diagnosed with a high cholesterol level. In this essay,
participants should indicate whether or not they would
recommend their friend to lower his or her cholesterol level
and to give reasons for their decision. The essays were
analyzed in terms of how participants applied their
knowledge about the controversiality of information to
inform their friend.
(1) Content analysis. For each essay it was determined
whether participants explicitly informed their friend about
the fact that the received information was conflicting by
either referring to one or more specific conflicts or by
labelling the information as generally conflicting. Explicit
referrals were coded in a dichotomous variable. Twenty
percent of the essays were coded by two independent raters;
interrater-agreement was excellent (Cohen’s Kappa = .913,
p < .001).
(2) Linguistic analysis. Furthermore, essays were
analyzed for the presence of rhetorical connectors used to
express textual relationships of two types: contrariness (e.g.,
however, in contrast) or coherence (e.g., likewise, similarly).
In selecting the rhetorical connectors, we drew on Pasch
(2003) who presented a comprehensive list of connectors for
the German language. Higher numbers of rhetorical
connectors in participants’ essays were supposed to be
indicative of a more pronounced approach to present the
information in an integrated fashion.

Intertextual conflict verification task (ICVT) To measure
the extent to which participants represented the given

1348

Navigation patterns Logfiles of navigation patterns were
recorded to provide insights into the effects of reading goals
and rhetorical connectors on a process level. Navigation
patterns were analyzed in terms of (1) the degree of
sequentiality of reading behavior (number of transitions
between any documents that followed one another in the list
of hyperlinks qualified by the total number of documents
accessed) and (2) length of navigation paths (total number
of documents accessed) indicating participants’ attempts to
create coherence through re-reading the materials.

Procedure
The main data collection took place in group sessions with a
maximum of eight participants, who worked individually
with a laptop. To prevent spill-over effects from elaborating
on the nature of medical knowledge to the way participants
approached the documents to be studied, epistemological
beliefs had been assessed via an online questionnaire at least
two days prior to the main data collection. During the main
session, participants first completed measures of the
remaining control variables. Afterwards, participants were
introduced to their respective reading assignment and started
reading for which they had 20 min. Log files of the reading
process were collected. Participants were reminded of their
respective reading goal after 10 and after 15 min had
elapsed. After 20 min, the experimenter terminated the
reading phase. Reading time was fixed in order to avoid
time-on-task effects. Afterwards, participants completed the
essay task, which was followed by the ICVT. Finally,
participants completed the same topic knowledge test that
had already been administered before reading.

Results
Covariates
ANOVAs revealed that the experimental groups did not
differ regarding topic interest, need for cognition, need for
cognitive closure, epistemological beliefs and prior topic
knowledge (all Fs ≤ 2.20, ns). As a consequence, all
covariates were dropped from further analyses.

Memory for Conflicting Information (ICVT)
To test our assumption regarding the influence of reading
goals on memory for conflicting information, we conducted
planned contrasts. Results revealed a significant but small
difference between the argumentation group and the key
word group, F(1, 174) = 5.83, p = .017, η2part = .032. Readers
instructed to read in order to later write an argumentation
remembered conflicting information better than readers who
read to create a list of key words (see Table 1).
Furthermore, the summary group performed better than
the key word group, F(1, 174) = 4.00, p = .047, η2part = .022,
whereas no significant difference was found between the
argumentation group and the summary group, F(1, 174) =
.157, ns.

Table 1: Means and standard deviations (in brackets) of
memory for conflicting information as a function of reading
goal and signaling.
Signaling
No signaling

Argumentation
.31 (.32)
.24 (.28)

Summary
.36 (.35)
.15 (.25)

Key words
.22 (.25)
.09 (.15)

We also tested the assumption that signaling through
rhetorical connectors would have a beneficial effect on
memory for conflicting information, which should be less
pronounced or non-existent among readers with a low
coherence-orientation. Planned contrasts, comparing each
reading goal with and without rhetorical connectors, yielded
a significant effect of rhetorical connectors among those
participants who read in order to write a summary, F(1, 174) =
8.08, p = .005, η2part = .044. Readers of texts with rhetorical
connectors outperformed readers who were not provided
with rhetorical connectors. However, there was no
significant difference between argumentation readers with
and without rhetorical connectors, F(1, 174) = 1.21, ns.
Finally, the presence of rhetorical connectors did only
marginally improve memory for conflicting information
among readers with a key word goal, F(1, 174) = 3.73, p =
.055, η2part = .021.

Application of knowledge about conflicting
information in a communication task
Due to technical error, essays from five participants could
not be collected.
(1) Content analysis: To test whether reading goals and
signaling of rhetorical relationships exerted an influence on
readers’ inclination to explicitly refer to the conflicting
nature of information, a three-way hierarchical log-linear
analysis with backwards elimination was calculated. The
second order effect of rhetorical connectors and conflict
explication was significant, likelihood ratio χ2(5) = 27.554, p
<.001. None of the further second or third order interactions
reached significance and they were thus excluded from the
final regression model. The descriptive statistics depicted in
Table 2 reveal that more essays contained explicit
references to the conflicting nature of information when
rhetorical connectors were available (42%) than when they
were not available (12%).
Table 2: Number of essays containing explicit references to
conflicting information per experimental group; number of
essays without references is given in brackets.
Signaling
No signaling

Argumentation
15 (15)
4 (27)

Summary
14 (16)
3 (25)

Key words
8 (21)
3 (24)

(2) Linguistic analysis: To determine the influence of
reading goals and signaling of rhetorical relationships on the

1349

degree of information integration observed in readers’
essays, we calculated a mixed ANOVA. Reading condition
and signaling served as independent factors and type of
connector (agreement vs. contradiction) as a repeated
measure. Results yielded a significant effect of type of
connector, F(1, 168) = 8.09, p = .005, η2part = .046. Across
conditions, participants used more connectors expressing
contradiction (M = 2.62, SD = .15) than connectors
expressing agreement (M = 2.09, SD = .12), a result
certainly reflecting the conflicting nature of the materials
readers had to deal with. Moreover, a significant effect of
signaling showed that participants who read texts with
rhetorical connectors structured their essays with a higher
number of rhetorical connectors than their counterparts
without rhetorical connectors, F(1, 168) = 11.33, p = .001,
η2part = .063. Finally, an effect of reading goal on the use of
rhetorical connectors was obtained, F(2, 168) = 9.57, p < .001,
η2part = .102. Planned contrasts showed that this was due to
both the argumentation group (F(1, 168) = 16.20, p < .001,
η2part = .088) and the summary group (F(1, 168) = 12.49, p <
.001, η2part = .069) structuring their essays with a higher
degree of connectors than the key word group. No
difference was observed between the argumentation group
and the summary group, F(1, 168) = .19, ns.

Navigation Path Measures
Logfiles could not be recorded from eight participants due
to technical error.
(1) Degree of sequentiality of reading behavior: An
ANOVA with the number of sequential transitions qualified
by the total number of texts accessed as dependent variable
yielded a significant effect of reading condition, F(2, 166) =
8.54, p < .001, η2part = .093. Participants reading to compose
a list of key words showed a higher degree of sequential
transitions than participants in the summary group, F(1, 166) =
16.33, p <.001, η2part = .090. No significant difference was
found between the argumentation group and the key word
group, F(1, 166) = 1.65, ns.
(2) Length of navigation paths: The length of navigation
paths was strongly affected by reading goal, as indicated by
an ANOVA, F(2, 166) = 71.04, p < .001, η2part = .461.
Participants in the key word group displayed a lower degree
of re-reading than participants in the summary group (F(1,
2
166) = 108.54, p <.001, η part = .395) and in the
argumentation group (F(1, 166) = 104.87, p <.001, η2part =
.387).

Discussion
With the present study, we sought to identify factors that
determine whether readers with little prior knowledge
successfully derive meaning from a set of internet
documents on a controversial medical topic. We
accomplished this by simultaneously examining the effects
of coherence-oriented reading goals and textual devices

cueing the presence of textual conflicts on the understanding
of conflicting scientific information. Comprehension was
operationalized as memory for intertextual conflicts and
application of this knowledge in a written essay composed
after reading.
In line with our expectations both the argumentation
group and the summary group outperformed readers in the
key word group. However, no difference was found between
recipients who read in order to write an argumentation and
those who were instructed to write a summary. Possibly,
readers in the argumentation group did not translate their
reading task into strategies of intertextual integration to the
degree we had expected due to time restrictions. The 20
minutes of reading time provided may have been too short
for laypersons to gain a basic understanding of the central
concepts at hand, relate them to one another and form an
own opinion. This result is in line with the findings reported
by Gil et al. (2010), who argued that argumentation tasks
may not live up to their full potential until a sufficient level
of prior knowledge is available and thus yield results
comparable with those accomplished by summary tasks.
Furthermore, we obtained a clear effect of rhetorical
connectors among participants who read in order to write a
summary. This effect was also present but less pronounced
among readers in the key word group. The fact that
participants reading to compose a simple list of key words
also benefitted at least to some degree from the presence of
rhetorical connectors underlines the power of this rhetorical
device as a tool to highlight intertextual relationships.
Hence, rhetorical connectors might compensate for a lack of
an a priori focus on the intertextual space. Unexpectedly, we
did not find a beneficial effect of rhetorical connectors in
the argumentation group either. This was because the
argumentation group already displayed a rather good
performance even without rhetorical connectors. Presence of
rhetorical connectors did not significantly raise performance
over and above this spontaneous level of conflict detection.
Analyses of the essays produced by our participants
largely corroborate the aforementioned results. Readers of
texts with rhetorical connectors more frequently produced
essays containing explicit references to the conflicting
nature of information. Moreover, these readers structured
their essays themselves with a higher number of rhetorical
connectors. No effect of reading goal on explicit conflict
referencing was obtained, but participants in both
coherence-oriented reading groups used more rhetorical
connectors than participants of the key word group.
Finally, navigation data provided us with insights into the
effects of reading goals on a process level. Participants in
the coherence-oriented reading conditions accessed a
significantly higher number of texts within the same time
limit. They thus showed a higher degree of re-reading
specific texts, which can be understood as an attempt to
create cross-textual coherence. This strategy might enable
readers to reactivate information in working memory that
has been read before and to relate it to information currently
being held active in working memory. Readers in the key

1350

word condition pursued a different strategy. They spent
more time on each text and read in a highly sequential order
with little re-reading. This allowed them to scrutinize each
single document, find key words and even gain factual
knowledge. However, as shown by a poor detection of
intertextual conflicts, this strategy obviously did not foster
the mental representation of intertextual relationships.
In summary, our results support the notion that one
precondition to successful cross-textual integration is that
readers pursue the goal of forming a coherent representation
across texts. In contrast, more functional reading goals, such
as composing a list of key words, appear not to support
integration processes on an intertextual level. Only when
pursuing reading goals that require a high degree of
coherence formation did readers successfully detect
intertextual conflicts. Participants reading for the goal of
composing a list of key words, however, confined
themselves to form coherence on a rather local level. This
allowed them to gain factual knowledge but did not foster
the formation of intertextual relationships.
Furthermore, our results indicate that reading goals have
an additional indirect influence on readers’ success in
identifying intertextual conflicts, by affecting the relevance
that is assigned to signaling text features: Rhetorical
connectors particularly facilitated awareness of intertextual
conflicts when readers pursued a goal that required them to
form a high level of coherence. This finding can be
interpreted as providing further evidence for the notion that
successful comprehension is based on an interaction of
strategic top-down on the side of the reader and processes
that are text-driven (Kurby, Britt & Magliano, 2005).
The goals adopted by readers are of utmost importance
when reading multiple, partly conflicting documents, since
they form the basis of all further text-processing. By
determining the relevance of specific text features, reading
goals have a particularly strong impact on cross-textual
integration when combined with text signals indicating the
relationship between documents.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG).

by

the

Deutsche

References
Bless, H., Wänke, M., Bohner, G., Fellhauer, R.F. &
Schwarz, N. (1994). Need for Cognition: Eine Skala zur
Erfassung von Engagement und Freude bei Denkaufgaben
[Need for cognition: A scale measuring engagement and
happiness in cognitive tasks]. Zeitschrift für
Sozialpsychologie, 25, 147-154.
Cerdán, R. & Vidal-Abarca, E. (2008). The effects of tasks
on integrating information from multiple documents.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 100, 209-222.
Gil, L., Bråten, I., Vidal-Abarca, E., & Strømsø, H. I.
(2010). Summary versus argument tasks when working
with multiple documents: Which is better for whom?
Contemporary Educational Psychology, 35, 157-173.

Goldman, S.R. (2004). Cognitive aspects of constructing
meaning through and across multiple texts. In N. ShuartFerris & D.M. Bloome (Eds.), Uses of intertextuality in
classroom and educational research. Greenwich, CT:
Information Age Publishing.
Hyönä, J., Lorch, R.F. J. & Kaakinen, J.K. (2002).
Individual differences in reading to summarize expository
text: Evidence from eye fixation patterns. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 94, 44-55.
Kurby, C. A., Britt, M. A. & Magliano, J. P. (2005). The
role of top-down and bottom-up processes in between-text
integration. Reading Psychology, 26, 335-362.
Lemarié, J., Lorch, R.F., Eyrolle, H. & Virbel, J. (2008).
SARA: A text-based and reader-based theory of signaling.
Educational Psychologist, 43, 27 - 48.
McCrudden, M. & Schraw, G. (2007). Relevance and goalfocusing in text processing. Educational Psychology
Review, 19, 113-139.
Otero, J. (2002). Noticing and fixing difficulties while
understanding science texts. In J. Otero, J. León & A. C.
Graesser (Eds.), The psychology of science text
comprehension. (pp. 281-307). Mahwah, NJ, US:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers.
Pasch, R. (2003). Handbuch der deutschen Konnektoren
[Handbook of German connectors]. Berlin: de Gruyter.
Perfetti, C.A. (1997). Sentences, individual differences, and
multiple texts: Three issues in text comprehension.
Discourse Processes, 23, 337-355.
Rouet, J.-F. (2006). The Skills of Document Use: From Text
Comprehension to Web-Based Learning. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Rouet, J.-F., Vidal-Abarca, E., Erboul, A. B., & Millogo, V.
(2001). Effects of Information Search Tasks on the
Comprehension of Instructional Text. Discourse
Processes, 31, 163-185.
Stahl, E. & Bromme, R. (2007). The CAEB: An instrument
for measuring connotative aspects of epistemological
beliefs. Learning and Instruction, 17, 773-785.
Tabachnick, B.G. & Fidell, L.S. (2001). Using multivariate
statistics (4th ed.). Needham Heights, MA: Pearson
Education Company.
Tapiero, I. (2007). Situation models and levels of
coherence: Toward a definition of comprehension.
Mahwah, NJ, US: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates
Publishers.
Webster, D. & Kruglanski, A. (1994). Individual differences
in need for cognitive closure. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 67, 1049-1062.
Wiley, J. & Voss, J.F. (1999). Constructing arguments from
multiple sources: Tasks that promote understanding and
not just memory for text. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 91, 1-11.
Wineburg, S.S. (1991). Historical problem solving: A study
of the cognitive processes used in the evaluation of
documentary and pictorial evidence. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 83, 79.

1351

