UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How is knowledge transmitted in a small world network through communicative
interaction?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/32x3q3r9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Honda, Hidehito
Matsuka, Toshihiko

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How is knowledge transmitted in a small world network through communicative
interaction?
Hidehito Honda (hito@muscat.L.chiba-u.ac.jp)
Toshihiko Matsuka (matsukat@muscat.L.chiba-u.ac.jp)
Department of Cognitive & Information Science, Chiba University
1-33, Yayoi-cho, Inage-ku, Chiba-shi, Chiba, 263-8522, Japan
Abstract
Social science studies have shown that people are connected
in a “small world.” In this network, people are connected with
short path lengths and are highly clustered. To clarify how
people in a small world acquire knowledge through
communicative interactions, we constructed a multi-agent
model and subsequently conducted a computer simulation.
Results of the computer simulation showed that in a small
world network, agents acquire correct and diverse knowledge.
We discuss the adaptive nature of a small world network for
knowledge acquisition.
Keywords: knowledge acquisition; small world network;
communicative interaction; multi-agent model

Introduction
Category learning is one of the most researched aspects of
knowledge acquisition in cognitive science. In their studies,
researchers often create experimental settings where
participants learn (artificial) categories by receiving
feedback. As a result, most research on category learning
has clarified people’s knowledge acquisition through
individual learning (e.g., Cohen & Lefebvre, 2005;
Kruschke, 2008).
However, in the real world people acquire knowledge not
only through individual learning, but also through
communication with others. Pentland (2007) argued that a
research perspective involving social networks containing
individuals is necessary to clarify human behaviors.
Goldstone and Janssen (2005) emphasized the importance
of research on collective behavior. For example, they point
out that “interacting ants create colony architectures that no
single ant intends,” and “populations of neurons create
structured thought, permanent memories and adaptive
responses that no neuron can comprehend by itself” (p.424).
By implication, interactions among individuals produce
unique processes of knowledge acquisition that are not
clarified by research on micro processes of an individual’s
knowledge acquisition.
In this paper, we discuss knowledge transmission which
occurs through interactions of individuals. This topic is very
important in the consideration of knowledge acquisition,
because people often communicate with each other in ways
that result in learning (e.g., Mason, Conrey, & Smith, 2007).
Research about knowledge transmission reveals not only the
roles of collective behavior for knowledge transmission, but
also individual cognitive aspects (e.g., Brighton, 2002;

Kalish, Griffiths, & Lewandowsky, 2007; Griffiths & Kalish,
2007; Smith, Kirby, & Brighton, 2003).
In the present study, we focus on one of the most
intriguing network structures of people’s connectivity,
called the small world, and examined the role of this
connectivity in knowledge transmission.

Connections in a small world
Social science researchers have shown that connectivity
among individuals is not random, but has some regularity
(although not complete). Milgram (1967) and Travers and
Milgram (1969) empirically showed that people were
connected with short path lengths (around six degrees of
separation), which is known as the “small world
phenomenon.” This is even more evident in recent research
using email and online relationships (Dodds, Muhamad, &
Watts, 2003). Another feature of individual connectivity is
highly clustered relationships, where one’s acquaintances
also have a high probability of knowing each other (we call
this probability clustering coefficient). Watts and Strogatz
(1998) called a network having these two features a small
world network. They proposed a very simple mathematical
model representing the small world network: Imagine the
network starting from a ring lattice with 1000 vertices, each
connected to its 10 nearest neighbors by edges. Then, each
edge is randomly rewired with probability p by
disconnecting one of its vertices and connecting it to a
randomly chosen vertex. Watts and Strogatz (1998) showed
that this model replicates the small world network with

Figure 1. Relationship between rewiring probability and
path length and clustering coefficient. These plots are
based on mean values over a sample of 100 different
graphs.

1841

intermediate values of p ( 0.01 ≤ p ≤ 0.1 ; see Figure 1).
Hereafter, we refer to the model of Watts and Strogatz
(1998) as the WS model.

Knowledge transmission in a small world
network
How is knowledge transmitted among individuals in a small
world network? Cowan and Jonard (2004) used computer
simulation to examine how effectively knowledge is
transmitted by interactions among agents in the WS model.
They found that agents in the small world network (p=0.09)
showed the highest level of knowledge accumulation.
Cowan and Jonard (2004) were mainly interested in
economic issues such as innovation in knowledge and
knowledge transmission from a quantitative perspective.
However, from a cognitive science perspective, we are
particularly interested in the quality of knowledge
transmission in a small world network. For example,
cognitive studies of human memory have shown that
individual memory mechanisms can produce incorrect
knowledge (e.g., false memory, Roediger & McDermott,
1995). The findings of Cowan and Jonard (2004) would
presumably include the transmission of both correct and
incorrect knowledge through interactions among agents in a
small world network. Thus, agents in a small world network
can “effectively” acquire both correct and incorrect
knowledge.
In the present study, we constructed a multi-agent model
and subsequently conducted a computer simulation in order
to examine how correct or incorrect knowledge is
transmitted through interactions among agents in the WS
model.

Scorrect: “There are no direct flights.”
Sincorrect: “There are direct flights.”
Smissing: “I have no idea.”
Cognitive features of agents Each agent had the following
two cognitive features. First, the default knowledge of each
agent was set as follows. The number of Scorrect of 100
objects was determined by random sampling from a normal
distribution, N(10, 52) for each agent. The number of Sincorrect
was determined by random sampling from a normal
distribution, N(9, 52) for each agent. Hence, at first, an agent
had 10 Scorrect, 9 Sincorrect, and 81 Smissing for 100 objects on
average. Second, each agent was assumed to have a limit on
the number of objects to acquire. This limit was determined
by random sampling from a normal distribution, N(80, 102)
for each agent. Therefore, each agent could have a total of
80 Scorrect and Sincorrect out of 100 objects on average. If the
number of knowledge states of Scorrect and Sincorrect exceeded
the limit, then one of objects whose knowledge state was
Scorrect or Sincorrect was randomly chosen and changed into
Smissing.
Communication We assumed that each of the knowledge
states for the 100 objects is revised through communication
between two agents. In particular, we assumed that the
agents calculate their degrees of confidence for the
knowledge states, and stochastically revise their knowledge
states using their degrees of confidence.
The three knowledge states are represented by three
values; Scorrect, Sincorrect, and Smissing equal 1, 0, and 0.5,
respectively. Let i and j denote agents who communicate
with each other, and kim and kjm denote knowledge states that
i and j have for object m. When agent i communicates with
agent j about object m, i and j respectively calculate their
continuous degrees of confidence about object m, Confim,
Confjm, based on the following equations:

Multi-agent network model for knowledge
transmission

(

Model
Network We set up a network in which 1000 agents exist.
The connectivity of the agents was represented using the
WS model. In this network, each agent had 10 edges for
nearest neighbors when the probability of rewiring was zero.
Thus the two parameters, the number of vertices and the
number of edges for each vertex, were 1000 and 10,
respectively. In order to represent various networks, from
regular to random networks, we constructed eight networks,
using eight values of rewiring probability: 0, 0.01, 0.04,
0.07, 0.1, 0.4, 0.7, and 1.
Knowledge Each agent learns 100 objects. We assumed that
agents have three discrete knowledge states, Scorrect, Sincorrect,
and Smissing for each object. Scorrect and Sincorrect represent
opposite ideas about an object. We defined Scorrect and
Sincorrect as the correct and incorrect knowledge states,
respectively, according to actual fact. Smissing represented the
state where agents have no ideas about an object. For
example, imagine the question, “Are there any direct flights
from Tokyo to Buenos Aires?” The following three states
are assumed for this question.

)

Conf im = 1 − α i0.1tim +1 k im + α i0.1tim +1 k jm

(

0.1t jm +1

Conf jm = 1 − α j

)k

0.1t jm +1

jm

+α j

k im

(1)
(2)

The parameters, α i and α j , represent weight for knowledge
state in calculating Confim and Confjm. For example, when
α i > 0.5 , agent i is influenced by agent j’s knowledge state
more than agent i‘s knowledge state. When α i < 0.5 , agent i
is influenced by agent i’s knowledge state more than agent
j‘s knowledge state. When α i = 0.5 , agent i is equally
influenced by agents i and j ’s knowledge states. Hence this
parameter represents psychological trait of agents on
strength of influence by other agents. α i and α j are
determined by random sampling from a normal distribution,
N(0.5, 0.12); and tim and tjm reflect the number of
communications on object m. In particular, tim and tjm start at
0 and are updated by 1 after each communication.
Based on the calculated Confim and Confjm, agents i and j
stochastically update knowledge states for m. Table 1 shows

1842

probabilities of i’s knowledge update of object m into Scorrect,
Sincorrect, or Smissing based on Confim 1.
Figure 2 shows the relationship among tim, α i , and Confim
when agent i (kim=1, knowledge state is Scorrect)
communicates with agent j (kjm=0, knowledge state is
Sincorrect). In this situation, these two agents have conflicting
knowledge states. Confim is affected by j’s knowledge state
when tim takes a small value. When tim equals 0 (i.e., agent i
has not had communication with other agents about object
m), the knowledge state is likely to shift into Smissing. For
example, when α i = 0.5 (i.e., agent i weights kim and kjm
equally in calculating Confim), i’s knowledge state shifts into
Smissing. However, as tim takes a larger value, Confim is not
affected by j’s knowledge state. This control represents
cognitive processes where the knowledge state is flexible at
first, but becomes gradually fixed and unlikely to change
through communications.
Table 1: Probabilities of i’s knowledge update of object m
into Scorrect, Sincorrect, or Smissing based on Confim.
Smissing
Sincorrect
Scorrect
Confim >0.5
Confim
1- Confim
0
Confim =0.5
0
1
0
0
Confim
1- Confim
Confim <0.5

Overview of simulation
We define one communication with four steps. Table 2
shows the outline of the four steps.
One period is defined as 2000 communications. For each
simulation, 3000 periods of 2000 communications were
conducted at least. From period r ( r ≥ 3000 ), we calculated
the following convergence criterion, CCr.
r
⎛ CN r −1 ⎞
(2)
⎜1 −
⎟
CC =
r

CN r =

∑

r =r −999

⎜
⎝

CN r ⎟⎠

CKS r
CKS r + IKS r

(3)

where CKSr and IKSr denote numbers of Scorrect and Sincorrect
knowledge states for 1000 agents at period r. Thus CNr
represents relative proportion of Scorrect to Sincorrect in period r.
In principle, CNr does not equal to CNr-1 because there is a
possibility in every communication that knowledge states of
communicating agents change. When CNr is increasing
through periods, CCr will deviate from zero and take
positive value because CNr-1/CNr tend take less than one. In
contrast, when CNr is decreasing through periods, CCr will
deviate from zero and take negative value because CNr1/CNr tend take more than one. These two patterns suggest
that numbers of Scorrect and Sincorrect do not converge. When
CNr fluctuates randomly, CCr will approach zero,
suggesting that numbers of Scorrect and Sincorrect have
converged. According to these features of CCr, when CCr
meets the following condition, we assumed that CNr has
converged at period r.
(4)
− 0.001 < CCr < 0.001
We conducted 30 simulations for each of the eight networks.
Table 2. Four steps of one communication
First step:
A pair of connected agents, i and j, is determined from a network.
Second step:
Object m is determined from 100 objects.
Third step:
Agents i and j calculate their degrees of confidence Confim and
Confjm, respectively.
Fourth step:
Based on the calculated Confim and Confjm, agents i and j update
their knowledge state kim and kjm, respectively.

Results and discussion
We shall discuss following two points about acquired
knowledge; correctness, and diversity.
Figure 2. Relationship among tim, α i , and Confim. This figure
shows the relationship when kim and kjm are 1 and 0,
respectively.

1

We assume that the discrete variables (i.e., kim or kjm) correspond
to behaviors in communication (i.e., the content that agents convey
in communication), and that the continuous variables (i.e., Confim
or Confjm) correspond to latent, psychological degrees of
confidence on object m.

Correctness
As to the correctness of acquired knowledge, we examined
CNr that can be assumed to represent converged correctness
of knowledge state.
Figure 3 shows the relationship between probability of
rewiring and CNr. CNr tends to increase as a network
becomes random. However, increase of CNr is diminishing
after p>0.1. Increase of CNr between p=0.01 and p=0.1 was
about 0.1 (0.543-0.643). In contrast, that between p=0.1 and

1843

p=1 was about 0.04 (0.643-0.688). Figure 1 shows that path
lengths substantially become shorter as probability of
rewiring increases until p=0.1. Thus, this relationship
between path lengths and CNr implies that path length
influences CNr in a network.
Cowan and Jonard (2004) showed that agents in a small
world network (i.e., p=0.09) could achieve the maximum
level of knowledge accumulation. Results of our simulations
showed that agents in the random world network (i.e., p=1)
could achieve correct knowledge at the maximum level.
However, the value of CNr in p=0.1 is closed to CNr in p=1,
suggesting that agents in a small world network could
acquire correct knowledge.
Our simulation architecture mainly differs from Cowan
and Jonard (2004) in the following two ways. First, the
criteria of learning (i.e., knowledge accumulation or
correctness of knowledge) differed. Second, the algorithms
of communication between agents differed. Therefore, our
simulation and Cowan and Jonard (2004) basically
examined different aspects of knowledge acquisition. In
common between our simulation and that of Cowan and
Jonard (2004) is the network in which the agents are set.
Therefore, our results and those of Cowan and Jonard
(2004) indicate that the network structure among agents
plays important roles in knowledge acquisition, irrespective
of the criteria of learning (i.e., quantity or quality of
knowledge) and the algorithm of communications.

Figure 3. Relationship between rewiring probability and
CNr. Error bars denote 95% confidence interval.

Diversity of acquired knowledge
Next, we analyze acquired knowledge from different
perspective. So far, our analyses have been based on each
agent’s acquired knowledge, and found that each agent
acquired Scorrects and Sincorrects for 100 objects after period r
in which CCr met the criterion of equation (4). These results

Figure 4. Proportions of Scorrect, Sincorrect, and Smissing for
each of 100 objects. Each figure has 100 rows, denoting
each of 100 objects. Blue, red, and white areas in each
row illustrate proportions of Scorrect, Sincorrect, and Smissing.
These are one of results of 30 simulations for each
network. Each tendency of the 8 networks shown in
Figure 5 was almost identical to results of the other 29
simulations.

1844

Figure 5. Relationship between CNr and Div. The curve represents the maximum Div predicted from CNr
raise another question about distributions of Scorrect and
Sincorrect for each of 100 objects. There are two possibilities
about distributions of Scorrect and Sincorrect for each object. The
first possibility is that all agents have the same knowledge
state. For example, all agents have Scorrect for some objects
and Sinorrect for others. In this case, it follows that objects do
not have diversity in that all agent have the same knowledge
state. The second possibility is that agents have different
knowledge states for a single object. In this case, objects
have diversity in that opposing knowledge states exist. Here
we examine distributions of Scorrect and Sincorrect for each of
100 objects. We calculated proportions of Scorrect, Sincorrect,
and Smissing for each of 100 objects.
Figure 4 illustrate these proportions for 8 networks. When
p value is 0, 0.01, or 0.04, 0.07, and 0.1, each object
contained Scorrect, Sincorrect. This tendency was not observed
when p>0.1. Although most objects contained only Scorrect,
and a few objects contained Sincorrect, there were few objects
that contained both Scorrect, and Sincorrect.
Note that diversity is basically correlated with correctness.
If an object has diversity, it means that Scorrect and Sincorrect
are equally likely to be acquired by agents for the object.
That is, there is trade-off relationship between correctness
and diversity. We examined the relationship between
correctness and diversity.
In order to examine this issue, we quantified the diversity
of acquired knowledge (Div) using following equation:
1 100
(3)
Div =
∑ (− cm log 2 cm − im log 2 im )
100 m =1
where cm denotes the relative proportion of Scorrect to Sincorrect
for object m, and im denotes the relative proportion of

Sincorrect to Scorrect (i.e., cm+im=1). Thus the equation
corresponds to the calculation of mean entropy among the
100 objects, using cm and im. Figure 5 shows the relationship
between CNr and Div. As discussed above, CNr and Div
were correlated. Note that when p=0.1, Div took higher
values than when p=0.4, 0.7, and 1. However, values of CN
were analogous when p=0.1, 0.2, 0.7, and 1 (see Figure 4).
Therefore, the difference of acquired knowledge between
networks of p ≥ 0.1 relates to the diversity of the acquired
knowledge. Although the correctness of the acquired
knowledge was analogous among networks of p ≥ 0.1 , the
diversity of the acquired knowledge was quite different.
Acquired knowledge showed some diversity when p=0.1
and this result was not observed when p>0.1. According to
the WS model, this difference seems to derive from the
clustering coefficients (see Figure 1). The clustering
coefficients are generally high when p ≤ 0.1 . However, the
clustering coefficients dramatically drop when p>0.1. This
boundary between high and low clustering coefficients
around p=0.1 seems to produce the difference of diversity in
acquired knowledge between networks.
In the real world, people can usually have contradicting
knowledge states for one object. Individual characteristics,
such as personality or intelligence should produce such
contradicting knowledge states. We do not deny this
argument. However, the findings in the present study
suggest that network structure, in particular cluster of
individuals, also plays very important roles in producing
contradicting knowledge states.

1845

General discussion
In this paper, we examined how correct or incorrect
knowledge is transmitted in the WS model by using
computer simulation. In particular, we focused on a small
world network, which is characterized by short path lengths
and high clustering coefficients (Watts & Strogatz, 1998).
We found that agents effectively acquired correct
knowledge through communicative interactions in the small
world network, which is regarded as the representation of
people’s connectivity in the real world (Dodds Muhamad, &
Watts, 2003; Milgram, 1967; Travers & Milgram, 1969).
Cowan and Jonard (2004) showed that agents in a small
world network effectively accumulated knowledge through
communicative interactions. Hence these findings suggest
that a small world network is an adaptive structure in that
knowledge can be transmitted effectively and correctly. We
also found that acquired knowledge in the small world
network has some diversity, which would be consistent with
the real world fact that people can have different knowledge
states for an identical object.
The present study shows that interactions among
individuals play important roles in knowledge acquisition.
We do not claim that network structures suffice to explain
human cognition. However, some previous studies have also
shown that interactions between individuals can explain the
knowledge structures that people possess (e.g., Brighton,
2002; Griffiths & Kalish, 2007; Smith, Kirby, & Brighton,
2003). Hence, research about human cognition from the
macro and social network level can make contributions for
clarifying not only interactions among individuals, but also
individual cognitive processes.

Kruschke, J. K. (2008). Models of categorization. In R. Sun
(Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of Computational
Psychology. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Mason, W. A., Conrey, F. R., & Smith, E. R. (2007).
Situating Social Influence Processes: Dynamic,
Multidirectional Flows of Influence Within Social
Networks. Personality and Social Psychology Review,
11, 279-300.
Milgram, S. (1967). The small world problem. Psychology
Today, 3, 60-67.
Pentland, A. (2007). On the Collective Nature of Human
Intelligence. Adaptive Behavior, 15, 189-198.
Roediger, H. L., & McDermott, K. B. (1995). Creating false
memories: Remembering words not presented in lists.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 21, 803-814.
Smith, K., Kirby, S., & Brighton, H. (2003). Iterated
learning: A framework for the emergence of language.
Artificial Life, 9, 371.
Travers, J., & Milgram, S. (1969). An experimental study of
the small world problem. Sociometry, 32, 425-443.
Watts, D. J., & Strogatz, S. H. (1998). Collective dynamics
of `small-world' networks. Nature, 393, 440-442.

Acknowledgements
This work was in part supported by Foundation of Fusion of
Science and Technology (FOST).

Reference
Brighton, H. (2002). Compositional Syntax from cultural
transmission. Artificial Life, 8, 25-54.
Cohen, H., & Lefebvre, C. (Eds.). (2005). Handbook of
Categorization in Cognitive Science: Elsevier Science.
Cowan, R., & Jonard, N. (2004). Network structure and the
diffusion of knowledge. Journal of Economic
Dynamics and Control, 28, 1557-1575.
Dodds, P. S., Muhamad, R., & Watts, D. J. (2003). An
Experimental Study of Search in Global Social
Networks. Science, 301, 827-829.
Goldstone, R. L., & Janssen, M. A. (2005). Computational
models of collective behavior. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 9, 424-430.
Griffiths, T. L., & Kalish, M. L. (2007). Language evolution
by iterated learning with Bayesian agents. Cognitive
Science, 31, 441-480.
Kalish, M. L., Griffiths, T. L., & Lewandowsky, S. (2007).
Iterated learning: Intergenerational knowledge
transmission reveals inductive biases. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 14, 288-294.

1846

