UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How Brief Initial Inspection of a Picture May Foster Comprehension of Text

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5155d4jv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Eitel, Alexander
Scheiter, Katharina
Schuler, Anne

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How Brief Initial Inspection of a Picture May Foster Comprehension of Text
Alexander Eitel (a.eitel@iwm-kmrc.de)
Knowledge Media Research Center, Konrad-Adenauer Str. 40,
72072 Tübingen, Germany

Katharina Scheiter (k.scheiter@iwm-kmrc.de)
Knowledge Media Research Center, Konrad-Adenauer Str. 40,
72072 Tübingen, Germany

Anne Schüler (a.schueler@iwm-kmrc.de)
Knowledge Media Research Center, Konrad-Adenauer Str. 40,
72072 Tübingen, Germany

Abstract
In the present study we hypothesized that the gist
representation of a picture (extracted from brief initial
inspection) supports inference generation from subsequent
text, which in turn should foster comprehension. Moreover,
we proposed that longer inspection of a picture is necessary to
provide learners with an alternative representation that fosters
mental animation and recall. Participants (N=76) learned from
a text about pulley systems, and in three out of four
conditions from an additional picture of a pulley system.
Students saw either the text only, the picture preceding the
text for 150ms or 2sec, or received a self-paced presentation
of the picture before the text. Results confirm our
assumptions that presenting the picture for the time to extract
the gist (2sec) before the text fostered comprehension,
whereas only the self-paced presentation of the picture
fostered mental animation and recall.
Keywords: Learning from Text and Pictures; Functions of
Pictures; Gist

Introduction
In research on learning from text and pictures there has been
much support for the so-called multimedia principle, stating
that students learn better from text and pictures than from
text alone (Anglin, Vaez, & Cunningham, 2004; Mayer,
2009). According to Mayer, improved learning is reflected
in improvements in retention and comprehension of the
presented material. To foster comprehension, information
selected from the picture has to be integrated with
information selected from text (and from long-term
memory) into a coherent mental representation.
An early study from Stone and Glock (1981) gives first
insights about how information from text and pictures may
be integrated at early stages in the learning process. In their
study, text and pictures were presented simultaneously, and
students initially attended to the picture for a short time
prior to reading text. Stone and Glock interpreted that the
brief initial glance on the picture served the purpose of
extracting information about the general theme (i.e., gist).
The present study reconstructed the process of early
attending to a picture for a short time before switching to

reading text in an experimental design. It investigates in a
systematic way whether information extracted from short
initial inspection is integrated with subsequently read text,
which is supposed to foster comprehension. Prior to being
able to investigate which information from short inspection
of the picture is integrated with text, it has to be investigated
which information is actually extracted from the picture at
short inspection. This has recently been done in a prior
study (Eitel, Scheiter, & Schüler, 2010).

Information Extraction from Briefly Attending
to Instructional Pictures
Unlike text, pictures have the property that “specific
information can just be read off” (Ainsworth, 2006, p. 185),
suggesting that specific information may be quickly
extracted from pictures. How quickly specific information is
extracted depends largely on the type of information that is
extracted, as shown by a prior study (Eitel et al., 2010).
This prior study investigated early prerequisite processes
in multimedia learning, namely, the question of which
information is selected from (briefly attending to)
instructional pictures by comparing selection processes in
pictures of scenes and in instructional pictures. As
instructional pictures visualizations of causal systems were
used, because causal systems are commonly used as
instructional material in studies on learning from text and
pictures. In this prior study, students were presented with 80
pictures of scenes and 80 pictures of causal systems at four
different presentation times (150ms, 600ms, 2sec, and 6sec).
After presentation of each picture, students had to verify one
statement about the gist of the picture, and one statement
about specific details in the picture.
Results revealed that gist is rapidly extracted from
pictures of scenes and causal systems. Nevertheless, it took
subjects longer to achieve the same accuracy level with
respect to gist extraction in causal systems (89% correct at
2sec) than in scenes (90% correct at 150ms). At these
presentation times that were sufficient to extract gist in the
prior study (150ms in scenes; 2sec in instructional pictures),
far less information about details was extracted in both

1358

scenes (63% at 150ms) and causal systems (63% at 2sec).
Extracting information about single details (or components)
thus requires longer inspection than extracting gist.
To conclude, while it takes some time to extract details
(or information about single components), gist information
has been shown to be rapidly extracted in pictures of scenes
(at 150ms) and in instructional pictures (at 2sec). The
question of whether gist information from an instructional
picture already fosters learning from subsequent text is
addressed in the current study by presenting the picture (for
a short time) before the respective text. More specifically,
students in the present study either learned from text and a
picture that was presented for as long as they liked (selfpaced), from text and a picture that was presented for a short
time (150ms or 2sec) or from text only.

Why Learning with Multimedia May Profit
from Rapid Gist Extraction
In general, students learn better from text and pictures than
from text alone, because pictures in addition to text support
cognitive functions that are not supported from text alone
(Ainsworth, 2006; Scaife & Rogers, 1996). Pictures are
especially suited to support visuo-spatial reasoning (Larkin
& Simon, 1987), as it is, for instance, required when trying
to understand how a causal system works (e.g., a pulley
system; Hegarty, 1992).
According to Hegarty and Just (1993), understanding
causal systems like pulley systems requires being able to
recall its single components and being able to mentally
animate the (pulley) system. Aside from recall and mental
animation, we assessed comprehension of the underlying
principles as a measure for comprehension on a more
abstract level of organization, which we refer to as
“comprehension” for reasons of simplicity in the following.
When learning about pulley systems, we assume that
briefly attending to the picture is already sufficient to
support some functions that learning from text alone does
not support. In particular, we assume that the brief initial
attention on the picture fosters comprehension, whereas no
effects are expected for either mental animation or recall.

Why Briefly Attending to a Picture May Foster
Comprehension
Results from the prior study suggests that watching an
instructional picture (e.g., pulley system) for 2 seconds only
is sufficient to get an impression about how the system
roughly looks like (even though single components are not
represented).
The brief initial presentation of the picture thus might free
working memory resources that might otherwise be devoted
to trying to visualize the (holistic) spatial structure of the
system (computational offloading; Larkin & Simon, 1987).
As a consequence, learners may have available more
cognitive resources to engage in meaning-making activities
(Ainsworth & Loizou, 2003), such as drawing inferences
necessary to understand the text on a more abstract or higher
level of organization (Ainsworth, 2006). Inference

generation may be further supported by the fact that these
inferences may be grounded in perception; that is, they are
perceptually scaffolded by the (holistic) spatial structure
constructed from the briefly inspected picture (Goldstone &
Son, 2005; Schwartz, 1995).
Moreover, since the gist representation already gives
students an impression about how the system is supposed to
look like, the range of inferences that students may draw
from subsequent text is already limited (graphical
constraining; Scaife & Rogers, 1996). This prevents
students from drawing erroneous inferences that would
otherwise hinder comprehension (Schnotz & Bannert,
2003).
To conclude, we expect the gist representation of the
picture (extracted after short initial presentation) to support
computational offloading and graphical constraining. This
should foster the generation of perceptually scaffolded
inferences that, in turn, foster comprehension.

Why Briefly Attending to a Picture Does Not Foster
Mental Animation
Adding a picture to a text is beneficial when the picture is
better suited for problem solving than the text (rerepresentation; Scaife & Rogers, 1996). Mental animation
mainly requires direct visuo-spatial reasoning with the
picture, which is why a picture will be better suited to
provide the information needed to perform mental
animation than a text. Students who are presented with both
a picture and a text, and are later asked to mentally animate
their representation of the pulley system, will most likely
profit more from information encoded in the picture than in
the text. If students had enough time to encode the picture of
the pulley system with respect to its single components, then
students may mainly use information encoded in the picture
to later perform the mental animation task (without the need
to integrate information with the text).
Results from our prior study suggest that when students
see a picture for 2 seconds only (or even less), they do not
have enough time to encode the picture on the basis of
single components (Eitel et al., 2010). Mental animation,
however, requires each single component to be represented,
because mental animation is a process that is carried out in a
piecemeal fashion, meaning that the single components of a
system are animated one after another (Hegarty, 1992,
2004). Hence, when students see the picture for 2 seconds
only (or even less), they cannot solely rely on information
encoded in the picture to perform mental animation in an
accurate way.
To conclude, after briefly inspecting the picture, students
may make use of the re-representation function (Ainsworth,
2006), which, however, will not help to better perform
mental animation compared to reading text alone. Students
may only benefit from re-representation once they have
enough time to encode the picture on the basis of its single
components.

1359

Why Briefly Attending to a Picture Does Not Foster
Recall
According to the Dual Coding Theory (Paivio, 1991),
information is represented in either a verbal or a nonverbal
code, whereby codes are connected to each other by
referential connections enabling that information in one
code can be used to retrieve information in the other code.
When information is presented in two codes rather than in
one, retrieval of this information is more likely because the
information can be traced either by its verbal or its
nonverbal code. Information encoded from a text is
represented in a verbal code, whereas information extracted
from a picture is represented in a nonverbal code. When a
picture is added to a text, information from the text can thus
be retrieved either by its verbal or – by making use of
referential connections – by its nonverbal code, making
correct retrieval (recall) more likely.
The model of working memory operations (Kulhavy et
al., 1993) incorporates basic assumptions of Dual Coding
Theory (Paivio, 1991) in that it presumes that a nonverbal
code (i.e., structure of a map) can be used to activate a
verbal code (i.e., facts from text). By contrast, in Kulhavy’s
model a special status is assigned to pictures (maps).
Pictures are thereby encoded as mental images whereby
their spatial structure is preserved (Kosslyn, 1995). Mental
images can be processed as a single unit in working memory
so that information within the image becomes
simultaneously available for use. When accompanying text
that describes the picture is read, facts from the text will be
related to their position within the spatial structure of the
mental image. Retrieval success for facts from the text is
therefore increased, because to retrieve facts from the text, it
is sufficient to activate the mental image of the picture. The
mental image of the picture will be activated together with
all its embedded information, that is, information from the
picture and from the text.
To sum up, pictures foster recall from text, because they
provide an additional representation that (because of its
spatial structure) is especially suited to help in retrieving of
information.
However, information from text and picture are connected
to each other on the basis of single facts or components
(Kulhavy et al., 1993; Paivio, 1991). A holistic
representation (from short initial presentation) from the
picture by definition does not contain single components or
facts (or they are weakly represented only). Single facts in
the verbal code thus cannot be related to single components
from the picture. Accordingly, these facts are not better
retrieved when presented with text and a picture for a short
time than when presented with text only. Only when the
picture can be inspected for a longer time, single facts from
the text can be related to single components in the picture,
and thus recall may profit from the dual coding of
information.

Present Research and Hypotheses
In the present study, we investigated how comprehension,
mental animation and recall are influenced by presenting
pictures of pulley systems (for a short time) before the
respective instructional text (see Figure 1).
By supporting computational offloading and graphical
constraining, presenting the picture for 2 seconds before the
text (time to extract gist) is supposed to foster
comprehension. Comprehension thereby should be as good
as when the presentation of the picture before the text is
self-paced. Comprehension should be better when the
picture is presented for 2 seconds before the text (and when
presented self-paced) than when the picture is presented for
150 ms before the text and than when text only is presented
(Hypothesis 1).
Since we assume that mental animation only benefits
from re-representation when students inspect the picture
long enough to acquire a detailed mental representation of
the picture, students are assumed to profit only from the
picture when they are given the time to inspect it for as long
as they liked (self-paced) before the text. Students thus are
assumed to neither profit from the 2-second-presentation
nor from the 150ms-presentation of the picture before the
text compared to the presentation of text alone. As a result,
Hypothesis 2 states that mental animation is better when the
presentation of the picture before the text is self-paced than
when the picture is presented for a short time (2sec or
150ms) before the text and than when no picture is
presented (text only). No difference between the three latter
conditions is expected.
Since recall of single facts or components is assessed, and
recall of single components is assumed to profit only from
dual coding at longer inspection of a picture (self paced),
recall should be better only when students can inspect the
picture for as long as they like (before the text) compared to
the presentation of text alone. The 150ms- and the 2secpresentation of the picture before the text thus are not
supposed to foster recall compared to the presentation of
text only. To conclude, Hypothesis 3 states that recall is
better when the presentation of the picture before the text is
self-paced than when the picture is presented for a short
time (2sec or 150ms) before the text and than when no
picture is presented (text only). No difference between the
three latter conditions is expected.

Method
Participants and Design
Seventy-six students (60 female, 16 male, average age: M =
23.93 years, SD = 3.44) from the University of Tuebingen,
Germany, took part in the experiment for either payment or
course credit. They were randomly assigned to one of four
experimental conditions (see Figure 1): (a) text only, (b) a
picture presented for 150 ms before the text (150ms-before),
(c) a picture presented for 2 seconds before the text (2secbefore), or (d) a picture presented for as long as they liked

1360

before the text (self-paced-before). There were always 19
students per condition.

Materials and Procedure
The learning material consisted of a black-and-white picture
of a pulley system (Figure 1), and of a text (240 words)
describing both the spatial structure of the pulley system
and what happens when the rope is pulled (cf. Hegarty &
Just, 1993). Moreover, two sentences were added explaining
the underlying principles of pulley systems (i.e., each free
pulley reduces weight to be lifted by half and doubles the
length of rope to be pulled). The text contained all the
information needed to understand pulley systems.
Students were tested in single sessions of approximately
30 min. They were first given a demographic questionnaire
in paper-pencil format. Then students were seated in front of
a computer screen. They were instructed to acquire as much
information as possible from the multimedia instruction.
picture before text
text only

Der Flaschenzug
Der Flaschenzug setzt sich aus
Rollen, zwei Seilen und einem
zusammen. Die obere Rolle ist
der befestigt. Darunter befindet
sich eine Rolle (mittlere Rolle),
die sich frei nach oben und
bewegen lässt und daher als
lose Rolle bezeichnet wird.
Das obere Seil ist mit dem
einen Ende an der Decke,
es führt unter der mittleren
und liegt auf der oberen Rolle

self paced

2 sec-before

self-paced-before

150 ms

2000 ms

self paced

Der Flaschenzug
Der Flaschenzug setzt sich aus
Rollen, zwei Seilen und einem
zusammen. Die obere Rolle ist
der befestigt. Darunter befindet
sich eine Rolle (mittlere Rolle),
die sich frei nach oben und
bewegen lässt und daher als
lose Rolle bezeichnet wird.
Das obere Seil ist mit dem
einen Ende an der Decke,
es führt unter der mittleren
und liegt auf der oberen Rolle

Der Flaschenzug
Der Flaschenzug setzt sich aus
Rollen, zwei Seilen und einem
zusammen. Die obere Rolle ist
der befestigt. Darunter befindet
sich eine Rolle (mittlere Rolle),
die sich frei nach oben und
bewegen lässt und daher als
lose Rolle bezeichnet wird.
Das obere Seil ist mit dem
einen Ende an der Decke,
es führt unter der mittleren
und liegt auf der oberen Rolle

150ms-before

N = 19

N = 19

N = 19

self paced

Results
time

time

self paced

self paced

Der Flaschenzug
Der Flaschenzug setzt sich aus
Rollen, zwei Seilen und einem
zusammen. Die obere Rolle ist
der befestigt. Darunter befindet
sich eine Rolle (mittlere Rolle),
die sich frei nach oben und
bewegen lässt und daher als
lose Rolle bezeichnet wird.
Das obere Seil ist mit dem
einen Ende an der Decke,
es führt unter der mittleren
und liegt auf der oberen Rolle

(1992), we assessed mental animation and recall (of single
components).
Comprehension of the underlying principles of pulley
systems was assessed with both a verbal multiple choice test
(3 statements; e.g., “If the weight was attached at the middle
pulley, then the rope would have to be pulled with the same
force than when the weight is attached to the lower pulley”)
and a labeling test (4 items). In the labeling test, students
saw different depictions of pulley systems and they had to
write down how much the to-be-lifted weight is reduced in
the different pulley systems. There was always only one
correct solution. Each correct solution was scored with one
point. Results from both the verbal multiple choice test and
the labeling test were merged in the analysis, so that
students could score a maximum of seven points for
comprehension of the underlying principles of pulley
systems.
Mental animation and recall were assessed with a verbal
multiple choice test, in which students had to verify
statements about pulley systems (with yes and no). One
point was given for each correct response to a statement.
Nine statements tested mental animation (e.g., “if the free
end of the upper rope is let go, then the middle pulley turns
clockwise”), and eight statements tested recall (e.g., “both
ropes are attached to the ceiling with one end”). Thus,
students could score a maximum of nine points for mental
animation, and a maximum of eight points for recall.

N = 19

Figure 1: Design of the present experiment. Each column
represents an experimental condition.
In every experimental condition, the learning phase
started with a fixation cross that was displayed for 800 ms
so that students could prepare for the upcoming presentation
of the picture (or the text). In conditions with picture before
text, the picture then appeared on the screen for either 150
ms or 2 seconds or it stayed on the screen until students
signalled that they had sufficiently inspected the picture
(self-paced). Then the experimenter pressed a key and the
presentation of the picture was replaced by a mask that was
displayed for 500 ms. Then the text appeared on the screen.
In the text-only condition, the text appeared right after the
fixation cross. In every experimental condition, students
were first presented with text (and picture) of a toilet flush
on which they were not tested, however. This “training
trial” was presented so that students could familiarize
themselves with the experimental procedure. The text fitted
on one page, and reading was self-paced in all conditions.

Measures
We assessed comprehension of the underlying principles of
pulley systems, and, based on the distinction from Hegarty

To test our hypotheses, we conducted orthogonal contrast
analyses following a procedure proposed by Niedenthal,
Brauer, Robin, and Innes-Ker (2002), where hypotheses are
translated into specific contrast. Contrasts A1 and A2 reflect
the predicted pattern of results, whereas the remaining
contrasts (B and C) reflect other result patterns.
Accordingly, a result was considered consistent with the
theoretical predictions when contrast A was statistically
significant, and the remaining contrasts (B and C), as a set,
were not statistically significant.
Hypothesis 1 corresponds to contrast A1 (-1 -1 1 1),
meaning that we expected students in the 2sec-before and in
the self-paced-before condition to show better
comprehension scores than students in the text-only and in
the 150ms-before condition. Given that there were four
experimental conditions, two additional orthogonal contrasts
captured the residual systematic variance within those
conditions that were not supposed to differ among each
other (B1: -1 1 0 0; C1: 0 0 -1 1). Students in the text-only
condition were not supposed to differ from students in the
150ms-before condition, and students in the 2sec-before
condition were not supposed to differ from students in the
self-paced-before condition with regard to their
comprehension scores, respectively.
Hypothesis 2 and Hypothesis 3 both correspond to
contrast A2 (-1 -1 -1 3), meaning that we expected students
in the self-paced-before condition to show better mental
animation and recall than students in the text only, in the

1361

9
8
7
test scores

150ms-before, and in 2sec-before condition. Given that
there were four experimental conditions, two additional
orthogonal contrasts captured the residual systematic
variance within the conditions that were not supposed to
differ among each other (B2: -1 -1 2 0; C2: -1 1 0 0).
Students in the text-only condition were not supposed to
differ from students in the 150ms-before and from students
in the 2sec-before condition.
For each of the three hypotheses, all three contrasts were
entered in multiple regression analyses. Contrast A was
entered as a single predictor, and the two remaining
contrasts (B and C) were entered as a set in the multiple
regression analysis.
Hypothesis 1 was supported (see Figure 2). A multiple
regression analysis in which comprehension of the
underlying principles of pulley systems was regressed on all
three contrasts revealed that contrast A1 was statistically
significant, F(1, 72) = 12.17, p = .001. As expected,
students in the 2sec-before and in the self-paced-before
condition had better comprehension scores than students in
the 150ms-before and in the text-only condition. The two
remaining contrasts (B1 and C1), as a set, were not
significant, F < 1, meaning that comprehension scores did
neither differ between students in the 2sec-before and the
self-paced-before condition nor between students in 150msbefore and the text only condition.

recall

6

mental animation

5
4
3
2
1
0
text only

150-before

2sec-before

self-pacedbefore

experimental condition

Figure 3: Results for recall and mental animation
performance.
To sum up, comprehension (of the underlying principles
of pulley systems) was better in the 2sec-before and in the
self-paced-before than in the 150ms-before and in the textonly condition, yielding support for Hypothesis 1. Recall
and mental animation were better in the self-paced-before
compared to the all three other conditions, supporting
Hypothesis 2 and Hypothesis 3.
Students in the self-paced before condition inspected the
picture longer (than in the 2sec-before condition. Moreover,
reading time was shorter in the self-paced before than in the
text only condition, but did not differ between the remaining
conditions. Reading time was not correlated to performance.

7

Summary and Discussion

6

test scores

5
4

comprehension (of the
underlying principles
of pulley systems)

3
2
1
0
text only

150-before

2sec-before

self-pacedbefore

experimental condition

Figure 2: Results for comprehension of the underlying
principles of pulley systems.
Hypothesis 2 was supported (see Figure 3). A multiple
regression analysis in which mental animation performance
was regressed on all three contrasts revealed that contrast A
was statistically significant, F(1, 72) = 20.78, p < .001. As
expected, mental animation was better in the self-pacedbefore than in the 2sec-before, than in the 150ms-before and
than in the text-only condition. The latter three conditions
did not significantly differ among each other, F(1, 72) =
2.44, p = .12. Hypothesis 3 was supported (see Figure 3). A
multiple regression analysis in which recall performance
was regressed on all three contrasts revealed that contrast A
was statistically significant, F(1, 72) = 5.36, p = .02. As
expected, recall was better in the self-paced-before than in
the 2sec-before, than in the 150ms-before and than in the
text-only condition. The other three conditions did not
significantly differ among each other, F < 1.

In the present study we first hypothesized that briefly
attending to a picture fosters comprehension by rapidly
providing holistic information (Eitel et al., 2010) that is
sufficient to support inference generation through
computational offloading and graphical constraining (Scaife
& Rogers, 1996). Results confirmed Hypothesis 1, because
students had better comprehension (i.e., of the underlying
principles of pulley systems) when they saw a picture of a
pulley system for 2 seconds before they learned from the
respective text than when they received text only or the
picture for 150 ms before the text.
According to Hypothesis 2, mental animation only profits
from re-representation when the picture is inspected long
enough so that single components are encoded and
represented in memory, making the piecemeal mental
animation process possible (Hegarty, 1992, 2004). Only the
self-paced presentation of the picture led to better mental
animation, confirming Hypothesis 2.
Since only longer inspection of the picture was supposed
to lead to dual coding of the single components, which is
necessary to foster recall (of single components),
Hypothesis 3 stated that recall should be better in the selfpaced before compared to the other three conditions. This
was confirmed by the results as well.
To conclude, by considering the nature of the functions of
pictures (Ainsworth, 2006; Scaife & Rogers, 1996), the
present study showed that specific predictions can be made
about when a picture (e.g., presented for 2sec before text)
fosters comprehension in addition to learning from text.

1362

Implications and Further Research
A short initial glance at a picture can already foster
comprehension of subsequent text! Therefore it may be an
effective strategy to first attend to the picture for a short
time before starting to read the text. Students actually
showed this type of processing in an early study of Stone
and Glock (1981). While reading text, students switched
back and forth between text and picture quite often.
According to Hegarty and Just (1993), these switches are
important to integrate information from text and picture on
the basis of single components (or units of components) so
that learners are able build a comprehensive mental model
of the multimedia message, which in turn fosters
comprehension. To what degree briefly attending to the
picture fosters comprehension compared to later switches to
the picture while reading is not yet clear. Further studies
will be needed to assess the relative importance of the brief
initial inspection of the picture.
In the present study we assessed effects of the short
presentation of the picture before the text with one type of
instructional material (i.e., pulley systems). Instructional
pictures of pulley systems in the present study were simple
line drawings in black-and-white. Further studies with
different instructional material and more complex
instructional pictures will be needed to see whether the
beneficial effect of the short initial presentation of the
picture can be generalized. One would assume that the short
initial presentation of the picture only fosters
comprehension when the spatial structure is rather easy to
encode (so that it is rapidly extracted), and when the spatial
structure is relevant to the functioning of the system.
Finally, there is reason to assume that the gist
representation of the picture contains the spatial structure of
the picture (spatial scaffold; Castelhano & Henderson,
2007), which likely has been responsible for the better
comprehension of subsequent text in the present study. If a
spatial scaffold indeed is sufficient to foster comprehension
of subsequent text, then the presentation of an externally
presented scaffold (i.e., perceptually degraded or incomplete
picture of a pulley system) should have the same effect. We
are currently conducting further studies that check for this
assumption.

References
Ainsworth, S. (2006). DeFT: A conceptual framework for
considering learning with multiple representations.
Learning and Instruction, 16, 183–198.
Ainsworth, S. E., & Loizou, A. T. (2003). The effects of
self-explaining when learning with text or diagrams.
Cognitive Science, 27, 669-681.
Anglin, G. J., Vaez, H., & Cunningham, K. L. (2004).
Visual representations and learning: The role of static and
animated graphics. In D. H. Jonassen (Ed.), Handbook of
Research on Educational Communications and
Technology (pp. 865-916). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.

Castelhano, M. S., & Henderson, J. M. (2007). Initial scene
representations facilitate eye movement guidance in
visual search. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 33, 753-763.
Eitel, A., Scheiter, K., & Schüler, A. (2010). What can
information extraction from scenes and causal systems
tell us about learning from text and pictures? In S.
Ohlsson & R. Catrambone (Eds.), Proceedings of the
32nd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 2822-2827). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Goldstone, R. L., & Son, J. Y. (2005). The transfer of
scientific principles using concrete and idealized
simulations. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14,
69–110.
Hegarty, M. (1992). Mental animation: Inferring motion
from static displays of mechanical systems. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 18, 1084-1102.
Hegarty, M. (2004). Mechanical reasoning by mental
simulation. Trends in cognitive science, 8, 280-285.
Hegarty, M., & Just, M. A. (1993). Constructing mental
models of machines from text and diagrams. Journal of
Memory and Language, 32, 717-742.
Kosslyn, S. M. (1995). Mental imagery. In S. M. Kosslyn &
D. N. Osherson (Eds.), An invitation to Cognitive Science:
Visual cognition (Vol 2, 2nd ed., pp. 267-296).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kulhavy, R. W., Stock, W. A., & Kealy, W. A. (1993). How
geographic maps increase recall of instructional text.
Educational Technology Research and Development, 41,
47-62.
Larkin, J. H., & Simon, H. A. (1987). Why a diagram is
(sometimes) worth ten thousand words. Cognitive
Science, 11, 65-99.
Mayer, R. E. (2009). Multimedia learning. 2nd edition.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Niedenthal, P. M., Brauer, M., Robin, L., & Innes-Ker. Å.
H. (2002). Adult attachment and the perception of facial
expression of emotion. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 82, 419-433.
Paivio, A. (1991). Dual coding theory: Retrospect and
current status. Canadian Journal of Psychology, 45,
255–287.
Scaife, M., & Rogers, Y. (1996). External cognition: How
do graphical representations work? International Journal
of Human-Computer Studies, 45, 185-213.
Schnotz, W., & Bannert, M. (2003). Construction and
interference in learning from multiple representations.
Learning and Instruction, 13, 141-156.
Schwartz, D. L. (1995). Reasoning about the referent of a
picture versus reasoning about the picture as the referent:
An effect of visual realism. Memory & Cognition, 23,
709–722.
Stone, D. E., & Glock, M. E. (1981). How do young adults
read directions with and without pictures? Journal of
Educational Psychology, 73, 419-426.

1363

