UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Identifying causal pathways with and without diagrams

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8zq0g8qp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Corter, James
Mason, David
Tversky, Barbara
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Identifying causal pathways with and without diagrams
James E. Corter (jec34@columbia.edu)
Teachers College, Columbia University, 525 W. 120th Street
New York, NY 10027 USA

David L. Mason (dlm2153@columbia.edu)
Teachers College, Columbia University, 525 W. 120th Street
New York, NY 10027 USA

Barbara Tversky (btversky@columbia.edu)
Teachers College, Columbia University, 525 W. 120th Street
New York, NY 10027 USA

Jeffrey V. Nickerson (jnickerson@stevens.edu)
Stevens Institute of Technology, Castle Point on Hudson
Hoboken, NJ 07030 USA

Abstract
Causal modeling generally involves the construction and use
of diagrammatic representations of the causal assumptions,
expressed as directed acyclic graphs (DAGs). Do such graphs
have cognitive benefits, for example by facilitating user
inferences involving the underlying causal models? In two
empirical studies, participants were given a set of causal
assumptions, then attempted to identify all the causal
pathways linking two variables in the model implied by these
causal assumptions. Participants who were provided with a
path diagram expressing the assumptions were more
successful at identifying indirect pathways than those given
the assumptions in the form of lists. Furthermore, the spatial
orientation of the causal flow in the graphical model (left to
right or right to left) had effects on the speed and accuracy
with which participants made these inferences.
Keywords: causal models; causal reasoning; causal
inference; path models; directed graphs; networks; indirect
effects

Introduction
Why are diagrams so much used, and so useful, in
learning and reasoning about abstract relationships?
Diagrams and language are two ways of externalizing
thought to reduce memory load and facilitate inferences
(Scaife & Rogers, 1996). Diagrams have the advantage that
they can use elements in space and spatial relations to
express the elements and relations of thought. Then people's
well-developed skills at making spatial judgments and
inferences can be applied to abstract judgments and
inferences (e.g., Larkin & Simon, 1987; Tversky, 2001).
Written language overcomes the fleeting nature of speech,
but the form of written language generally bears no direct
correspondence to the forms of thought. On the contrary,
written language requires people to construct and hold
mental models of the forms of thought as well as to use the
mental models for reasoning and inference, a double burden
that taxes limited working memory capacity. For many
reasoning tasks, then, constructing a diagram should both

alleviate limited memory and facilitate inference-making.
Abstraction (Schwartz, 1995) and transfer (Novick &
Hmelo, 1994) are two types of inferences, ordinarily
difficult for people, that may be facilitated by diagrams. It
should be noted, however, that diagrams are not always
useful for inference and problem-solving; one reason is that
learning to construct and use appropriate diagrammatic
representations can be difficult (e.g., Ainsworth, 2006;
Corter, Nickerson, Tversky, Zahner & Rho, 2008; Zahner &
Corter, 2010).
Diagrams are especially appropriate to represent ideas
that are inherently or metaphorically spatial, as they readily
map elements and relations from some conceptually spatial
world to elements and relations on the page. Maps of all
kinds, architectural plans, diagrams of the body are
examples. Conveying dynamic or invisible properties like
change in time, forces, and causes often require the addition
of diagrammatic devices like dots, lines, and arrows
(Tversky, Zacks, Lee & Heiser, 2000).
Causal modeling is one area where diagrams are
conventionally used to represent abstract relationships
among entities. Causal modeling involves the use of
directed acyclic graphs (DAG) to diagram probabilistic
causal relationships. These path diagrams represent
variables as nodes and causal relations as directed arrows
between pairs of nodes, thus abstracting (and perceptually
grounding) the critical information needed for reasoning.
Why do path diagrams play such an integral role in causal
modeling? First, some software interfaces for structural
equation modeling (SEM) and many systems implementing
Bayesian networks (BN) require that the causal model be
constructed as a directed graph in a visual programming
interface; the resulting diagram is then used to guide the
computations for estimation and inference (Greenland, Pearl
& Robins, 1999; Lauritzen & Spiegelhalter, 1988; Pearl,
1988). Other researchers have investigated how the structure
of the causal network might be inferred from data (e.g.,
Griffiths & Tenenbaum, 2005; Pearl, 2000; Steyvers,

2715

Tenenbaum, Wagenmakers, & Blum, 2003). But even in
traditional approaches to path analysis (e.g., Wright, 1921;
Alwin & Hauser, 1975; Bollen, 1989) where the causal
network is not directly involved in computation,
construction of the path diagram is thought to be an
essential step. Causal reasoning in social science domains
often involves complex systems of direct and indirect
relationships; these concepts may be more easily
remembered and understood if these relationships are
expressed with diagrams.
However, surprisingly little research has been conducted
on what specific cognitive effects and benefits are provided
by using path diagrams. McCrudden, Schraw, Lehman, &
Poliquin (2007) found that memory for and comprehension
of causal relationships from a science text were enhanced by
providing a diagram with the text. They also concluded that
the benefits of diagrams were greater for more difficult-tolearn causal sequences. Easterday, Aleven, Scheines and
Carver (2008) studied the difficulties students have in
constructing and interpreting causal diagrams. They found
that providing students with a diagram for an inference
problem about policy options led to best performance on the
immediate task, but asking students to construct the
appropriate diagram led to better transfer performance.
One possible reason that path diagrams help users to
reason about complex causal interrelationships is that in a
path model, indirect influences of variable X on variable Y
may involve long causal chains through intervening
mediator variables. To use a simple example from
educational research, achievement motivation (X) may
affect grade-point average (Y) mainly because motivation
affects time put into studying (W), which in turn affects Y.
Use of the diagrammatic representation makes it easier to
find such indirect causal paths involving mediator variables
and to correctly interpret how they interact to influence the
dependent variable.
Several specific visual aspects of path diagrams may
facilitate, or interfere with, the desired inferences. One
benefit of the diagram stems from the fact that indirect
effects in the causal model (an abstract concept) are
represented by paths in the diagram, a perceptually basic
aspect of the network. Paths in the network are lines; they
have the gestalt property of connectedness, meaning that
they are perceptually salient and easily understood in
relation to our natural abilities to navigate along paths on
the two-dimensional surface of the earth. One complication
is that both the basic causal assumptions of the model and
paths corresponding to indirect effects have directionality.
This directionality is indicated in the DAG by arcs or
arrows. Arrows are a commonly used device in diagrams,
one that is naturally suited for many purposes (Horn, 1998;
Kurata & Egenhofer, 2005; Tversky, Zacks, Lee & Heiser,
2000). Arrows are lines, so they connect; but they are
asymmetric, indicating an asymmetric relationship such as
causation. Students spontaneously interpret arrows in
mechanical diagrams as causes, and spontaneously draw
arrows in their own visual explanations (Heiser & Tversky,

2006). Here, an arrow indicates an abstraction, that the
variable at the tail has a causal influence on the variable at
the point.
But previous related research in our lab (Corter et al.,
2008; Nickerson, Corter, Tversky, Zahner & Rho, 2008)
suggests that several factors might impede efficient use and
correct interpretation of path diagrams. These factors are
related to the constraints of representation: direct graphs
need to be embedded in a two-dimensional page. This fact
can of course lead to issues of effective design and use (e.g.,
how to avoid crossing arcs). More importantly, our
previous studies have shown that even though the formal
properties of the problem are represented solely by the
graph topology, users cannot help being influenced by
Euclidean properties of the embedding, such as the distances
among nodes (proximity). Humans also show preferences
for certain directions in the plane (i.e., left-right and updown asymmetries), preferences that affect the construction
of and processing of external visual representations (Taylor
& Tversky, 1992; Tversky, Kugelmass & Winter, 1991;
Tversky, 2001).
This brief review suggests a need to replicate and extend
the few studies that have investigated cognitive issues
surrounding the use and interpretation of path diagrams.
The first study described below investigates if use of a path
diagram improves users’ ability to find causal paths
representing indirect causal influences of one variable on
another, compared to using text representations of the causal
assumptions defining the causal model. We also seek
evidence (in the second study) that superficial aspects of the
spatial embedding of the path diagram into the plane, in
particular left-right directionality, might affect the
interpretation and use of the diagram.

Study 1
Do path diagrams improve reasoning about the implications
of causal models, specifically the ability to specify all the
ways, direct and indirect, in which one variable can causally
affect another? Study 1 was designed to provide some initial
answers to this question.

Method
In Study 1, we compared how well participants did at
identifying all the potential indirect paths between two
variables when a path diagram was provided, versus when
only a listing of all the assumed direct causal effects was
provided.
Participants. Participants were recruited from a
crowdsourcing website, Amazon’s Mechanical Turk (MT).
A total of 172 respondents completed the task. Their mean
age was 32.5 (s = 11.9), and they were 54% male. Seventyseven percent of them were native English speakers, and
93% had at least some college education.
Procedure. Participants were randomly assigned to one of
three conditions. Two of these conditions presented a set of

2716

causal assumptions in the form of text (in two different
formats) and the third presented the same set of assumptions
as a path diagram (a directed acyclic graph or DAG).
We first presented participants with instructions that
included a worked example, in a format consistent with their
assigned condition:
In causal modeling of a social science problem,
researchers try to specify all the ways in which
variables influence each other. For example, a
researcher might assume that variable X affects Y, X
affects Z, and Y affects Z. In that case, X has a
causal influence on Z in two ways. First, there is a
direct effect of X on Z (by assumption). Also, X
affects Z indirectly, because X is assumed to affect Y
and Y is assumed to affect Z. Thus X has both direct
and indirect effects on Z.
This description was followed by one of three displays
that depicted the causal assumptions of the preceding
problem (X affects Y, X affects Z, Y affects Z) as either linear
text, text written vertically (as a table), or a path diagram,
depending on the condition to which the participant had
been assigned. Finally, participants were instructed that the
goal was to list all the ways in which variable X could have
a causal effect on variable Z (for this example: X affects Z,
and X affects Y which affects Z). Put in slightly more formal
terms, the task was to list all causal pathways (i.e., any
direct and all indirect effects) between X and Z.
After reading these instructions and the worked example,
participants were then presented with a similar (but more
complex) problem to solve. The given information was a
set of nine assumptions about pairwise causal relationships
among five variables, presented either as horizontal text,
vertical text, or as a path diagram in the respective condition
(see Figure 1). Participants were asked to “Please write all
the ways that variable H could influence variable R.”
H affects C, H affects R, H affects S, S affects C, S
affects R, S affects M, C affects M, C affects R, M affects R
H affects C
H affects R
H affects S
S affects C
S affects R
S affects M
C affects M
C affects R
M affects R
Figure 1: Presentation of a set of causal assumptions in one
of three formats: as horizontal text, as vertical text, or as a
diagram.

for the diagram condition versus the two text conditions was
significant in a log-linear analysis (z=2.916, p=.004),), as
was the difference between vertical and horizontal text (z =
2.165, p=.030). As Table 1 shows, incorrect paths were only
rarely given; most incorrect answers were due to omitting
paths.
Table 1: Study 1 performance (mean accuracy and total
work time), by condition.
Condition
Horizontal
text
Vertical
text
Diagram

N

%corr.

correct
paths

incorrect
paths

Time
(sec)

53

43

5.9

.06

509.9

59

24

5.3

.08

517.7

60

50

6.0

.05

380.9

Table 1 also shows that time required to do the task, as
measured by the web-based task administration software,
differed among the three conditions, with participants in the
diagram condition completing the task marginally faster
than participants in the text conditions, F(1,169) = 3.430, p=
.066.
Not surprisingly, the probability that a participant omitted
an indirect effect in their answer tended to increase with the
length of the corresponding causal path. The percentage
correct for the path of length 2 (the direct effect, HR) was
98%; for paths of length 3 the figure was 92%; for paths of
length 4 it was 78%, and for HSCMR, the only path of
length 5, it was 54%. The average benefit of using a
diagram over the text conditions increased with path length:
the advantage in accuracy for paths of length 2, 3, 4 and 5
was 2%, 5%, 5%, and 17% respectively.
In response to an explicit post-task question, 27% of
participants in the text conditions reported constructing their
own diagrams “offline”, on scratch paper, in the process of
answering the paths question, while only 2% reported doing
so in the diagram condition. Thus, the observed advantage
of the diagram condition over the text conditions is probably
underestimated. In the horizontal text condition, 23%
reported making a list or table summarizing the assumed
causal relationships, versus only 14% in the vertical text
condition and 13% in the diagram condition. Consequently,
the advantage observed here for horizontal text over vertical
text may also be affected by user-generated external
representations.

Discussion

Results
As shown in Table 1, the number of correct responses was
highest for the diagram condition (50%), followed by
horizontal text (43%), then vertical text (24%). As
hypothesized, the difference between the proportions correct

As expected, participants in the diagram condition indeed
showed higher accuracy in identifying all direct and indirect
causal pathways between the two target variables. An
unanticipated finding was the large (and significant)
advantage of horizontal text over vertical text. However,
note that the text presented to participants in this study had a
high degree of organization: causal links (pairs) were

2717

presented in an order consistent with the implied causal
chains, so that the causal chains do have a kind of indirect
visual representation in the horizontal text condition. If the
lists of causal assumptions had not been organized in this
particular chain-consistent order, the causal chains would
likely have been less salient, and the advantage of diagram
over text would likely have been even higher.

diagram (52%), though this difference was not significant, z
= 1.014, p = .312. However, the total work times reported
in Table 2 reveal that participants worked much more
slowly with the right-to-left version. Accuracy did not differ
between the two text conditions, z = 0.297, p=.764.
C affects S, C affects R, C affects H, R affects M,
R affects A, H affects A, H affects S, A affects M, A
affects S, M affects S.

Study 2
Study 2 was an attempt to replicate the main findings of
Study 1 and assess the generalizability of the diagram
advantage by using a new set of causal assumptions
corresponding to a new diagram structure. Also, the effect
of manipulating one superficial aspect of the diagram was
investigated, in this case whether the causal flow in the
diagram was generally from left to right (the conventional
orientation observed in many English texts and journal
articles on causal modeling), or from right to left. Our
previous work (Corter et al., 2008; Nickerson et al., 2008)
has shown cognitive effects of supposedly superficial
aspects of how network diagrams are embedded on the
page, including preferences for top-down and left-right
processing of diagrams (see also Taylor & Tversky, 1992;
Tversky et al., 1991).

Method
The methods of Study 2 were essentially the same as for
Study 1, except for use of a new causal structure, and the
addition of a variant diagram with right-to-left causal flow.
Participants. Participants were recruited from a crowdsourcing website. After eliminating participants who had
participated in Study 1, and those who failed to follow
instructions for the Study 2 task, we were left with N=212
participants. Their mean age was 31.1 (s = 11.1), and they
were 54% male. Seventy-six percent of them were native
English speakers, and 89% had at least some college
education.
Procedure. Task instructions for Study 2 used the same
worked example as did the instructions for Study 1. The
only substantive change to the procedure (besides use of a
different causal structure) involved adding a second diagram
condition, in which causal flow in the diagram proceeded
from the right side of the diagram to the left, rather than left
to right, as is usual practice. Thus, the tested conditions
were: horizontal text, vertical text, diagram l-r, and diagram
r-l (see Figure 2). Participants were asked to “Please write
all the ways that variable C could influence variable S.”

Results
The proportion of correct answers again differed among
conditions (Table 2), with the two diagram conditions
showing higher performance than the two text conditions.
This advantage was confirmed in a log-linear analysis, z =
2.290, p = .022. Surprisingly, the right-to-left diagram
resulted in higher accuracy (62%) than the left-to-right

Figure 2: Presentation of a set of causal assumptions (Study
2) as horizontal text, as a diagram with left-to-right causal
flow, and with right-to-left causal flow (vertical text
condition not shown).
Table 2: Study 2 performance (mean accuracy and total
study work time), by condition.

Condition
Horiz. text
Vertical text
Diagram l-r
Diagram r-l

N
46
45
69
52

%
correct
39
42
52
62

# corr.
Paths
5.78
6.02
6.33
6.21

Time
(sec)
526.0
617.0
355.9
620.8

As in Study 1, the probability that participants omitted an
indirect effect in their answers increased with the length of
the causal path. The overall percentage correct for the direct
effect, (path SC) was 98%; for path (CHS) it was 96%; for
paths of length 4 it was 88%, and for length 5 paths, it was
74%. The advantage due to using a diagram tended to
increase with path length, though the advantage for paths of
length 4 (9%) exceeded that for paths of length 5 (4%).

2718

In Study 2 31% of participants in the text conditions
reported constructing their own diagrams offline in the
process of answering the paths question, while only 6%
reported doing so in the diagram conditions. This is further
evidence, albeit indirect, that diagrams are useful to
participants trying to answer the inference question, and
suggests that the higher accuracy observed here for the
diagram conditions compared to the text conditions may be
an underestimate of the true effect of using diagrams. Also,
in the text conditions 14% of participants reported making
their own list or table of the assumed causal relationships,
versus 10% in the diagram conditions.

Discussion
Again, the results show that participants did a better job of
identifying all the indirect causal paths from one variable to
another when they were provided with a diagram
representing
the
underlying
causal
assumptions.
Furthermore, many participants who were not provided with
a diagram reported constructing one on their own,
presumably to aid themselves in the task. Participants were
slowed in their work when the causal diagram presented the
causal flow from right-to-left, an unusual orientation;
however, this manipulation seemed to actually improve
accuracy. This effect, should it prove replicable, might be
due to the unfamiliar orientation triggering more careful
processing (e.g., Bjork, 1994; Alter, Epley, Oppenheimer &
Eyre, 2007).

General Discussion
This research adds to the body of evidence that diagrams are
useful external aids to reasoning. In both studies reported
here, providing participants with a path diagram improved
their accuracy in finding all direct and indirect effects of one
variable on another, a task that is equivalent to specifying all
the causal paths between those variables.
It is worth re-emphasizing that the advantages in
inference accuracy found here for diagrams are likely to be
underestimates of the true benefits, for several reasons.
First, many participants in the text conditions reported
constructing their own diagram “offline” in answering the
inference question, even though they were not asked to do
so. Also, note that the text versions of the problems were
highly organized in a way that should promote the finding
of causal paths. Because the models examined here were
recursive, and the given direct causal relationships between
pairs of variables were presented in a lexicographic order
based on (cause, effect), each causal path corresponding to
an indirect effect (i.e., the component paths in the correct
answer) could be constructed with a single “pass” through
the list of causal relationships. Because this degree of
organization in the text versions of the problems is both
optimal and artificial (or at least a special case), organizing
the lists in any other way could be expected to lower
performance for the text conditions, increasing the measured
benefit of diagrams.

Another noteworthy finding, from Study 2, is that use of
the path diagram seemed to be affected by a superficial
aspect of how the causal diagram was embedded into the
plane – specifically, by whether the causal flow was
depicted as generally from left-to-right or right-to-left. In
previous work involving how people reason using network
diagrams (Corter et al., 2008; Nickerson et al., 2008), we
have found that people use and interpret such supposedly
superficial aspects of how the formal diagram is embedded
on the two-dimensional page (c.f. Landy & Goldstone,
2007). The typical left-to-right reading of diagrams often
displayed by native speakers of Western languages (Taylor
& Tversky, 1992; Tversky, Kugelmass & Winter, 1991) is a
predilection that diagram designers may take into account.
Thus, these findings add to the growing evidence that
diagram designers and users are affected by and take
advantage of the affordances of the page.

Acknowledgments
This work has been supported by awards IIS-0725223,
HHC-0905417, and IIS-0855995 from the National Science
Foundation, and by the Stanford Regional Visualization and
Analysis Center.

References
Ainsworth, S. (2006). DeFT: A conceptual framework for
considering learning with multiple representations.
Learning and Instruction, 16, 183-198.
Alter, A. L., Oppenheimer, D. M., Epley, N., & Eyre, R. N.
(2007). Overcoming intuition: Metacognitive difficulty
activates analytic reasoning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 136(4), 569–576.
Alwin, D. F., & Hauser, R. M. (1975). The decomposition
of effects in path analysis. American Sociological Review,
40, 37-47.
Bjork, R.A. (1994). Memory and metamemory
considerations in the training of human beings. In J.
Metcalfe and A. Shimamura (Eds.) Metacognition:
Knowing about knowing. (pp.185-205). Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press
Bollen, K. A. (1989). Structural Equations with Latent
Variables. New York: Wiley.
Corter, J. E., Nickerson, J.V., Tversky, B., Zahner, D., and
Rho, Y. (2008). Using diagrams to design information
systems. In B. C. Love, K. McRae, and V. M. Sloutsky
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 30th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, (pp. 2259–2264). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Easterday, M. W., Aleven, V., & Scheines, R. (2007). ‘Tis
better to construct than to receive? The effects of diagram
tools on causal reasoning. Proceedings of AIED, pp. 93100, IOS Press, Amsterdam.
Greenland, S., Pearl, J., & Robins, J. M. (1999). Causal
diagrams for epidemiologic research. Epidemiology,
10(1), 37-48.

2719

Griffiths, T. L., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2005). Structure and
strength in causal induction. Cognitive Psychology, 51,
334–384.
Heiser, J. & Tversky, B. (2006). Arrows in comprehending
and producing mechanical diagrams. Cognitive Science,
30, 581-590.
Landy, D., & Goldstone, R. L. (2007). How abstract is
symbolic thought? Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 33(4), 720–733.
Larkin, J. H., & Simon, H. A. (1987). Why a diagram is
(sometimes) worth ten thousand words. Cognitive
Science, 11, 65-99.
Lauritzen, S., and Spiegelhalter, D. (1988). Local
computations with probabilities on graphical structures
and their application to expert systems. Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society, 50,157–224.
McCrudden, M. T., Gregory Schraw, G.,Lehman, S., &
Poliquin, A. (2007). The effect of causal diagrams on text
learning. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 32,
367–388.
Nickerson, J. V., Corter, J. E., Tversky, B., Zahner, D., and
Rho, Y. (2008). The spatial nature of thought:
Understanding information systems design through
diagrams. In Boland, R., Limayem, M., and Pentland B.,
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 29th International Conference
on Information Systems.
Novick, L. R., & Hmelo, C. E. (1994). Transferring
symbolic representations across nonisomorphic problems.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 20(6), 1296-1321.
Pearl, J. (1988). Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent
Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. San Mateo CA:
Morgan Kaufmann.
Pearl, J. (2000). Causality: Models, reasoning, and
inference. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Scaife, M., & Rogers, Y. (1996). External cognition: How
do graphical representations work? International Journal
of Human-Computer Studies, 45, 185-213.
Schwartz, D. L. (1995). The emergence of abstract
representations in dyad problem solving. The Journal of
the Learning Sciences, 4(3), 321-354.
Steyvers, M., Tenenbaum, J. B., Wagenmakers, E.-J., &
Blum, B. Inferring causal networks from observations and
interventions. Cognitive Science, 27, 453–489.
Taylor, H.A., & Tversky, B. (1992). Descriptions and
depictions of environments. Memory & Cognition, 20,
483-496.
Tversky, B., Kugelmass, S., & Winter, A. (1991) Crosscultural and developmental trends in graphic productions.
Cognitive Psychology, 23, 515-557.
Tversky, B. (2001). Spatial schemas in depictions. In M.
Gattis (Ed.), Spatial schemas and abstract thought, Pp.
79–111. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Tversky, B. (2005). Prolegomenon to scientific
visualizations. In J. K. Gilbert (Ed.), Visualization in
science education, Series: Models and modeling in
science education, Dordrecht, Kluwer, 1, 29-42.

Wright, S. (1921). Correlation and causation. Journal of
Agricultural Research, 20, 557-585.
Zahner, D., & Corter, J. E. (2010). The process of
probability problem solving: Use of external visual
representations. Mathematical Thinking and Learning,
12(2), 177 - 204.

2720

