UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Implicit Context-Specific Learning Leads to Rapid Shifts in Syntactic Expectations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3ct0g7ph

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Farmer, Thomas
Fine, Alex
Jaeger, Florian

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Implicit Context-Specific Learning Leads to Rapid
Shifts in Syntactic Expectations
Thomas A. Farmer (tfarmer@bcs.rochester.edu), Alex B. Fine (afine@bcs.rochester.edu), and
T. Florian Jaeger (fjaeger@bcs.rochester.edu)
Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14627 USA

Abstract
During incremental language understanding, comprehenders
draw on a rich base of probabilistic cues to efficiently process
the noisy perceptual input they receive. One challenge listeners
face in employing such cues is that most cues are contextdependent. Here, we present an experiment that investigates the
extent to which listeners learn situation-specific adjustments in
the information and/or weight of the lexical bias of a verb.
Specifically, we ask to what extent comprehenders are able to
rapidly change their interpretation of lexical cues to syntactic
structure, where such behavior would be rational due to
situation-specific statistics in the environment.
Keywords: Language Comprehension; Ambiguity Resolution;
Learning Effects; Language Experience

Introduction
Across many different levels of linguistic representation,
statistical regularities contained within the input have been
shown to influence language processing and acquisition
(Christiansen & Chater, 2001; Elman et al., 1996;
Seidenberg & McClelland, 1989, to name only a few).
These types of findings are typically captured by
connectionist accounts in which learning and processing are
often viewed as inseparable (Chang, Bock, & Dell, 2006).
Every instance of exposure to linguistic input causes
adjustments, however subtle, to the systems responsible for
processing it. This process of gradual adjustment affords the
ability to approximate, over time, the mathematical
functions that underlie the relevant input (Elman, 1993).
Within these experience-driven approaches, it follows
naturally that learning about the regularities in language by
processing them is continuous—it does not end at some
discrete point of time in ontogenetic development, but
instead may occur across the life-span.
This raises questions as to why it is the case that lifelong
learning should be an advantageous strategy? At the level of
speech perception, the utility of a flexible system is
relatively easy to surmise. There exists a famous “lack of
invariance” in the acoustic signal. Factors such as speech
rate, linguistic and acoustic context, and speaker-based
idiosyncrasies contribute to the presence of a wide range of
variability in the signal. In light of this variability, a
perceptual system designed to adapt to context-, situation,
or even person-specific properties of a communicative
context is a necessity during speech perception. Indeed, at
the level of phonology, an emerging literature has started to

demonstrate that listeners update their expectations about
speech sound categories in a speaker-specific manner. For
example, Kraljic and Samuel (2006, 2007) have
demonstrated that speakers readily adapt phonetic category
boundaries in order to accommodate the statistical
properties of perceptual input (see Pardo & Remez, 2006,
for an overview), but do so only when speaker adaptation
can feasibly aid the communicative process (Krajlic,
Brennan, & Samuel, 2008). Adult listeners also adapt to
group-specific phonological properties: with sufficient
exposure to non-native speakers of the same native language
(e.g. English produced by native speakers of Chinese),
listeners show improved comprehension of novel speakers
of the same foreign accent (Bradlow and Bent, 2008). In
other words, in the face of great inter-speaker variability,
adaptation is functionally advantageous. The learning that
leads to such adaptation is implicit, in that learners are never
aware of the adjustments they make (and would not, for
example, be able to describe them). In short, the mapping
between acoustic percepts and phonological categories
seems to be malleable throughout one’s lifetime, allowing
speaker-, group-, and context-specific adaptation, which in
turn facilitates language understanding.
At the level of syntax, however, the degree to which the
probabilistic knowledge of linguistic structure that is built
up over a lifetime of exposure can be temporarily amended
to accommodate context-dependent aspects of a
communicative situation remains very much an open
question. This is the question we seek to address in this
paper. Specifically, we ask whether comprehenders rapidly
adapt to context- or speaker-specific deviations from typical
lexical statistics.
In the domain of on-line language comprehension, one
well acknowledged finding is that people rely heavily upon
syntactic expectations, which have been argued to contribute
to the fast and robust nature of language understanding. The
expectations that are responsible for on-line comprehension
likely arise, at least in part, from multiple probabilistic cues to
structure working in concert to constrain interpretation
(MacDonald, Pearlmutter, & Seidenberg, 1994; McRae,
Spivey-Knowlton, & Tanenhaus, 1998.). Indeed, probabilistic
cues such as referential context (Altmann, Garnham, &
Dennis, 1992), plausibility (Garnsey, Pearlnutter, Myers, &
Lotocky, 1997), and prosody (Snedeker & Yuan, 2008) have
all been shown to modulate the interpretation of an incoming
sequence. Inherent to claims about multiple-cue integration in
language comprehension is the notion that an individual cue,

2055

in and of itself, is only probabilistic, such that multiple
probabilistic cues are employed as soon as possible in pursuit
of understanding.
Lexical biases of verbs, such as how often a verb like
warned is likely to be used as a main verb (as in, The
soldiers warned the townspeople) versus as the verb of a
relative clause (as in, The soldiers warned about the
dangers were nervous) constitute another cue that has been
shown to reliably influence the ease with which incoming
information can be processed (Garnsey et al., 1997;
Trueswell, Tanenhaus, & Kello, 1993). The verb warned is
over three times more likely to be used as a main verb in a
sentence than it is to be used as the onset of a relative clause
sentence (Tabossi, Spivey-Knowlton, McRae, & Tanenhaus,
1994). Even young children are sensitive to the biases of
verbs, such that their processing preferences mirror the
probabilistic nature in which verbs are used in child-directed
speech (Snedeker & Trueswell, 2004). Verb-bias, then, is a
factor likely to drive the strength of expectations about
which of a set of possible verb uses is most likely.
Although a lot is known about how learning gives rise to
expectations, the literature on how those expectations can
change in adulthood is substantially less clear. From the
syntactic priming literature, we know that exposure to a
prime structure can rapidly change syntactic expectations in
later sentences (Tothathiri and Snedeker, 2008). According
to some accounts of syntactic priming, these rapid changes
are due to implicit learning (Bock and Griffin, 2000; Chang
et al., 2006; Snider and Jaeger, submitted), although this
issue is still under debate (Dubey, Keller, & Sturt, 2008). In
line with the hypothesis that syntactic priming may be
related to implicit learning, there is now preliminary
evidence that recently processed stimuli can cumulatively
affect expectations beyond the effect of the most recent
prime (Farmer, Monaghan, Misyak, & Christiansen, in
press; Fine, Qian, Jaeger, and Jacobs, 2010). On a longer
time-scale, Wells et al. (2009) demonstrated that after a
multi-day training regiment, subjects’ reading patterns
converged with the statistical regularities to which different
groups of subjects were exposed over training. Common to
all of these studies, subjects read a subset of trials in which
some sort of cue-based expectation is violated, akin to
warned being used to head a relative clause instead of being
used as a main verb. And, in each experiment, there was
evidence that subjects were progressively more able to adapt
to the specific statistical patterns contained in the material.
The goal of the experiment reported here is to examine the
degree to which people are able to learn about the statistical
contingencies inherent to a set of sentence materials simply
by reading them. By learning here, we do not mean simply
short-term activation of a structure. Instead, we examine
whether the learning effects are more long-lasting, or,
extend beyond one item after the prime. Through statistical
analyses that allow one to assess the continuous change in
expectation strength across an experiment, we provide
evidence that subjects adapt their syntactic expectations in
response to repeated exposure to violations of verb bias.

Moreover, the changes in expectations are not immediate;
the change appears to reflect a more protracted adjusting of
distributional knowledge about how verbs are used in a
specific context.

Experiment
Subjects were presented with a sentence set originally utilized
in MacDonald, Just, and Carpenter (1992) to elicit a gardenpath effect.
1 (a) The experienced soldiers / warned about the dangers
/ before the midnight / raid.
(b) The experienced soldiers / spoke about the dangers /
before the midnight / raid.
(c) The experienced soldiers / warned about the
dangers / conducted the midnight / raid.
(d) The experienced soldiers / who were warned about
the dangers / conducted the midnight / raid.
That is, in example (1), the sentences containing a temporary
structural ambiguity (1a and 1c) become ambiguous at
segment two. The verb “warned,” for example, may be
interpreted as either the main verb (MV) of the sentence (1a)
or as the beginning of a reduced relative clause (RC) (1c).
Segment three, the point of disambiguation, contains the
information necessary to arrive at the ultimately correct
interpretation of the ambiguity. People have a strong bias to
interpret the verb “warned” as a main verb, such that when
the ambiguity is resolved in accordance with that structural
interpretation of the input, little to no evidence of processing
difficulty is typically detected, relative to an unambiguous
control sentence (1b, where the verb “spoke” cannot head a
reduced relative clause, thus producing no ambiguity). When
the ambiguity is resolved in accordance with the reduced
relative clause interpretation, however, processing difficulty
in the form of increased Reading Times (RTs) at the point of
disambiguation is observed (i.e. the garden-path effect),
relative to an unambiguous control (1d, where the inclusion
of the relative pronoun plus the past tense form of the verb “to
be” eradicates any ambiguity).
As noted above, the lexical bias for an MV reading of the
verbs in this sentence set arises from how they are used in
natural language. Tabossi et al. (1994) conducted a series of
corpus analyses on the ambiguity-creating verbs (like warned
in (1), above) used in the MacDonald et al. sentences. They
found that there existed an overwhelming bias against relative
clause resolution for each verb: the ambiguity-creating verbs
appeared over three times more in main clauses than they did
in relative clauses. This frequency-based bias against RC
resolution of the ambiguity is likely to be a strong contributor
to the presence of a garden-path effect (i. e. increased RTs at
the point of disambiguation) when the ambiguity is resolved
in accordance with an RC interpretation.
In accordance with their use in natural language, the
ambiguity-producing verbs used here are likely to confer a
strong expectation for an MV reading of the ambiguity.

2056

Unlike natural language, however, reading through these
sentences produces a situation in which the ambiguityproducing verbs, on 50% of the trials where an ambiguity is
present, are used in an RC structure, thus strongly violating
the expectations that subjects likely bring with them when
arriving at the experiment.
If adaptation occurs at the syntactic level, then the biases
of the ambiguity-producing verbs should weaken some as
subjects see cumulatively more examples of a violation of
the bias for MV usage. That is, because subjects are being
exposed to a disproportionally large number of syntactic
ambiguities that are resolved in a manner inconsistent with
their strong bias against RC resolution, the verb-based
biases should degrade over the course of reading the
sentences. This weakening of verb-bias should become
apparent in the magnitude of the garden-path effect on RC
resolved ambiguous sentences. Over time, the magnitude of
the garden-path effect on the RC-resolved ambiguous
sentences should decrease, indicating that comprehenders
have adjusted their expectations, as conferred by verb-bias,
to accommodate new context-dependent distributional
information.
To be precise, there are two reasons to expect such a
change. First, the context-specific probability of an RC
increases rapidly throughout the experiment. This holds
both for each verb (the probability approaches .5 in the
experiment) and for the overall probability of an RC.
Second, the verb, which originally was a strongly
informative cue to MV vs. RC structures will become less
and less informative. This might lead listeners to overall
rely less on the verb as cue.

Method
Participants Seventy-two native English speakers (M=18.89
years, SD=.994) enrolled at a medium-sized Mid-Atlantic
university participated in this study for extra course credit.
Materials The sentence set contained 36 sentences frames,
with four versions of each frame. The manipulation, as
explained above, produces a 2 (Structure: Main Verb vs.
Relative Clause) X 2 (Ambiguity Status: Ambiguous vs.
Unambiguous) X (Region: Point of Ambiguity vs. Point of
Disambiguation) design. The four versions of the 36 different
sentence frames were counterbalanced across four
presentation lists in a completely crossed repeated-measures
design. As a result, each list was comprised of one sentence
from each of the 36 sentence frames, such that each subject
saw nine of each combination of Sentence Type X Ambiguity
Status, but only one sentence from each sentence frame. Fifty
filler items, along with eight unrelated practice items, were
incorporated into each list.
Procedure Participants were randomly assigned to one of the
four presentation lists, and the presentation order of all target
and filler items was randomized per subject. All sentences
were presented in a non-cumulative, word-by-word moving
window format (Just, Carpener, & Woolley, 1982) using
Psyscope version 1.2.5 (Cohen, MacWhinney, Flatt, &
Provost, 1993).

Subjects initially viewed a tutorial designed to acquaint
them with the task. Subjects were then instructed to press the
‘GO’ key to begin the task. The entire test item appeared on
the center (left-justified) of the screen in such a way that
dashes preserved the spatial layout of the sentence, but
masked the actual characters of each word. As the subject
pressed the ‘GO’ key, the word that was just read disappeared
and the next one appeared. RTs (msec) were recorded for
each word. Following each sentence, subjects responded to a
Yes/No comprehension question, and upon another key press,
the next item appeared.

Results and Discussion
RTs on each word were length-adjusted according to a
procedure described by Ferreira and Clifton (1986). First,
using the raw RTs on all words in both the experimental and
filler items, we computed a regression equation predicting
each subject’s overall RT per word from the number of
characters in each word. The equation was used in order to
generate an expected RT on each word given its length.
Expected RTs on each word were then subtracted from the
observed RTs, and the resulting difference score was used for
all analyses.
As per the segmentation of the sentences (denoted by “/”)
in example (1), ambiguous and unambiguous regions of the
sentences were defined in accordance with the specifications
used by MacDonald, Just, & Carpenter (1992; see p. 65 for a
more in-depth discussion of the intricacies associated with
this type of ambiguity). The point of ambiguity in the
ambiguous (1a and 1c) sentences contained the ambiguityproducing verb (i.e. warned) in addition to the subsequently
occurring words that follow it up until the point where
information exists that can facilitate disambiguation.
Although no ambiguity existed in the unambiguous condition
(1b and 1d) conditions, a region consisting of words that
eliminated the ambiguity (verbs that don’t permit an
ambiguity and must be interpreted as main verbs in the main
verb, unambiguous condition, such as spoke in 1b, or the
relative pronoun + past tense version of the verb to be in the
relative clause, unambiguous sentences condition, such as
who were in 1d) in addition to the same words that appeared
in the point of ambiguity for the corresponding ambiguoussentence versions was also specified. The point of
disambiguation for all the ambiguous-sentence conditions
(and corresponding unambiguous control sentences) started
with the first word that could be used to strongly support one
interpretation over the other, in addition to the subsequent
words remaining in the sentence, but excluding the final word
of the sentence. The final word of the sentences was excluded
due to sentence “wrap-up” effects, where increases in RTs
frequently occur due to extra processing before subjects
progress to a new item. The length-adjusted RTs on each
word within a region (either the point of ambiguity or
disambiguation) were averaged, per region, to create a mean
length-adjusted RT within each region, and these mean
length-adjusted RTs comprised the dependent measure of
interest.

2057

Here, we employ a regression approach to investigate the
degree to which the influence of sentence-level variables
changes over the course of the experiment (see Baayen,
Davidson, & Bates, 2008, for a discussion of the advantages
of linear mixed effects models in understanding how effects
change over the course of an experiment). To examine the
extent to which the ambiguity effect (previously reported in
MacDonald et al., 1992) changed over the course of the
experiment, we regressed length-corrected RTs onto the full
factorial design (i.e. all main effects and higher-order
interactions) of Structure (RC vs. MV), Ambiguity
(Unambiguous vs. Ambiguous), Region (Ambiguous region
vs. Disambiguating region) and presentation order (simply the
order in the experimental list at which the item was presented,
coded 1-36). As an additional control, we included a main
effect of log-transformed presentation order. This was done
because previous work suggests that reading times in selfpaced reading studies are subject to a general speed-up effect
(“task adaptation”, Fine et al. 2010), which surfaces as a loglinear relationship between reading times and presentation
order, illustrated in Figure 1. We chose a linear rather than
log-linear presentation order effect for the higher order
interactions because the linear component of presentation
order essentially captures the number of previous MV and
RC trials, thereby starting with the assumption of a linear
effect of recent exposure. Finally, the model included the
maximum random effects structure justified by the data based
on model comparison using log-likelihood ratio tests. All
predictors were centered in order to reduce collinearity
between higher-order interaction terms. Apart from an
unsurprisingly high correlation between the main effects of
presentation order and log-transformed presentation order (r =
-.8), all correlations between fixed effects were <.2 (we note
that collinearity only affects standard error estimates of
predictors that are collinear).

Figure 1. Collapsing across both Structure and Ambiguity
Status, a main effect of Order is apparent at all regions of the
sentence. RTs decrease in a protracted manner as the
experiment proceeds.

Table 1. Beta coefficients associated with each main effect or
interaction term in the model, along with corresponding tvalues (terms with a corresponding t-value > 2 are
significant at the .05 level).

Intercept
Structure (RC)
Ambiguity (Unamb.)
Region (Disamb. Region)
Presentation Order
Log Pres. Order
Struc. X Ambig.
Struc. X Region
Ambig. X Region
Struc. X Order
Ambig. X Order
Region X Order
Struc. X Ambig. X Region
Struc. X Ambig. X Order
Struc. X Region X Order
Ambig. X Region X Order
Struc. X Ambig. X Region X Order

Coef
β
-9.28
13.59
-11.56
-0.84
-2.81
-26.38
-11.25
15.57
-12.57
-0.73
0.72
-0.04
-10.42
0.73
-0.76
0.35
0.44

SE
(β)
4.66
2.32
2.32
3.03
0.63
6.70
2.32
2.31
2.31
0.33
0.23
0.25
2.31
0.22
0.22
0.22
0.22

tvalue
-1.99
5.87
-4.98
-0.28
-4.43
-3.94
-4.85
6.73
-5.43
-2.19
3.22
-0.14
-4.50
3.26
-3.39
1.56
2.00

Coefficients, standard errors, and t-values for each of the
predictors in the model are given in Table 1. For data sets of
the size used in this study, t-values with an absolute value of
roughly 2 or greater are significant at α = .05 (p-values based
on MCMC-sampling in a model with only random intercepts
confirm the conclusions given below). As illustrated in Table
1, the three-way Structure X Ambiguity X Region interaction
was significant. Because the coefficient of this 3-way
interaction is negative, a learning effect of the kind proposed
here—i.e. where the ambiguity effect is weakened over the
course of the experiment—would surface as an interaction
between this 3-way interaction and presentation order with a
positive coefficient. This four-way interaction is indeed
significant and in the predicted direction, and is shown on the
last line of Table 1. Put another way, the magnitude of the

Figure 2.Coefficient size of the Structure X Ambiguity X
Region interaction in “early”, “middle”, and “late” trial
bins. Notice that as the experiment proceeds the coefficient
of the 3-way interaction gets weaker and weaker (closer to
0).

2058

3-way interaction is diminished as a result of experience (i.e.
the items in the experiment), thus moving the coefficient
closer to zero. This is illustrated in Figure 2, which shows the
predicted effect of the 3-way interaction within the first,
middle, and final third of the experiment.
The significance of the four-way interaction provides
evidence that the nature of the Structure X Ambiguity X
Region interaction is dependent on order. Figures 3 and 4,
below, aid in decomposing the four-way interaction. In
Figure 3, there is a strong decrease in the magnitude of the
garden-path effect (i.e. a decrease in RTs at the point of
disambiguation for the RC resolved ambiguous sentences,
relative to the baseline unambiguous control sentences), as
would be predicted if subjects were continuously modifying
their expectations about the likelihood of the ambiguityproducing verb (such as warned) being used in a relative
clause structure instead of being the main verb of the
sentence. For the MV sentences, there exists no relationship
between presentation order and the amount of difficulty
observed when the ambiguity is resolved in accordance with
the MV interpretation of the ambiguity (relative to a
baseline unambiguous control sentence).

Figure 3. The ambiguity effect at the point of disambiguation for
the Reduced Relative Clause sentences (RTs in Ambiguous
condition minus Unambiguous condition) as a function of
presentation order. The garden-path effect typically associated
with RC resolution decreases continuously across the experiment.

Figure 4. Ambiguity effect at the point of disambiguation for the
Matrix Clause sentences as a function of presentation order. No
relationship is observed.

General Discussion
Upon arriving at the experiment, subjects had a strong bias
for the ambiguity-producing verbs that were used in this
experiment to be used as main verbs of sentences and not as
the onset of a reduced relative clause. The results reported
here demonstrate that those expectations shifted over the
course of the experiment as subjects encountered a
cumulatively larger number of instances in which the verbs
were used in the much less frequent relative clause
structure. It should be noted that although the four-way
interaction was significant, it was driven by RTs at the point
of disambiguation when the ambiguity was resolved in
accordance with the RC interpretation.
Consistent with the proposal of Fine et al. (2010), these
results highlight a rarely-mentioned property of the language
comprehension system. Namely, they raise the possibility that
comprehenders can shift their distributional knowledge about
the syntactic biases of verb behavior, as typically used in
natural language, in order to adapt to the task demands
conferred by a linguistic context. Such a result is consistent
with input-driven accounts of language comprehension (e. g.
Chang et al., 2006; MacDonald & Christiansen, 2002), which
argue for a continuous updating of linguistic knowledge
based on the processing of new input.
A large amount of work exists demonstrating that both
infants and adults can easily learn various types of statistical
regularities imbued within an artificial language (Saffran,
2003), constituting the plausibility of mechanisms for the
induction of grammar. In these types of experiments,
artificial languages are used instead of one’s native
language to control for the very same thing we study here.
That is, artificial languages are used so that any pre-existing
knowledge about the structure of a language doesn’t
influence the ease with which subjects can learn the
statistical regularities under investigation. In the experiment
reported here, we demonstrate that the adaptive nature of the
comprehension system facilitates the ability to adjust one’s
prior beliefs about the structure of language (conferred, in
this case, by the lexical biases of verbs), by repeated
exposure to uses of a verb that are inconsistent with the
biases in natural language use.
The degree to which results such as the ones reported here
are generalizable to a naturalistic uncontrolled
communicative context is, at this point, unclear. Unlike the
phonological level, where variability in the input is the norm,
the amount of variability in syntactic preferences during
naturalistic conversation is less well-established. Indeed, we
know little about how variability in personal history can
create individual differences in how people use lexical cues
to syntactic structure during language production. Work on
individual differences in language comprehension provides
some evidence that syntactic variability may exist.
Dabrowska (1997), for example, found that a group of
highly educated individuals were significantly more apt to
answer comprehension questions about syntactically
complex sentences in a manner that was commensurate with
the grammatically correct parse of the sentence than were

2059

groups of individuals with lower levels of formal education.
Such a result suggests that language use may differ across
various socio-cultural and socio-economic stratifications.
And, it is situations when one is faced with such variability
that syntactic adaptation from one speaker to another is
likely to occur. Work is currently under way to better
understand in what situations and under what conditions one
would expect to find substantial syntactic variability, and
whether or not adaptation occurs in these types of settings.
And, even if it is the case that syntactic adaptation does
occur in more naturalistic situations where one might expect
adaptation based on syntactic variability in a communicative
setting, it is also unclear at this point just how speaker- or
context-dependent syntactic adaptation is. Experiments are
currently underway to investigate whether the type of
adaptation reported here stops once a subject leaves the
testing room, or whether lingering effects of the adaptation
process generalize to different linguistic or otherwise
communicative contexts. Nonetheless, the results reported
here, along with those reported in Fine et al. (2010) and
Farmer et al. (in press), highlight the flexible nature of the
systems responsible for language comprehension when
faced with contexts in which language unfolds in
unexpected ways.

References
Altmann, G. T. M., Garnham, A., & Dennis, Y. (1992). Avoiding
the garden path: Eye movements in context. Journal of Memory
and Language, 31, 685-712.
Baayen, R. H., Davidson, D. J., & Bates, D. M. (2008). Mixed
effects modeling with crossed random factors for subjects and
items. Journal of Memory and Language, 59, 390-412.
Bradlow, A. R., & Brent, T. (2008). Perceptual adaptation to nonnative speech. Cognition, 106, 707-729.
Chang, F., Dell, G. S., & Bock, K. (2006). Becoming syntactic.
Psychological Review, 113, 234-272.
Christiansen, M. H., & Chater, N. (Eds.) (2001). Connectionist
psycholinguistics. Westport, CT: Ablex.
Cohen, J. D., MacWhinney, B., Flatt, M., & Provost, J.
(1992). Psyscope: A new graphic interactive environment for
designing psychology experiments. Behavioral Research
Methods, Instruments, and Computers, 25(2), 257-271.
Dabrowska, E. (1997). The LAD goes to school: A cautionary tale
for nativists. Linguistics, 35, 735-766.
Dubey, A., Keller, F., & Sturt, P. (2008). A Probabilistic Corpusbased Model of Syntactic Parallelism. Cognition, 109, 326-344.
Elman, J. (1993). Learning and development in neural networks: The
importance of starting small. Cognition, 48, 71-99.
Elman, J. L., Bates, E. A., Johnson, M. H., Karmiloff-Smith, A.,
Parisi, D., & Plunkett, K. (1996). Rethinking innateness: A
connectionist perspective on development. Cambridge, MA: The
MIT Press.
Farmer, T. A., Monaghan, P., Misyak, J. B., & Christiansen, M. H.
(in press). Phonological typicality influences sentence processing
in predictive contexts: A reply to Staub et al. (2009). Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition.
Ferreira, F., & Clifton, C. (1986). The independence of syntactic
processing. Journal of Memory and Language, 25, 348-368.
Fine, A. B., Qian, T., Jaeger, T. F., & Jacobs, R. (2010). Syntactic
adaptation in language comprehension. In Proceedings of ACL
Workshop on Cognitive Modeling and Computationa Linguistics.

Uppsala, Sweden.
Garnsey, S. M., Pearlmutter, N. J., Myers, E., & Lotocky, M. A.
(1997). The contributions of verb bias and plausibility to the
comprehension of temporarily ambiguous sentences. Journal of
Memory and Language, 37, 58-93.
Just, M. A., Carpenter, P. A., & Woolley, J. D. (1982). Paradigms ad
processes in reading comprehension. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 111, 228-238.
Kraljic, T., Brennan, S.E., & Samuel, A.G. (2008). Accommodating
variation: Dialects, idiolects, and speech processing. Cognition,
107, 51-81
Kraljic, T. & Samuel, A. G. (2006). Generalization in perceptual
learning for speech. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 13, 262268.
Kraljic, T. & Samuel, A. G. (2007). Perceptual adjustments to
multiple speakers. Journal of Memory and Language, 56, 1-15.
MacDonald, M. C., & Christiansen, M. H. (2002). Reassessing
working memory: Comment on Just and Carpenter (1992) and
Waters and Caplan (1996). Psychological Review, 109, 35-54.
MacDonald, M. C., Just, M., A., & Carpenter, P. A. (1992).
Working memory constraints on the processing of syntactic
ambiguity. Cognition, 24, 56-98.
MacDonald, M., Pearlmutter, N., & Seidenberg, M. (1994). The
lexical nature of syntactic ambiguity resolution. Psychological
Review, 101, 676–703.
McRae, K., Spivey-Knowlton, M. J., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (1998).
Modeling the effects of thematic fit (and other constraints) in online sentence comprehension. Journal of Memory and Language,
37, 283–312.
Pardo, J. S. and Remez, R. E. (2006). ‘The Perception of Speech’, in
M. Traxler and M. A. Gernsbacher (eds.), The Handbook of
Psycholinguistics, 2nd edn. New York: Elsevier.Saffran, J. R.
(2003). Statistical language learning: Mechanisms and constraints.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 12, 110-114.
Sidenberg, M. S., & McClellannd, J. L. (1989). A distributed,
developmental model of word recognition and naming.
Psychological Review, 96, 523-568.
Snedeker, J., & Trueswell, J. C. (2004). The developing constraints
on parsing decisions: The role of lexical-biases and referential
scenes in child and adult sentence processing. Cognitive
Psychology, 49, 238-299.
Snedeker, J., & Yuan, S. (2008). Effects of prosodic and lexical
constraints on parsing in young children (and adults). Journal of
Memory and Language, 58, 574-608.
Snider, N. and Jaeger, T.F. (submitted) Syntax in Flux: Structural
priming maintains probabilistic rep
Tabossi, P., Spivey-Knowlton, M., McRae, K., & Tanenhaus, M.
(1994). Semantic effects in syntactic ambiguity resolution:
Evidence for a constraint-based resolution process. In C. Umilta &
M. Moscovitch (Eds.) Attention and Performance XV:
Unconscious processes. (pp. 589-616). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Thothathiri, M., & Snedeker, J. (2008). Give and take: Syntactic
priming during spoken language comprehension. Cognition, 108,
51-68
Trueswell, J. C., Tanenhaus, M. K., & Kello, C. (1993). Verbspecific constraints in sentence processing: Separating effects of
lexical preference from garden-paths. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 19, 528-553.
Wells, J. B., Christiansen, M. H., Race, D. S., Acheson, D. J., &
MacDonald, M. C. (2009). Experience and sentence processing:
Statistical learning and relative clause comprehension. Cognitive
Psychology, 58, 250-271.

2060

