UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Individual vocabulary differences and the development of the shape bias

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/39d9p100

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Perry, Lynn
Samuelson, Larissa

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Individual vocabulary differences and the development of the shape bias
Lynn K. Perry (lynn-perry@uiowa.edu)
Larissa K. Samuelson (larissa-samuelson@uiowa.edu)
Delta Center and Department of Psychology, E11 Seashore Hall
Iowa City, IA, 52242, USA
Abstract
Researchers have proposed that learning names of individual
words and categories leads an individual child to develop a
general word learning bias. However, evidence to date comes
from studies of group means rather than individuals. The
current study tests the prediction that the statistics of an
individual child’s vocabulary are closely related to that
child’s development of word learning biases. We demonstrate
that individual differences in vocabulary structure predict
individual differences in novel noun generalization.
Keywords: vocabulary development, categorization

The literature on early word learning suggests children
overcome the difficulties involved in word learning via the
use of biases or constraints such as, for example, the
tendency to generalize novel names of solid objects by
similarity in shape rather than material or color (shape bias)
(Landau, Smith, & Jones, 1988). Work on the shape bias
suggests that attending to shape is beneficial in that the
majority of nouns children learn early in development are
names for concrete artifact categories organized by shape
similarity (Samuelson & Smith, 1999). The shape bias is
fundamentally developmental; experimental evidence
demonstrates that children begin attending to shape in noun
generalization tasks after they have learned some nouns and
attention to shape increases with development (Samuelson
& Smith, 1999; Gershkoff-Stowe & Smith, 2004).
Smith and colleagues have proposed a four-step process
to explain the development of the shape bias from prior
learning of individual nominal categories (Smith, Jones,
Landau, Gershkoff-Stowe & Samuelson, 2002). According
to this proposal, as children learn names for individual
instances (step 1) and individual categories (step 2) this
regular association of solid things and categories organized
by similarity in shape helps them to learn to attend to shape
when learning new words for solid objects (step 3). Further,
once they have learned to attend to shape, they will learn
new words more quickly (step 4).
Support for this proposal comes from longitudinal
studies showing that teaching children names of multiple
categories organized by similarity in shape helps them
develop a precocious shape bias and acquire vocabulary
more quickly than those not given such training
(Samuelson, 2002; Smith et al., 2002). Furthermore, crosslinguistic studies show that the biases depend on the
language (and therefore the specific regularities) being
learned (Smith, Colunga, & Yoshida, 2003) and studies of
atypical learners (such as children with autism and latetalkers) show that they do not develop the same attentional

biases in word-learning as typically-developing children
(Tek, Jaffery, Fein, & Naigles, 2009; Jones & Smith, 2005).
Recent training studies have examined the influence of
variability both in the exemplars children see when learning
categories (Perry, Samuelson, Schiffer, & Malloy, 2010),
and in the statistics within the noun vocabulary children
learn (Samuelson & Schiffer, 2011), on the development of
the shape bias. Perry et al. (2010) used mixed logistic
regression to show how individual children’s performance at
each step in the four-step process influences what they learn
and the bias that develops. Samuelson & Schiffer (2011)
found that children taught a vocabulary dominated by count
nouns that named solid objects in categories well organized
by similarity in shape learned biases differently from
children taught a vocabulary containing equal numbers of
count and mass nouns, names for solid and nonsolid things,
and names for categories organized by shape or material.
These studies demonstrate that the biases that develop
are clearly influenced by the statistics of children’s prior
vocabulary learning, both in terms of 1) between-category
organization and overlap between category organization,
solidity, and syntax and 2) the specifics of the withincategory variability children see. They also support the idea
that what the child knows determines how they will be
influenced by the regularities available to learn next.
However, no work to date has examined in detail the
relation between individual children’s vocabulary structures
and the biases they develop. This is the focus of the current
paper. Specifically, we examine whether the statistics of
individual children’s vocabularies predict their individual
likelihood to demonstrate a shape bias.
Noun generalization data are not typically analyzed at the
level of individual children, because capturing detailed
individual data can be difficult. One exception is a
longitudinal study conducted by Gershkoff-Stowe and
Smith (2004). They examined the vocabularies of individual
children to find the point at which children first
demonstrated a systematic bias to attend to shape in a novel
noun generalization task. Gershkoff-Stowe and Smith found
that as a group, children who knew more than 50 nouns
showed a shape bias. Importantly, however, there was
neither a “critical mass” of count nouns, or names for
categories organized by similarity in shape nor a specific
age or amount of time in the study that determined whether
individual children demonstrated a shape bias in their task.
In part this could be because only 1 novel noun
generalization trial was collected from each child at each
visit. Data from children this young are notoriously variable,
thus it is possible that the patterns of individual children’s

3022

shape-biased performance with respect to their vocabulary
structures were not statistically reliable, even if the group
mean was. Clearly, multiple novel noun generalization trials
are necessary to examine individual performance.
Another issue is what part of vocabulary to examine.
Gershkoff-Stowe and Smith looked at the number of object
names in productive vocabulary in relation to generalization
biases. However, one could potentially examine
classifications other than object names, and for that matter,
break object names into other more fine-grained
classifications as well. For example, some objects are solid
things in categories organized by similarity in shape (e.g.
ball) and some are nonsolid things in categories organized
by material (e.g. pudding). Samuelson and Smith (using
adult judgments of the nominal categories listed on the
MCDI) examined the structure of the early noun vocabulary
in terms of these other classifications. Adults were asked to
judge whether each of the 312 nouns referred to a category
of solid objects or nonsolid substances, a category organized
by similarity in shape or material, and whether each noun
was a count or mass noun. As can be seen in Figure 1, they
found that there were more nouns referring to solid objects
than nonsolid substances, more categories organized by
similarity in shape than similarity in material, and more
count nouns than mass nouns. Furthermore, there was more
overlap between solidity, category organization, and syntax
for the set of words that would support a shape bias—the
“shape side” (solid+shape+count)—than between the set of
words that would support a bias to attend to material
substance when generalizing a name for a nonsolid—the
“material side” (nonsolid+material+mass).
Using these judgments of the MCDI noun structure,
Samuelson and Smith then examined both how the number
of nouns of each type, and the number of nouns within a
joint classification was related to the mean proportion shape
responding in a novel noun generalization task. Looking at a
wide range of children in terms of both age (17-33 months)
and noun vocabulary size (0-309 words), they showed that

Figure 1: Overlap between solidity, syntax, and category
organization based on Samuelson and Smith 1999 analysis.
children at all vocabulary levels had more names for solid
objects, categories organized by similarity in shape, and
count nouns than names for nonsolid things, categories
organized by similarity in material, and mass nouns.
However, only children with more than 151 nouns in their
productive vocabularies demonstrated a shape bias. Thus,
just because a child knows more words that fall into the
classifications on the “shape side” does not mean that she

will demonstrate a shape bias—otherwise children in all the
vocabulary groups would have demonstrated this bias.
Thus, to understand the relation between vocabulary
structure and bias development we need to look at more
than just the number of nouns of different types that
children know. In particular, Samuelson & Smith’s data
suggest that what may matter most for shape bias
acquisition is the relative proportions of these kinds of
words to other word types. In fact, despite the dominance of
the shape side early in vocabulary development, there are
also, of course, many other kinds of words that very young
children learn. In terms of nouns, these other words include
those that might support a bias to attend to material when a
novel nonsolid substance is named, such as pudding and
milk. In addition, children also learn nouns that are
exceptions to the ontological divide. These words, such as
pretzel (solid, + material) or bubble (nonsolid + shape),
might be said to “go against the system” in that they would
not support a link between solid objects and attention to
shape or nonsolid substances and attention to material. In
fact, given that all children will have many solid+shape
+count words in their vocabularies, it might be more
informative to look at differences across children in their
knowledge of nouns that that “go against the system.”
The nature of the MCDI also makes examination of
these types of words critical. Samuelson & Smith chose to
examine the MCDI in their study because it a reliable and
valid measure with extensive normative testing (Fenson et
al., 1994). However, Samuelson and Smith’s analysis tells
us that this measure is itself biased towards count nouns that
name solid things in categories well organized by similarity
in shape. Accordingly, any child’s vocabulary measured
with this tool will almost certainly have more of these kinds
of nouns than others (as seen in Samuelson & Smith, 1999).
Thus, with this measure we will only be able to detect
relations between vocabulary structure and noun
generalization performance if we look at the parts of the
vocabulary that not all children share. One might argue that
a measure other than the MCDI might be preferable.
However, we choose to continue with this measure because
1) the MCDI is still the standard measure of vocabulary
development for children the age-range we are interested in,
2) switching measures would necessitate obtaining new
judgments of solidity, category structure and syntax, and 3)
it enables comparison to prior work. In addition, because no
examination of the statistical structure of the English
language has been done, restricting the vocabulary of
interest to the MCDI means we can examine our findings in
the context of the known proportions of words on that
measure. That is, we can look at the number of names for
solid things in categories organized by similarity in material
with respect to the known proportion of those kinds of
words in the possible vocabulary we are examining. So
while the MCDI might not be perfectly representative of all
kids’ knowledge of all categories, it is useful in that it is the
“average” vocabulary of an “average” child at a given age.
The goals of the present study, therefore, are to better

3023

understand the development of word learning biases such as
the shape bias by 1) exploring the structure of individual
children’s productive vocabularies with respect to individual
and joint noun classifications, especially those words that go
against the typical structure, and 2) using vocabulary
structure to predict performance in novel noun
generalization. We predict that the statistics of a child’s
vocabulary should be correlated with his or her performance
in our task. Specifically, we expect to find differences in the
words that individual children know, especially in those
joint classifications that go against the typical structure (e.g.
solids in material categories), that are linked to their
likelihood of demonstrating a shape bias.

Method
Participants Seventy-five 15- to 23-month-old monolingual
English speakers (M=1 year 7 months, 14 days) participated.
There were 40 boys and 35 girls in the final group.
Stimuli Eighteen familiar objects and 30 novel objects were
used. Familiar objects formed six sets of two identical
objects and one completely different object (e.g. two
identical blue cups and one yellow rabbit) used for a warmup task. Novel objects were used in the novel noun
generalization test. These formed six sets of five objects
each. Each consisting of an exemplar object, two objects of
the same shape as the exemplar but different in color and
material (shape matches), and two objects made from the
same material as the exemplar but different in color and
shape (material matches). Six nonce words were used as
names and were randomly assigned to each stimulus set and
counterbalanced across participants.
Procedure Participants came to the laboratory for three
experimental sessions spaced no more than eight days apart
(M: 3 days, range: 1-8 days) (see Table 1). At each session
the child completed four novel noun generalization (NNG)
test trials for two of the novel sets so that after three
sessions they had completed four trials for all six sets.
Parents completed the MacArthur Communicative
Developmental Inventory (MCDI): Words and Sentences
(Fenson et al., 1994) at the first visit and reviewed it at each
subsequent visit to add any new words the children began to
produce over the course of the three visits to the laboratory.
On each trial the child explored the exemplar object, one
shape match test object and one material match test object
for about 10s. The experimenter then placed the two test
objects on the tray, held up the exemplar saying, for
example, “This is my kiv. Can you get your kiv?” and
pushed the tray forward. Each of the two shape-match
objects in a stimulus set were presented with each of the two
material-match objects once for a total of four trials per
stimulus set. After a child completed all four trials for a
given stimulus set the experimenter moved on to the next
set. The order of experimental trials within each stimulus
set, as well as the order of the stimulus set was
counterbalanced across children and across visits.
Coding & Analysis Sessions were videotaped and coded
offline. 25% of sessions were recoded for reliability; inter-

coder agreement was 100%. All results are reported as
proportion shape choice. We analyze NNG performance in
two ways: 1) using t-tests against chance to examine overall
performance and 2) using mixed logistic regression to
examine the effects of vocabulary on performance.
We use mixed logistic regression because recent
arguments suggest that ANOVA’s on categorical outcome
variables, such as those in a forced-choice NNG task, are
inappropriate (see Jaeger, 2008). All analyses were
conducted using the R language package. This approach has
recently been used to demonstrate the links between the four
steps of Smith et al.’s four-step process (Perry et al., 2010).
Furthermore, these models are advantageous for our
individual differences approach because we can include
random subject and item effects in our models and thereby
account for variance contributed by individual differences in
children’s vocabulary structure as well as differences caused
by the particular stimuli. We removed collinearity from our
models by sum-coding the data and scaling continuous
variables. To determine appropriate random effects
structure, we began with a completely specified random
effects structure including random slopes for all variables
included in a given model. Then, using model comparison,
we systematically removed uninformative random effects to
find an appropriate model (c.f. http://hlplab.wordpress.com
/2009/05/14/random-effect-structure/). All final models
included random intercepts for subject, items, and session.

Results and Discussion
We first examine the results of our NNG test. Specifically,
we ask if participants show a significant tendency to select
the shape match. Overall, children demonstrated a bias to
choose the shape-match stimulus at test at greater than
chance levels (.50), M=.57, t(446)=5.81, p<.0001. This
suggests that, overall, children are biased to attend to shape
when generalizing the names of novel objects. In addition,
shape choices were significantly higher than chance for each
of the three sessions, Session 1: M=.59, t(75)=3.75, p<.001,
Session 2: M=.58, t(75)=3.76, p<.001; Session 3: M=.55,
t(74), p<.05. Thus, all children were attending to shape most
when generalizing novel names for these solid objects
We next examine the relationship between vocabulary
and NNG performance. We first overview participants’
vocabulary structure in terms of single and joint
classifications of solidity, syntax, and category organization.
We then examine how knowing the names of words in each
of these classifications influences the likelihood of
demonstrating a shape bias. To begin our overview of
vocabulary structure and to facilitate comparison to earlier
work, we broke children into vocabulary subgroups based
on the number of nouns in their productive vocabulary. We
used the same groups as previously used by Samuelson &
Smith (1999). These subgroups are as follows: 0-50 nouns,
51-150 nouns, 151-250 nouns, 251+ nouns. We examined
NNG performance, the means and ranges of the total noun
vocabulary, as well as the individual and joint
classifications of the vocabulary for each subgroup. We also

3024

measured the proportion of words in each noun
classification out of the total number of nouns on the MCDI.
Overall, relative proportions of each of the single
classifications are similar to that of the structure of the
MCDI and that found by Samuelson and Smith (1999). For
example, the proportion of count nouns/mass nouns for each
subgroup (from lowest to highest) are .79/.10, .75/.11,
.75/.10, and .75/.10 respectively, compared to .74/.10 of
MCDI nouns. The proportions of joint classifications are
also similar to the structure of the MCDI. For example, the
proportion of nouns naming nonsolid substances in
categories organized by material for each subgroup are .04,
.02, .02, and .02, compared to .02 of MCDI nouns.
Our overview of the vocabulary structure goes above and
beyond the work of Samuelson and Smith (1999), however,
in that we analyzed words that fall into joint classifications
that go against the system, examining nouns that do not
support the link between solidity, shape and count syntax or
the link between nonsolidity, material and mass syntax.
There are four such joint classifications of nouns on the
MCDI. These include: names of solid objects that take mass
syntax, such as “meat” (.006 of nouns); names of categories
organized by similarity in shape that take mass syntax, such
as “popcorn” (.003 of nouns); names of categories organized
by similarity in material that take count syntax, such as
“towel” (.006 of nouns); and names of solid objects in
categories organized by similarity in material, such as
“chalk” (.08 of nouns). There are clearly a considerable
number of words that go against the development of a shape
bias. In fact, there are actually twice as many names of solid
objects in categories organized by similarity in material than
there are mass nouns naming nonsolid substances, names of
nonsolid substances in categories organized by material, and
names of nonsolid substances in categories organized by
material that take the mass syntax combined (.04 of nouns).
The solid/material classification is also noteworthy for the
relatively large standard deviations of each group. For
example, the lowest vocabulary group has an average of .8
words in this classification with a range of 0-6, but the
standard deviation is 1.3 words. There is more within-group
variability in this classification than there is in the number
of mass nouns or names for nonsolids those children know
(M: 1, range: 0-4, SD: .6). Both this variability and the
relatively large number of words that fall into this
classification support further examination of the relationship
between differences in individual children’s’ vocabulary
structure and their novel noun generalization performance.
To examine the relationship between vocabulary and
generalization, we first look at the NNG performance of
each of the vocabulary subgroups. We scored responses
such that a shape response received a 1 and material
response received a 0. Thus the higher the score (out of the
24 possible trials), the more biased a participant was to
attend to shape. All four groups were significantly likely to
choose shape matches, 0-50: M=.55, t(40)=3.68, p<.001; 51150: M=.59, t(19)=4.11, p<.001; 151-250; M=.57, t(8)=2.80,
p<.05; 251; M=.71, t(4)=2.82, p<.05. However, it is also

apparent that not all individual children are choosing the
shape match on every trial. In fact, only in the highest
vocabulary group do all children have a score above 12
(corresponding to above-chance performance). On the other
hand, children in the lower three vocabulary subgroups have
a wider range of scores. This suggests that for the lower
three vocabulary subgroups, despite overall high attention to
shape, there are many children who are either performing at
chance or demonstrating a material bias. In fact, a mixed
logistic regression model accounting for random subject
item, and session factors, shows that the three lowestvocabulary groups are significantly less likely than the
highest to generalize by shape, z=2.55, p<.05. We still need
to know, however, if differences in the amount of shape
responding relate to specific differences in vocabulary.
In order to examine differences in vocabulary, we must
consider the possibility that such differences might not
present themselves equally in each of our vocabulary
subgroups. Because the MCDI has a fixed structure,
knowing the majority of words on it will mean having a
vocabulary that most closely conforms to that structure.
Thus, those children with the largest vocabularies will have
much less room to vary from the MCDI or from each other.
Children with smaller vocabularies, however have more
room to vary. As can be seen in Figure 2, the four
vocabulary groups were not equally variable in NNG
performance. This figure shows the proportion shape
responding by vocabulary level for each child. Note that the
lowest vocabulary group actually has some children that
show a material bias, whereas all children in the highest
vocabulary group show a shape bias. By including subgroup
in our regression models, then, we can account for such
variability and are actually able to better examine individual
differences.

Figure 2: Noun vocabulary size and proportion shape
choices for each individual participant.
Using mixed logistic regression, we examine the effects
of the interaction between subgroup and each area of the
vocabulary—shape side, material side and against the
system—on shape choice in novel noun generalization. We
do this by regressing out the number of total nouns a child
knows from the number of nouns he or she knows within a
given area, such that this predictor is the number of nouns a

3025

0

2

0-50 nouns
51-150 nouns
151-250 nouns
251+ nouns

-2

Predicted Logit of Shape Choice

4

only one child in the smallest vocabulary group who knew a
word from each of these other classifications. Clearly, most
of the work of the against the system predictor is being done
by the number of names of solid objects in material
categories children know. In fact, a model of just the
interaction between vocabulary group and the number of
nouns a child knows that name solid objects in categories
organized by similarity in material was able to account for
children’s novel noun generalization. The more of these
words children know, the more likely they are to
demonstrate a material bias, z= -2.21, p<.05. Furthermore,
there was an interaction such that children with smaller
vocabularies who knew more of these words were more
likely to demonstrate a material bias, z= -2.48, p<.05. This
result is pictured in Figure 3. The negative slope of the red
line is the clearest illustration of the finding that number of
names of solid objects in material categories children know
above and beyond what we would expect given their
vocabulary group predicts their likelihood of demonstrating
a shape bias, but the negative slope is also clear for the 51150 and 151-250 vocabulary groups as well.

-4

child knows in a classification area above and beyond what
would be predicted based on their group. Thus, the shape
side predictor includes the number of count nouns that name
solid objects, count nouns that name categories organized by
similarity in shape , and the names of solid objects in
categorize organized by shape. The material side predictor
includes the number of mass nouns that name nonsolid
substances, mass nouns that name categories organized by
similarity in material similarity, and the names of nonsolid
substances in categories organized by similarity in material.
The against the system predictor includes the number of
count nouns that name categories organized by material,
mass nouns that name solid objects, mass nouns that name
categories organized by shape, and the names of solid
objects in categories organized by material similarity.
We found that the number of words a child knows on
the shape side was a significant predictor of novel noun
generalization performance such that knowing more of these
words leads to a bias to attend to shape, z=2.19, p<.05.
There is also a significant interaction such that children with
smaller vocabularies who know more of these words are
more likely to attend to shape, z=2.56 p<.05. The model also
shows that the number of words a child knows that go
against the system is a significant negative predictor of
novel noun generalization such that knowing more of these
words leads to a bias to attend to material, z= -2.22, p<.05.
There is also a significant interaction such that children with
smaller vocabularies who know more these words are more
likely to attend to material, z= -2.56, p<.05. There was no
effect of the number of words a child knows on the material
side, however, z= -.62, ns.
We next conducted model comparison to examine
which of these predictors was necessary to account for
children’s performance in novel noun generalization. We
found that a model without either the shape side predictor or
the against the system predictor were significantly worse
than a model that contained all three predictors, X2(1)
=11.28, p<.05, and X2(1)=13.78, p<.01, but a model without
the material predictor was not statistically different, X=.64,
ns. Further model comparison revealed that a model
containing only the shape side predictor was significantly
worse than a model with all three predictors, X2(1)=16.78,
p<.05. A model containing only the against the system
predictor, however, was no different than the model with all
three predictors, X2(1)=11.85, ns. Thus, the number of
words children know that go against the system can account
for their novel noun generalization performance.
To understand what this result means we next consider
the composition of classifications of nouns that go against
the system. There are 31 nouns in classifications that go
against the system. However, 25 of these name solid objects
in categories organized by material, while the other 6 are
spread across four other classifications: 2 count nouns that
name material categories, 2 mass nouns that name solid
objects, 1 mass noun that names a category organized by
shape and material, and 1 count noun that names a category
organized by shape and material. Furthermore, there was

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

Solid/Material Nouns after accounting for total nouns

Figure 3: Relationship between number of names of solid
objects in material categories a child knows above and
beyond what we would expect given their vocabulary group
and likelihood of choosing shape match.
Overall, our results suggest that the structure of a
child’s vocabulary can predict the direction of attentional
bias she will demonstrate in an NNG task with solid objects.
A vocabulary dominated by the overlap between solid
objects and shape organization will support attention to
shape when the child is asked to generalize the names of
novel solid objects. However, as can be seen in Figure 3, if
the structure of a child’s vocabulary is dominated by the
overlap between solid objects and material organization,
then this will support attention to material. Thus, the
individual biases children demonstrate are tightly linked to
the specifics of their individual vocabularies.

General Discussion
Importantly, this is the first in depth look at individual
children’s vocabulary and its effect on word learning biases.
This study is also the first to examine how words that

3026

“against the system” affect the biases that emerge. In doing
so, we were able to demonstrate that knowing more words
that name solid objects in categories organized by material
leads to a bias to attend to material when generalizing the
names of novel solid objects. Interestingly, attending to
material in naming solids is actually not inappropriate when
we consider that as adults we have to be able to flexibly
shift to attend to any number of dimensions depending on
context. For example, we are clearly able to have multiple
construals for solids (e.g. considering a table either as a
table (shape construal) or as made of wood (material
construal)) (Prasada, Ferenz, & Haskell, 2002). In fact, the
four-step process predicts that there is nothing special about
the shape side of the vocabulary per se, but rather its
dominance and the overlap between these classifications are
what lead to the emergence of the shape bias. The reason,
then, that a bias to attend to shape seems to become the
default early on is because of this default structure in the
English noun environment. This makes our study one of the
strongest tests of the four-step process, because we are able
to demonstrate that when children have noun environment
(e.g. their individual vocabulary) with a different structure
than the typical one, they show different, and related biases.

Smith, L.B., Colunga, E., & Yoshida, H. (2003). Making an
ontology: Cross-linguistic evidence. In L. Oakes & D.
Rakison (Eds.), Early category and concept development:
Making sense of the blooming, buzzing confusion (pp.
275–302). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Smith, L.B., Jones, S., Landau, B., Gerskoff-Stowe, L., &
Samuelson, L. (2002). Object Name Learning Provides
On-the-Job Training For Attention. Psychological
Science, 13, 13-19.
Tek, S., Jaffery, G., Fein, D., Naigles, L.R. (2008). Do
children with autism disorder show a shape bias in word
learning? Autism Research, 1(14), 208-222.

Acknowledgments
Research was supported by grant R01 HD045713 awarded
to Larissa Samuelson by the National Institutes of Health.

References
Gershkoff-Stowe, L., & Smith, L.B. (2004). Shape and the
first hundred nouns. Child Development, 75, 1098-1114.
Jones, S.S. & Smith, L.B. (2005). Object name learning and
object perception: a deficit in late talkers. Journal of Child
Language, 32, 223-240.
Jaeger, T.F. (2008). Categorical data analysis: away from
ANOVAs (transformation or not) and towards logit
mixed models. Journal of Memory and Language, 59,
434-446.
Landau, K.B., Smith, L.B., & Jones, S.S. (1988). The
importance of shape in early lexical acquisition. Cognitive
Development, 3, 299-321.
Perry, L.K., Samuelson, L.K., Malloy, L.M, & Schiffer,
R.N. (2010). Learn locally, think globally: exemplar
variability supports higher-order generalization and word
learning. Psychology Science, 21(12), 1894-1902.
Prasada, S., Ferenz, K., & Haskell, T. (2002). Conceiving of
entities as objects and stuff. Cognition, 83, 141-165.
Samuelson, L.K. (2002). Statistical regularities in
vocabulary guide language acquisition in connectionist
models and 5-20-month-olds. Developmental Psychology,
38, 1016-1037.
Samuelson, L.K. & Schiffer, R.S. (2011). Statistics And The
Shape Bias: It Matters What Statistics You Get And When
You Get Them. Manuscript in preparation.
Samuelson, L., & Smith, L.B. (1999). Early noun
vocabularies: Do ontology, category, and syntax
correspond? Cognition, 71, 1-33.

3027

