UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Individual differences in visual comprehension of morphological complexity

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1746d87k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Kuperman, Victor
Van Dyke, Julie

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Individual differences in visual comprehension of morphological complexity
Victor Kuperman (vickup@mcmaster.ca)
Department of Linguistics and Languages, McMaster University, 1280 Main Street West
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada L8S 4M2

Julie A. Van Dyke (jvandyke@haskins.yale.edu)
Haskins Laboratories, 300 George Street
New Haven, CT 06511 USA
Abstract
This paper explores variability in individual strategies of processing morphologically complex words. We examined the
eye-movement record that 71 readers showed during reading of
suffixed words (truck+er): the readers also took part in a battery of 17 skill tests, which allowed for a fine-grained characterization of their verbal abilities. Statistical analyses revealed
that an individual’s ability to segment words as well as his
or her level of reading comprehension shifted the balance between recognition of a complex word as a whole and its recognition via decomposed morphemes. Effects of whole-word frequency and base morpheme frequency were observed in both
good and poor readers, yet their qualitative nature varied by
skill. Good readers suffered from lexical competition between
whole words (trucker) and base morphemes (truck), while poor
readers received a recognition boost from base words. We discuss these interactive patterns in the context of computational
models of morphological processing and argue that readers
strategically adjust weights of different sources of morphological information, depending on the quality of the lexical representation for both the complex words and their morphemes.
Keywords: word recognition; morphological processing; individual differences; computational models; eye-movements

Introduction
There is a growing consensus in word recognition research
that human comprehenders simultaneously access multiple
sources of morphological information: lexical forms of whole
complex words (trucker), their morphemes (truck, -er), and
their morphological families (trucking, truckload, firetruck).
Prior work has extensively explored the link between formal,
semantic and contextual properties of words that affect the
degree of engagement of the different sources of probabilistic
information (distributional, semantic, syntactic, phonological
and other) in lexical access of complex words (e.g., Bertram,
Pollatsek, & Hyönä, 2004). Evidence points to a processing system in which higher-frequency, shorter or semantically opaque complex words tend to rely more on full-form
representations, while words with higher-frequency, largerfamily, or otherwise easily identifiable morphemes are preferentially recognized via decomposed morphemes (e.g., the
dual-route model of Baayen, Dijkstra & Schreuder, 1997).
Recognition via full-forms is suggested by effects of wholeword properties (such as frequency of occurrence or length)
and morpheme-based processing is diagnosed by effects of
morphemic properties (morpheme frequency, family size, affix productivity or length, etc.). The parallel engagement
of processing routes shows up in the interactions of wholeword and morphemic properties, attested in behavioral measures throughout the entire time-course of word recognition.

The interactions reported thus far in the literature indicate
competition between information sources, such that wholeword frequency effects are weakened in words with higherfrequency or otherwise salient morphemes (see Kuperman,
Bertram, & Baayen, 2010, and references therein). The parallel operation of multiple access routes, as well as trade-offs
between the routes, are at the core of several computational
models of morphological processing: for example, tradeoffs were implemented as simultaneous activation and lexical
competition of words that match the perceptual input (Baayen
& Schreuder, 2000), or as the simultaneous adjustment of
weight coefficients for the amounts of information associated
with distributional properties of complex words, their morphemes and morphological families (Kuperman, Bertram, &
Baayen, 2008).
Importantly, these models have developed for the most part
independently of a large body of reading research that suggests that efficient word recognition is not simply about linguistic characteristics of words, but rather about linguistic
characteristics of words as learned by particular individuals
(but see Reichle & Perfetti, 2003). While some subjective aspects of lexical variables have been investigated earlier (e.g.,
Balota et al., 2004 and references therein), relatively little
is known about how engagement of the information sources
contributing to recognizing complex words is modulated by
the skill-level of individual readers (see however Carlisle &
Katz, 2006 for morphological processing in children). The
present study aims at characterizing variability in processing
strategies that readers of different skill levels employ when
reading complex word structures. As a diagnostic, we use the
interactions between individual scores in skill tests that tap
into particular verbal abilities (e.g., word decoding, word segmentation, reading comprehension) on the one hand, and the
distributional properties of the full-form of complex words
and their component morphemes, on the other hand.
We take as a guiding assumption the idea advocated iby
the Lexical Quality hypothesis (Perfetti, 2007) that individuals differ in the average quality of their word representations.
High quality lexical representations are characterized by i)
highly automatic associations of precise orthographic forms
to the phonological representations learned during oral language acquisition; ii) automatic associations of these same
phonological representations to semantic representations; and
iii) a highly elaborated and redundantly specified semantics,
encompassing the full variety of syntactic and semantic con-

1643

texts for the word (cf. Seidenberg & McClelland, 1989; Harm
& Seidenberg, 1999 for a connectionist implementation of
some aspects of this idea). Concomitant with high quality
lexical representations is a qualitative, experience-dependent
shift from deliberate constituent-based decoding (e.g., letterby-letter, or syllable-by-syllable reading) to a unitary, fullyspecified representation of individual words (Perfetti, 1992;
2007; see also Andrews, 2008; Ehri, 1999 for similar proposals). This perspective leads to markedly different predictions about how morpheme-based sources of information may
affect word recognition. Namely, individuals who possess
a higher proportion of full-form lexical representations may
suffer interference from similar lexical forms: in morphologically related forms this similarity is afforded by a substantial orthographic, phonological and, typically, semantic overlap (compare truck and trucker). On the other hand, these
same sources of interference would not be present for individuals without full-form representations of most words. Rather,
the constituent-based word recognition strategy employed by
these readers may be facilitated by the ability to identify segments of words, be they affixes, base words or lexical constituents of compounds. To examine these hypotheses further,
we focus on individual skill measures that provide an index of
lexical quality, the subskills required to produce high-quality
lexical representations, and general reading comprehension
ability.

Methods
Stimuli: Our data source is the eye-movement record for
69 English suffixed words (sing+er) read silently within unrelated sentences by 71 participants, e.g., The well-known
singer thanked his fans during intermission. All target words
were semantically transparent, and ended in one of three productive suffixes: -er/-or (noun), -ist or -ing (adjective). The
suffixed words offered natural variability in the frequencies
of whole words and base morphemes. Our choice of suffixes
restricted their distributional and orthographic characteristics,
allowing us to focus on the interaction of derived words and
their bases. The preceding contexts were semantically neutral.
Participants: Participants (43 females; 28 males) belonged to the age group of 16-24 (mean = 20.8; SD = 2.6). In
order to maximize variation in reading ability, we recruited
from the local community and only accepted non-collegebound individuals (formal level of education did not exceed
the equivalent of high school). All were native English speakers, and none had a diagnosed reading or learning disability. In addition to the reading task, participants undertook
a battery of 17 reading ability tests, chosen based on previous research outlining the component factors of reading ability (e.g., Scarborough, 1998; Vellutino et al., 1996). The
observed range of scores in skill tests was considerable and
their distributions were nearly uniform with a slight skew towards higher scores. In the word segmentation task (see below), scores ranged from the equivalent of the 2nd grade to

the equivalent of the 10th grade (mean = 6.4, sd = 3.8); in
the reading comprehension Peabody Individual Achievement
Test-Revised the lowest score was the equivalent of the 4th
grade, and the highest was the first year of college (mean =
9.8, sd = 4.3).
Battery of skill tests: The 17 tests of the battery targeted
individual ability at the sub-word, word, and sentence-level.
They included measures of phonological processing (e.g.,
phonological awareness, phonological memory, and rapid
naming), grapheme-to-phoneme decoding, working memory,
and both listening and reading comprehension ability. To
foreshadow the results, the skill tests that proved to have the
strongest impact on the choice of processing strategies were
the word and non-word segmentation tests and two tests of
reading comprehension, both described below. As other tests
did not show consistent reliable interactions with the properties of full-forms and morphemes, we do not discuss them
further.
1. Word and nonword segmentation tasks: Participants
were instructed: “I’m going to say a word and I want you
to repeat it. Then say the word one sound at a time. Say
each sound that you hear in the order that your heard it. For
example, if I say “me”, you would say the word “me” and
then you would say m-ee.” Twenty trials were given with
2-8 phoneme-long words, and another twenty trials with 2-8
phoneme-long nonwords.
2. Peabody Individual Achievement Test-Revised (Dunn &
Markwardt, 1970): In this reading comprehension test, participants read a list of increasingly difficult sentences and then
choose a picture, from an array of four, that best matches
the meaning of the sentence. Notably, difficulty is increased
mainly with respect to vocabulary items in the sentences,
and not complexity of the sentence structure. Odd-numbered
items from the subtest were administered, with a stop condition of 5 errors in 7 consecutive items.
3. Fast Reading subtest of the Stanford Diagnostic Reading
Test (Karlson & Gardner, 1995). This reading comprehension test consists of a short expository passage containing 30
choice points (similar to a cloze format) at which the participant is required to select the appropriate word from among
three alternatives. For example, the test begins “San Francisco, California is known as the city with cable cars. These
are essentially street...” (here the participant must choose between “cleaners”, “cars”, or “lights”) “that are pulled up or
down the steep hills of that city by means of a..” (again participants must choose, choices are “horse”, “sail”, or “cable”).
In previous work with this population, we determined that the
proportion of correct responses was a better indicator of their
ability than their absolute score, thus all analyses reported
here are based on the proportion correct measure.
Procedure: Participants were seated in front of a 17-in.
display with a refresh rate of 85.03 Hz with their eyes approximately 64 cm from the display. They wore an EyeLink II head-mounted eye tracker (SR Research, Mississauga,
Canada), sampling at a rate of 250 Hz from both eyes. Sen-

1644

tences were presented one at a time on a single line, with a
maximum of 90 characters, using a monospace font. Type
size was such that 3.5 characters occupied 1 degree of visual angle. The eye tracker was calibrated using a series of
nine fixed targets distributed around the display, followed by
a 9-point accuracy test. Data from the right eye only were analyzed, except for one participant for whom only the left eye
calibration was valid. Comprehension questions occurred on
55% of trials. Participants indicated their answer by pressing
the associated button on a button box.
Variables and statistical analyses: We fitted linear
mixed-models to the temporal eye-movement measures associated with the target words: first fixation duration; single
fixation duration (duration of the single fixation on the word
before the gaze leaves the word for the first time); gaze duration (summed duration of fixations on the word before the
gaze leaves the word for the first time), as well as total fixation time (summed duration of fixations on the word). Critical predictors were log frequency of the suffixed word and
that of the base word (both estimated from the 410 million
token Corpus of Contemporary American English by Davies
(2008)), as well as individual scores in 17 tests of verbal
skills. (The size of morphological family for the base word
showed weaker predictivity of reading times than base word
frequency and is not reported further.) To avoid the harmful
impact of collinearity between measures of individual performance on the models’ estimates, we fitted multiple models to
each of the dependent variables with exactly one test score
at a time. Controls included the length of the suffixed word
and the base word; word position in the sentence; presence
of skips prior to or after the target word; productivity of suffix; and others. The random effects structure was established
using the log-likelihood ratio model comparison test and included participant, word, and suffix as intercepts as well as
several random slopes.

phological processing mechanisms. Several tests passed this
criterion in the models fitted to single fixation and gaze duration (other eye-movement measures did not reveal consistent
interactive patterns and are not reported further). Individual scores in the reading comprehension Stanford Diagnostic Reading test interacted with log suffixed word frequency
and log base word frequency in models fitted to both single fixation and gaze durations, while the Peabody Individual
Achievement Test and segmentation tasks showed similar interactions in respective models for gaze duration. We return
to this finding in the General Discussion.
Qualitatively, interactions followed the same patterns
across tests and dependent measures. All readers demonstrated negative effects of whole-word frequency, while the
effect was much greater on readers with lower scores on the
tests listed above. Moreover, the contrast in processing times
between relatively poor and good readers was maximal in
low-frequency words, see Figure 1. This interaction replicates the Word Frequency x Skill interaction documented in
eye-tracking literature (Ashby et al., 2005; Hawelka et al.,
2010; Kuperman & Van Dyke, 2011). The same interaction
has been observed in naming and lexical decision tasks (e.g.,
Pugh et al., 2008; Shaywitz, 2003). We interpret this interaction as an indication that higher-frequency words have good
quality representations in the mental lexicons of both good
and poor-performing readers, with particularly strong associations between the word’s meaning and its orthographic form,
gained through repeated exposures to the word. These associations alleviate the disadvantage that arises from poorreaders’ inferior grapheme-to-phoneme associations, which
leads them to have greater difficulty when they must engage
sublexical processing to read words for which they have not
stored full-form orthographic representations (i.e., infrequent
words), see Strain & Herdman (1999).

Results and Discussion
We trimmed the eye-movement data by removing fixations
that were shorter than 50 ms and longer than 1,000 ms, and
we pooled adjacent fixations that landed within one character (about 12% data). The resulting data pool consisted of
4,738 data points for gaze duration and total fixation time
(and 3,247 for single fixation duration). Our criterion for considering a test of verbal skill as relevant for complex word
recognition was whether the test scores entered into statistically reliable interactions with both log frequency of the suffixed word (trucker), and log frequency of the base morpheme
(truck) for the given dependent variable. Three-way interactions of skill by base frequency by whole-word frequency did
not reach significance in any of our models, possibly due to
insufficient statistical power. Since these frequencies separately diagnose access to either a full-form or a constituent
(see Introduction), we took the presence of simultaneous interactions between each type of lexical frequency and skill as
evidence that skill affected the efficiency of one of the mor-

The unique contribution of this paper is the observed interaction of skill by log frequency of base morpheme (truck).
Readers with the strongest performance in the comprehension
and segmentation tasks showed a positive correlation of eyemovement latencies with base word frequency (the dashed
light-grey bottom line in Figure 2). That higher-frequency
base words slowed down the recognition time for the derived
words suggests lexical competition between morphemes and
full-forms in skilled readers. Competition appeared to increase when base morphemes were more entrenched in an
individual’s mental lexicon due to their high frequency of occurrence. Crucially, the positive correlation of base frequency
with eye-movement durations weakened in readers who performed less well in the selected tasks, and finally the correlation became negative in readers with poor comprehension
or segmentation skills (the solid top line in Figure 2). We interpret this change in polarity as suggestive of readers with
the poorest skills receiving a recognition boost from identifying the base morpheme (truck in trucker), and that the
boost is stronger, the more frequently this morpheme occurs
in the language. Readers in the mid-range of test scores show

1645

Base x word segmentation

300

−2.1

−0.73
−0.04

250

Gaze duration, ms

350
300

−2.1

250

Gaze duration, ms

400

350

Whole x word segmentation

0.87
1.78

−0.73
−0.04

200

0.87

200

1.78

−2

−1

0

1

−2

Whole−word frequency, log, std

Figure 1: Interaction plot for gaze duration: log suffixed word
frequency (standardized) by segmentation test score (standardized). The lines plot the effect of derived word frequency
for the quartiles of segmentation test score (quantile values
provided at the right margin). Word frequency comes with
the strongest negative effect at the 1st quartile (solid line), the
effect gradually levels off at the 2nd quartile (dashed line), the
3rd quartile (dotted line), and the 4th quartile (dotdash line),
and is the weakest in the top performers in the test, the 5th
quartile (longdash line). Same interaction was observed for
comprehension tests.

only moderate reliance on morphological structure, as evidenced by weak correlations of their eye-movement latencies
with base word frequency: in this subpopulation, the derived
words are identified without noticeable competition with or
boost from their morphemes.

General Discussion
Our eye-tracking study of English suffixed words revealed
two novel patterns in morphological processing. First, we
observed that the degree of engagement of whole-words and
morphemes in the recognition of complex structures is affected by individual performance in a small subset of the 17test battery that tapped into most major components described
in the literature: namely, word and nonword segmentation
tasks, and the two reading comprehension tests. Predictivity of segmentation tasks for morphological processing is not
surprising, and is perhaps the most indicative of our skill measures, as segmentation is a direct index of the ability to parse
out the embedded morphemes from a string of characters.
This ability demonstrably depends on well-studied phonological, orthographic and distributional properties of morphemes
(e.g., Laudanna & Burani, 1995). The present study addition-

−1

0

1

2

Base frequency, log, std

Figure 2: Interaction plot for gaze duration: log base morpheme frequency (standardized) by segmentation test score
(standardized). The lines plot the effect of base frequency
for the quartiles of segmentation test score (quantile values
provided at the right margin). Base frequency comes with
the negative effect at the 1st quartile (solid line), the effect reverses its direction and becomes increasingly positive through
the 2nd quartile (dashed line) to the 5th quartile (longdash
line). Same interaction was observed for comprehension
tests.

ally points to the import of individual aptitude at segmentation, and not just properties of the word, as a determiner of
morphological decomposition.
The predictivity of the two reading comprehension tests,
which produced an identical interaction, points to the link between the overall quality of an individual’s lexical representations and comprehension. In particular, these tests are the
only tests in our battery that specifically tap into semantic aspects of an individual’s lexical representation, and hence may
serve as an index of the amount of interference arising from
similar-meaning morphological neighbors. It goes without
saying that poor word knowledge, either at the decoding stage
where the relationship between orthography and the phonological representations of known words is unlocked, or else at
the meaning stage presents a significant barrier to text comprehension. A question for further research is the relationship between the deficit at the level of word (morpheme) segmentation and that at the level of comprehension; one could
imagine that segmentation problems could play a significant
causal role in producing poor comprehension, although admittedly there are a range of other contributing factors that
may also play equally significant or greater causal roles.
Our results are consistent with the predictions of the Lex-

1646

ical Quality hypothesis (Perfetti, 2007). It follows straightforwardly that the increased quality of the lexical representation of base morpheme, measured by its higher frequency of
occurrence, would lead to its automatic activation, increased
interference and a larger effort necessary for inhibiting the
meaning of the base morpheme and the correct identification of the meaning of the whole-word. Conversely, word
decoding may not be an automatic process for readers with
inferior verbal skills: poor readers are often engaged in sublexical word processing, due to weak orthography-phonology
and phonology-semantics associations in their lexical representations (e.g., Coltheart et al., 2001). Poor readers are more
likely to recruit information about the form and meaning of
morphemes as a cue for the meaning of the whole complex
word in order to compensate for absent or inferior full-forms.
Hence, for these readers, sublexical components serve as an
aid for word recognition, rather than a source of interference. With the left-to-right direction of reading and suffixation under study here, recognition of the base word (truck)
as a meaningful initial fragment of the character string does
not impede the identification of the word’s full-form in poor
readers, but rather facilitates it as it activates a word that is
semantically, phonologically and/or orthographically similar
to the longer word that the readers ultimately need to identify (trucker). Thus, in poor readers the task of complex word
recognition is helped by the quality of lexical representation
of both the whole word and the base morpheme, where the
quality is indexed by lexical frequency.
The observation of both inhibitory and facilatory roles for
morphemic information is an important contribution of the
present paper. Our data point to a strong link between the
way that morphemic information contributes to word recognition and individual reading ability; namely, good readers
suffer from competition from morphologically related words
more than less skilled readers do, while poor readers receive
a recognition boost from base words. The notion of lexical
competition – such as observed here in skilled readers – is not
novel in morphology and has been proposed to account for
well-documented interactions wherein effects of whole-word
frequency are weaker in words with salient (high-frequency,
large family-size or long) morphemes; for an overview of interactions in visual and auditory comprehension see Kuperman et al. (2010). Such competition has been implemented
in most computational models of morphological processing in
the form of trade-offs between a full-form and a morphemebased processing route. For example, Baayen and Schreuder
(2000) modeled competition via assigning increasing activation weights to access representations that either match the
target word or are orthographically similar to (have a small
edit distance from) the word. This architecture leads to the
simultaneous activation of both complex words and the morphemes they embed, and gives rise to stronger competition
if the resting activation level of the morpheme is higher, due
to, for instance, the morpheme’s higher-frequency of occurrence. A slightly different aproach was adopted by Kuper-

man et al. (2008), who accommodated trade-offs of lexical
competition via weight coefficients assigned to amounts of
information that correspond to whole-word and morphemic
frequency, along with other sources of probabilistic information. Since a given weight coefficient may have different
signs when occurring with differing amounts of information
in Kuperman et al.’s model, a larger value for a given coefficient would simultaneously translate into a stronger effect
of base morpheme frequency and a weaker effect of wholeword frequency on reading times, thus replicating the interactions observed here. The interactive nature of the processing routes was also implemented in the morphological extension of the E-Z Reader model of eye-movement control
in reading by Pollatsek, Reichle and Rayner (2003). (Reichle and Perfetti’s (2003) model is underspecified with respect to the effect of embedded morphemes on recognition of
complex words). Thus, lexical competition, such as that observed here in skilled readers, is easily accommodated within
the architectures of several popular computational models of
morphological processing. Crucially, however, these models
appear unable to accommodate the recognition boost seen in
our low-skill readers especially when they were processing
higher-frequency base words.
To conclude, we present evidence that individual skill-level
plays a determining role in how morphological information is
processed. This is a particularly noteworthy observation, in
light of the fact that previous studies have focused on participant populations with a narrow range of reading abilities (undergraduate students). Our evidence points to the simultaneous activation of both morphemic and whole-word routes, as
suggested by dual- and multiple-route models such as Baayen
et al. (1997), Baayen and Schreuder (2000), and Kuperman et
al. (2008), yet the engagement of these routes appears to vary
qualitatively as a function of individual verbal skill. In terms
of the weight-adjustment model of Kuperman et al., readers
appear to shift the relative importance of different sources of
morphological information depending on the quality of the
representation of both whole words and morphemes, indicated here via lexical frequency, and on the ability of individuals to segment complex words into morphemes as well
as the more general individual ability of reading comprehension. Further research is necessary to incorporate the regulating role of skill-driven individual strategies of word identification into computational models of morphological processing.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by the Rubicon grant of the
Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO) to
Victor Kuperman, and the following grants from the NIH National Institute of Child Health and Human Development: HD
058944 to Julie Van Dyke (PI), HD 056200 to Brian McElree
(PI), HD 040353 to Donald Shankweiler (PI). Partial support
also came from the NIH National Institute on Deafness and
Other Communication Disorders via grant DC 07548 to Carol

1647

Fowler (PI). The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of
the National Institutes of Health.

References
Andrews, S. (2008). Lexical expertise and reading skill. In
B. Ross (Ed.), The psychology of learning and motivation:
Advances in research and theory (p. 247-281). San Diego,
CA: Elsevier.
Ashby, J., Rayner, K., & Clifton, C. (2005). Eye movements
of highly skilled and average readers: Differential effects
of frequency and predictability. The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology Section A, 58A, 1065–1086.
Baayen, R. H., Dijkstra, T., & Schreuder, R. (1997). Singulars
and plurals in Dutch: Evidence for a parallel dual route
model. Journal of Memory and Language, 37, 94-117.
Baayen, R. H., & Schreuder, R. (2000). Towards a psycholinguistic computational model for morphological parsing. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society (Series A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences),
358, 1-13.
Balota, D., Cortese, M., Sergent-Marshall, S., Spieler, D., &
Yap, M. (2004). Visual word recognition for single-syllable
words. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 133,
283-316.
Bertram, R., Pollatsek, A., & Hyönä, J. (2004). Morphological parsing and the use of segmentation cues in reading
Finnish compounds. Journal of Memory and Language, 51,
325–345.
Carlisle, J., & Katz, L. (2006). Effects of word and morpheme familiarity on reading of derived words. Reading
and Writing, 19(7), 669–693.
Coltheart, M., Rastle, K., Perry, C., Langdon, R., & Ziegler,
J. (2000). DRC: A dual route cascaded model of visual
word recognition and reading aloud. Psychological Review,
108(1), 204–256.
Davies, M. (2008-). The Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA): 410+ million words, 1990-present.
Available online: http://www.americancorpus.org.
Dunn, L., & Markwardt, F. (1970). Peabody individual
achievement test. Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance
Service.
Ehri, L. (1999). Phases of development in learning to read
words. In J. Oakhill & R. Beard (Eds.), Reading development and the teaching of reading (p. 79-108). Malden,
MA: Blackwell.
Harm, M. W., & Seidenberg, M. S. (1999). Phonology, reading acquisition, and dyslexia: Insights from connectionist
models. Psychological Review, 106, 491-528.
Hawelka, S., Gagl, B., & Wimmer, H. (2010). A dual-route
perspective on eye movements of dyslexic readers. Cognition, 115(3), 367–379.
Karlson, B., & Gardner, E. (1995). Stanford diagnostic reading test(4th ed.). San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corp.
Kuperman, V., Bertram, R., & Baayen, R. (2008). Morpho-

logical dynamics in compound processing. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 23, 1089-1132.
Kuperman, V., Bertram, R., & Baayen, R. (2010). Processing
trade-offs in the reading of Dutch derived words. Journal
of Memory and Language, 62, 83-97.
Kuperman, V., & Van Dyke, J. (2011). Effects of individual
differences in verbal skills on eye-movement patterns during sentence reading. Journal of Memory and Language,
65, 42-73.
Laudanna, A., & Burani, C. (1995). Distributional properties of derivational affixes: Implications for processing. In
L. B. Feldman (Ed.), Morphological Aspects of Language
Processing (p. 345-364). Hillsdale, N. J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Perfetti, C. (1992). The representation problem in reading acquisition. In E. L. Gough P.B. & R. Treiman (Eds.), Reading acquisition (p. 145-174). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Pollatsek, A., Reichle, E., & Rayner, K. (2003). Modeling
eye movements in reading: Extensions of the E-Z Reader
model. In Y. Hyönä, R. Radach, & H. Deubel (Eds.), The
mind’s eye: Cognitive and applied aspects of eye movement
research (pp. 361–390). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Pugh, K., Frost, S., Sandak, R., Landi, N., Rueckl, J., Constable, R., et al. (2008). Effects of stimulus difficulty and repetition on printed word identification: an fMRI comparison
of nonimpaired and reading-disabled adolescent cohorts.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 20(7), 1146–1160.
Reichle, E., & Perfetti, C. (2003). Morphology in word
identification: A word-experience model that accounts for
morpheme frequency effects. Scientific Studies of Reading,
7(3), 219–237.
Scarborough, H. (1998). Early identification of children at
risk for reading disabilities: Phonological awareness and
some other promising predictors. Specific reading disability: A view of the spectrum, 75–119.
Seidenberg, M. S., & McClelland, J. L. (1989). A distributed, developmental model of word recognition and
naming. Psycholgical Review, 96, 523–568.
Shaywitz, S., Shaywitz, B., Fulbright, R., Skudlarski, P.,
Mencl, W., Constable, R., et al. (n.d.). Neural systems
for compensation and persistence: young adult outcome of
childhood reading disability. Journal of Biological Psychiatry, 54(1), 25–33.
Strain, E., & Herdman, C. (1999). Imageability Effects in
Word Naming: An Individual Differences Analysis. Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology, 53(4), 347–359.
Vellutino, F. R., Scanlon, D. M., Sipay, E. R., Pratt, A.,
Chen, R., & Denckla, M. B. (1996). Cognitive profiles of
difficult-to-remediate and readily remediated poor readers:
Early intervention as a vehicle for distinguishing between
cognitive and experiential deficits as basic causes of specific reading disability. Journal of Educational Psychology,
86, 601-638.

1648

