UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Influence of Implicit Beliefs and Visual Working Memory on Label Use

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/85v7c02b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Hahn, Amanda
Yamauchi, Takashi
Yu, Na-Yung

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Influence of Implicit Beliefs and Visual Working Memory on Label Use
Amanda Hahn (achahn30@gmail.com)
Takashi Yamauchi (tya@psyc.tamu.edu)
Na-Yung Yu (nayungyu@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, Mail Stop 4235
Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843 USA

Abstract
This study aims to examine the factors that influence the use
of labels when making similarity decisions. We predict that a
person‘s visual working memory (VWM) ability and implicit
beliefs can predict the frequency in which a subject will rely
on labels when making similarity decisions. To test this
hypothesis, participants completed a VWM task along with a
questionnaire to study how they relate to label use. We found
a negative trend between VWM ability and use of labels, but
a direct relationship between certain implicit beliefs and label
use. Implications of these results in relation to label use are
also discussed.
Keywords: Categorization; Reasoning; Decision Making;
Labeling; Visual Working Memory; Implicit Beliefs

Introduction
When introduced to novel items, people use cues in order to
assimilate those items into previously formed categories.
We categorize items in a variety of ways: such as living or
non-living, color and shape, or by how the item is used.
When categorizing, language plays a key role through
labeling because labels are one of the indicators people use
to make categorical decisions and generalizations. For
example, by knowing an object is called ―oven‖, we make
assumptions about the object (e.g. it is used for cooking or
crafts, it has a timer, etc.) Likewise, labeling people as
―Hispanic‖ or ―feminist‖ leads others to make
generalizations about them, sometimes faulty ones.
However, not everyone influenced by labels to the same
degree.
What influences some people to use labels to judge and
generalize more than others? Previous studies have focused
on label use itself, finding that participants tend to judge
dissimilar looking pictures as more similar when the two
pictures have the same label. Furthermore, labels have been
shown to have an influence on several types of decisions.
For example, children believe that the name of an animal
will not change even if its surface features change to make it
appear like another animal (Rips, 1989). The effect of labels
goes beyond the superficial as category labels have been one
factor that represents people‘s inner beliefs. Research shows
that category membership, especially when it is denoted by
verbal labels, influences the way people perceive attributes
of stimuli (Goldstone, 1994, 1995; Livingston, Andrews, &
Harnad, 1998; Yamauchi & Yu, 2008; Yamauchi, Kohn, &
Yu, 2007). The category membership also affects subjects‘

perceptions of similarity between images (Yu, Yamauchi, &
Schumacher, 2008; Yu & Yamauchi, 2008).
One source of labeling‘s power is that people believe
surface features are representative of deeper properties of an
item and that these properties are stable and innate (Medin
& Ortony, 1989; Gelman, Heyman & Legare, 2007). In this
regard, previous research has suggested that labels not only
represent categorical membership (Yamauchi & Yu, 2008)
but also evoke innate qualities of items, such differentiating
between animate or inanimate objects (Yu et al., 2008).
These research findings suggest that category labels are a
part of people‘s assumptions. However, individuals have
been shown to possess different belief systems which hold
varying assumptions. Although there has been extensive
research on how different types of labels influence
decisions, there has been little illumination on how these
individual differences and beliefs affect the tendency to rely
on labels when making categorical and similarity
judgments. Social cognition studies show that there are
individual differences regarding how a person views the
world in terms of the rigidity (fixed/rigid theory) or
malleability of traits (flexible/entity theory) (Dweck, Chiu,
& Hong, 1995).
How these systems influence an
individual‘s use of labels is unclear. We believe the extent
to which a person believes that features and properties are
unchanging and that those features are reflective of deep,
innate properties will likely affect a person‘s tendency to
view a label as a representation of the similarity between
items.
Although the effect of labels is very strong, the effect is
not absolute. Some people disregard labels and instead focus
on physical appearance when making judgments. One
influential factor may be an individual‘s visual working
memory (VWM) span. Studies have shown that individuals
differ in the ability to process visual information (Palmer,
1990; Luck & Vogel, 1997). This capacity for visual
information can be measured by a visual working memory
span task (Luck & Vogel, 1997). Research on working
memory suggests that there are different systems for verbal
and visual working memory and that the two interact
(Baddeley, 1992; Morey & Cowan, 2004). Furthermore,
identifying labels is interrupted by processing visual
information at the same time as shown in task such as the
Stroop Test (Stroop 1935). Thus, we suggest that having
larger visual working memory can result in less use of

2389

verbal information such as labels due to a greater focus and
capacity for visual information.
The goal of this study is to identify factors that affect the
extent of label use. In this study, we investigate two factors:
implicit beliefs and VWM capacity. With respect to implicit
beliefs, we predict that those who believe that traits cannot
be changed will use labels more because previous research
has shown that people believe labels reflect deeper
properties. We also predict that those with larger VWM
capacities will use labels less due to the greater focus on
physical properties of stimuli.
To test this idea, we measured participants‘ label use,
implicit beliefs, and VWM capacities. Label use was
measured in the similarity judgment task (Sloutsky &
Fisher, 2003; Yu et al., 2008; Yu, Yamauchi, Yang, Chen,
& Gutierrez-Osuna, 2010) in which participants were shown
three faces: a target picture displayed at the top of a triad
with two base pictures at the bottom (Figure 1). Participants
were instructed to select which of the base pictures was
more similar to the target. We measured label use in two
conditions: a no-label condition and a label condition. In
the no-label condition, triads of pictures were shown
without labels (Figure 1a). In the label condition, the base
picture that was more dissimilar looking (i.e., dissimilar
base picture) to the target was shown with the same label as
the target and the more similar base picture was shown with
a different label from the target (Figure 1b).
If people used labels in the similarity judgment task, the
frequency of selecting the dissimilar base picture as more
similar to the target would be higher in the label condition
than the no-label condition (i.e., label use). To determine
how implicit beliefs affect label use, participants were given
an implicit belief questionnaire based on Dweck, Chiu, and
Hong (1995) after the similarity judgment task. To measure
the relationship between VWM and label use, subjects were
tested for accuracy during a VWM task (Luck & Vogel,
1997).

Method
Participants
A total of 247 participants took part in the experiment. They
were randomly assigned to one of two conditions: diseaselabel (n = 130) or last-name label (n = 117).

Materials
In the similarity judgment task, participants viewed triads of
human face pictures (Figure 1). To create stimuli, four pairs
of photographed human face pictures were selected. Each
pair of original faces was merged in 18 degrees creating 72
morphed pictures (MorphMan 4.0, 2003). In each triad, one
of the base pictures was always more dissimilar to the target
than the other. The degree of dissimilarity varied from trial
to trial. The trials were divided into three levels of physical
difference― low-, medium-, and high-difference― based
on the degree of merging of the two original pictures. In the
low-difference condition, the target and the dissimilar base
picture were not very different (Figure 2a); in the mediumdifference condition, the target and the dissimilar base
picture were moderately different (Figure 2b); and in the
high-difference condition, the target and the dissimilar base
picture were highly different (Figure 2c). Two sets of base
pictures were randomly selected at each level of physical
difference and were combined with two original pictures in
each pair, yielding 12 triads for each pair (a total of 48 triads
= 4 face pairs × 12 triads) altogether.
The labels themselves were pseudowords (Figure 1b) and
were the same in both the disease and last name conditions.
The meaning for the labels was described only in the
instructions. Participants in the disease condition were told
the labels represented a disease carried by each person in the
triad, while those in the last name condition were told it
signified the last name of each person.
In the VWM task, participants viewed an image (Figure
3) followed by a second image and were asked to decide
whether two were identical or not. The images were created
closely following procedures defined in Luck and Vogel
(1997). Each one consisted of eight colored squares placed
randomly on a gray background. We created 40 original

Figure 1: Triad of faces used in similarity judgment task. Pictures were shown without labels (a), or with
labels (b)

2390

Design
The similarity judgment task had a 2 (Label Condition; nolabel vs. label conditions; within-subjects) × 2 (Label Type;
Disease vs. Last Name; between-subjects) × 3 (Physical
Difference; low-difference, medium-difference, highdifference; within-subjects) factorial design. The dependent
measure was the frequency in which participants selected
the dissimilar base pictures as more similar to the target than
the other base pictures as measured by a proportion.

Procedure
Participants carried out the similarity judgment task, VWM
task, and the implicit belief questionnaire. In the similarity
judgment task, participants completed 48 trials where they
were asked to select the base picture that they judged to be
more similar to the target than the other base picture. They
indicated their responses by pressing the left or right arrow
key on the keyboard. The order of presented stimuli was
random. The dissimilar base picture was presented on the
left or the right side an equal number of times.
In the VWM task, participants from both of the label
conditions (disease & last name condition) were asked to
judge whether two images were identical. They completed a
total of 80 trials: in half of the trials, the two images were
identical; in the other half, they were different. At the
beginning of each trial, a gray screen with a black fixation
point was displayed for 500 ms; the first image that
consisted of colored squares (Figure 3) was displayed for
100 ms. Following the first image, a gray screen was
displayed for 900 ms; then a second image was displayed
for 2,000 ms. Participants were asked to determine whether
the two images were identical during the time in which the
second image was displayed. Although the second image
was only displayed for 2,000 ms, participants were given an
unlimited amount of time to respond. The order of trials was
randomized. Decisions were made by selecting the ‗S‘ key
on the keyboard if the arrays believed to be the same, and
the ‗D‘ key if different.

Figure 2: The three levels of physical difference—
low (a), medium (b), and high (c) used in the
similarity judgment task. In this example, the
dissimilar picture is seen on the right.
images in which the color of each square was chosen
randomly from red, blue, green, yellow, violet, white, or
black. From these, we created 40 more images in which we
changed the color of one square in each to create a total of
80 images.
In the implicit beliefs questionnaire (Dweck, Chiu, &
Hong, 1995), participants received nine statements to
determine the degree to which a participant believes
intelligence, morals, and the characteristics in the world in
general are fixed traits or malleable.

Figure 3: Example of stimuli used in the VWM task.
After the VWM task, participants were presented with an
implicit belief questionnaire using Visual Basic software.
They read 9 statements one at a time and rated the sentences
in 6 point scale (1: strongly agree, 6: strongly disagree).
Participants rated how strongly they agreed or disagreed to
statements such as, ―Your intelligence is something about
you that you can‘t change very much,‖ and ―Though we can

2391

change some phenomena, it is unlikely that we can alter the
core dispositions of our world.‖ Participants who agreed
with these statements hold beliefs that traits are fixed, while
those who disagreed are determined to have beliefs that
traits are flexible. The statement order was randomized.

Results
Similarity Judgment Task The overall results are shown in
Table 1. We measured the frequency in which a subject
selected the dissimilar base face as being most similar to the
target face as a proportion.
Table 1: Frequency of choosing the dissimilar picture in the
similarity judgment task, measured as a proportion
Label type
Overall
Disease
Last Name

No label
0.19
0.19
0.19

Label
0.26
0.27
0.26

Label use was measured by subtracting the frequency of
choosing the dissimilar picture when a label was present
from the frequency of choosing the dissimilar picture when
a label was not present. When labels were attached to the
pictures, similarity judgment of human faces changed
considerably. Overall, significant label use (i.e., difference
in the proportion of participants selecting the dissimilar base
picture between the label and no-label conditions) was
found, t (246) = 6.48, SE = .01, p < .001. The labeling effect
was significant in all levels of physical differences: lowdifference, t(246) = 5.23, SE = .01, p <.001, mediumdifference, t(246) = 4.73, SE = .01, p <.001, high-difference,
t(246) = 4.64, SE = .01, p <.001.
Participants used the labels in their similarity judgments
regardless of what the label indicated. The difference in
label use was also indistinguishable between the disease
condition (M = .09, SD = .19) and the last name condition
(M = .06, SD = .17), F(1, 245) = 1.18, MSE = .10, p = .28,
2
 = .005. There was no interaction between the label
condition (disease vs. last name) and the physical
2
difference, F (2, 262) = .41, MSE = 0.04, p = .26,  = .007.
Visual Working Memory (VWM) Task A total of 133
participants took the VWM task along with the labeling
task. This difference is because the similarity judgment task
was administered for a period of time before the VWM task
and implicit belief questionnaires were administered to
determine whether or not labels were found to be effective
in the similarity judgment task before using it as a measure
of labeling effects. After this task was found to be effective,
the VWM task and implicit beliefs questionnaire was given
along with the similarity judgment task. Analysis on VWM
ability was done only on participants that took both the
similarity judgment and VWM tasks. VWM ability was

measured by two ways: 1) a subject‘s d-prime (d’) score
based on the average number of hits (correctly recognizing
the two arrays were identical) and false alarms (falsely
identifying the arrays as identical when they were actually
different) obtained (Macmillan & Creelman, 1991) and by
2) subtracting the number of hits from the number of false
alarms, hereafter denoted by hits minus false alarms. Higher
values for these measurements indicated better VWM ability
than low values. VWM ability was not different between the
disease condition compared to those in the last name
condition in d’, t(131) = .53, SE = 1.11, p = .60, and hits
minus false alarms, t(131) = 1.08, SE = .09, p = .28.
For further analysis, subjects were divided into three
groups: low- (n = 44), medium- (n = 45), and high- (n = 44)
VWM ability according to participants‘ d’ scores. This was
done to determine if there were any significant differences
between the different groups and label use, which there
were not between low and medium ability, t(87) = 1.34, SE
= 0.04, p = .18, low and high ability, t(86) = 1.43, SE =
0.03, p = .16, or medium and high ability, t(87) = 0.03, SE =
0.03, p = .98. Although there were not significant
differences between these ability groups, there was an
overall trend that participants with small visual working
memory span tended to use category labels more in the
similarity judgment task (Figure 4). VWM ability (d’ and
hits minus false alarms) and label use showed a
significantly negative correlation, d’ and label use: r(133) =
-.17, p =.05, hits minus false alarms and label use: r(133) =
-.17, p = .06.

Figure 4: Relationship between VWM ability and label
use showing both individual data and general trend
Implicit Belief Questionnaire We measured the extent to
which people believe that one‘s intelligence, one‘s sense of
morality, or how much our world can be changed

2392

(fixed/flexible implicit belief). Higher values for these
measurements indicated more flexible implicit belief than
low values. The values on intelligence, morality, and world
were highly correlated to each other (Figure 5): intelligence
and morality, r(164) = .25, p <.001, intelligence and world,
r(164) = .38, p <.001, and morality and world, r(164) = .33,
p <.001. Participants in the disease condition did not differ
from those in the last name condition in their implicit belief
about one‘s intelligence (t (162) = .13, SE = .18, p = .89),
one‘s morality (t (162) = -.27, SE = .17, p = .79), and our
world, t (162) = .95, SE = .14, p = .34.
Participants with flexible implicit beliefs tended to use
labels more than participants with fixed belief (Figure 5).
The more a participant thought one‘s intelligence can be
changed rather than being fixed, the tendency to use labels
increased r(164) = .17, p <.05. This was also true among
those who think our world can be changed r(164) = .23, p
<.005. There was no correlation between beliefs on one‘s
morality and label use, r(164) = .08, p = .30.
The positive relationship between label use and flexible
implicit beliefs was stronger when the label indicated

Figure 5: Relationship between implicit beliefs and label
use

diseases compared to when the labels indicated last names.
When labels indicated last names, label use increased as
participants believed that one‘s intelligence can be changed,
r(75) = .33, p <.005, that one‘s morality can be changed,
r(75) = .24, p <.05, and that our world can be changed,
r(75) = .30, p <.01. However, when labels indicated
diseases, label use was not related to people‘s beliefs about
intelligence and morality: label use and intelligence scores,
r(89) = .04, p = .70, label use and morality scores, r(89) = .03, p =.75, and label use and world scores r(89) = .18, p
=.10.

Discussion
The results suggest that individual differences and beliefs
are related to the tendency to rely on labels when making
similarity judgments. In the experiment, participants judged
dissimilar faces as being most similar to a target face when
those faces have same labels, and this tendency to use labels
in similarity judgment is related to VWM capacity and
implicit belief. People with low VWM spans tend to use
labels more often than those with high VWM spans. Among
participants who completed the last name condition in the
similarity judgment task, those who believe that intelligence
and phenomena in the world can be changed tend to use
labels more than those who held fixed beliefs. These results
show that individual differences can affect label use. When
making judgments, people are limited by their VWM ability
and influenced by their implicit beliefs.
We found that those with low VWM ability used labels
more. This trend may reflect the costs of competing visual
and verbal information. Research has found that there is a
tradeoff when people process both visual and verbal
working memory together (Morey & Cowan, 2004). We
believe that those with low VWM performance likely lack
the capacity to process visual information compared to those
with medium and high levels of VWM ability; therefore,
people with low VWM rely on labels when performing the
similarity judgment task. In contrast, those with high and
medium VWM abilities can process the visual complexities
of morphed human faces in making judgments and do not
rely on labels as often as those with low VWM spans.
However, results regarding implicit beliefs suggest that
people are not simply using labels due to a lack of cognitive
resources, such as low levels of ability to hold visual
information. We found that in some cases, people use labels
depending on their beliefs, suggesting that assumptions and
beliefs are a factor in determining the importance of labels
in similarity judgments. Overall, people who hold the belief
that traits are flexible tended to use labels more. This
finding is unexpected, especially because in previous
studies, it has been found that those who hold beliefs that
traits are flexible tend to disregard racial labels in making
judgments of similarity between faces, while those with
beliefs that traits are fixed are more influence by racial

2393

labels when making judgments (Eberhardt, Dasgupta, &
Banaszynski, 2003).
However, the finding that there was a strong relationship
between label use and implicit beliefs mainly applied to the
relationship with the last name condition of the similarity
judgment, not the disease condition. This result implies that
not only do the individual differences of the participants
affect label use, but the type of label itself can play a
significant role in how people will respond and react to it.
When it comes to making judgments based on a label said to
be a disease, participants holding implicit beliefs across the
spectrum use labels with nearly equal frequency. In previous
studies, disease labels were more commonly believed to be
a powerful indicator of shared category membership than
other labels, such as last names (Yu et al., 2008). Therefore,
the findings in the present study serve to provide evidence
that the disease label is so powerful that the label will be
―believed‖ and therefore used with equal frequency
regardless of one‘s beliefs. The frequency of label use with
last names, however, may be more susceptible to being
influenced by a person‘s beliefs. Last name labels are
typically used less in general, suggesting that participants do
not believe there is as much categorical information
provided from last name as other labels. This may be due to
the ease in which a person can change their last name
through legal means, marriage, etc. Therefore, those with
beliefs that traits are fixed may not believe that the last
name label provides useful categorical or similarity
information, and therefore use labels less than others.
The goal of this study was to expand on previous research
that have found labels to be important in categorical and
similarity judgments and identify some of the factors that
play a role in the tendency for people to use labels. In this
experiment, we found that although they are not perfect
predictors of label use, both VWM ability and implicit
beliefs do relate to the use of labels when making similarity
judgments, signifying that both limitations of cognitive
resources and implicit beliefs can explain why people use
labels as opposed to other cues when making similarity
judgments.

References
Baddeley, A. (1992). Working memory. Science, 255, 556559.
Dweck, C. S., Chiu, C., & Hong, Y. (1995). Implicit
theories and their role in judgments and reactions: A
world from two perspectives. Psychological Inquiry, 6(4),
267-285.
Eberhardt, J. L., Dasgupta, N., & Banaszynski, T. L.
(2003). Believing is seeing: The effects of racial labels
and implicit beliefs on face perception. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 29(3), 360-370.
Gelman, S. A., Heyman, G. D., & Legare, C. H. (2007).
Developmental changes in the coherence of essentialist

beliefs about psychological characteristics. Child
Development, 78(3), 757-774.
Goldstone, R. L. (1994). Influences of categorization on
perceptual discrimination. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 123(2), 178-200.
Goldstone, R. L. (1995). Effects of categorization on color
perception. Psychological Science, 6(5), 298-304.
Livingston, K. R., Andrews, J. K., & Harnad, S. (1998).
Categorical perception effects induced by category
learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 24(3), 732-753.
Luck, S. J., & Vogel, E. K. (1997). The capacity of visual
working memory for features and conjunctions. Nature,
390, 279-281.
Macmillan, N. A., & Creelman, C. D. (1991). Detection
Theory: A User's Guide. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Medin, D. & Ortony, A. (1989). Psychological essentialism.
In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.), Similarity and
Analogical Reasoning. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Morey, C. C, & Cowan, N. (2004). When visual and verbal
memories compete: Evidence of cross-domain limits in
working memory. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 11,
296-301.
Palmer, J. (1990). Attentional limits on the perception and
memory of visual information. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and. Performance, 16,
332–350.
Rips, L. J. (1989). Similarity, typicality, and categorization.
In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.), Similarity and
Analogical Reasoning. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Fisher, A. V. (2004). Induction and
categorization in young children: A similarity-based
model. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
133(2), 166-188.
Stroop, J. R. (1935). Studies of interference in serial verbal
reactions. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 18, 643662.
Yamauchi, T., Kohn, N., & Yu, N. Y. (2007). Tracking
mouse movement in feature inference: Category labels are
different from feature labels. Memory & Cognition, 35(5),
852-863.
Yamauchi. T. & Yu, N. Y. (2008). Category labels versus
feature labels: Category labels polarize inferential
predictions. Memory & Cognition, 36(3). 514-553.
Yu, N. Y., Yamauchi, T., & Schumacher, J. (2008).
Rediscovering Symbols: The role of category labels in
similarity judgment. Journal of Cognitive Science, 9, 89109.
Yu, N. Y., Yamauchi, T., Yang, H., Chen, Y., & GutierrezOsuna, R., (2010). Feature selection for inductive
generalization. Cognitive Science, 34(8), 1574-1593.

2394

