UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Interactive rhythmic auditory stimulation system reinstates natural 1/f timing in gait of
Parkinson’s patients

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3f61g13v

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Hove, Michael J.
Suzuki, Kazuki
Uchitomi, Hirotaka
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Interactive Rhythmic Auditory Stimulation reinstates
natural 1/f structure in gait of Parkinson’s patients
Michael J. Hove (michaeljhove@gmail.com)1,2, Kazuki Suzuki (suzuki@myk.dis.titech.ac.jp)1,
Hirotaka Uchitomi (uchitomi@myk.dis.titech.ac.jp)1, Satoshi Orimo (orimo@kanto-ctr-hsp.com)3,
Yoshihiro Miyake (miyake@dis.titech.ac.jp)1
1

Dept. of Computational Intelligence and Systems Science, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Yokohama 226-8502, Japan
2
Max Planck Institute for Cognitive and Brain Sciences, 04103 Leipzig, Germany
3
Department of Neurology, Kanto Central Hospital, Setagaya, Tokyo 158-8531, Japan
Abstract

Parkinson’s disease (PD) and basal ganglia dysfunction impair
movement timing, which leads to gait instability and falls.
Parkinsonian gait consists of random, disconnected stride times—
rather than the 1/f structure observed in healthy gait—and this low
fractal scaling of stride times is a strong predictor of falling.
Walking with fixed-tempo Rhythmic Auditory Stimulation (RAS)
improves many aspects of gait timing; however it requires attention
and lowers fractal scaling away from healthy 1/f structure. In this
experiment, PD patients and healthy participants walked with a) no
auditory stimulation; b) fixed-tempo RAS; and c) an interactive
rhythmic auditory stimulation system that used foot sensors and
nonlinear oscillators to track and interact with the human’s timing.
Patients effortlessly synchronized with the interactive system, their
gait felt more stable, and their fractal scaling returned to levels of
healthy participants. With the fixed-tempo RAS, patients and
healthy participants rarely synchronized, and when they did their
fractal scaling declined away from healthy 1/f levels. After
removing the interactive rhythmic stimulation, the PD patients’
boost in fractal scaling persisted, indicating that the interaction
stabilized the internal rhythm generating system and reintegrated
timing networks. Interactive rhythmic auditory stimulation offers a
flexible, portable, low-cost, non-invasive rehabilitation system that
can improve the mobility, safety, and quality of life of Parkinson’s
Disease patients.
Keywords: Timing;
Parkinson’s
Disease;
Cognitive
Technology; Nonlinear oscillators; 1/f; Scaling Laws.

Introduction
Human timing systems involve a distributed and
interactive network that rely heavily on the basal ganglia
(Buhusi & Meck, 2005). Impairments of the basal ganglia,
such as in Parkinson’s disease (PD) and Huntington’s
disease, lead to problems of movement timing and rhythm
(Grahn & Brett, 2009; Graybiel, Aosaki, Flaherty, &
Kimura, 1994; Schwartze, Keller, Patel, & Kotz, 2010).
Among the most debilitating symptoms of PD are gait
timing disturbances, for they can lead to falls, reduced
independence, and the associated problems of isolation,
cognitive decline, and increased mortality (Hausdorff,
2009). These gait disturbances are manifest in numerous
ways including a slow shuffling gait, accelerating walking,
or highly variable stride timing (Jankovic & Tolosa, 2006).
PD is treated with dopaminergic medication, deep brain
stimulation, and behavioral techniques. Deficient internal
rhythms can be compensated for with external Rhythmic

Auditory Stimulation (RAS), as auditory rhythms are
thought to entrain motor rhythms via the relatively close
neural connections between auditory and motor areas (Thaut
& Abiru, 2010; Thaut, et al., 1996). Extensive clinical
studies have shown that fixed-tempo Rhythmic Auditory
Stimulation improves many aspects of gait timing (for
reviews see (Rubinstein, Giladi, & Hausdorff, 2002; Thaut
& Abiru, 2010). Fixed-tempo RAS can increase gait tempo
and stride length (McIntosh, Brown, Rice, & Thaut, 1997)
and decrease the magnitude of stride-time variability (Arias
& Cudeiro, 2008; Hausdorff, et al., 2007). Improvements in
timing continue in the short-term after the auditory cues are
removed, suggesting that the external rhythms can stabilize
internal rhythm generating networks (Hausdorff, et al.,
2007; McIntosh, et al., 1997).
Another important method for diagnosing gait
impairment examines the fractal scaling of stride times, and
how walking dynamics unfold over time (Hausdorff, 2009).
In healthy adults the small timing fluctuations from strideto-stride are not random (white noise); instead, a stride time
is related to adjacent stride-times and to stride-times
hundreds of strides later. The distribution of stride-times in
a healthy walk has a 1/f-like structure (Hausdorff, 2009;
Hausdorff, et al., 1996) similar to the fractal-like long-range
correlations observed in many complex systems in nature
(Gilden, Thornton, & Mallon, 1995; Newman, 2005). In 1/f
relations, the fluctuations are self-similar across multiple
time scales (scale-invariance), and log power is roughly
proportional to log frequency. While many sources of 1/f
have been proposed, a prominent idea is that 1/f structure
emerges from the complex interactions between components
in a self-organized system (Bak, Tang, & Wiesenfeld, 1997;
Chen, Ding, & Kelso, 2001; Schmidt, Beek, Treffner, &
Turvey, 1991; Torre & Wagenmakers, 2009).
In Parkinson’s disease, the fractal scaling of stride times
is considerably weaker; each stride time is relatively random
and unrelated to other strides (Bartsch, et al., 2007;
Hausdorff, 2009; Hausdorff, et al., 2000). Decreased fractal
scaling is associated with pathology in gait and in
cardiovascular activity (Goldberger, et al., 2002). The
increased randomness and lack of ‘memory’ suggests
defective activity among interacting subcomponents (e.g.
basal ganglia). Elderly adults with low fractal scaling (i.e.,
high stride-to-stride randomness) are more likely to fall than

2727

those with a high fractal-scaling, and this index is a better
predictor of falling than other indices (Herman, Giladi,
Gurevich, & Hausdorff, 2005).
Fixed-tempo RAS has proven very promising in gait
rehabilitation, but has a few limitations. First, when
synchronized with fixed-tempo RAS, the fractal scaling
decreases away from healthy 1/f structure (Hausdorff, et al.,
1996), as stride-time variability becomes organized around a
single frequency rather than retaining fluctuations
(Delignieres & Torre, 2009). Fixing on a single tempo can
decrease adaptability by overtraining one tempo during
rehabilitation. Additionally, fixed-tempo RAS requires that
the human synchronizes to the external rhythms, but the
ability to synchronize with auditory stimuli is impaired in
patients with Parkinson’s (O'Boyle, Freeman, & Cody,
1996) and basal ganglia lesions (Schwartze, et al., 2010).
One possible method to increase gait stability and flexibility
and concurrently circumvent Parkinson’s patients’ impaired
synchronization capabilities is to offload some of the
synchronization task to an interactive external timing
system.
Here, we compare the effects of walking with fixedtempo RAS and interactive rhythmic auditory stimulation
generated by a computer system that can track and interact
with a person’s gait. The interactive “WalkMate” system
developed by Miyake and colleagues generates rhythmic
pacing sequences using nonlinear limit-cycle oscillators
(Miyake, 2009; Miyake, Miyagawa, & Tamura, 2004;
Miyake & Shimizu, 1994; Miyake & Tanaka, 1997). The
system’s intrinsic oscillators transmit auditory pacing
signals and receive information about human step times
from pressure sensors in the human’s shoes (Fig. 1). The
system calculates the relative phase difference, and in real
time adjusts its frequency and phase to complement the
human’s step timing. This in turn affects the human’s gait,
thus creating reciprocal interaction (Miyake, 2009).

Figure 1: Depiction of interactive rhythmic auditory stimulation
system.

In the experiment, Parkinson’s patients and healthy
participants walked around a long corridor with three
rhythmic cueing conditions: interactive rhythmic cueing
with
frequency
and
relative
phase
adjustment
(“WalkMate”); non-interactive fixed-tempo Rhythmic
Auditory Stimulation set to the individual’s spontaneous

walking tempo (“RAS”); and a silent control condition
(“Silent Control”). For the PD patients, each of these
experimental conditions was followed by a lap without
auditory stimulation to look for carry-over or memory
effects. Data were analyzed using Detrended Fluctuation
Analysis (DFA) (Goldberger, et al., 2002; Peng, Havlin,
Stanley, & Goldberger, 1995); and the primary dependent
measure of interest was the DFA fractal-scaling exponent as
this is an indicative measure of healthy gait (Hausdorff,
2009) and a strong predictor of falling (Herman, et al.,
2005).

Methods
Participants Twenty patients (12 women, 8 men) with
idiopathic Parkinson’s Disease participated in the
experiment (mean age = 69.2 years; SD = 7.7). Patients’
disease severity was Hoehn and Yahr Stage 2-3, and mean
duration of disease was 3.6 years. All were tested while
“on” dopaminergic medication. Eighteen healthy controls
(16 men) also participated (mean age = 24.7 years; SD =
2.7). Informed consent was provided and participants were
paid for participating. Experimental procedures were
approved by the Kanto Central Hospital Ethics Committee.
Procedure and Equipment Participants were instructed to
walk at a natural and comfortable pace around a long
corridor. Rhythmic auditory stimuli (short sine tones at 523
and 700 Hz) were played over circumaural headphones.
Three types of auditory stimulation were presented in
separate, counter-balanced blocks: interactive rhythmic
cueing with period and phase adjustment (“Walkmate”);
fixed-tempo rhythmic auditory stimulation (“RAS”); and
unassisted silent control condition (“Silent control”). For the
PD patients, each block consisted of three separate laps:
first, a pretest lap without auditory stimulation to establish
baseline performance; second, a test lap with one of the
three auditory stimulation conditions to establish the
immediate efficacy of stimulation; and third, a post-test lap
without auditory stimulation to examine potential carry-over
effects. Laps within a block were separated by 5-minute
breaks, and blocks were separated by 30-minute breaks. No
baseline differences, nor order effects, were observed
among the pretest laps. After each lap, patients reported
their perceived movement stability and perceived speed on a
7 point Likert-scale. The healthy control experiment omitted
the baseline and carry-over laps, and thus consisted of the
three rhythmic cueing conditions counter-balanced in order.
On average, each lap lasted 180 seconds and contained 320
footsteps.
Gait timing information was collected via pressure
sensors attached to participants’ shoes, was relayed to a
laptop via radio frequency every 10 ms, and was processed
in real time for the requisite auditory stimulation. In trials
with auditory stimulation, the rhythmic auditory
presentation started after 25 seconds of walking. The
participant’s walking tempo from this initial stage
determined the stimulus start-tempo (based on the mean of 5

2728

step-periods after excluding extreme values). In the fixedtempo RAS condition, the stimulus tempo remained
constant throughout the trial. In the interactive WalkMate
condition, the stimulus tempo changed in response to the
participant’s gait timing. The computer algorithms
controlling the stimulus tempo were run in Matlab on a
Panasonic CF-W5 laptop.
The computer’s timing system used nonlinear oscillators
and was organized hierarchically in two modules. Module 1
mutually entrained the frequencies of the computer’s
auditory outputs and the participant’s strides. Module 2
adjusted the relative phase difference between the computer
and the participant to a target phase difference.
Module 1 utilized phase oscillators in its control law, as
shown in equation (1). Here, !m represents the computer
system’s phase of its cycle, and "m designates its natural
frequency. When !m in equation (1) attained an integer
multiple of 2#, the system transmitted a tone to the
participant. The input variable of this equation, !h, presents
the phase of the participant’s gait cycle, estimated from the
discontinuous timing of the participant’s heel strike. Km (>
0) designates the coupling constant.
!!m = " m + K m sin(! h # ! m )
(1)

each box of length n, a least-squares line is fit to the data,
which represents the trend in that box. The fluctuation F(n)
for each box is then calculated as the root-mean-square
deviation between the integrated time-series and its local
trend. This calculation is repeated for all time scales (box
sizes). Typically, the fluctuation, F(n), will increase with
larger box sizes. A linear relationship on a log-log plot
indicates self-similar scaling, in that fluctuations in the
smaller boxes are related to the fluctuations in the larger
boxes in a power-law relation. The slope of the line log F(n)
over log n is the scaling exponent !, and gives a measure of
the “roughness” of the original gait time-series (see Fig 2).
Using DFA, a scaling exponent ! " 0.5 corresponds to
rough and unpredictable white noise; ! " 1.0 corresponds to
1/f-like noise and long-range correlations (Goldberger, et
al., 2002). The first 30 seconds and last 10 strides of each
trial were not analyzed.

Module 2 was responsible for adjusting the relative phase
difference to a target value. The relative phase between the
human’s step time and the computer system’s auditory
output from Module 1 is $!m = !h - !m. The control law for
Module 2 could then be presented as in equation (2), in
which $!m, $!d, and µ denote the Module 1 phase
difference, the target phase difference, and the control gain,
respectively.
"! m = $ µ sin(#! d $ #! m )

(2)

The above equations can be applied for both the right and
left legs, with a phase shift of #. In this study, empirically
derived values of 0.5, 0.32, and 0.2 rad were used for Km, µ,
$!d respectively.
Data Analysis Temporal processes often show long-range
correlations and fractal scaling. Long-range dependence,
“long memory,” power laws, and 1/f-like noise have been
observed in time series from many domains (for a review
see Kello, et al., 2010).
One can inspect the degree of scale-invariance by plotting
the fluctuations at different temporal resolutions. We
quantified the long-range correlations using detrended
fluctuation analysis (DFA) (Goldberger et al. 2002; Peng et
al., 1995; Hausdorff, 2009). This technique offers certain
advantages over other methods (e.g., spectral or Hurst
analyses) when dealing with non-stationary time series, for
it “avoids spurious detection of apparent long-range
correlations that are an artifact of non-stationarity” (Peng et
al. 1995). We briefly describe the DFA algorithm following
Peng et al. (1995) and Goldberger et al. (2002). First the
human’s gait-period time series is integrated, and then this
integrated time series is split into equal boxes of size, n. In

Figure 2: Examples of two trials. On the left, the stride times of
one leg are plotted against trial time. On the right, the DFA
technique plots the average fluctuation per box size. The mean and
SD of stride-times are similar, but during the Silent condition (2a),
the PD patient’s strides are unpredictable akin to white noise,
whereas during interactive rhythmic stimulation (2b), the stride
fluctuations have a 1/f-like structure.

Results
Results indicate that during unassisted walking (Silent
Control), the stride time DFA fractal-scaling exponent for
Parkinson’s patients (M = .90) is significantly lower than for
healthy participants (M = 1.05), t(36)=3.38, p = .002 (Fig.
3). This reduced fractal scaling in PD away from healthy 1/f
structure is indicative of impaired gait (e.g., (Bartsch, et al.,
2007).
Rhythmic stimulation affected PD patients’ fractal
scaling, F(2,38) = 4.44, p = .019. The interactive WalkMate
auditory stimulation lead to significantly higher fractal
scaling compared to unassisted Silent Control and fixed-

2729

Figure 3. DFA fractal-scaling exponents (± SEM). *p < .05; n.s. =
non-significant.

tempo RAS conditions (ps < .05); no difference was
observed between Silent and fixed-tempo RAS (p > .6). The
observed between Silent and fixed-tempo RAS (p > .6). The
mean and standard deviation of stride times did not differ
among the three conditions, nor did they correlate with
fractal scaling; thus dynamic analyses can capture important
signals in gait not revealed with more conventional analyses
(Hausdorff, 2009). Importantly, fractal scaling for PD
patients with WalkMate (M = 0.99) did not differ from
healthy participants’ normal walking (M = 1.05), t(36)=1.2,
p > .2. This suggests that for Parkinson’s patients,
interacting with the WalkMate system can reinstate healthy
gait dynamics.
For the healthy participants, rhythmic stimulation also
affected fractal scaling, but differently than for PD patients,
F(2,34)=4.39, p = .02. Unlike the PD patients, fractal
scaling did not differ between WalkMate and silent baseline
(p > .1), but fixed-tempo RAS drove fractal scaling lower
than baseline (p = .018). WalkMate boosted fractal scaling
only for PD patients. A reduction in fractal scaling with
fixed-tempo RAS has been previously observed, as the
variance becomes organized around the stimulus tempo
(Delignieres & Torre, 2009; Hausdorff, et al., 1996).
Closer inspection of the step-to-tone phase differences
showed that stable synchronization was uncommon for
fixed-tempo RAS. Five of 18 healthy participants and only 2
of 20 PD patients had a unimodal distribution of step-totone phase differences (Rayleigh test of uniformity p-values
<.01). Other studies show that PD patients can synchronize
their steps to fixed-tempo RAS when instructed to
synchronize (Rubinstein, et al., 2002; Thaut & Abiru, 2010);
but our data indicate that if they are not explicitly instructed
to synchronize, they often won’t. Regardless, across groups
the fractal scaling was lower when synchronized with fixedtempo RAS (M = .79; n = 7) than when un-synchronized (M
= .90, n= 31), t(36) = 1.95, p =.059.
With WalkMate, all PD patients and healthy participants
exhibited stable synchronization between their footsteps and
the auditory stimuli (Rayleigh test p-values < .01 for all
trials). Even without explicit instruction, the PD patients and
the WalkMate system effortlessly coupled in mutual

interaction; and this manipulation of interaction increased
fractal scaling. In addition to more stable step-to-tone
coupling and higher fractal scaling with WalkMate
compared to fixed-tempo RAS, patients also preferred
WalkMate and reported that their body movements
fluctuated less with WalkMate than with fixed-tempo RAS,
t(19)= 2.67 p = .015.
Finally, potential carry-over effects from the rhythmic
stimulation were examined. After each of trial, the PD
patients rested for 5 minutes then walked another lap
without sound. The carry-over fractal scaling differed
between conditions, F(2,38)=4.48, p = .018. Trials without
sound post-WalkMate retained higher fractal scaling
(M=.96), compared to post-fixed-tempo RAS (M=.90) or
post-Silent (M = .90) (ps < .05). This ‘memory’ effect
indicates that the rhythmic stabilization induced by the
interactive system carries-over into the short term.

Discussion
Without auditory stimulation, the PD patients’ stridetimes had lower fractal scaling (higher randomness) than
healthy participants, and this low fractal scaling of stride
times has been associated with impaired gait and basal
ganglia dysfunction (Hausdorff, et al., 2000). In the fixedtempo RAS condition, the fractal scaling decreased when
steps and tones were synchronized, as previously observed
(Hausdorff, et al., 1996), since the stride times become
organized around the metronome rather than flexibly
fluctuating. We did not explicitly instruct synchrony;
somewhat surprisingly, the patients rarely synchronized
with the fixed-tempo RAS, and hence their fractal scaling
remained at the impaired level. Synchronization is not
automatic. Fixed-tempo RAS effectively improves many
gait impairments, but the attentional and/or volitional
requirements diminish its applicability in rehabilitation.
Additionally, a walking support device with a fixed tempo
(or requiring manual adjustment) is impractical in a
dynamic real-world environment.
Patients and healthy participants effortlessly coupled
with the interactive WalkMate system. The computer
system took over some of the synchronization task by
correcting a portion of the relative phase difference and
adjusting its frequency to complement the human’s timing.
The system’s intrinsic oscillators were set to adapt yet
persist, and hence served as a ‘memory,’ in that the output
timing is partially based on previous beat period, which
decreases temporal randomness and increases predictability.
This stabilized the reciprocal interaction and allowed the
system to support, rather than dictate, human gait timing.
Previous work showed that healthy participants’ fingertapping was more synchronized with a slightly adaptive
metronome (Repp & Keller, 2008; cf. Kelso, de Guzman,
Reverley, & Tognoli, 2009); such adaptivity might
importantly
compensate
for
patients’
impaired
synchronization abilities.
When the internal and external rhythms integrate and
interact, the patients’ fractal-scaling index returned to levels

2730

of the healthy participants. This reinstatement of 1/f
structure is consistent with proposals that fractal scaling
emerges from self-organized interactions among multiple
components. In gait, many subcomponents interact in
feedforward and feedback loops, including the neuralmuscular periphery, the intraspinal nervous system, and
central networks for motor control and timing that contain
the basal ganglia (Scafetta, Marchi, & West, 2009).
Disruptions of the basal ganglia, such as in Parkinson’s and
Huntington’s diseases, lead to gait impairments; fractal
scaling decreases and walking consists of more random
disconnected strides (Hausdorff, et al., 2000). We argue that
the WalkMate system essentially acts as an “external basal
ganglia,” in that it supplants some of the impaired
functionality of generating rhythmic oscillations, integrating
sensorimotor information, and relaying timing signals for
the motor system.
The carry-over effect of higher fractal scaling after
synchronizing with rhythmic stimulation (cf. McIntosh, et
al., 1997), suggests that rhythmic auditory stimulation is not
simply an external pace-maker driving motor systems, but
that it influences the neural time-keeping circuitry
(Hausdorff, et al., 2007). The basal ganglia-SMA circuit
supports synchronizing internal oscillations with external
events (Grahn & Rowe, 2009; Kotz, Schwartze, & SchmidtKassow, 2009), and these oscillations continue after
removing the external stimulation. Internal rhythmicity can
be reestablished in basal ganglia impairments (Kotz, et al.,
2009), and a similar reestablishment of the basal ganglia
oscillations likely occurs in the short-term after interactive
rhythmic stimulation.
The 1/f structure is not merely an epiphenomenal byproduct of healthy gait or reintegrated timing circuits, but it
could serve to increase flexibility, predictability, and
stability. The fractal scaling in healthy gait (as well as in
healthy heart beat time-series) might benefit the system by
avoiding “mode locking” to a single local tempo, thereby
increasing flexibility and responsiveness to environmental
demands (Goldberger, et al., 2002; Hausdorff, 2009).
Additionally, the strong association between low fractal
scaling and falling (Herman, et al., 2005) might relate to
decreased predictability: Highly random stride times
undermine the temporal predictability of an upcoming stride
time, which in turn would hinder corrective movement,
balance, and stability. In a 1/f time series, the upcoming
stride-time is more predictable than in a random series,
because a) short-range correlations have a more
circumscribed set of temporal possibilities, and b) due to
scale-invariance, the long-range correlations can be used to
predict the short-range ones and vice-versa (similarly,
fractal structure in music improves predictability of tempo
changes, Rankin, Large, & Fink, 2009). This increased
predictability might explain the patients’ higher perceived
movement stability.
The interactive rhythmic auditory system seamlessly
integrates with the human; oscillation frequencies mutually
entrain, fractal-scaling increases back to healthy 1/f levels,

and patients’ perceived stability improves. This humanmachine interaction provides a good example of coupling
internal and external systems (Miyake, et al., 2004; Miyake
& Shimizu, 1994) and is a promising rehabilitation tool.
Previous work showed that the interactive system can
stabilize gait in hemiparetic stroke patients (Muto,
Herzberger, Hermsdoerfer, Pöppel, & Miyake, 2007) and in
Parkinson’s patients with strongly accelerating gait
(Miyake, 2009). Future work should investigate
effectiveness in patients “off” or with reduced dopaminergic
medication. Additionally the carry-over effect of improved
rhythmicity post-WalkMate suggests potential in a longterm rehabilitation program. Interactive rhythmic auditory
stimulation system offers a flexible, portable, low-cost, noninvasive therapeutic intervention that can improve the
mobility and quality of life of Parkinson’s Disease patients.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by JSPS Grants to YM and a
Fulbright Fellowship to MJH. We thank James Cutting,
David Field and Peter Keller for insightful discussion.

References
Arias, P., & Cudeiro, J. (2008). Effects of rhythmic sensory
stimulation (auditory, visual) on gait in Parkinson’s
disease patients. Experimental Brain Research, 186, 589601.
Bak, P., Tang, C., & Wiesenfeld, K. (1997). Self-organized
criticality: An explanation of 1/f noise. Physcial Review
Letters, 59, 381-384.
Bartsch, R., Plotnik, M., Kantelhardt, J. W., Havlin, S.,
Giladi, N., & Hausdorff, J. M. (2007). Fluctuation and
synchronization of gait intervals and gait force profiles
distinguish stages of Parkinson's disease. Physica A, 383,
455-465.
Buhusi, C. T., & Meck, W. H. (2005). What makes us tick?
Functional and neural mechanisms of interval timing.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 6, 755-765.
Chen, Y., Ding, M., & Kelso, J. A. S. (2001). Origins of
Timing Errors in Human Sensorimotor Coordination.
Journal of Motor Behavior, 33, 3-8.
Delignieres, D., & Torre, K. (2009). Fractal dynamics of
human gait: a reassessment of the 1996 data of Hausdorff
et al. Journal of Applied Physiology, 106, 1272-1279.
Gilden, D. L., Thornton, T., & Mallon, M. W. (1995). 1/f
Noise in Human Cognition. Science, 267, 1837-1839.
Goldberger, A. L., Amaral, L. A., Hausdorff, J. M., Ivanov,
P. C., Peng, C. K., & Stanley, H. E. (2002). Fractal
dynamics in physiology: alterations with disease and
aging. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
99, 2466-2472.
Grahn, J. A., & Brett, M. (2009). Impairment of beat-based
rhythm discrimination in Parkinson's disease. Cortex, 45,
54-61.
Grahn, J. A., & Rowe, J. B. (2009). Feeling the Beat:
Premotor and Striatal Interactions in Musicians and

2731

Nonmusicians during Beat Perception. The Journal of
Neuroscience, 29, 7540-7548.
Graybiel, A., Aosaki, T., Flaherty, A., & Kimura, M.
(1994). The basal ganglia and adaptive motor control.
Science, 265(5180), 1826-1831.
Hausdorff, J. M. (2009). Gait dynamics in Parkinson’s
disease: Common and distinct behavior among stride
length, gait variability, and fractal-like scaling. Chaos, 19,
026113-026111-026114.
Hausdorff, J. M., Lertratanakul, A., Cudkowicz, M. E.,
Peterson, A. L., Kaliton, D., & Goldberger, A. L. (2000).
Dynamic markers of altered gait rhythm in amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis Journal of Applied Physiology, 88, 20452053.
Hausdorff, J. M., Lowenthal, J., Herman, T., Gruendlinger,
L., Peretz, C., & Giladi, N. (2007). Rhythmic auditory
stimulation modulates gait variability in Parkinson's
disease. European Journal of Neuroscience, 26, 23692375.
Hausdorff, J. M., Purdon, P. L., Peng, C. K., Ladin, Z., Wei,
J. Y., & Goldberger, A. R. (1996). Fractal dynamics of
human gait: stability of long-range correlations in stride
interval fluctuation. Journal of Applied Physiology, 80,
1448-1457.
Herman, T., Giladi, N., Gurevich, T., & Hausdorff, J. M.
(2005). Gait instability and fractal dynamics of older
adults with a "cautious" gait: why do certain older adults
walk fearfully? Gait and Posture, 21, 178-185.
Jankovic, J. J., & Tolosa, E. (Eds.). (2006). Parkinson's
Disease and Movement Disorders (5th ed.). Philadelphia:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Kello, C. T., Brown, G. D. A., Ferrer-i-Cancho, R., Holden,
J. G., Linkenkaer-Hansen, K., Rhodes, T., et al. (2010).
Scaling laws in cognitive sciences. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 14, 223-232.
Kelso, J. A. S., de Guzman, G. C., Reverley, C., & Tognoli,
E. (2009). Virtual Partner Interaction (VPI): Exploring
novel behaviors via coordination dynamics. PLOS One, 4,
e5749.
Kotz, S. A., Schwartze, M., & Schmidt-Kassow, M. (2009).
Non-motor basal ganglia functions: A review and
proposal for a model of sensory predictability in auditory
language. Cortex, 45, 982-990.
McIntosh, G. C., Brown, S. H., Rice, R. R., & Thaut, M. H.
(1997). Rhythmic auditory-motor facilitation of gait
patterns in patients with Parkinson's disease. Journal of
Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 62, 22-26.
Miyake, Y. (2009). Interpersonal synchronization of body
motion and the Walk-Mate walking support robot. IEEE
Transactions on Robotics, 25, 638-644.
Miyake, Y., Miyagawa, T., & Tamura, Y. (2004). Manmachine interaction as co-creation process. Transaction of
the Society of Instrument and Control Engineers, E-2,
195-206.
Miyake, Y., & Shimizu, H. (1994). Mutual entrainment
based human-robot communication field. Paper presented

at the Proc. of 3rd. IEEE Int. Workshop on Robot and
Human Communication (ROMAN'94), Nagoya, Japan.
Miyake, Y., & Tanaka, J. (1997). Mutual-entrainment-based
internal control in adaptive process of human-robot
cooperative walk,. Paper presented at the Proc. of 1997
IEEE Int. Conf. on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics,
Orlando.
Muto, T., Herzberger, B., Hermsdoerfer, J., Pöppel, E., &
Miyake, Y. (2007). Virtual robot for interactive gait
training: Improving regularity and dynamic stability of
the stride pattern. IEEE/ICME International Conference
on Complex Medical Engineering, 1240-1247.
Newman, M. E. J. (2005). Power laws, Pareto distributions,
and Zipf's law. Contemporary Physics, 46, 323-351.
O'Boyle, D. J., Freeman, J. S., & Cody, F. W. J. (1996). The
accuracy and precision of timing of self-paced, repetitive
movements in subjects with Parkinson's disease. Brain,
119(1), 51-70.
Peng, C.-K., Havlin, S., Stanley, H. E., & Goldberger, A. L.
(1995). Quantification of scaling exponents and crossover
phenomena in nonstationary heartbeat time series. Chaos,
5, 82.
Rankin, S. K., Large, E. W., & Fink, P. W. (2009). Fractal
tempo fluctuation and pulse prediction. Music Perception,
26, 401-413.
Repp, B. H., & Keller, P. E. (2008). Sensorimotor
synchronization with adaptively timed sequences. Human
Movement Science, 27, 423-456.
Rubinstein, T. C., Giladi, N., & Hausdorff, J. M. (2002).
The power of cueing to circumvent dopamine deficits: A
review of physical therapy treatment of gait disturbances
in parkinson’s disease. Movement Disorders, 17, 11481160.
Scafetta, N., Marchi, D., & West, B. J. (2009).
Understanding the complexity of human gait dynamics
Chaos, 19, 026108-026101-026110.
Schmidt, R. C., Beek, P. J., Treffner, P. J., & Turvey, M. T.
(1991). Dynamical substructure of coordinated rhythmic
movements. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 17, 635-651.
Schwartze, M., Keller, P. E., Patel, A. D., & Kotz, S. A.
(2010). The impact of basal ganglia lesions on
sensorimotor synchronization, spontaneous motor tempo,
and the detection of tempo changes Behavioural Brain
Research.
Thaut, M. H., & Abiru, M. (2010). Rhythmic Auditory
Stimulation in rehabilitation of movement disorders: A
review of the current research. Music Perception, 27, 263269.
Thaut, M. H., McIntosh, C. G., Rice, R. R., Miller, R. A.,
Rathbun, J., & Brault, J. A. (1996). Rhythmic auditory
stimulation in gait training with Parkinson's disease
patients. Movement Disorders, 11, 193-200.
Torre, K., & Wagenmakers, E. J. (2009). Theories and
models for 1/f! noise in human movement science.
Humans Movement Science, 28, 297-318.

2732

