UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Interactive Coin Addition: How Hands Can Help Us Think

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9n01q5g4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Neth, Hansjorg
Payne, Stephen J.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Interactive Coin Addition:
How Hands Can Help Us Think
Hansjörg Neth (neth@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)
Center for Adaptive Behavior and Cognition, Max Planck Institute for Human Development
Lentzeallee 94, 14195 Berlin, Germany

Stephen J. Payne (s.j.payne@bath.ac.uk)
Department of Computer Science, University of Bath
Bath BA2 7AY, United Kingdom
Abstract

A richer view of the role of external displays and their manipulation is provided in the work of Carlson and colleagues.
Cary and Carlson (2001) showed that the availability of pencil and paper allowed participants to develop strategies more
reflective of the structure of the task. Similarly, Carlson,
Avraamides, Cary, and Strasberg (2007) showed that pointing increased both accuracy and speed in counting arrays of
items and suggested that this was in part due to the provision
of external markers for the boundaries between phases of a
cognitive strategy. In this article we further explore this idea
that movement allows the marking of items’ roles.
We repeat Kirsh’s (1995) experiment, with actual movement of coins allowed. Conducting our study in a virtual environment is still different from using real coins and multiple
fingers, but allows us to address a range of subtle questions
that go beyond the intuitive result that using hands can help
us solve a mental addition task. Specifically, we answer the
following questions:

Does using our hands help us to add the value of a set of coins?
We test the benefits and costs of direct interaction with a mental arithmetic task in a computerized yoked design in which
groups of participants vary in their interactive mode (move vs.
look) and the initial configuration of coins (pseudo-random vs.
another mover’s final layout). By assessing performance and
conducting a microgenetic analysis of the strategies employed
we argue that the purpose of movement is the result, rather
than the process of moving. Participants move coins in order
to sort, rather than to mark, and select them by value, rather
than by location. They spontaneously create remarkably smart
solutions, thereby incidentally creating physical configurations
that can help other problem solvers.
Keywords: embodied cognition, epistemic actions, complementary strategies, immediate interactive behavior.

Introduction
Do our hands help us to think? Although the roles of actions and gestures for guiding thought have often been recognized (e.g., Kirsh & Maglio, 1994; Clark, 1997; Cary &
Carlson, 2001; Neth & Payne, 2001; Neth et al., 2007) the
transformative potential of using our hands to re-organize and
re-structure a problem is still poorly understood.
Consider the simple task of adding the value of coins scattered across a surface. Kirsh (1995) showed that a ‘hands’
condition was faster and more accurate at this task than
was a ‘look only’ condition. However, the ‘hands’ condition was restricted to pointing to photographs of arrays of
coins—moving the coins was not possible. Furthermore, beyond the important definition of complementary strategies—
organizing activities that recruit external elements to reduce
cognitive loads—Kirsh offers no precise account of the actual strategies which use of hands facilitated. In the absence
of such an account it almost seems as if using hands provides
a ‘magic ingredient’ for problem solving.
One rather mundane possibility is that the interactions per
se have little effect, and all that matters is the information revealed in the resulting states of the world. This possibility
has been supported with respect to interactive computer visualisations of an unfamiliar 3-D object by Keehner, Hegarty,
Cohen, Khooshabeh, and Montello (2008). In these authors’
experiments any learning benefit of interaction was matched
by mere exposure to the most informative displays. In our experiment we test the force of a similar hypothesis with respect
to moving coins while counting them.

1. Performance benefits or trade-offs: Does it help to use our
hands to solve this arithmetic task? If so, is there a benefit
of both accuracy and speed, or rather a trade-off, e.g., a
benefit in accuracy with a corresponding cost in speed?
2. Process vs. result: Are the benefits based on the process of
moving coins or the result of such a process? Are there systematic patterns in which objects are selected and moved?
3. Purpose of interactions: Are objects moved to mark those
that are processed or to sort to facilitate future processing? Are movers reacting adaptively to the complexity of
the task? Can use of hands also decrease performance by
tempting humans to act instead of add on easy tasks?
To answer the performance-related questions we compare
the tasks of adding sets of coins which can only be looked at
with adding sets of coins which can be relocated during addition. Addressing the more detailed questions about how and
why movement helps requires more methodological refinement. Rather than using physical coins, we present realistic
life-size pictures of coins that can be moved on a computer
screen by a mouse-operated drag-and-drop operation. This
allows us to record complete behavioral protocols and perform detailed analyses of movement strategies.
Moreover, the use of a virtual environment enables us to
incorporate a comparison between participants who receive
specific spatial arrangements of coins and participants, who

279

Table 1: Overview of the four experimental groups.
interactive mode
move
configuration

initial 1: initial-move
final 4: final-move

look
2: initial-look
3: final-look

Note. Any differences along the configuration dimension depend
on the actions performed in Group 1.

The stimulus sets also involved three dimensions that determined the complexity of the problem (by manipulating the
number and values of coins, as well as the roundness of their
sums). Due to space limitations, we do not analyze or discuss
these within-subjects factors in this report.

Figure 1: Example screen display of an initial configuration
(Participant 3, Trial 9).

Design A 2×2 variation of two between-subjects factors
yielded the four experimental groups depicted in Table 1. The
two between-subjects factors were:

are presented with somebody else’s initial or final coin configurations. This ‘yoked’ design allows us to address a related issue of agency: Is it important that people can interact
themselves with the objects on display, or will they also benefit from the result of someone else’s interactions? To preview our results, we find that people successfully use physical movements of objects to transform the task and adaptively
create structures that are helpful to other problem solvers.

• Interactive mode: In a move-condition participants were
free to move coins individually by using a drag-and-drop
procedure. In the look-condition participants could view
the sets of coins, but could neither move or point at them.
(To prevent its use as a pointing device the cursor was hidden within the display area.)
• Configuration: In the initial condition coins were scattered pseudo-randomly within the display area (with the
constraint that two coins could not appear at the same
location). The other’s final condition—hereafter final—
depended on the manipulations of a particular person in
the initial-move-condition and presented the configuration
of coins at the end of the trial as the initial stimulus for
another person.

Experiment
Method
Participants Sixty psychology undergraduates (44 female,
16 male) participated in the experiment in partial fulfillment
of a course requirement. The mean age of participants was
20.6 years (ranging from 18 to 33).
Apparatus The experimental software was programmed in
Microsoft Visual Basic™6 and ran on an Intel Pentium™4
PC with a 17” flat panel display.
All images of coins were distributed within a white rectangular display area, which measured 30 cm horizontally and
18 cm vertically at the 1024 by 768 screen resolution. When
viewed from a 60 cm distance a coin was viewed at an 1.7–
2.7◦ angle and the display area extended 26◦ horizontally and
16◦ vertically.

For the sake of brevity, members of the four experimental
groups will be referred to as initial movers (Group 1), initial
lookers (2), final lookers (3), and final movers (4).
Note that the 2×2 variation of interactive mode and configuration separates the process of moving from the results of
movement, and movers always have the option of not moving
anything. Thus, any differences along the configural dimension depend entirely on the actions of movers in Group 1. In
the extreme case of a particular mover deciding not to move
anything all three yoked participants receive identical configurations of coins. Likewise, and with respect to the interactive dimension, any non-moving participants in a move
condition would be self-selecting themselves into the corresponding look condition.
Group membership of participants to one of the four groups
resulting from the 2×2 variation of the two between-subjects
factors was assigned according to their order of arrival in the
experimental laboratory. The presentation order of stimuli
was randomized for every participant in Group 1. Yoked
Groups 2 to 4 received the same stimulus order as the corresponding participant in Group 1.

Materials Each stimulus consisted of a set of n British
coins ci , ci ∈ {1 pence, 2p, 5p, 10p, 20p, 50p, £1, £2}, with
n ≥ 7 on any trial. (See Figure 1 for an example.) 24 different stimuli sets (comprising a total of 396 coins) with a mean
number of 20 coins (ranging from 12 to 21) and a mean value
of 480 pence (ranging from 209 to 820 pence) were used.
Coins were presented as naturalistic photographs in their
original dimensions, with diameters ranging from 18 mm for
the smallest (5p) and 28 mm for the largest (£2) coins. However, as only a single image was used for each denomination,
multiple coins of the same value were always viewed from
the same side and at the same rotation angle.

280

Table 2: Addition accuracy: Mean number (and standard deviations) of errors by configuration and interactive mode.

Table 3: Addition latency: Mean trial times (and SDs) for
correct additions by configuration and interactive mode.

interactive mode
configuration
initial
final

move

look

5.27 (3.56)
4.93 (3.99)

11.33 (6.49)
6.20 (3.65)

interactive mode
configuration
initial
final

move
29.4 (8.0)
19.1 (6.0)

look
25.2 (6.1)
19.2 (6.1)

could be selected by their location or by their value. In the
absence of any a priori assumptions we will sketch some descriptive analyses that inform these issues.

Procedure Participants were tested individually. They
were instructed to add as quickly as possible without making errors until a criterion of 24 correct trials was reached.
Before the test trials participants practiced the procedure
of adding items and entering sums on four lists of single-digit
numbers and demonstrated knowledge of the drag-and-drop
procedure in a scrabble task (when in the move-condition).
Participants were also shown an example image of each coin
and had to identify its value to the experimenter.
On a typical trial during the test phase, participants were
presented with a stimulus, which they inspected or interacted
with according to their interactive means. When they had
completed adding, they pressed a key, whereupon the stimulus disappeared, and then were prompted for the result. Immediately after entering a result, participants received feedback regarding the correctness of their answer, and could request the next trial by pressing a key. This cycle was repeated until the participants had correctly added 24 stimulus sets. On average, participants completed the experiment
within 32 minutes.

Results
We will first report basic performance results before considering the process of moving coins and the strategies, goals,
and adaptivity of movers.

Performance
Accuracy Accuracy was analysed in terms of the total number of erroneous trials per participant. An ANOVA was performed with configuration and interactive mode as betweensubjects factors. There was a significant main effect of both
configuration and interactive mode and a significant interaction between configuration and interactive mode. The corresponding means and standard deviations are shown in Table 2. An analysis of simple main effects demonstrated that
the combination of being shown the initial configuration and
not being able to move the coins leads to significantly more
errors than being able to move the initial configuration of
coins, F(1, 56) = 13.15, p = .001, or than looking at the final configuration, F(1, 56) = 9.41, p = .003.
In short, initial lookers were less accurate than any of the
other three groups. More specifically, being able to move
coins or receiving the final coin configurations reliably increased the accuracy of participants’ additions.

Hypotheses
The ability to interact with the stimulus set in both move conditions allows for a variety of functions, including pointing,
marking, and sorting. Using some or all of these functions
could allow movers to re-structure the mathematical properties of the task (e.g., exploit the commutativity and associativity of addition, or turn an addition of n identical values v
into a multiplication n · v).
As the strategies available to the participants in our move
condition form a super-set of those available to participants
in the look condition, our most basic hypothesis is that the
former will exhibit performance benefits (in overall speed,
accuracy, or both) over the latter.
If movers mainly move for moving’s sake, i.e., benefit from
the process of moving, then initial and final movers should
show similar extents of movements, and receiving someone’s
final configurations is unlikely to convey a substantial benefit. However, if a main incentive for moving is the result of
having moved objects then final movers should move objects
to a lesser degree than initial movers and receiving the result
of someone’s moves is likely to convey a benefit.
We also hypothesize that two basic (not mutually exclusive) goals of movements could be to mark counted coins vs.
to sort coins into clusters. Similarly, coins that are moved

Latency As the integrity of the within-stimulus dimensions
is only preserved when participants determine the correct
value of a set of coins, latency was analysed in terms of time
to complete correct trials.
Table 3 contains the mean addition latencies for correct additions in all four groups. There was a significant main effect
of configuration (p < .001) but no main effect of interactive
mode or interaction between these two factors. Thus, participants who encountered coins in their final configurations
were reliably faster than those who encountered their initial
configurations (19.1s vs. 27.3s) but being able to move coins
did neither result in faster nor in slower performance than
when only looking at them (24.3s vs. 22.2s, respectively).

Interactive Process and Strategies
Our performance results have shown that the option to move
coins yields some benefits: Initial movers were more accurate

281

Table 5: Descriptive indices of the extent of coin relocations.
initial-move

final-move

moved***

Percent of coins
61.09 (17.93) 13.80 (11.78)
Number of moves***
265.13 (93.30) 56.67 (48.88)
Mean distance per move (cm)***9.85 (0.86) 7.31 (1.38)
Mean duration per move (sec)* 0.64 (0.16) 0.53 (0.14)
Note.

∗∗∗ p < .001; ∗ p = .05

in independent t-tests (df = 28).

whether and which coins to move next are made on the fly in
a truly dynamic fashion. As the time interval between moves
(i.e., between dropping one coin and selecting another) must
contain the selection of and movement towards the next target, it is no surprise that both groups spend more time between moves than moving.

Figure 2: Example screen display of a final configuration
(Participant 3, Trial 9). Thin solid lines indicate coin moves;
dashed lines indicate distances between moves.
than initial lookers. However, so far we have only reported indirect evidence that any movement has actually taken place.
The benefits (both in accuracy and in speed) derived from seeing the final configuration suggest that initial movers changed
the display in a way that is helpful to final lookers.
In fact, participants in the initial-move and final-move
groups made ample use of their option to move coins. Their
recorded interactions comprise a total of 4,827 coin relocations, which were moved for a total distance of 457.8 meters in 2,953 seconds. (Figure 2 illustrates how an initial
mover transformed the display of Figure 1.)
In the following, we will provide a precise process account
of what initial movers did in order to explain the observed
configuration effects. We also contrast the interactions of initial movers with those of final movers to assess the purpose
and the adaptivity of their strategies.

It is noteworthy, however, that both groups spend substantial periods of time after making their last move. Although
initial movers spend a smaller proportion of their trial time
after the last move than final movers (29.4% vs. 48.0%), their
longer overall trial times mean that they spend more absolute
time after the last move (8.4s vs. 5.2s, respectively, p < .01).
With respect to the interleaving of cognition and action this
suggests that there is little planning prior to moving, but some
mental addition takes place after the final coin movement.
Extent of movement Our performance and temporal process results suggest that initial movers moved more than final
movers. As ‘moving more’ could mean many different things
Table 5 shows the percentage of moved coins, the mean number of moves, as well as two measures of move distance and
duration. Participants in the initial-move group not only made
more moves, but a coin on average was moved for a further
distance and for a longer time. Further, the fact that a coin
was moved repeatedly in only 5.1% of all cases indicates that
the process is highly successful at first shot.

Time allocations Table 3 reported total trial latencies as a
function of group membership. But how did initial and final
movers allocate their temporal resources? Table 4 shows their
time distributions expressed as relative proportions of overall
time. Although initial movers do not take reliably more time
than final movers, Table 4a shows that they spend a vast majority of their total time (98.3%) on trials with moves (vs.
1.7% on trials without moves, p < .001). By contrast, final
movers spend more equal proportions of their total time on
trials with moves and on trials without moves (57% vs. 43%,
p = .301.).
Table 4b shows the relative time distributions for trials with
at least one move. In both groups, the time interval from
the trial onset to the selection of the first coin is very brief.
Although final movers spend a larger proportion of a trial’s
duration before selecting the first coin than initial movers
(18.0% vs. 8.1%, p < .05), the absolute first-coin selection
latencies of both groups do not differ significantly (2.1s vs.
2.2s, p = .89). The brevity of this interval—which must include the initiation of movement, the choice of and cursor
movement to the first target coin—excludes the possibility
that much adding or planning can have taken place beforehand. This also implies that most subsequent decisions of

If final movers can use the result of their yoked initial
movers, there should be a negative correlation between the
percentages of moved coins by initial and final movers. Indeed, the data shows an inverse relationship between the extent of movement in both groups, i.e., if a particular initial
mover moved a lot the yoked final mover had less of an incentive to move, and vice versa (Pearson’s r = −.48, p < .05).
This indicates that those final movers whose initial movers
had invested more effort were less inclined to move coins.
Purpose of moving Beyond showing performance differences due to the potential for movement and demonstrating that coins were actually moved a deeper explanation has
to address questions about how, where and why coins were
moved. With regards to the purpose of movement we considered two principal a priori hypotheses: Coins could be moved
to mark already counted ones, or to sort coins into different
arrangements. In the first case, the spatial position of a coin
would be used as a primitive cognitive artifact to distinguish

282

Table 4: Time allocations in percenta by group.
(a) on all trials
Group
initial-move
final-move

w/o moves
1.7%
43.0%

(b) on trials with moves (m)

with moves

before m

98.3%
57.0%

8.1%
18.0%

during m

betw. m

after m

23.4%
10.4%

39.1%
23.6%

29.4%
48.0%

a

To make both groups comparable, all latencies are expressed as relative proportions. The percentages are based on a mean total time of
704.7s (SD=191.8s) for the initial-move group and lower mean total time of 457.4s (144.4s) for the final-move group, t(28) = 4.0, p < .001.

but first select high-value coins and then coins of identical or
lower value in a step-wise fashion. Figure 3 illustrates this
characteristic pattern for the trial of which the initial and final
configurations were shown by Figures 1 and 2, respectively.
To implement such a selection-by-value strategy, both eyes
and fingers of movers must traverse enormous distances.

between counted coins and coins yet to be counted. In the
second case, the spatial arrangement of coins would be altered to facilitate their subsequent addition.
The performance benefits in the final-look condition and
the inverse relation between initial and final movers already
favors the sorting over the marking hypothesis. To demonstrate that coins were really sorted by their value we conducted two analyses that compared the number of coin clusters in the initial and final configurations. Two kinds of clusters were distinguished: If coins are sorted into clusters of
identical values the number of identical nearest neighbors
(INNs, e.g., a 10p coin being closest to another 10p coin)
should increase. Similarly, if coins are sorted into groups
with a round sum of values the number of round value clusters
should increase. The presence of a ‘round value cluster’ was
registered whenever a coin plus any subset of its 1–5 direct
nearest neighbors added up to the next higher round number
(i.e., 10p for coins Cv , 1p ≤ v ≤ 5p, and 100p for 10p ≤ v ≤
50p). (See Figure 2 for examples of both cluster types.)
Table 6a shows that the proportion of INNs increases substantially in the initial-move group, but not in the final-move
group. Similarly, Table 6b shows a large increase in the number of round value clusters for initial but not final movers.
Thus, both measures provide additional support that movers
move coins to sort them into clusters, but note that the final
result of their movements is still far from perfectly sorted.
Similar analyses, which we can only sketch here, show
that participants select coins by value, rather than by location. More specifically, movers do not minimize the distance
between subsequent pick-up or drop-off positions of coins,

Discussion
Our results demonstrate that a potential for direct interaction
has multi-faceted consequences for the performance and process of a cognitive task.
With respect to performance, being able to move coins increases the accuracy of additions without a corresponding
cost in latency. However, seeing the result of someone else’s
moves increases both accuracy and speed.
Coins were moved to sort them into clusters of identical
and round values, rather than to mark them by location. They
were selected by value, rather than by location. This suggests
that aspects of the mathematical task (concerning the values
of addends) guided and governed the physical events (on the
spatial and perceptual-motor level) in a top-down fashion.
The spontaneity and swiftness of interactions suggests that
the complex interleaving of eye- and hand-movements with
mental processes required little planning or reflective thought.
An inverse relationship between the amount of movements by
initial and their yoked final movers shows not only a high
degree of adaptiveness in their actions, but also that there
is some intersubjective agreement about what constitutes a
‘good’ configuration.
We oversimplified by stating the difference between moving for moving’s sake (or for the process of moving) and moving to achieve a final configuration (or to obtain a result) as a
strict dichotomy. Although both aspects are not mutually exclusive, we accumulated much converging evidence that—for
this task—the result mattered more than the process.

Conclusion
We began this paper with the hunch that using hands would
help to add the values of a set of coins. Although our results confirm this intuition, our analysis uncovered many unanticipated aspects of this task. For instance, the result that
the ability to move increases the accuracy but not the speed of
additions is in contrast to Kirsh (1995)’s results, who reported
an increase both in accuracy and speed when using fingers to
point at photographs of coin displays. However, it is notable

Figure 3: Plotting selected coin values by elapsed time shows
a characteristic downward step function. (See Figures 1 and 2
for the initial and final configurations of the same trial.)

283

Table 6: Proportion of identical and round value clusters at the beginning and end of all trials by group.
(a) Identical nearest neighbors
Group
initial-move
final-move

initially
19.5% (1.4%)
46.9% (11.5%)

finally
46.9% (11.5%)
49.1% (8.6%)

(b) Coins in round value clusters
initially

finally

23.5% (1.7%)
50.1% (7.2%)

50.1% (7.2%)
52.2% (7.0%)

References

that our non-significant result regarding latencies also fails to
support the plausible counter-hypothesis that physical interaction involves a trade-off between speed and accuracy, i.e.,
incurs a cost in time as a price for increasing accuracy.
Any fine-grained account of the interactions between cognitive and physical task components requires microgenetic
studies like ours as a necessary first step towards building accurate cognitive process models of interactive cognition. Our
finding that movers care more about the result of their movements than benefitting from the process per se demystifies the
‘magic’ of moving in a similar way as Keehner et al. (2008)’s
study explained the benefits of multiple views of a 3D-object.
Rather than offering some magic bullet that somehow facilitates tasks, the potential for interaction provides concrete
means for re-structuring a task into more manageable steps
(e.g., changing an addition of many different values into a
multiplication of identical values). Interestingly, even participants with very poor adding skills (as indicated by their error
rate on simple addition tasks) had no difficulty using their
hands to exploit the mathematical properties of addition.
Overall, our study provides a detailed account of the interplay between organism, task, and task environment, and
shows how embodied creatures recruit complex interactive
resources in the service of a simple cognitive task. The result that movers move coins to sort them into clusters (rather
than adding and marking counted coins) and that they select
coins by value (rather than minimizing the distance between
moves) shows that movers willingly traverse long distances
with their eyes and fingers to facilitate a mental task. The increased accuracy of their solutions without a corresponding
cost in time justifies their interactions as a smart investment.
The solution strategies that movers spontaneously select
have the side-effect that others can benefit from the configurations that are created during problem solving. This effect
was unintentional as our movers did not know that the result
of their interactions would be shown to other people facing
the same task. Such benefits derived from receiving someone else’s final state are similar to the phenomena of indirect
interactions, e.g., through the trails left by other pedestrians
(Helbing, Keltsch, & Molnar, 1997; Goldstone & Roberts,
2006) or through spontaneous pattern formation in social settings (Moussaid, Garnier, Theraulaz, & Helbing, 2009). As
human cognition heavily relies on artifacts (like language
and notational systems, Clark, 1997) we speculate that seeing someone else’s solution to a problem is a basic—albeit
sometimes accidental—origin of culture and technology.

Carlson, R. A., Avraamides, M. N., Cary, M., & Strasberg,
S. (2007). What do the hands externalize in simple arithmetic? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 33(4), 747–756.
Cary, M., & Carlson, R. A. (2001). Distributing working memory resources during problem solving. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 27(3), 836–848.
Clark, A. (1997). Being there: Putting brain, body, and world
together again. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Goldstone, R. L., & Roberts, M. E. (2006). Self-organized
trail systems in groups of humans. Complexity, 11, 43–50.
Helbing, D., Keltsch, J., & Molnar, P. (1997). Modelling the
evolution of human trail systems. Nature, 388, 47–50.
Keehner, M., Hegarty, M., Cohen, C., Khooshabeh, P., &
Montello, D. R. (2008). Spatial reasoning with external
visualizations: What matters is what you see, not whether
you interact. Cognitive Science, 32, 1099–1132.
Kirsh, D. (1995). Complementary strategies: Why we use our
hands when we think. In Proceedings of the 17th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 212–217).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Kirsh, D., & Maglio, P. (1994). On distinguishing epistemic
from pragmatic action. Cognitive Science, 18(4), 513–549.
Moussaid, M., Garnier, S., Theraulaz, G., & Helbing, D.
(2009). Collective information processing and pattern formation in swarms, flocks, and crowds. Topics in Cognitive
Science, 1(3), 469–497.
Neth, H., Carlson, R. A., Gray, W. D., Kirlik, A., Kirsh, D.,
& Payne, S. J. (2007). Immediate interactive behavior:
A symposium on embodied and embedded cognition. In
D. S. McNamara & J. G. Trafton (Eds.), Proceedings of the
29th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
33–34). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Neth, H., & Payne, S. J. (2001). Addition as interactive problem solving. In J. D. Moore & K. Stenning (Eds.), Proceedings of the 23rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 698–703). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.

284

