UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Is Instinct Rational? Are Animals Intelligent? An Abductive Account

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/75q569ts

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Author
Magnani, Lorenzo

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Is Instinct Rational? Are Animals Intelligent?
An Abductive Account
Lorenzo Magnani (lmagnani@unipv.it)
Department of Philosophy, University of Pavia
P.zza Botta, 6 - 27100 Pavia, Italy
tivity – which is considerably model-based2 – they are at the
same time engaged in “being cognitive agents” and therefore
in thinking intelligently. An important effect of this semiotic
activity is a continuous process of “hypothesis generation”
that can be seen at the level of both instinctual behavior, as
a kind of “hardwired” cognition, and representation-oriented
behavior, where nonlinguistic pseudothoughts drive a plastic
model-based cognitive role.
This activity is at the root of a variety of human and nonhuman abductive performances, which I have also analyzed in
the light of the concept of affordance (Magnani, 2009, chapter five). Another important character of the model-based
cognitive activity above is the externalization of artifacts that
play the role of mediators in animal languageless “thinking”.3
That is, the interplay between internal and external representations exhibits a new cognitive perspective on the mechanisms underlying the semiotic emergence of abductive processes in important areas of model-based thinking of mindless organisms. A considerable part of abductive cognition
occurs through an activity consisting in a kind of reification in
the external environment followed by re-projection and reinterpretation through new configurations of neural networks
and their chemical processes. I contend that the analysis of
the central problems of abduction and hypothesis generation
can help to address the problems of other related topics in
model-based animal cognition, like pseudological and reflexive thinking, the role of pseudoexplanatory guesses in plastic
cognition, the role of reification and beliefs and the problem
of the relationship between abduction and perception, and between rationality and instincts.

Abstract
The concept of abduction can be useful to clarify the conflict instinct vs. inference in cognitive science. The resulting idea that abduction is partly explicable as a biological instinctual phenomenon and partly as a more or less “logical”
operation related to “plastic” cognitive endowments of all organisms naturally leads to stress that many animals – traditionally considered “mindless” organisms – make up a series
of signs and are engaged in making, manifesting or reacting
to a series of signs. Through this semiotic activity – which is
considerably model-based – they are at the same time engaged
in “being cognitive agents” and therefore in thinking intelligently. An important effect of this semiotic activity is a continuous process of “hypothesis generation” that can be seen at
the level of both instinctual behavior, as a kind of “hardwired”
cognition, and representation-oriented behavior, where nonlinguistic pseudothoughts drive a plastic model-based cognitive role. Another important character of the abductive modelbased cognitive activity above is the externalization of artifacts
that play the role of mediators in animal languageless “thinking”. That is, the interplay between internal and external representations exhibits a new cognitive perspective on the mechanisms underlying the semiotic emergence of abductive processes in important areas of model-based thinking of mindless
organisms.
Keywords: Abduction; instinct; rationality; animal cognition.

Instinct vs. Inference
The concept of abduction (Magnani, 2009) can be useful to
clarify the conflict instinct vs. inference in cognitive science.
We can overcome this conflict simply by observing that the
work of abduction is partly explicable as a biological phenomenon and partly as a more or less “logical” operation related to “plastic” cognitive endowments of all organisms. I
entirely agree with Peirce: a guess in science and the appearance of a new hypothesis is also a biological phenomenon and
as such it is related to instinct, in the sense that we can compare it to a chance variation in biological evolution (even if of
course the evolution of scientific guesses does not conform to
the pattern of biological evolution). An abduced hypothesis
introduces a change (and an opportunity) in the semiotic processes to advance new perspectives in the coevolution of the
organism and the environment (gene/cognive niches coevolution (Odling-Smee, Laland, & Feldman, 2003)).
The resulting idea that abduction is partly explicable as a
biological instinctual phenomenon and partly as a more or
less “logical” operation related to “plastic” cognitive endowments of all organisms naturally leads to stress that many animals – traditionally considered “mindless” organisms – make
up a series of signs and are engaged in making, manifesting
or reacting to a series of signs.1 Through this semiotic ac1 For

Rationality of Instincts
Instincts are usually considered irrational or at least arational. Nevertheless, there is a way of considering the behavior performances based on them as rational. Based on this
conclusion, while all animal behavior is certainly described as
lution, dynamics, and learning of signaling systems, in humans and
other animals, both from an individual and a “network” perspective,
cf. (Skyrms, 2008).
2 I strongly maintain (Magnani, 2002, 2009) that there are
two kinds of abduction, “sentential”, related to logic and to verbal/symbolic inferences, and “model-based”, related to the exploitation of internalized (or to the manipulation of external) models of
diagrams, pictures, etc., cf. below in this paper. I have to note
that the idea of extension of the notion of abduction beyond logic
is sometimes disputed in the cognitive science literature.
3 On the common historical view – defended, for example by
Daniel Dennett, Michael Dummett, and Donald Davidson, has been
that we should not assign rich cognitive abilities to creatures that
lack language, cf. (Francescotti, 2007).

a recent survey on the current research on the origin, evo-

150

rational, at the same time it is still rudimentarily considered
instinctual. The consequence is that every detailed hypothesis on animal intelligence and cognitive capacities is given
up: it is just sufficient to acknowledge the general rationality of animal behavior. Let us illustrate in which sense we
have to interpret this apparent paradox. I think the analysis of this puzzling problem can further improve knowledge
about model-based and manipulative ways of thinking in humans, offering at the same time an integrated view regarding
some central aspects of organisms’ cognitive behavior. Furthermore, I contend that the argument for reduction of the distinction between abductive inference and perception/instinct
offers the suitable philosophical/cognitive tools to make up
this integrated view.

ground assumption is the seeming impossibility that something ineluctable like instinct cannot be at the same time intrinsically rational. Of course the concept of rationality is in
this case paradoxical and the expression rationality has to be
taken in a Pickwickian sense: indeed, in this case the organisms at stake “cannot” be irrational. A strange idea of rationality! Given the fact that many performances of nonlinguistic organisms are explainable in terms of sensory preconditioning (and so are most probably instinct-based – hardwired
– and without learnt and possibly conscious capacities which
enable them to choose and decide), the rationality of costs and
benefits in these behaviors is expressed in the “non-formal”
terms of Darwinian “fitness”. For example, in the optimal
foraging theory, rationality is related to the animal’s capacity
– hardwired thanks to evolution – to optimize the net amount
of energy in a given interval of time. Contrarily to the use of
some consciously exploited heuristics in humans, in animals
many heuristics of the same kind are simply hardwired and
so related to the instinctual adaptation to their niches.
The following example provided by Bermúdez can further
clarify the problem. “Redshanks are shorebirds that dig for
worms in estuaries at low tide. It has been noticed that they
sometimes feed exclusively on large worms and at other times
feed on both large and small worms. [. . . ] In essence, although a large worm is worth more to the red shank in terms
of quantity of energy gained per unit of foraging time than
a small worm, the costs of searching exclusively for large
worms can have deleterious consequences, except when the
large worms are relatively plentiful” (Bermúdez, 2003, p.
117). The conclusion is simple: even if the optimal behavior
can be described in terms of a rational complicated version
of expected utility theory, “[. . . ] the behaviors in which it
manifests itself do not result from the application of such a
theory” (ibid.). We can account for this situation in abductive
terms: the alternatives which are “abductively” chosen by the
redshanks are already wired, so that they follow hardwired algorithms developed through evolution, and simply instantiate
the idea of abduction related to instincts present in Peircean
insights: “When a chicken first emerges from the shell, it does
not try fifty random ways of appeasing its hunger, but within
five minutes is picking up food, choosing as it picks, and picking what it aims to pick. That is not reasoning, because it is
not done deliberately; but in every respect but that, it is just
like abductive inference”.4
The situation does not change in the case that we consider
short-term and long-term rationality in evolutionary behaviors. In the case of the redshank we deal with “short-term”
instinct–based rationality related to fitness, but in the case of
animals that sacrifice their lives in a way that increases the
lifetime fitness of other individuals we deal with “long-term”
fitness. It has to be said that sometimes animals are also
“hardwired” to use external landmarks and territory signs,

Explanations in terms of psychological states obviously attribute to human beings propositional attitudes, which are a
precondition for giving a rational picture of the explained behavior. These attitudes are a combination of beliefs and desires. Rational internal – doxastic – states characterize human
behavior and are related to the fact that they explain why a
certain behavior is appropriate on the basis of a specific relationship between beliefs, desires, and actions (cf. (Magnani,
2007b, chapter seven)). How can this idea of rationality be
extended to nonlinguistic creatures such as human infants and
several types of animals, where the role of instinct is conspicuous? How can the inferential transformations of their possible internal “thoughts” be recognized when, even if conceivable as acting in their nervous systems, these thoughts do not
possess linguistic/propositional features?
The whole idea of rationality in human beings is basically
related to the fact we are able to apply deductive formalsyntactic rules to linguistic units in a truth preserving way,
an image that directly comes from the tradition of classical logic: a kind of rationality robustly related to “logicoepistemological” ideals. The computational revolution of the
last decades has stressed the fact that rationality can also
be viewed as linked to ways of thinking such as abduction and induction, which can in turn be expressed through
more or less simple heuristics. These heuristics are usually
well-assessed and shared among a wide community from the
point of view of the criteria of applicability, but almost always they prove to be strongly connected in their instantiation
to the centrality of language. Indeed cognitive science and
epistemology have recently acknowledged the importance of
model-based and manipulative ways of rational thinking in
human cognition, but their efficacy is basically considered
to be strictly related to their hybridization with the linguistic/propositional level. Consequently, for the reasons I have
just illustrated, it is still difficult to acknowledge the rationality of cognitive activities that are merely model-based and
manipulative, like those of animals.
At the beginning of this section I said that, when dealing
with rationality in nonlinguistic creatures, tradition initially
leads us to a straightforward acknowledgment of the presumptive and intrinsic rationality of their instincts. The back-

4 Cf. the article “The proper treatment of hypotheses: a preliminary chapter, toward and examination of Hume’s argument against
miracles, in its logic and in its history” [1901], in (Peirce, 1966, p.
692).

151

and communicate with each other using these threat-display
signals that consent them to avoid direct conflict over food.
These artifacts are just a kind of instinct-based mediators,
which are “instinctually” externalized and already evolutionarily stabilized. These mediators are similar to the cognitive, epistemic, and moral mediators that humans externalize
thanks to their plastic high-level cognitive capacities, but less
complex and merely instinct-based.5

acknowledgment that model-based and manipulative cognitions are endowed with an “inferential” status in the Peicean
wide semiotic sense of the word Peirce: all inference is a
form of sign activity, where the word sign includes “feeling,
image, conception, and other representation” (Peirce, 19311958, 5.283).
The second relates to the rejection of the restricted logical
perspective on inference and rationality I have described in
the previous section, which identifies inferences at the syntactic level of natural and artificial/symbolic languages (in this
last case, also endowed with the truth-preserving property,
which produces the well-known isomorphism between syntactic and semantic/content level). I think the perspective in
terms of multimodal abductive cognition,6 which avoids oldfashioned models of rationality, furnishes the suitable background for a unified analysis of the issue.
At this high-rationality level we can hypothesize in nonlinguistic organisms more than the simple selection of actions,
seen as merely hardwired and operating at the level of perceptions like the theory of immediate affordances teaches, where
a simple instrumental conditioning has attached to some actions a positive worth. Instead, in Level 2 rationality, complicated, relatively stable, internal representations that account
for consequences are at work. In this case selecting is selecting – so to speak – for some “reasons”: a bird that learns
to press a lever in a suitable way to obtain food, which will
then be delivered in a given site, acts by considering an association between that behavior and the consequences. A
kind of instrumental pseudobelief about the future and about
certain probable regularities is established, and contingencies
at stake are represented and generalized in a merely modelbased way. Then the organism internally holds representations with some stability and attaches utility scores to them:
based on their choice a consequent action is triggered, which
will likely satisfy the organism’s desire. The action will be
stopped, in a nonmonotonic way, only in the presence of outcoming obstacles, such as the presence of a predator.
Of course the description above suffers the typical anthropomorphism of the observer’s “psychological” explanations.
However, beliefs do not have to be considered explicit; nevertheless, some actions cannot be explained only on the basis
of sensory input and from knowledge of the environmental
parameters. Psychological explanations can be highly plausible when the goal of the action is immediately perceptible
or when the distal environment contains immediately perceptible instrumental properties. This is obvious and evident in
the case of human beings’ abilities, but something similar occurs in some chimpanzees’ behavior too. When chimpanzees
clearly see some bananas they want to reach and eat, and

Levels of Rationality in Animals
Beyond the above idea of rationality in animals and infants as
being related to tropistic behaviors connected to reflexes and
inborn skills such as imprinting or classical conditioning, the
role of intermediary internal representations has to be clearly
acknowledged. In this last case we can guess that a rational intelligence closer to the one expressed in human cognition, and so related to higher levels of abductive behavior, is
operating. We fundamentally deal with behaviors that show
the capacity to choose among different outcomes, and which
can only be accounted for by hypothesizing learnt intermediate representations and processes. In some cases a kind of
decision-making strategy can also be hypothesized: in front
of a predator an animal can fight or flee and in some sense
one choice can be more rational than the other. In front of
the data, to be intended here as the “affordances” in a Gibsonian sense, provided through mere perception and which
present various possibilities for action, a high-level process
of decision-making is not needed, but choice is still possible.
With respect to mere pre-wired capacities the abductive behavior above seems based on reactions that are more flexible.
(Bermúdez, 2003, p. 121) labels Level 1 this kind of rationality. It differs from rationality intended as merely instinctbased, expressed in immutable rigid behaviors (called Level
0). Level 1 rationality (which can still be split in short-term
and long-term) is for example widespread in the case of animals that entertain interanimal interactions. This kind of rationality would hold when we clearly see ir-rational animals,
which fail to signal to the predator and instead flee, thus creating a bad outcome for group fitness (and for their own lifetime
fitness: other individuals will cooperate with them less in the
future and it will be less probable for them to find a mate).
To have an even higher level rationality (Level 2) we need
to involve the possibility of abductively selecting among different hypotheses which make the organisms able to perform
certain behaviors: a kind of capacity to select among different hypotheses about the data at hand, and to behave correspondingly. This different kind of rational behavior, is neither merely related to instincts nor simply and rudimentarily
flexible, like in the two previous cases.
To make the hypothesis regarding the existence of this
last form of rationality plausible, two epistemological preconditions have to be fulfilled. The first is related to the

6 From the perspective of distributed cognition I also stress that
abduction is essentially multimodal, in that both data and hypotheses can have a full range of verbal and sensory representations, involving words, sights, images, smells, etc., but also kinesthetic –
related to the ability to sense the position and location and orientation and movement of the body and its parts – and motor experiences and other feelings such as pain, and thus all sensory modalities
(Magnani, 2009, chapter four).

5 I have fully described the role of epistemic mediators in scientific reasoning in chapter one of my book (Magnani, 2009), and of
moral mediators in ethics in (Magnani, 2007b).

152

Artifactual Mediators and Languageless
Pseudological Thinking

some boxes available on the scene, they have to form an internal instrumental belief/representation on how to exploit the
boxes. This “pseudobelief” is internal because it is not immediately graspable through mere perceptual content:

Animal Artifactual Mediators
Even if the animal construction of external artifactual mediators is sometimes related to instinct, it can also be the
fruit of plastic cognitive abilities strictly related to the need
to improve actions and decisions.7 In this case action occurs through the expert delegation of cognitive roles to external tools, like in the case of chimpanzees in the wild, that
construct wands for dipping into ant swarms or termite nests.
These wands are not innate but highly specialized tools. They
are not merely the fruit of conditioning or trial and error processes as is clearly demonstrated by the fact they depend on
hole size and they are often built in advance and away from
the site where they will be used.
The construction of handaxes by the hominids had similar
features. It involved paleocognitive model-based and manipulative endowments such as fleeting consciousness, private
speech, imposition of symmetry, understanding fracture dynamics, ability to plan ahead, and a high degree of sensorimotor control. They represent one of the main aspects of the
birth of material culture and technical intelligence and are at
the root of what it has been called the process of a “disembodiment of mind” (Magnani, 2006; Mithen, 1996).
From this perspective the construction of artifacts is an
“actualization” in the external environment of various types
of objects and structures endowed with a cognitive/semiotic
value for the individual of for the group. Nonlinguistic beings already externalize signs like alarm calls for indicating
predators and multiple cues to identify the location of the
food caches, which obey the need to simplify the environment and which of course need suitable spatial memory and
representations (Shettleworth, 2002; Balda & Kamil, 2002).
However, animals also externalize complicated artifacts like
in the case of Darwin’s earthworms (Crist, 2002).8

Any psychological explanation will always have an instrumental content, but the component needs not take the
form of an instrumental belief. [. . . ] instrumental beliefs really only enter the picture when two conditions
are met. The first is that the goal of the action should
not be immediately perceptible and the second is that
there should be no immediately perceptible instrumental
properties (that is to say, the creature should be capable
of seeing that a certain course of action will lead to a desired result). The fact, however, that one or both of these
conditions is not met does not entail that we are dealing
with an action that is explicable in non-psychological
terms (Bermúdez, 2003, p. 129).
The outcomes are represented, but these “pseudorepresentations” lack in lower kinds of rationality. The following example is striking. A food source was taken away
from chicken at twice the rate they walked toward it but
advanced toward them at twice the rate they walked away
from it: after 100 trials, this did not affect the creatures’
behavior which failed to represent the two contingencies
((Hershberger, 1986) quoted in (Bermúdez, 2003, p. 125)).
Chicken, which do not retreat from a certain kind of action
faced with the fact that a repeated contingency no longer
holds, are not endowed with this high level “pseudorepresentational” kind of abductive rationality.
The widespread diffusion of abductive cognition is also
confirmed by research into the cognitive basis of science dealing with the potential rational behavior of certain early hominids. (Carruthers, 2002, p. 78) contests the discontinuity
view supporting the idea according to which the human mind
needs to be radically reprogrammed by immersion in an appropriate language-community and culture to acquire cognitive processes (and “in order for anything resembling science
to become possible”). The evolutionary successful, and “social”, art of tracking in hunter-gatherer communities would
have helped them to develop imagination – linguistic and
model-based – and thus, hypothetical cognition (abductive)
– endowed with a kind of explanatory, causal, and instrumental/predictive power. It would have come about because of
its capacity to detect the behavior of animals through the few
signs available, to reach the best explanation. This contention
offers Carruthers the chance to state that “[. . . ] anyone having a capacity for sophisticated tracking will also have the basic cognitive wherewithal to engage in science” (Carruthers,
2002, 83). The only difference lies in aims and beliefs, and of
course in the fact that the development of science needed suitable props and aids, such as instruments, the printing press
and a collective exchange of ideas. The human beings that
created science would not have needed major cognitive reprogramming.

7 Also

plants exhibit interesting plastic changes. In resource-rich
productive habitats where the activities of the plants “generate” various resources above and below ground that strongly modify the environment, plants themselves exhibit various kinds of, so-called, morphological plasticity – that is, the replacement of existing tissues
(Grime & Mackey, 2002, p. 300). It is important to note that plant
plasticity is particularly advantageous when responses are reversible
rather than irreversible (Alpert & Simms, 2002). On plants phenotypic plasticity, like their reaction to appropriate environmental
cues, see also (Godfrey-Smith, 2002); on plants capacity to build
complicated niches (plasticity in dispersal, flowering timing, and
germination timing) cf. (Donohue, 2005). On animals artifacts cf.
also the articles by James L. Gould (Gould, 2007) and Jean Mandler (Mandler, 2007) contained in the recent (Margolis & Laurence,
2007); the book also illustrates other interesting psychological, neurological, evolutionary, and philosophical issues concerning artifacts
in general.
8 Among scientists it is of course Darwin (Darwin, 1985) who
first clearly captured the idea of an “inner life” (the “world of perception” included) in some humble earthworms (Crist, 2002). A kind of
mental life can be hypothesized in many organisms: Darwin wanted
“to learn how far the worms acted consciously and how much mental power they displayed” (Darwin, 1985, p. 3). He found levels of
“mind ” where it was not presumed to exist. It can be said that this
new idea, which bridges the gap between humans and other animals,

153

to the capacity to discriminate causal links from mere noncausal generalizations or accidental conjunctions.10
It is interesting to note in prelinguistic organisms the use of
both logical and fallacious types of reasoning. For example
the widespread use of “hasty generalization” shows that poor
generalizations must not only be considered – in the perspective of a Millian abstract universal standard – as a bad kind of
induction. Even if hasty generalizations are considered bad
and fallacious in the light of epistemological ideals, they are
often strategic to the adaptation of the organism to a specific
niche (Woods, 2004; Magnani, 2007a).

These activities of cognitive delegation to external artifacts is the fruit of expert behaviors that conform to innate
or learnt embodied templates of cognitive doing. In some
sense they are analogous to the templates of epistemic doing
I have described in chapter one, which explain how scientists, through appropriate actions and by building artifacts,
elaborate for example a simplification of the reasoning task
and a redistribution of effort across time. For example, Piaget says, they “[. . . ] need to manipulate concrete things in
order to understand structures which are otherwise too abstract” (Piaget, 1974) also to enhance the social communication of results. Some templates of action and manipulation, which are implicit and embodied, can be selected from
the set of the ones available and pre-stored, others have to be
created for the first time to perform the most interesting creative cognitive accomplishments of manipulative cognition.
Manipulative “thinking through doing” is creative in particularly skilled animals, exactly like in the case of human beings, when for example chimpanzees make a “new” kind of
wand for the first time. Later on the new behavior can possibly be imitated by the group and so can become a shared
“established” way of building artifacts. Indeed chimpanzees
often learn about the dynamic of objects from observing them
manipulated by other fellows: a process that enhances social
formation and transmission of cognition.

Conclusion
In this paper, beyond the idea of rationality in animals and
infants as being related to tropistic behaviors connected to reflexes and inborn skills such as imprinting or classical conditioning, I have stressed the role of intermediary internal representations. In this last case I have guessed that a rational intelligence closer to the one expressed in human cognition, and
so related to higher levels of abductive behavior, is operating.
We fundamentally deal with behaviors that show the capacity to choose among different outcomes, and which can only
be accounted for by hypothesizing learnt intermediate representations and processes. The main concern was that modelbased abductive cognition represents a significant unifying
cognitive perspective able to unveil some basic features of
abductive cognition in non-human animals. I have illustrated
that a considerable part of this semiotic activity is a continuous process of “hypothesis generation” that can be seen at the
level of both instinctual behavior and representation-oriented
behavior, where nonlinguistic pseudothoughts drive a “plastic” model-based cognitive role. From this perspective referral to the central role of the externalization of artifacts that act
as mediators in animal languageless cognition also becomes
epistemologically critical to the problem of multimodality of
abduction. An open question – still related to the problem
of rationality – I have not addressed in this paper is related
to the problem of how nonlinguistic creatures could possess
second-order thoughts on thoughts (and so the more or less
rational capacity to attribute thoughts to others) and first –
and second-order – desires (that is desires when one should
have a specific first-order desire).

Pseudological Thinking
Among the various ways of model-based cognition – still related to the problem of animal rationality – present in nonlinguistic organisms, some can be equated to well-known inferential functional schemes which logic has suitably framed
inside abstract and ideal systems. There are forms of pseudological uses of negation (for example dealing with presence/absence, when mammals are able to discern that a
thing cannot have simultaneously two contrary properties),
of modus ponens and modus tollens (of course both related to
the presence of a pseudonegation), and of conditionals (cf.
(Bermúdez, 2003, chapter seven)). Of course, these ways
of reasoning are not truth preserving operations on “propositions” and so they are not based on logical forms, but it can
be hypothesized that they are very efficient at the nonlinguistic level, even if they obviously lack an explicit reference to
logical concepts and schemes.9 They are plausibly all connected with innate abilities to detect regularities in the external niche. In addition, forms of causal thinking are observed,
of course endowed with an obvious survival value, related

References
Alpert, P., & Simms, E. L. (2002). The relative advantages
of plasticity and fixity in different environments: when is
it good for a plant to adjust? Evolutionary Ecology, 16,
285–297.

in some sense furnishes a partial scientific support to that metaphysical synechism claimed by Peirce contending that matter and mind
are intertwined and in some sense indistinguishable. The recent discovery of the cognitive roles (basically in the case of learning and
memory) played by spinal cord further supports this conviction that
mind is extended and distributed and that it can also be – so to say –
“brainless” (Grau, 2002).
9 On the formation of idealized logical schemes in the interplay
between internal and external representations cf. (Magnani, 2007a)
and chapter seven of (Magnani, 2009). Further results about the role
of proto-logical and illogical performances humans share (or do not
share) with some animals cf. (Yamazaki, Okanoya, & Iriki, 2006).

10 Human prelinguistic infants show surprise in front of scenes
when “action-at-a-distance” is displayed (it seems they develop a
pseudothought that objects can only interact causally through physical contact) (Spelke, 1990). Some fMRI experiments on “perceptual” causality are described in (Fugelsang, Roser, Corballis, Gazzaniga, & Dunbar, 2005): specific brain structures result involved in
extracting casual frameworks from the world. In both children and
adults these data show how they can grasp causality without inferences in terms of universality, probability, or casual powers.

154

Balda, R. P., & Kamil, A. C. (2002). Spatial and social cognition in corvids: an evolutionary approach. In M. Bekoff,
C. Allen, & M. Burghardt (Eds.), The Cognitive Animal.
Empirical and Theoretical Perspectives on Animal Cognition (pp. 129–134). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Bermúdez, J. L. (2003). Thinking without Words. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Carruthers, P. (2002). The roots of scientific reasoning: infancy, modularity and the art of tracking. In P. Carruthers,
S. Stich, & M. Siegal (Eds.), The Cognitive Basis of Science
(pp. 73–95). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Crist, E. (2002). The inner life of eartworms: Darwin’s argument and its implications. In M. Bekoff, C. Allen, &
M. Burghardt (Eds.), The Cognitive Animal. Empirical and
Theoretical Perspectives on Animal Cognition (pp. 3–8).
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Darwin, C. (1985). The Formation of Vegetable Mould,
through the Action of Worms with Observations on Their
Habits [1881]. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Donohue, K. (2005). Niche construction through phenological plasticity: life history dynamics and ecological consequences. New Phytologist, 166, 83–92.
Francescotti, R. (2007). Animal mind and animal ethics: an
introduction. The Journal of Ethics, 11(3), 239–252.
Fugelsang, J. A., Roser, M. E., Corballis, P. M., Gazzaniga,
M. S., & Dunbar, K. N. (2005). Brain mechanisms underlying perceptual causality. Animal Learning and Behavior,
24(1), 41–47.
Godfrey-Smith, P. (2002). Environmental complexity and
the evolution of cognition. In R. Sternberg & K. Kaufman (Eds.), The evolution of intelligence (pp. 233–249).
Mawhah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Gould, J. L. (2007). Animal artifacts. In E. Margolis &
S. Laurence (Eds.), Creations of the mind. theories of artifacts and their representation (pp. 249–266). Oxford University Press: Oxford.
Grau, J. W. (2002). Learning and memory without a brain. In
M. Bekoff, C. Allen, & M. Burghardt (Eds.), The Cognitive
Animal. Empirical and Theoretical Perspectives on Animal
Cognition (pp. 77–88). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Grime, J. P., & Mackey, J. M. L. (2002). The role of plasticity
in resource capture by plants. Evolutionary Ecology, 16,
299–307.
Hershberger, W. A. (1986). An approach through the looking
glass. Animal Learning and Behavior, 14, 443–451.
Magnani, L. (2002). Epistemic mediators and model-based
discovery in science. In L. Magnani & N. J. Nersessian
(Eds.), Model-Based Reasoning: Science, Technology, Values (pp. 305–329). New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum
Publishers.
Magnani, L. (2006). Mimetic minds. Meaning formation
through epistemic mediators and external representations.
In A. Loula, R. Gudwin, & J. Queiroz (Eds.), Artificial
Cognition Systems (p. 327-357). Hershey, PA: Idea Group
Publishers.

Magnani, L. (2007a). Abduction and cognition in human
and logical agents. In S. Artemov, H. Barringer, A. Garcez,
L. Lamb, & J. Woods (Eds.), We Will Show Them: Essays
in Honour of Dov Gabbay (Vol. II, pp. 225–258). London:
College Publications.
Magnani, L. (2007b). Morality in a Technological World.
Knowledge as Duty. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Magnani, L. (2009). Abductive Cognition. The Epistemological and Eco-Cognitive Dimensions of Hypothetical Reasoning. Heidelberg/Berlin: Springer.
Mandler, J. M. (2007). The conceptual foundations of animals and artifacts. In E. Margolis & S. Laurence (Eds.),
Creations of the mind. theories of artifacts and their representation (pp. 191–210). Oxford University Press: Oxford.
Margolis, E., & Laurence, S. (Eds.). (2007). Creations of the
mind. theories of artifacts and their representation. Oxford
University Press: Oxford.
Mithen, S. (1996). The Prehistory of the Mind. A Search for
the Origins of Art, Religion, and Science. London: Thames
and Hudson.
Odling-Smee, F. J., Laland, K. N., & Feldman, M. W. (2003).
Niche Construction. The Neglected Process in Evolution.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Peirce, C. S. (1931-1958). Collected Papers of Charles
Sanders Peirce. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press. (vols. 1-6, Hartshorne, C. and Weiss, P., eds.; vols.
7-8, Burks, A. W., ed.)
Peirce, C. S. (1966). The Charles S. Peirce Papers:
Manuscript Collection in the Houghton Library. Worcester, MA: The University of Massachusetts Press. (Annotated Catalogue of the Papers of Charles S. Peirce. Numbered according to Richard S. Robin. Available in the
Peirce Microfilm edition. Pagination: CSP = Peirce / ISP
= Institute for Studies in Pragmaticism.)
Piaget, J. (1974). Adaptation and Intelligence. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Shettleworth, S. J. (2002). Spatial behavior, food storing, and
the modular mind. In M. Bekoff, C. Allen, & M. Burghardt
(Eds.), The Cognitive Animal. Empirical and Theoretical
Perspectives on Animal Cognition (pp. 123–128). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Skyrms, B. (2008). Presidential address: Signals. Philosophy
of Science, 75, 489–500.
Spelke, E. S. (1990). Principles of object segregation. Cognitive Science, 14, 29–56.
Woods, J. (2004). The Death of Argument. Dordrecht:
Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Yamazaki, Y., Okanoya, K., & Iriki, A. (2006). Development
of logical and illogical inference. In D. Andler, Y. Ogawa,
M. Okada, & S. Watanabe (Eds.), Reasoning and cognition
(pp. 63–74). Tokyo: Keio University Press.

155

