UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
It’s all about the game: Infants’ action strategies during imitation are influenced by their
prior expectations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2d74m4t2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Yu, Yue
Kushnir, Tamar

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

It’s all about the game: Infants’ action strategies during imitation
are influenced by their prior expectations
Yue Yu (yy376@cornell.edu), Tamar Kushnir (tk397@cornell.edu)
Department of Human Development, Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850 USA
Abstract
Infants’ imitation is influenced by causal and intentional cues.
Here we examine whether imitation is influenced by prior social
expectations. Infants (mean age = 27 months) first played one of
three games either: 1) copying the experimenters’ gestures, 2)
establishing and working toward a shared goal or 3) a
non-interactive control. They then participated in a separate
imitation task involved both causally necessary and unnecessary
actions and a goal. Infants who began by copying the experimenter
were more likely to imitate causally unnecessary actions, infants
who played a game with a shared goal were more likely to only
perform causally necessary actions. Infants in the non-interactive
control had no preferred response, and were least likely to achieve
outcome as demonstrated. These results implicate the broader
social context as an important factor guiding the actions infants
choose to imitate, and have implications for the role of imitation in
early learning.
Keywords: infant; faithful imitation; emulation; prior
expectation; social context; social cognition.

Introduction
The tendency to imitate others plays an important role in the
behavioral repertoire of infants and young children.
Newborns imitate facial and manual gestures as part of their
earliest affiliative interactions (Meltzoff & Moore, 1977,
1989). By 6 months, infants begin to imitate sequences of
object-related actions as well. Increasingly over the first few
years of life, imitation becomes more than a way to affiliate
with others; it becomes an important mechanism for
learning about the world (Meltzoff, 1995).
But infants do not always imitate faithfully. In fact, one
important observation is that, in some cases, infants only
copy the goals of another person’s action, ignoring the exact
means of producing those goals (termed "emulation",
Tomasello, 1996). In other cases, infants reproduce whole
action sequences faithfully (Lyons, Young, & Keil, 2007;
McGuigan, Whiten, Flynn, & Horner, 2007; Nielsen &
Tomaselli, 2009; Want & Harris, 2002). Studies show that
which of the two behaviors – emulation or faithful imitation
– infants engage in depends on several factors, including
their understanding of physical causality, their ability to
read intentional and pedagogical cues, and also on their
assumptions that agents behave rationally in the pursuit of
goals (Brugger, Lariviere, Mumme, & Bushnell, 2007;
Carpenter, Call, & Tomasello, 2005; Gergely, Bekkering, &
Király, 2002; McGuigan & Whiten, 2009; Meltzoff, 1995).
In this paper, we offer evidence of an additional factor
that might drive imitative behavior, namely prior social
expectations. We know from previous work that children
can read and track others intentions during social

interactions (Malle, Moses, Baldwin, & Bruner, 2003).
These understandings could cause infants to form
expectations which guide their action strategies broadly in
the context of social interactions, and specifically, these
expectations could result in different imitative behaviors
even when controlling for other causal and intentional cues.
To investigate this, we assigned groups of 27-month-old
infants to play one of three games prior to participating in an
imitation task. The first game involved mimicking the hand
gestures of the experimenter (playing “copy me”). The
second game involved taking turns finding and putting
pieces in a puzzle, and thus established a shared goal. The
final game was non-interactive, and served as a control.
Critically, none of these games involved the toys used in the
imitation task, but rather were used to establish the tenor of
the overall social interaction with the experimenter.
We selected a set of toys for use in the imitation test
which in previous work (Brugger et al, 2007) were shown to
be easy to operate and also causally transparent to infants of
this age. A two action sequence was demonstrated towards
toys, which led to an interesting effect. Of these two actions,
the second (action B) was always necessary for producing
the effect, but the first (action A) was only necessary for
half of the toys. The other half of the time it was causally
unnecessary. For example, in the “flowerbox”, action A was
to remove a Velcro latch, and action B was to open the lid.
In the Necessary condition the Velcro latch was attached on
the lid and held it close, whereas in the Unnecessary
condition the Velcro latch was on the other side of box and
did not hold the lid close. The critical imitation task, then,
occurred when action A was demonstrated but was causally
unnecessary, we could see whether infants’ prior
expectations would be more likely to lead to faithful
imitation, emulation, or some other response.
Using a similar method, Brugger et al (2007) showed that
15-month-old infants were not likely to perform the first
action (action A) when it was unnecessary, despite it was
part of the demonstration. Thus we could expect that,
minimally (in the absence of social cues which would elicit
faithful imitation), infants in our study would also likely
perform only the actions necessary to produce the desired
outcome. Critically, then, the ability to understand the
causal properties of the toys was readily available to infants
and held constant across conditions.
Also held constant across conditions were the social cues
during the imitation task. This was important because in
previous work such cues (e.g. pedagogical intent) have been
shown to influence children’s tendency to faithfully imitate
(Brugger, et al, 2007; Király, 2009; Lyons et al, 2007;
Nielsen, 2006). In our imitation task, all demonstrated

3570

actions were performed with pedagogical intent.
Consequently any differences in imitation could be
attributed to participating in one of the three initial games,
and not to the social cues during the imitation task itself.
Our hypothesis was that the prior expectation (as established
in the initial game) would influence the infant’s action
strategy during imitation. That is, playing a game that
emphasized mimicking hand gestures would lead to more
faithful imitation, whereas playing a game that emphasized
a shared goal would lead to more emulation. More critically,
our goal was to demonstrate that different actions across the
two contexts are due to infants’ different social inferences
about the game being played (i.e. copying actions vs.
sharing goals), rather than to different levels of social
engagement. Thus, we included controls for level of
engagement both within conditions and at baseline.
Comparisons between Necessary and Unnecessary
conditions allowed us to check for the possibility that prior
game context could simply cause different levels of
engagement or attention. If prior game context leads to
different social inferences, then we expect it to influence the
imitation of causally unnecessary actions but not to affect
the execution of causally necessary ones. Furthermore, a
separate group of infants began with a non-interactive prior
game to measure imitation at baseline (i.e. with only the
social cues available during the imitation task).

Toy
Condition

Birdhouse
Necessary

Unnecessary

Initial state
latches

the latch locked the
door

the latch was on the
door but did not lock
the door

Action A
turn the latch around

Action B
open the door

Method

Retrieve
the toy

Participants
Participants were 36 healthy infants (19 males, mean age =
27 mo, range = 23-33 mo) recruited from an infant database
in a small town in upstate NY. Five additional infants were
recruited but were not able to complete the test. According
to parental report, 69% of the included infants are Caucasian,
50% have siblings, 50% had attended day care (median
length = 18 mo), 97% of their mothers have college degree
or higher. Equal group of infants (n = 12) were randomly
assigned to one of three prior games. The average age for
the copy-me, find-the-piece and drawing games are 27.1,
27.5 and 26.6 months respectively. All infants received a gift
for their participation.

Material
Five toys were used in the imitation game: the box, the ramp,
the rake (these three were adapted from Brugger, et al., 2007)
and two versions of the birdhouse (see Fig. 1). For the first
three toys, each could be set up so that the first action
(action A) was either necessary for retrieving the piece or
unnecessary. Detailed descriptions of these three toys can be
found in the original study (Brugger, et al., 2007). We
constructed two versions of the birdhouse (one used in
Necessary condition and one used in Unnecessary condition)
following the same logic. Importantly, like the toys taken
from Brugger et al (2007), the causal properties of the
birdhouses were designed to be transparent to infants of this
age.

get the piece
Figure 1: The birdhouses used in the imitation game. Two
versions of birdhouses were built: one version (Necessary
condition) required two causal actions (i.e., unhook the latch,
open the door) to open and retrieve a puzzle piece, whereas
the other toy (Unnecessary condition) was perceptually
identical except that only the second of these two actions
was necessary (i.e., the latch did not lock the door, so
turning the latch was not necessary for retrieve puzzle
piece).
The objects to be retrieved from the toys (8 in total) were
all puzzle pieces in the shape of baby animals, roughly 2
inches in diameter.

Procedure
The study used 3 (prime game: copy-me, find-the-piece,
drawing; between-subjects) × 2 (condition: Necessary,
Unnecessary; within-subjects) design. Infants were tested in
a quiet room with one table and three chairs. They sat next
to their parents at the table. If they felt uncomfortable, they
could sit on their parents’ lap. The experimenter sat across
the table, facing the infants. The entire session was
videotaped. Infants participated in a familiarization session
first, followed by one of three prior games, and then they
played the imitation game.

3571

Familiarization The familiarization session was designed
to make sure that infants were familiar with the causal
properties of all toys used in the imitation game. A male
experimenter sequentially showed infants the four empty
toys (the box, the ramp, the rake, and Necessary version of
the birdhouse). The order of the toys was counterbalanced
across participants. For each toy the experimenter said
“Look! Have you seen this toy before? You can play with
it”, and pushed the toy to them. Infants played with each toy
for up to 1 minute. If they did not explore all causal actions
related to the toy (action A and B) before shifting attention
away, the experimenter would point out the related parts on
the toy and let infants try these actions.
Prior Games Following familiarization, the infants were
randomly assigned to one of three games. The copy-me
game involved mimicking the hand gestures of the
experimenter. The experimenter started by saying “(Infant’s
name), let’s play a game called ‘copy-me’. I will do some
actions, and you will follow me and do the same.” He then
demonstrated the first “clap-slap” action, and prompted the
infants to do the same thing. After the infants followed
correctly for about 5 seconds, the experimenter moved on to
demonstrate the second action. The infants copied a total of
four actions, including “clap-slap” (alternately clapping
hands and slapping hands on the table), “open shut”
(alternately opening and shutting two hands), “rub hands”
(rubbing hands slowly) and “flying” (crossing the thumbs of
two hands and flapping the other fingers as a bird flapping
wings).
The find-the-piece game involved establishing a shared
goal. The experimenter first presented a puzzle board with
eight sockets on it (four mom animals, four baby animals).
These sockets could be fitted by different pieces with animal
drawings. Four of the pieces (mom animals) were placed
beside the board, and the other four (baby animals) were
hidden in the toy boxes and served as the pieces to be
retrieved during imitation game. The experimenter started by
saying “(Infant’s name), look at this! What are these
animals?” After infants identified the animals, the
experimenter drew their attention to the pieces beside the
board and said “Look, the mom elephant is outside! Let’s
help the mom elephant go back home!” He then picked up the
mom elephant piece, and put it back to the right spot with
little hops indicating walking. Then he turned to the infants
and said “Now let’s see, who else is outside? Could you help
the mom giraffe to get back to her home?” He encouraged
infants to pick up and fit in the other three pieces of mom
animals. After they did so, the experimenter said “Good job!
But look, the baby animals are still missing. Let’s find the
baby animals.”
The drawing game served as a non interactive control. The
experimenter took out a crayon and a piece of paper, and said
“Let’s play a drawing game. You can draw whatever you
want”. He then gave infants the crayon and paper to draw,
and did not interact with them during drawing.

Imitation Game Immediately after they had played the
prior game, infants participated in the imitation game. The
imitation game was comprised of 8 trials, 4 in Necessary
condition and 4 in Unnecessary condition. The order of toys
and conditions were staggered within participants and
counterbalanced between participants. For each trial, the
experimenter took out the toy box and placed it out of the
infants’ reach. He said “Watch me”, and performed the three
actions (action A, action B, and retrieving the puzzle piece)
in a slow, deliberate fashion. At the end he took out the
puzzle piece and showed it to the infants. He then removed
the toy from the infants’ view and placed the piece back
inside. He again presented the toy to the infants, saying
“Now your turn!” The infants were allowed to play with the
toy until they had retrieved the piece or until 1 minute had
passed.

Coding
All videos from the imitation games were coded by two
research assistants blind to the purpose of the study. Prior to
coding, all information related to the prior game was clipped
out from the video, to ensure that the coders were
condition-blind as well. For each trial, the coders first
recorded whether the infants retrieved the puzzle piece. For
those trials in which the piece was retrieved, infants’
retrieval time (time period from first touching the toy to
getting the piece out) and action strategy were also coded.
For action strategy, the coders first coded infants’ individual
actions along the timeline. Individual actions were coded as
one of the following: action A, action B, the action of
retrieving the piece, other actions aiming at getting the piece
out, other actions with the toy (not aiming at getting the
piece out), actions directed at the demonstrator, and actions
directed at parent. Then, the sequence of actions was
converted to one of three retrieval strategies: “A+B”
described an action sequence of action A, then action B,
followed by retrieving the piece, with no other actions
inserted among them. This represented faithful imitation of
the demonstrator’s action sequence. “B only” described a
sequence of action B, followed by retrieving the piece,
without action A or any other actions. This represented
emulation of the demonstrator’s goal to get the piece (note
that this sequence was only possible in the Unnecessary
condition, since in the Necessary condition it was not
possible to retrieve the piece without completing both A and
B). Finally, “other” included all performances that couldn’t
be characterized as “A+B” or “B only”. This could have
involved either reversing the order of A and B, adding
additional actions into the sequence, or retrieving the toy in
a way different from the demonstration. All of these “other”
responses occurred roughly an equal proportion of the time
(9.0%, 7.6%, 10.4% of total responses, respectively).
Inter-rater reliability was high for all measurements (for
whether the piece was retrieved, percentage of agreement =
99.0%; for retrieval time, inter-rater correlation = 94.8%, for
action strategy, Cohen’s Kappa = 80.4%).

3572

The results showed that infants’ action strategy (action A+B,
action B only, other action) in the Unnecessary condition
differed by the prior game they played (Fig. 2). We
analyzed the number of responses in a 3 (prior game) × 3
(action strategy) ANOVA. Results showed a main effect for
action strategy (F (2, 32) = 14.41, p < .001, η2p = .47), and
an interaction effect between prior game and action strategy
(F (4, 66) = 4.56, p = .003, η2p = .22). The main effect was
largely due to the small number of “other” responses across
conditions. Critically, the interaction effects demonstrated
that infants’ action strategy differed significantly depending
on the expectations from the prior game. Infants who played
copy-me game performed more “A+B” responses than “B
only” and “other” (ps < .02, ds > 0.82). This group also
performed significantly more “A+B” responses than infants
who played find-the-piece and drawing games (ps < .01,
ds > 1.15). Infants who played find-the-piece game
performed “B only” marginally more than “A+B” (p = .064,
d = 0.59), and significantly more than “other” action (p
= .002, d = 1.14). They also performed more “B only” then
those in copy-me game (p = .018, d = 1.05). Infants who
played drawing game did not show a preference for any
particular strategy (ps > .5, ds < 0.2), but they performed
more “other” types of responses then those in copy-me and
find-the-piece games (ps < .03, ds > 0.95). In sum, infants
who played copy-me game tended to faithfully imitate the
causally unnecessary actions, whereas infants who played
find-the-piece game tended to perform only the actions
necessary to achieve the desired outcome.
4

Action strategy

Number of trials

3

other
2
B only
A+B

1

0
Copy-me

Find-the-piece

Drawing

Figure 2: Infants’ action strategy in Unnecessary condition.
Infants who played copy-me game were more likely to
reproduce the whole action sequence (“A+B”) than the other
two groups (ps < .01); Infants who played find-the-piece
game were more likely to use the most direct way to get the
puzzle piece (“B only”) than those played copy-me game (p
= .018); Infants who played drawing game were more likely
to use a way different from the demonstration (“other”) than
the other two groups (ps < .03).
We also analyzed infants’ action strategy in the Necessary
condition (Fig. 3) to make sure that the prior games did not

simply influence overall level of social engagement. The
results in the Necessary condition showed no significant
differences in action strategy across the three game contexts
(F (2, 33) = 1.88, p = .17). Additionally, for both Necessary
condition and Unnecessary condition, infants playing three
prior games did not differ in total number of retrievals or
average retrieval time (ps > .2), indicating equal levels of
engagement in the task.1
4

3
Number of trials

Results

Action strategy
2

other
A+B

1

0
Copy-me

Find-the-piece

Drawing

Figure 3: Infants’ action strategy in Necessary condition.
Action strategy did not differ significantly by prior games.
When both actions were causally necessary, infants tended
to imitate faithfully the experimenters’ actions.

Discussion
In this study, 27-month-old infants played an imitation
game after they played one of three prior games. In the
imitation game itself, actions were demonstrated with clear
pedagogical intent. Nonetheless, the different emphasis
placed on copying actions vs. sharing goals in the prior
games significantly influenced infants’ action strategies
during imitation. Infants who played “copy-me” were more
likely to faithfully imitate the experimenter’s causally
unnecessary actions. In contrast, infants who played
“find-the-piece” were more likely to avoid unnecessary
actions and instead only copy necessary ones. Infants who
played a non-interactive control game, but again saw the
same pedagogical demonstration during the imitation task,
were equally likely to faithfully imitate, emulate, or explore
their own way of achieving the goal.
Importantly, we also found that different action strategies
across the two contexts could not be explained by different
levels of attention or social engagement. Instead, our results
suggest that different action strategies were due to infants’
different social inferences about the game being played (i.e.
copying actions vs. sharing goals). Previous studies show
1

Infants’ “A+B” and “B only” responses did not differ between
the first time and second time they played with one toy (ps > .2).
This is true for both Necessary and Unnecessary condition
(ps > .2), and for the three prior games (ps > .05). However, infants
performed more “other” responses in the first time then in the
second time (p = .014), and they were more likely to get out the
piece in the first time (p < .001).

3573

that infants can learn differential action strategies from
different intentional cues before and during imitation
(Brugger, et al., 2007; Carpenter, Call, & Tomasello, 2002;
Carpenter, et al., 2005; Gergely, et al., 2002). Similarly, we
suggest the initial games caused infants to form expectations
about the entire social interaction. Thus, we provide
evidence that infants’ inferences about global social context
influence local social behavior.
However, the nature of infants’ inference is still an open
question. For example, it may be that infants understood the
prior game as the demonstrators’ preference to play in a
particular way. On the other hand, infants might have
understood the prior game as setting up rules to be followed
(Rakoczy, 2008). One possible way to examine whether
infants’ inferences were about a particular individual or
about the game context is to test their imitative response in
the demonstrator’s absence, or in the presence of a new
person. It is also possible that the expectation could be
interpreted differently across development, in particular as
children form more advance social cognitive theories about
the causes of others’ behaviors. Such questions need to be
addressed in future research.
The current results also have implications for early
learning. Of particular interest is the fact that infants in the
non-interactive control were less likely than infants in either
interactive group to perform either of the demonstrated
action. Thus, it seems that when social expectations of any
sort are absent, infants are less likely to learn from others’
actions. It is important to note that the children in the
non-interactive control group were not less engaged or
attentive, but rather were more likely to explore their own
way of acting on the objects. This is consistent with
evidence from preschool children demonstrating trade-offs
between exploratory play and imitative learning (e.g.,
Bonawitz et al., in press).
In sum, our results demonstrate that, beyond causal and
intentional understandings, prior social expectations can
also guide infants’ social inferences, and thus their choice of
action when learning from others. Our findings implicate the
broader social context as an important factor in imitative
learning.

Acknowledgments
We gratefully thank Katy Braun, Shelby Distenfeld, Niki
Klein, Alexis Ritter, Chris Vredenburgh, and Katie
Weidlein, for assistance with recruitment, testing and
coding.

References
Bonawitz, E., Shafto, P., Gweon, H., Goodman, N. D.,
Spelke, E., & Schulz, L. (in press). The double-edged
sword of pedagogy: Instruction limits spontaneous
exploration and discovery. Cognition.
Brugger, A., Lariviere, L. A., Mumme, D. L., & Bushnell, E.
W. (2007). Doing the right thing: infants' selection of
actions to imitate from observed event sequences. Child
Development, 78(3), 806-824.

Carpenter, M., Call, J., & Tomasello, M. (2002).
Understanding “prior intentions” enables two–year–olds
to imitatively learn a complex task. Child Development,
73(5), 1431-1441.
Carpenter, M., Call, J., & Tomasello, M. (2005). Twelveand 18-month-olds copy actions in terms of goals.
Developmental Science, 8(1), F13-F20.
Gergely, G., Bekkering, H., & Király, I. (2002). Rational
imitation in preverbal infants. Nature, 415(6873), 755.
Király, I. (2009). The effect of the model's presence and of
negative evidence on infants' selective imitation. Journal
of Experimental Child Psychology, 102(1), 14-25.
Lyons, D., Young, A., & Keil, F. (2007). The hidden
structure of overimitation. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
104(50), 19751-19756.
Malle, B. F., Moses, L. J., Baldwin, D. A., & Bruner, J. S.
(2003). Intentions and Intentionality: Foundations of
Social Cognition. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
McGuigan, N., & Whiten, A. (2009). Emulation and
"overemulation" in the social learning of causally opaque
versus causally transparent tool use by 23- and
30-month-olds. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 104(4), 367-381.
McGuigan, N., Whiten, A., Flynn, E., & Horner, V. (2007).
Imitation of causally opaque versus causally transparent
tool use by 3- and 5-year-old children. Cognitive
Development, 22(3), 353-364.
Meltzoff, A. N. (1995). Understanding the intentions of
others: Re-enactment of intended acts by 18-month-old
children. Developmental Psychology, 31(5), 838-850.
Meltzoff, A. N., & Moore, M. K. (1977). Imitation of facial
and manual gestures by human neonates. Science,
198(4312), 74-78.
Meltzoff, A. N., & Moore, M. K. (1989). Imitation in
newborn infants: Exploring the range of gestures imitated
and the underlying mechanisms. Developmental
Psychology, 25(6), 954-962.
Nielsen, M. (2006). Copying actions and copying outcomes:
social learning through the second year. Developmental
Psychology, 42(3), 555-565.
Nielsen, M., & Tomaselli, K. (2009). Over-imitation in the
kalahari desert and the origins of human cultural
cognition. Nature Precedings, 713.
Rakoczy, H. (2008). Taking fiction seriously: Young
children understand the normative structure of joint
pretence games. Developmental Psychology, 44(4),
1195-1201.
Tomasello, M. (1996). Do apes ape? In C.M. Heyes &
B.G.Jr. Galef (Eds.), The roots of culture: Social learning
in animals (pp. 319-346). New York: Academic Press.
Want, S. C., & Harris, P. L. (2002). How do children ape?
Applying concepts from the study of non-human primates
to the developmental study of ‘imitation’ in children.
Developmental Science, 5(1), 1-14.

3574

