UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Language comprehension is sensitive to changes in the reliability of lexical cues

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2nz793kg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Fine, Alex
Jaeger, T. Florian

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Language comprehension is sensitive to changes in the reliability of lexical cues
Alex B. Fine (afine@bcs.rochester.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences and Department of Linguistics, University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627 USA

T. Florian Jaeger (fjaeger@bcs.rochester.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences and Department of Computer Science, University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627 USA
Abstract

(1)

This paper tests the hypothesis that language comprehenders update their beliefs about the statistics of their language
throughout the lifespan, and that this belief update allows comprehenders to combine probabilistic linguistic cues according
to their reliability. We conduct a multi-day sentence comprehension study in which the reliability of a probabilistic cue
to syntactic structure is manipulated between subjects. We
find that as the reliability of one cue to syntactic structure decreases, comprehenders come to rely more on a second cue
to syntactic structure. The results are consonant with rational models of cue integration in speech perception and in nonlinguistic domains, thus suggesting a unifying computational
principle governing the way humans use information across
both perceptual and higher-level cognitive tasks.
Keywords: psycholinguistics; adaptation; sentence processing; cue combination

The lawyer acknowledged the judge had been unfair
to the defendant.

Probabilistic cues provide comprehenders with information that can guide inferences during incremental language
processing, contributing to processing efficiency (see Smith &
Levy, 2008 for an explicit proposal along these lines). However, the cues relevant to comprehension are moving targets:
probabilistic cues such as those mentioned above are contextdependent in that their validity (Bates & MacWhinney, 1987)
may vary depending on speaker identity, context, and speaker
dialect (see Tagliamonte, 2005 for a discussion of variability
in syntax). Bates and MacWhinney (1987) define cue validity
as the product of cue availability (how often a cue is present
in the environment) and cue reliability (how often a cue leads
to the correct inference, when present). How do comprehenders cope with this variability and maximize the usefulness
of probabilistic cues? The current study addresses this question and tests a two-pronged hypothesis, framed in the spirit
of rational analysis (Anderson, 1990):

Introduction
In order to process language, humans must make inferences
about intended messages in the face of uncertainty arising
from noisy perceptual data and ambiguity inherent in the linguistic signal. Research in psycholinguistics suggests that humans accomplish this task partially by capitalizing on probabilistic cues in the linguistic as well as the non-linguistic
context (Jurafsky, 1996; Tanenhaus, Spivey-Knowlton, Eberhard, & Sedivy, 1995). For instance, in sentences such as (1),
the judge is temporarily interpretable as both the direct object
of acknowledged and the subject of an embedded sentence
complement. By-word reading times at the point at which
the sentence is disambiguated (had been) are correlated with
the conditional probability of the structural representation assigned to the incremental parse given a number of probabilistic cues. One such cue is the verb—the probability of a sentence complement occurring is greater given assert than acknowledge, based on corpus statistics and norming data (e.g.,
Trueswell, Tanenhaus, & Kello, 1993; MacDonald, Pearlmutter, & Seidenberg, 1994). A second cue is the post-verbal
noun phrase—if a post-verbal noun phrase is unlikely to be
a direct object of the verb, it is more likely to be the subject
of an embedded clause, thereby increasing the probability of
a sentence complement continuation (Garnsey, Pearlmutter,
Myers, & Lotocky, 1997). Finally, if present, the complementizer that (e.g., The lawyer acknowledged that the judge
had been . . . ) also serves as a strong cue to syntactic structure. Indeed, comprehenders have been shown to rely on all
of these cues during the incremental processing of sentences
such as (1) (MacDonald et al., 1994).

• A: Lifelong implicit learning: Throughout adulthood, humans continuously update and adjust estimates of probabilistic cues relevant to language comprehension. We will
refer to the results of this process as adaptation (cf. also
Chang, Dell, & Bock, 2006 and references therein).
• B: Rational linguistic adaptation: Adaptation is rational
in the sense that humans update the weight they assign to a
particular cue based on changes in the validity of that cue.
Preliminary evidence for (A) comes from language comprehension studies at multiple levels of representation (at the
phonetic level: Clayards, Tanenhaus, Aslin, & Jacobs, 2008;
Kraljic & Samuel, 2007; at the syntactic level: Fine, Qian,
Jaeger, & Jacobs, 2010; Wells, Christiansen, Race, Acheson,
& MacDonald, 2009). Preliminary evidence for (B) comes
primarily from speech perception (Clayards et al., 2008;
Kraljic, Samuel, & Brennan, 2008), though these studies are
not necessarily framed in terms of the hypotheses presented
above. Of particular relevance is Clayards et al. (2008), who
manipulated participants’ experience with voice-onset time
(VOT), a probabilistic cue to phonetic category membership.
For participants in one group, the distribution over VOT values that emerged over the course of the experiment had a low
variance; for participants in the other group, this distribution
had a high variance. The rationale of the manipulation is that

925

the reliability of a probabilistic cue can be quantified as the
inverse of the variance of the distribution over values that the
cue can take. Generally speaking, rational models of perception predict that cues should be weighted according to their
reliability—the lower the reliability of a probabilistic cue, the
less subjects should rely on that cue (e.g., Ernst & Banks,
2002).
Consistent with the predictions of rational models, participants in the low reliability (i.e. high variance) group displayed less certainty than subjects in the high reliability (i.e.
low-variance) group in a categorization task that required
making inferences based on VOT. In short, participants relied
on a probabilistic cue to the extent that that cue was reliable.
It remains an open question whether the computational
principles underlying participants’ behavior in the Clayards
et al. (2008) study pervade all levels of language processing, or whether these principles are limited to the interface
between perceptual processes and linguistic categories, as in
speech perception.
The goal of the present study is therefore to test the hypotheses that belief update and the rational weighting of probabilistic cues are general computational principles of language processing by asking whether these principles are operative in sentence comprehension. Following the terminology
from Bates and MacWhinney (1987) introduced above, we
focus on the effect of cue reliability in syntactic comprehension.

that comprehenders can employ to make inferences about the
incremental parse. Verbs such as acknowledge, regret, confess, etc. can take either a sentence complement (SC), as in
(1), or a direct object (DO), as in The woman acknowledged
her own shortcomings. Each of these argument types occurs
with some probability, which can be estimated based on corpus statistics or norming studies. In the current study, we
provide participants with experimentally controlled exposure
to such so-called DO/SC verbs to directly manipulate participants’ estimates of the reliability of the verb as a probabilistic
cue in order to see whether this shifts how participants weigh
each cue during parsing.
Participants were assigned to one of two groups. In both
groups, participants read sentences containing DO/SC verbs
over the course of three non-consecutive days. In one group,
all verbs took SCs. In the other group, verbs occurred 50%
of the time with DO arguments and 50% of the time with SC
arguments. Because the variance of a binomial distribution is
minimized when one event occurs with a probability of 1 and
the other with a probability of 0 and maximized when both
events are equally likely, we refer to the two groups as the
high reliability group and the low reliability group, respectively. This between-participants manipulation is visualized
in Figure (1).
The key prediction is that, as the variance of the distribution over argument types for the verbs increases (i.e., as
the variance of p(SC|v) increases), the reliability of the verb
as a cue to syntactic structure decreases. Participants should
therefore rely more on a second cue to syntactic structure—
here, the complementizer that, since the reliability of that cue
remains constant across groups—as the reliability of the verb
cue decreases. In other words, the complementizer becomes a
better cue to syntactic structure than the verb for participants
in the low reliability group.
A tradeoff between multiple cues like the one predicted
here has been demonstrated in vision (Knill & Saunders,
2003) and visual-haptic tasks (Ernst & Banks, 2002), to give
just two examples.

Methods
To explore these questions, we conducted a multi-day sentence processing study in which the reliability of a probabilistic cue to syntactic structure was manipulated by providing
participants with experimentally controlled experience with
that cue in a between-subjects design, following the logic of
the experiment reported in Clayards et al. (2008).
Specifically, in sentences like (1), reading times at the
point of disambiguation (had been) are sensitive to at least
two cues. First, we consider the presence or absence of the
complementizer that (e.g. The lawyer acknowledged that the
judge had been unfair to the defendant), which, when present,
disambiguates the post-verbal NP (the judge) as the subject of
a sentence complement. However, because the complementizer cue is not always available, it is not a perfectly valid cue.
Moreover, it is important to consider that linguistic perception
is noisy (due to environmental noise, noise within the nervous
system, etc.) such that there is uncertainty about what words
have been perceived (for evidence, see Levy, Bicknell, Slattery, & Rayner, 2009). This suggests that even when the complementizer is present in a speaker’s output it is not a perfect
cue to syntactic structure due to the uncertainty as to whether
it has been perceived. Second, we consider the verb itself
(acknowledged in (1)) a probabilistic cue to syntactic structure. The verb contains information about the probability of
different argument types (and hence different syntactic structures) following it. In that sense, the verb is a probabilistic cue

Procedure
80 participants visited the lab on five non-consecutive days.
Each visit took place no sooner than 48 hours after the previous one. The structure and time-course of the exposure phase
in this experiment were closely modeled on that of Wells et
al. (2009). Similar to their experiment, ours consisted of a
pre-exposure self-paced reading task on the first visit, a second, post-exposure self-paced reading task on the fifth visit
which was identical to the first, and three intervening visits
that comprised the exposure phase of the study.
The procedure at each of these five visits is outlined below,
and the overall experimental regimen is visualized in Figure
(2), where each box corresponds to a different day in the experiment.
Visit 1: Pre-training self-paced reading task Participants
were randomly assigned to either the low reliability or high

926

1.0
0.8
0.6

(2)

0.2
SC

0.0

DO

Low Reliability Group

DO

SC

High Reliability Group

Figure 1: Between-participant manipulation: Distribution
of DO vs. SC continuations that participants in the Low Reliability (left) and High Reliability (right) were exposed to
during visit 2-4 (cf. Figure 2).
Low
Low
Low
Reliability Reliability Reliability
Exposure Exposure Exposure

Visit 1:
SPR task

The talented photographer accepted . . .
a. . . . that the money could not be spent yet.
b. . . . the money could not be spent yet.

Verb-bias was manipulated between items. Based on norming data from Garnsey et al. (1997), 12 target verbs were classified as SC-biased, 12 as EQ-biased, and 12 as DO-biased.
The goal of the first visit was to provide an initial, baseline measure of the effects of prior verb bias and ambiguity
(complementizer presence/absence) on participants in each
group, to which post-exposure self-paced reading times could
be compared to assess the effect of exposure. Specifically,
we expect the change in reading times from pre-exposure to
post-exposure during the ambiguous and disambiguating regions (e.g., . . . the money could not . . . ) to reflect the group
manipulation.

0.4

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.0

0.2

Probability

1.0

not) are underlined.

Visit 5:
SPR task
High
High
High
Reliability Reliability Reliability
Exposure Exposure Exposure

Figure 2: Schematic illustration of the exposure phase used
in the experiment

reliability group. During the first visit, participants in both
groups completed the same self-paced reading task. The materials for the self-paced reading task comprised a subset of
those used in Garnsey et al. (1997). Participants read 36 target sentences containing DO/SC verbs, as well as 72 filler
sentences containing a variety of syntactic structures.
To maximize the temporary ambiguity effect, the DO/SC
verb was always followed by an NP that made a plausible
DO continuation (e.g. The talented photographer accepted
the money could not be spent yet). Target sentences occurred
in one of 2 (temporarily ambiguous vs. not) x 3 (verb bias)
conditions. In the self-paced reading task, all critical items
contained SC continuations—that is, all verbs that could take
a SC continuation did.
In the unambiguous condition, the complementizer that
was present, as in (2a). In the ambiguous version, the complementizer that was absent, as in (2b), where the temporarily
ambiguous NP (the money) and disambiguating region (could

927

Visits 2-4: Exposure Beginning with the second visit to the
lab, participants received experimentally controlled exposure
to DO/SC verbs. Of the 36 verbs included in the self-paced
reading task from visit 1, 16 of these were included in the
exposure phase. Of these, 8 were classified as SC-biased and
8 were DO-biased. The purpose of including only a subset
of the verbs in the exposure phase was to assess the lexicalspecificity of the effect of exposure, discussed below.
At each visit in the exposure phase, participants read a total of 64 sentences containing DO/SC verbs, with each of the
16 verbs appearing 4 times at each visit. In addition to these
64 sentences, participants read 64 filler sentences, randomly
interspersed between critical sentences. Filler sentences contained a variety of syntactic structures, but none contained
DO/SC verbs. Across the exposure phase visits, all DO/SC
sentences and all fillers were unique (participants never read
the same sentence twice). Moreover, the sentences containing
DO/SC verbs included in the exposure varied in length and
semantic content. Sentences were presented in block form
(i.e. the entire sentence appeared on the screen, and participants pressed the space bar when they were done reading the
sentence).
Participants assigned to both the low reliability and the
high reliability group received exposure to the same 16 verbs,
saw these 16 verbs an equal number of times, and read the
same fillers. The crucial difference between the two groups’
exposure lists was the proportion of sentences containing
DO/SC verbs that involved DO continuations (as in (3)) versus SC continuations (as in (4)). For participants in the high
reliability group, all sentences containing DO/SC verbs occurred with SCs. For participants in the low reliability group,
DO/SC verbs occurred 50% of the time with DOs and 50%
of the time with SCs.
(3)

The lawyer acknowledged [SC the judge had been lying].

(4)

The lawyer acknowledged [DO the judge in the red
sweater].

For both groups, half of all SC sentences included the complementizer that.

fect of exposure on verbs included in the exposure phase vs.
those not included.

Visit 5: Post-exposure self-paced reading task Participants in both groups returned to the lab and performed the exact same self-paced reading task they performed during visit
1. Additionally, each subject saw the same experimental list
they saw during visit 1 (i.e., saw the same items in the same
conditions), in order to make pre- and post-training reading
times maximally comparable.
By hypothesis, then, for participants in the high reliability
group, an estimate of p(SC|vi )—i.e. the conditional probability of the SC structure given a particular verb, vi , included
in the exposure—that reflects the context-specific statistics
of the input is p(SC|vi ) = 1, and for participants in the low
reliability group, p(SC|vi ) = .5. Crucially, for both groups,
p(SC|that) is the same. Thus, the informativity or reliability
of the verb cue differs between the groups, while the reliability of that remains identical for the two groups.
What would count as a rational estimate of p(SC|v), if the
goal of adaptation is efficient processing (as hypothesized in
(B)), depends on a variety of as yet unknown factors: how
much variability there is between speakers at the syntactic
level, for example. Also, in our experiment, it is unknown
whether speakers consider the visits to be all generated by
the same “speaker” or at least a sufficiently consistent and
stable “situation” that adaptation can be considered a rational
strategy.
Even though these questions remain unanswered and we
therefore do not know the rational estimate of p(SC|v) for
visit 5, we can still say that the verb will be a more reliable
cue in the high reliability group compared to the low reliability group, and that the reliability of the complementizer will
be higher than that of the verb cue in the low reliability group.
In sum, then, if participants in our experiment are updating their representations of probabilistic cues to syntactic structure in order to reflect the statistics of the (possibly
experiment-specific) input, and are subsequently weighting
these cues according to their reliability, participants in the low
reliability group should rely more on the complementizer as
a cue during the post-exposure self-paced reading task than
in the pre-exposure task. These participants should also rely
on this cue more relative to participants in the high reliability
group.

Effect on verbs in exposure
To test the hypotheses outlined in the introduction, lengthcorrected reading times at the critical region were regressed
onto the full factorial design (i.e. all main effects and interactions) of time (pre- vs. post-training), group (high reliability
vs. low reliability), ambiguity (complementizer present vs.
absent), and SC-bias (SC- vs. DO-biased). The data were
analyzed using linear mixed effects regression, with the maximum random effects structure justified by the data based on
model comparison.1
Regardless of which group participants were assigned to,
there was an overall speedup in reading times from pre- to
post-exposure—i.e., a main effect of time (β = −42, SE =
3.9, p < .001). There was also a significant main effect of
ambiguity, such that reading times were lower for unambiguous sentences (sentences with the complementizer that) than
for ambiguous sentences (sentences without the complementizer). This interacted with time: the processing advantage
conferred by the presence of the complementizer that was
greater during the pre-exposure self-paced reading task than
in the post-exposure self-paced reading task (β = 3.8, SE =
.92, p < .05).
A significant ambiguity by SC-bias interaction was found,
suggesting that the processing advantage conferred by the
complementizer was diminished as the a priori bias of the
verb to take SCs increased (β = 2.3, SE = .89, p < .05).
This replicates previous studies using similar materials (e.g.
Garnsey et al., 1997; Trueswell et al., 1993). Again, this
effect interacted with time: the tradeoff between ambiguity
and prior verb bias was diminished during the post-exposure
self-paced reading task compared to the pre-exposure task
(β = −2.24, SE = .89, p < .05).
Most crucially for the hypothesis that linguistic adaptation serves the purpose of allowing efficient communication,
there was a significant time by group by ambiguity interaction
(β = 2.4, SE = .9, p < .05): the degree to which the complementizer was exploited by participants changed over time, but
more importantly, the nature of this change depended on the
group’s experience during the exposure phase.
To facilitate visualization of the interaction, we computed a difference score by subtracting post-exposure lengthcorrected RTs from pre-exposure length-corrected RTs in the
critical region. Thus, a large change score means a large decrease from pre- to post-exposure reading times. As shown in
Figure (3), participants in the high reliability group showed
a greater decrease in reading times for ambiguous sentences
than participants in the low reliability group, reflecting the
relatively high degree of certainty for participants in the high
reliability group that DO/SC verbs would take SCs, based on
the statistics of the exposure phase.

Results and Discussion
First, we computed length-corrected reading times by regressing raw word-by-word reading times for all words in
both critical and filler items onto word length. The residuals of this model then served as the dependent measure for
all analyses reported. We analyzed length-corrected (residual) reading times for words in the critical region (underlined
in (2a)-(2b)) across both pre- and post-exposure. We examine the effect of exposure for items which contained a verb
included in the exposure, as well as the extent to which the
effect of training was lexically specific by comparing the ef-

1 4-way ANOVAs yield the same results as those reported below. The results do not depend on the particular statistical analysis
performed.

928

the effect of training was of a similar character across both
groups, and there was no significant time by ambiguity by
group interaction (p > .1).

Conclusion

120

The results reported here provide support for two related
claims. First, the results support a view of language comprehension in which humans continuously update their estimates of the statistics of the language they speak via implicit
learning. This extends previous work in speech perception to
higher level aspects of language processing (Clayards et al.,
2008; Kraljic & Samuel, 2007; Vroomen, Linden, Gelder, &
Bertelson, 2007).
Together, these results support the hypothesis of lifelong
learning (A), which is a central assumption of many connectionist accounts (Chang et al., 2006; Elman, 1990; Juola,
1999). This assumption is also supported by recent work
suggesting effects of recent experience that go beyond shortterm boosts in activation associated with the most recently
processed relevant linguistic stimulus (e.g., in production:
Kaschak, 2007; Snider & Jaeger, submitted; in comprehension: Fine et al., 2010; Wells et al., 2009). Since at least 10
days elapsed between the first and last visit, our results highlight the longevity of the effect of exposure, suggesting that
the effect is not the result of short-term syntactic priming.
Second, our results suggest a possible explanation for lifelong linguistic adaptation: by maintaining accurate estimates
of the statistics of the ambient language, comprehenders can
exploit probabilistic linguistic cues in a way that maximizes
the utility of these cues. In our experiment, as the reliability
of one probabilistic cue to syntactic structure (the verb) decreased, participants came to depend more on a second cue
(the complementizer that). Thus participants in our experiment showed a behavioral pattern consistent with rational
models of cue combination (Ernst & Banks, 2002; Knill &
Saunders, 2003).
The lexical specificity of the effect of exposure is noteworthy as well. Recall that the tradeoff between the verb and
complementizer cues was observed only for items containing
verbs included in the exposure phase, suggesting that participants in the experiment tracked very fine-grained statistics
about the reliability of the verb as a cue to syntactic structure.
The results reported here thus go beyond previous work in
important respects. Within sentence comprehension, in addition to finding that the use of probabilistic cues during sentence comprehension is sensitive to experience (supporting
the claims made by, e.g., Wells et al., 2009), we find that the
way in which multiple cues are used during sentence comprehension is guided by very specific details of the statistical
structure of that experience.
Moreover, to the extent that subjects’ behavior in our experiment depended on the variance of a cue to syntactic structure (i.e., on the variance of p(SC|v)), the results suggest
that sentence comprehension may be guided by knowledge
of entire probability distributions, rather than simple point

20

40

60

80

100

Unambiguous
Ambiguous

0

Decrease in length-corrected reading times (pre - post)

Furthermore, the decrease in reading times for participants
in the low reliability group was actually greater for sentences
with the complementizer than for sentences without; and this
decrease was greater for participants in the low reliability
group than in the high reliability group. This pattern shows
that participants in the low reliability group came to rely on
the complementizer as a probabilistic cue more than the high
reliability group, providing support for hypothesis (B) outlined in the introduction.

High Reliability

Low Reliability

Figure 3: Group by Ambiguity interaction

Lexical Specificity of Exposure Effect
We also tested whether the effect of training was modulated
by whether the verb for the item being read was included in
the exposure phase (recall that only a subset of the 36 verbs
in the pre- and post-exposure self-paced reading task were
included in the exposure phase). Because all verbs included
in the exposure were either SC- or DO-biased, models including both a term for exposure (in exposure phase vs. not)
and for SC-bias did not converge, due to collinearity between
these two predictors. Therefore, to test the lexical specificity
of the exposure effect, we regressed length-corrected reading
times at the critical region onto the full factorial design of
time (pre- vs. post-exposure), exposure (in vs. not), ambiguity (temporarily ambiguous vs. unambiguous), and group
(high vs. low reliability). The model included the maximum random effect structure justified by the data based on
model comparison. Again, there was a main effect of time
(β = −38.5, SE = 4.3, p < .001), and a main effect of ambiguity (β = −7.8, SE = 1.1, p < .001) as well as an interaction
between these two predictors (β = 4, SE = .8, p < .01). All
of these effects went in the same direction as in the previous
analysis.
Most notably, the three-way time by ambiguity by group
interaction reported above interacted with training: specifically, the differential weighting of the complementizer across
the two groups only held for experimental items containing
verbs that appeared in the training phase (β = 1.8, SE =
.9, p < .05). For items with verbs not included in training,

929

estimates of those distributions, as is typically assumed (explicitly or implicitly) by previous work focusing on the role
of probabilistic cues during sentence comprehension (e.g.,
Trueswell et al., 1993).
Beyond the domain of sentence comprehension, if humans
rationally integrate cues to syntactic structure, this would
suggest that the same computational principle governing cue
combination demonstrated in speech perception (Bejjanki,
Clayards, Knill, & Aslin, accepted; Clayards et al., 2008;
Toscano & McMurray, 2010) and in non-linguistic domains
(Ernst & Banks, 2002; Knill & Saunders, 2003) is at work
in higher-level language processing, thus suggesting a unifying computational principle governing the way humans use
information across both perceptual and higher-level cognitive
tasks.

tense and plural morphology. Cognitive Science, 23(4),
463-490.
Jurafsky, D. (1996). A probabilistic model of lexical and
syntactic access and disambiguation. Cognitive Science,
20(2), 137-194.
Kaschak, M. (2007). Long-term structure priming affects
subsequent patterns of language production. Memory and
Cognition, 35, 925-937.
Knill, D. C., & Saunders, J. (2003). Do humans optimally
integrate stereo and texture information for judgments of
surface slant? Vision Research, 43(24), 2539-2558.
Kraljic, T., & Samuel, A. (2007). Perceptual adjustments to
multiple speakers. Journal of Memory and Language, 56,
1-15.
Kraljic, T., Samuel, A., & Brennan, S. (2008). First impressions and last resorts: How listeners adjust to speaker
variability. Psychological Science, 19(4), 332-338.
Levy, R., Bicknell, K., Slattery, T., & Rayner, K. (2009).
Eye movement evidence that readers maintain and act on
uncertainty about past linguistic input. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 106(50), 21086-21090.
MacDonald, M., Pearlmutter, N., & Seidenberg, M. (1994).
The lexical nature of syntactic ambiguity resolution. Psychological Review, 101, 676-703.
Smith, N. J., & Levy, R. (2008). Optimal processing times
in reading: A formal model and empirical investigation.
In Proceedings of the 30th annual meeting of the cognitive
science society.
Snider, N., & Jaeger, T. F. (submitted). Syntax in flux: Structural priming maintains probabilistic representations.
Tagliamonte, S. (2005). No momentary fancy! the zero in english dialects. English Language and Linguistics(2), 289309.
Tanenhaus, M., Spivey-Knowlton, M., Eberhard, K., & Sedivy, J. (1995). Integration of visual and linguistic information in spoken language comprehension. Science, 268,
1632-1634.
Toscano, J. C., & McMurray, B. (2010). Cue integration with
categories: Weighting acoustic cues in speech using unsupervised learning and distributional statistics. Cognitive
Science, 434-464.
Trueswell, J. C., Tanenhaus, M. K., & Kello, C. (1993). Verbspecific constraints in sentence processing: Separating effects of lexical preference from garden-paths. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 19(3), 528-553.
Vroomen, J., Linden, S. van, Gelder, B. de, & Bertelson,
P. (2007). Visual recalibration and selective adaptation
in auditory-visual speech perception: Constrasting buildup courses. Neuropsychologia, 45, 572-577.
Wells, J., Christiansen, M., Race, D., Acheson, D., & MacDonald, M. (2009). Experience and sentence processing: Statistical learning and relative clause comprehension.
Cognitive Psychology, 58(2), 250-271.

Acknowledgments
We wish to thank Jeremy Ferris for his dedicated and tireless
efforts with subject recruitment and data collection, and Camber Hansen-Karr for comments on an earlier draft. We also
thank five anonymous CogSci reviewers. This work was partially supported by NSF Graduate Research Fellowship to AF
and NSF Grant BCS-0844472 and Alfred P. Sloan Research
Fellowship to TFJ.

References
Anderson, J. R. (1990). The adaptive character of thought.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Bates, E., & MacWhinney, B. (1987). Mechanisms of language acquisition. In B. MacWhinney (Ed.), (chap. Competition, variation, and language learning). Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Bejjanki, V. R., Clayards, M., Knill, D. C., & Aslin, R. N.
(accepted). Cue integration in categorical tasks: insights
from audio-visual speech perception. PLoS ONE.
Chang, F., Dell, G., & Bock, K. (2006). Becoming syntactic.
Psychological Review, 113(2), 234-272.
Clayards, M., Tanenhaus, M., Aslin, R., & Jacobs, R. (2008).
Perception of speech reflects optimal use of probabilistic
speech cues. Cognition, 108(3), 804-809.
Elman, J. (1990). Finding structure in time. Cognitive Science, 14, 179-211.
Ernst, M. O., & Banks, M. S. (2002). Humans integrate visual and haptic information in a statistically optimal fashion. Nature, 415(6870), 429-433.
Fine, A. B., Qian, T., Jaeger, T. F., & Jacobs, R. (2010, July).
Syntactic adaptation in language comprehension. In Proceedings of the 2010 workshop on cognitive modeling and
computational linguistics (pp. 18–26). Uppsala, Sweden:
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Garnsey, S., Pearlmutter, N., Myers, E., & Lotocky, M.
(1997). The contributions of verb bias and plausibility
to the comprehension of temporarily ambiguous sentences.
Journal of Memory and Language, 37, 58-93.
Juola, K. P. . P. (1999). A connectionist model of english past

930

