UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Layers of Joint Commitments in Interpersonal Communication

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/76s089ht

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Carassa, Antonella
Colombetti, Marco

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Layers of Joint Commitments in Interpersonal Communication
Antonella Carassa (antonella.carassa@usi.ch)
Faculty of Communication Sciences, University of Lugano, Via Giuseppe Buffi 13
6900 Lugano, Switzerland

Marco Colombetti (marco.colombetti@polimi.it)
Department of Electronics and Information, Politecnico di Milano, Piazza Leonardo da Vinci 32
20133 Milano, Italy
Faculty of Communication Sciences, University of Lugano, Via Giuseppe Buffi 13
6900 Lugano, Switzerland
Abstract
We propose a theory of communicative interactions based on
the idea that it is constitutive of interpersonal communication
to create and manage a fragment of social reality. We define
such a fragment in terms of joint commitments of the
interactants, and analyze how these commitments are made in
a conversation. We distinguish between three layers of joint
commitments: those that regulate the embedding activity of
the conversation; those that constitute the joint meaning of
communicative acts; and those that concern the target of the
conversation. We argue that joint commitments are created in
a concrete situation by producing and negotiating interpersonal affordances, which allows the interactants to retain
suitable freedom of movement. Finally, we analyze some
relationships between our conception of communicative acts
and illocutionary acts.
Keywords: Interpersonal communication; communicative
act; interpersonal reality; joint commitment; joint meaning.

Introduction
Fifty years since the publication of Austin’s How to Do
Things with Words (1962), the idea that human communication is to be regarded as a form of action has gained universal acceptance. However, there are reasons to doubt that
Speech Act Theory (as developed, among others, by Searle,
1969; Schiffer, 1972; Bach & Harnish, 1979; and Alston,
2000) provides an adequate treatment of real communicative
interactions. Reasons for skepticism have been put forward,
for example, by Levinson (1981), Clark (1996), and Mey
(2001); Mey, in particular, proposes to replace the notions
of illocutionary and perlocutionary acts of Speech Act Theory with that of a pragmatic act, understood as the situated
performance of a concrete act of communication.
As of today, no situated approach to communication can
boast the generality and depth of Speech Act Theory. It may
be argued that attaining such a result is an impossible mission, insofar as a situated standpoint is by its very nature
sensitive to concrete particulars, which clashes with the
quest for generality; nevertheless, we believe that significant
results can be achieved by suitably choosing the theory’s
‘field of view.’ In the attempt to move forward in this direction, in this paper we confine our interest to processes of
interpersonal communication, aiming to clarify: (i), what
concept of a situation is suited for dealing with interpersonal
communication; and (ii), what relationships hold between

the performance of a single act of interpersonal communication, the interaction process to which the act belongs, and
the situation in which such an interaction is couched.
Our approach is centered on a normative concept, namely,
joint commitment. The importance of normative concepts in
general, and of commitment in particular, has been highlighted in various areas of research related to human communication, like dialogue theory (Hamblin, 1970; Walton &
Krabbe, 1995), philosophy of language (Brandom, 1994;
Alston, 2000; Searle, 2010), and computer-based interaction
(Winograd & Flores, 1986). Nevertheless, the foundational
role of commitment in theories of communication is still
insufficiently appreciated. At least in part this may be due to
the fact that, as remarked by Harnish (2005), we still lack a
widely accepted treatment of commitment, comparable to
the theories of epistemic and volitional mental states, like
belief, desire, and intention.
We found, however, that a theory of commitment suitable
for our goals is offered in the work of Margaret Gilbert
(1989, 1996, 2000, 2006). We rely on Gilbert’s concept of
joint commitment to define interpersonal reality as a major
component of a social situation. In our view interpersonal
communication functions as the main source of interpersonal reality, through the creation and management of suitable affordances; this approach leads us to propose a novel
point of view on several fundamental concepts related to
communicative action, like meaning and uptake.
The paper is structured as follows. In the next section we
introduce a concept of interpersonal communication and
present our view of a situation, with particular regard to its
interpersonal component, based on the concept of joint
commitment. In the following section we give a concise
introduction to joint commitment. Subsequently we delineate a theory of communicative acts, and then analyze some
relationships between communicative acts, and speech acts
as conceived in Speech Act Theory. Finally we draw some
conclusions and describe directions for further research.

The Social Situation
We take interpersonal communication to be a form of communication between individual selves. By this we mean that
interpersonal communication is ‘person-to-person’ (rather
than in broadcast, like in the case of mass communication),
strongly related to the personal identity of the interactants

1055

and to the interpersonal relationship holding between them,
and only marginally sensitive to institutionalized roles (contrary to the case of institutional communication).
Interpersonal communication can take place in a variety
of settings, like for example face-to-face conversations,
phone conversations, mail exchanges, or interactions
through online social networks. In this paper we concentrate
on the basic setting (Clark, 1996), to wit, face-to-face conversations; moreover, for the sake of simplicity we shall
confine to conversations involving two agents.
Interpersonal communication typically occurs in the context of some embedding activity (Bunt, 1998), jointly carried
out by the interactants, like for example making dinner, sailing a ship, or writing a paper together. In the limiting case
of a pure conversation, the whole embedding activity coincides with the communication process. The embedding activity is a major component of the global situation, in which
interpersonal communication is couched. Intuitively, we can
think of the global situation as the set of all states of affairs
which affect, or are affected by, the interaction. Such states
of affairs (be they physical, psychological, or social) function as resources and constraints for action, and often are
themselves the result of the ongoing activity.
At every moment, a situation presents a range of affordances (Gibson, 1979; Norman, 1988; Carassa et al., 2005),
that is, of action possibilities that are perceived by the
agents. To a large extent, agents carry out an interaction by
exploiting the affordances offered by the current situation,
and by creating new affordances for further exploitation. It
is important to remark that the global situation cannot be
identified with the externally observable, spatio-temporal
slice of the world in which the interaction takes place: the
mental representations of the interactants typically bring
into relevance states of affairs that are far away in time and
space, like for example significant events belonging to previous interactions.
In our analysis we concentrate on the social component of
the global situation, which we call the social situation More
precisely, we take the social situation to consist of social
reality, understood as the collective acceptance or recognition of deontic powers, like obligations, rights, and so on
(Searle, 2010). Our definition is justified by various reasons,
and in particular by the fact that the social situation: (i), is
amenable to a general theoretical treatment; (ii), accounts
for a remarkable variety of communicative phenomena; and
(iii), presents interesting dynamics, in that it both affects,
and is continually modified by, communicative action.
It is useful to distinguish between two roughly disjoint
components of social reality: (i), superpersonal reality, constituted by the deontic powers attributed to an agent by a
superpersonal entity (like society at large, a legislature, an
organization, etc.), and typically associated to the roles
played by the agent within some institutional structure; and
(ii), interpersonal reality, constituted by the deontic powers
informally created by people for themselves in everyday
interactions. Both types of social reality involve deontic
powers, but there is an important difference: with superper-

sonal reality, the agents typically recognize certain deontic
powers that they did not contribute to create; on the contrary, interpersonal deontic powers are created by the very
same agents who are bound by them.
As far as interpersonal reality is concerned, we submit
that the creation and maintenance of deontic powers is based
on joint commitments, that are negotiated by the relevant
agents through communicative action (Carassa & Colombetti, 2009c). In the next section we provide an introduction
to the concept of joint commitment, mainly based on the
work of Margaret Gilbert (in particular 1996, Part III; 2000,
Chapter 4; and 2006, Chapter 7).

Joint Commitment
According to Gilbert, all genuinely collective phenomena
(like joint activities, collective beliefs, group feelings, social
conventions, and so on) involve a special kind of commitment, namely, a joint commitment. An agent may be personally committed to do X, for example as a result of an individual decision: such a decision may be rescinded, but failing this the agent is committed to do X. Being committed to
do X is a desire-independent reason (although in general not
a sufficient cause) for the agent to do X; however, in the
personal case the agent is the only ‘owner’ of the commitment, and can rescind it as he or she pleases. Contrary to
personal commitments, a joint commitment is a commitment of two or more agents, called the parties of the joint
commitment, to engage in a common project ‘as a single
body.’ The main difference between personal and joint
commitments is that a joint commitment is not separately
owned by its parties, but is, so to speak, collectively owned
by all the parties at the same time.
According to Gilbert, to establish a joint commitment to
do X it is necessary and sufficient that every party expresses
his or her readiness to be so committed, in conditions of
common knowledge; such common knowledge may derive
from an explicit agreement, but also from less structured
interactions and, in many cases, from the shared understanding of a culturally meaningful context.
In view of the purpose of this article, the main feature of
joint commitments is that they consist of deontic relationships between the parties. If a group is jointly committed to
do something, then every party is obligated to all other parties to do their part, and has the right that all other parties do
their parts. It is characteristic of joint commitments that
such obligations are created simultaneously, when the joint
commitment comes into force, and are interdependent, in
the sense that each party is bound by the joint commitment
only as long as the other parties are so bound. If and when
all its obligations are fulfilled, a joint commitment is itself
fulfilled; on the contrary, if one of its obligations is violated,
the whole joint commitment is violated; as remarked by
Gilbert (1996), violation by a party typically implies that the
joint commitment becomes voidable by the other parties.
Moreover, the obligations of a joint commitment are persistent, in the sense that they do not expire unless the joint

1056

commitment is fulfilled or re-negotiated. Thanks to their
persistence, joint commitments appear to exert a crucial
function in human interaction, in that they provide collectively accepted desire-independent reasons for action, and
thus make the future behavior of agents more stable and
predictable.
The content of a joint commitment need not be an activity: a group of agents may also commit to a propositional
attitude, like a belief or a desire, or to a value, a feeling, and
so on; for example, the members of the Flat Earth Society
are jointly committed to believing that the Earth is flat, and
the components of a sports team are jointly committed to be
proud of their victories. It is important to remark that all
commitments, irrespective of their contents, are desireindependent reasons for action, and as such have a world-tomind direction of fit. This is obvious for a commitment to
do something, but may sound odd, for instance, in the case
of a commitment to a belief. The reason is that in the case of
an action commitment, both the commitment and its content
have the same direction of fit, namely, world-to-mind; but
in the case of a commitment to a belief, the commitment has
a world-to-mind direction of fit, while its content has a
mind-to-world direction of fit. This apparent conflict vanishes if one thinks that all types of commitments entail obligations, which in turn give a crucial contribution to the formation of intentions. For example, suppose that Ann is a
member of the Flat Earth Society; then, to fulfill her join
commitment, she ought to behave in certain ways, like referring to the North Pole as “the center of the Earth.”
Joint commitments to beliefs (that following Gilbert,
1987, we call collective beliefs) play a key role in our theory
of interpersonal communication. A collective belief that p
(i.e., the joint commitment of a group to uphold as a body
the belief that p) should not be confused with what is usually called common or mutual belief. Both collective and
common beliefs are ‘distributed’ mental states, in the sense
that they require all the members of a group to entertain
certain mental states; there are, however, important differences between the two concepts. The first such difference is
that a collective belief, being a joint commitment, is a
source of obligations and rights; more precisely, if p is collective belief of group G, then every member of G is obligated to all other members to act as if p were common belief
of G, and has the right against all other members of G that
they behave accordingly. A further difference is that collective beliefs, contrary to common beliefs, are logically independent of what the relevant agents personally believe. As a
limiting case, it is logically possible for a group of agents to
hold the collective belief that p, while it is common belief of
the same group that not-p. However, if a group of agents
collectively believe that p, then all members of the group are
obligated to behave as if p were common belief of the group
(a situation that is well portrayed by Andersen’s story of the
Naked King).

Communicative Acts
Our approach takes the move from the following assumptions: (i), interpersonal communication is a situated activity,
by which a group of agents create and manage a fragment of
interpersonal reality; (ii), such interpersonal reality consists
of those deontic powers that are collectively accepted by the
very agents engaged in the interaction; (iii), collective acceptance consists of joint commitments of the same agents.
As we have already pointed out, in this paper we restrict our
treatment to face-to-face conversations involving two interactants, A and B. In the sequel we sketch the overall scheme
of our theory.
Layers of interpersonal reality Interpersonal communication involves three layers of interpersonal reality (Carassa &
Colombetti, 2009c). As we shall see, the bottom layer consists of the joint commitments of A and B concerning the
current activity, which embeds the communicative interaction (and actually coincides with it, in the case of a pure
conversation); the middle layer involves the construction of
joint meaning, that is, the creation of joint commitments to
the effect that certain communicative acts have been performed; and the top layer involves joint commitments concerning the target of the interaction.
Let us consider a real example of a pure conversation:1
(1a) A: Can I ask you something?
(1b) B: Sure.
(2a) A: Are you planning to get any stuff from Amazon
shortly?
(2b) B: Not really.
(3a) A. There are a couple of books I need.
(3b) B: [in a slightly teasing tone] Ok, just send me the
data.
(4a) A: Oh, thanks!
(4b) B: You’re welcome, dear.
This exchange consists of a sequence of utterances, organized as four adjacency pairs, that we shall now analyze in
details.
Setting up the embedding activity As we have already
pointed out, we regard interpersonal reality as consisting of
joint commitments. According to Gilbert, to make a joint
commitment to X it is necessary and sufficient that A and B
express their readiness to be so committed, in conditions of
common knowledge. A first observation is that while a joint
commitment binds its parties simultaneously, the process of
creating the joint commitment is typically incremental, as it
is highly improbable that all the parties express their readiness at the same time. Typically one of the agents, say A,
will start expressing readiness, thus making what we call a
precommitment. This precommitment functions as an interpersonal affordance for B, who may ignore it, express a
matching readiness (thus transforming A’s precommitment

1

1057

Free translation from Italian. A and B are in the same room,
working independently at their laptops; it is common practice of
A and B that B carries out online purchases for A.

into a full-blown joint commitment of A and B), or deal
with it otherwise.
A first example of this is pair 1a-1b. By utterance 1a, A
expresses her readiness to engage in a conversational exchange with B, and this creates for B the interpersonal affordance to set up a conversation with A. B can now exploit
such an affordance in different ways. A first possibility
would be to ignore A’s precommitment, and just keep silent:
(1b’) B: –
Another possibility for B is to acknowledge A’s precommitment, while refusing to turn it into a joint commitment;
this result could be achieved, for example, by answering:
(1b”) B: Not now, please, I’m in a hurry here.
Third, B can acknowledge A’s precommitment, and accept to turn it into a joint commitment of A and B to engage
in a conversation together, and this is what B does by uttering 1b. Such a joint commitment entails certain mutual
rights and obligations, like the right to address further communicative acts to the other party, and the obligation to participate in the construction of joint meaning and in the negotiation of the target (see the following subsections). Note
that even if B, by uttering 1b”, would reject A’s precommitment to set up a conversation, he would still implicitly
acknowledge that he construed utterance 1a as creating such
a precommitment, thus implying that joint meaning of 1a
has been achieved; this would not be the case with response
1b’ (silence).
It is important to remark that our treatment does not aim
to provide a comparative evaluation of responses like 1b,
1b’, and 1b”, for example relative to a system of conversational rules. Indeed, keeping silent (like in 1b’) would be
considered inappropriate in most conversational situations;
but this has to do with what we have called superpersonal
reality, that is, with the normativity that is externally imposed on the current social situation. What we try to clarify,
on the contrary, is what different responses actually contribute to the creation and maintenance of interpersonal reality,
that is, to the normativity that is built by the interactants
within the current situation.
Creating joint meaning Meaning is a highly controversial
topic. For most speech act theorists, what an agent means by
an utterance depends on their communicative intention, independently of what the addressee understands, and even of
the actual existence of an addressee; for other, more socially-minded, theorists, meaning is in some important sense
jointly constructed by the speaker and the addressee. In a
previous paper (Carassa & Colombetti, 2009a) we have proposed to dissolve this apparent conflict of views by distinguishing between speaker’s meaning, which is a function of
the speaker’s communicative intention, and joint meaning,
which is collectively constructed by the speaker and the
addressee. The joint meaning of an utterance, addressed by
A to B, is the joint commitment of A and B to uphold as a
body the belief that A’s utterance has been produced with a
given communicative intention. This implies that joint
meaning is to be regarded as the collective belief of the

speaker and the addressee, to the effect that a certain communicative act has been performed.
Going back to our example, we can notice that an utterance often gives an implicit contribution to the construction
of joint meaning of previous utterances. After pair 2a-2b, it
is still not established that 2a is meant by A as a pre-request,
related to the target of getting some books from Amazon.
But that this is the case becomes clear after 3a-3b; more
precisely, utterance 3b: (i), implies that B construed 3a as an
indirect request, and 2a as a related pre-request; (ii), conveys acceptance of the request; and (iii), suggests a way of
carrying out the joint project that is now understood to be
the target of the conversation. A different construal would
be put forward, for example, by a response like:
(3b’) B: Try Amazon Italy, delivery is free.
Like in the case discussed in the previous subsection
(concerning the joint action of setting up an embedding activity), also joint meaning is built by the speaker’s creation
of an interpersonal affordance, which can be exploited by
the addressee to complete the construction of a joint commitment. This view is especially useful to deal with indirect
speech; for example, A’s utterance 3a creates affordances
for B to interpret it in different ways: as an indirect request
to buy some books for A; as an indirect request to put the
speaker in condition of buying the books herself; as a mere
expression of a wish; and so on. By response 3b, B offers to
A an interpretation of 3a as a request to buy some books for
her (and, by the same utterance, B accepts such a request).
Then, by 4a, A implicitly accepts B’s construal; but note
that at this stage A still has the possibility of suggesting a
different interpretation, for example by saying,
(4a’) A: I think I can manage it, I just wanted to know if
you want to add something to my order.
An addressee’s contribution to the construction of joint
meaning is obviously related to Austin’s concept of uptake.
In the Speech Act literature, uptake has been either completely neglected, or at most considered as the addressee’s
epistemic recognition of an intended illocutionary act. On
the contrary, we advocate a normative concept of uptake, as
the addressee’s contribution to the construction of joint
meaning, understood as a piece of interpersonal reality.
Such a contribution we call interpersonal uptake.
Negotiating the target At the third layer of interpersonal
reality, the target of the communicative interaction is negotiated. Also at this layer we understand interaction as the
production of interpersonal affordances in the form of precommitments, which the addressee may ignore, accept (and
thus transform into full-blown joint commitments), refuse,
or otherwise negotiate. In our example, the target concerns
B buying some books for A from Amazon. But that this is
the case is fully established only with utterance 4a, where A
accepts B’s construal of 3a as an indirect request. All utterances preceding 4a provide relevant affordances in this direction, but still leave the interactants some freedom of
movement.

1058

The concept of freedom of movement is crucial to understand why communicative interactions are carried out by
creating and managing affordances at different layers of
interpersonal reality (Carassa & Colombetti, 2009b). In the
last resort, what is at stake is negotiating the target: in our
example, A has the personal goal of getting B to buy certain
books for her; but this goal could also be achieved through a
direct request, like for example:
(2a’) A: Please buy me a few books from Amazon, I’ll
send you the data.
A first observation is that a direct request of this tenor
conveys a presumption of authority of A over B, that would
be inappropriate in the relevant social situation. This explains why A is willing to leave B some freedom of movement at the target layer, but is still insufficient to fully understand our example; indeed, the same result could be
achieved by a direct request that explicitly acknowledges
B’s right to refuse, like:
(2a”) A: I need a few books. You may buy them for me
from Amazon, if you want.
The problem with such a request is that it leaves B two alternatives: accepting the request, which B may not want to
do, or refusing it, which may be embarrassing. What we see
in our example, instead, is that the locus of negotiation is
moved from the target layer to the layer of joint meaning:
after 3a, B is still free to construe it as an indirect request of
buying the books for A, or in a different way, like for example as a weaker request of assistance (see 3b’).
It is important to clarify that the target (i.e., B’s concrete
action of buying some books for A) is not part of the present
situation: B’s action will be performed at some future moment, after the current interaction has been terminated (by
pair 4a-4b). On the contrary, the joint commitment of A and
B, to the effect that such an action will be carried out, is part
of the present situation, as it is here that the commitment is
created. Interestingly, the commitment does not expire when
the current interaction is terminated: as we have already
remarked, the temporal persistence of joint commitments is
essential to their function of making the future consequences of an interaction adequately stable and predictable.

Communicative vs. Speech Acts
Given the impact of Speech Act Theory on theories of
communication, it is meaningful to confront a novel conception of a communicative act with that of a speech act. Here
we shall consider four aspects related to Speech Act Theory:
(i), the distinction between illocution and perlocution; (ii),
the controversy between normativistic and naturalistic approaches; (iii), the distinction between communicative and
conventional acts; and (iv), the treatment of indirect speech.
Illocution and perlocution Our treatment of communicative acts situates itself at the illocutionary level. While this
is obvious for the joint meaning layer, it may seem that the
target layer is concerned with perlocution. But this is not the
case, as we do not examine the mental processes that lead an
addressee, for example, to accept or refuse a request; rather,

we analyze how acceptance or refusal is made public
through communication, and this concerns illocution.
In any case, our treatment of illocution departs from classical Speech Act Theory, in that we are interested in how
the illocutionary force of an utterance is collectively constructed as a matter of joint meaning. A consequence is that
communicative acts cannot be studied in isolation, but only
in the flow of conversation.
Normativistic vs. naturalistic approaches Harnish (2005)
contrasts normativistic and naturalistic theories of speech
acts. According to the former (originated by Austin, 1962,
and mainly developed by Searle, 1969, and Alston, 2000),
to perform an illocutionary act is to produce an utterance in
conformance with certain constitutive rules; according to the
latter (mainly developed by Schiffer, 1972, and Bach &
Harnish, 1979), to perform an illocutionary act is to produce
an utterance with a reflexive communicative intention,
which includes its own recognition by the addressee in its
conditions of satisfaction.
It seems to us that our approach overcomes this opposition by recognizing the crucial importance of the normative
dimension of communicative acts, but reducing it to a perfectly natural phenomenon, that is, the human cognitive
ability to make joint commitments (see Carassa & Colombetti, 2009a, for a preliminary analysis of the role of reflexive communicative intentions in the creation of joint commitments).
Communicative vs. conventional acts According to normativistic theories, there is no essential difference between,
say, asking a favor and pronouncing two persons man and
wife: in both cases, an illocutionary act is performed in conformance with certain constitutive rules. Naturalistic theories, on the contrary, deal differently with the two types of
illocutionary acts, because the addressee’s recognition of the
communicative intention is crucial in the former case, but
not in the latter. This introduces a sharp distinction between
communicative and conventional acts, as first proposed by
Strawson (1964). In our view, the difference between these
two types of illocutionary acts is related to the two kinds of
social reality, that is, interpersonal reality (for communicative acts) and superpersonal reality (for conventional acts).
What is at stake, then, is not so much a difference between
types of illocutionary acts, but rather a difference between
types of social situations. In the future, we plan to extend
our treatment to conventional acts including superpersonal
reality in our treatment of the social situation.
Indirect illocutionary acts In Speech Act Theory, an utterance like 3a is usually analyzed as realizing both a literal
illocutionary act of the assertive type, and an indirect illocutionary act of the directive type. The inference from the literal to the indirect interpretation can be accounted for in
terms of conversational implicature (Searle, 1975).
It is by no means obvious, however, that such a treatment
provides a satisfactory view of what goes on in a real conversation. In uttering 3a, for example, even A may not be
completely clear about her own communicative intention: is

1059

she intentionally requesting B to buy the books for her, or is
she suggesting that buying the books would be nice of B, or
is she just presenting a state of affairs to B, in the hope that
B will somehow help her? Not only this cannot be established by simply scrutinizing A’s utterance; more importantly, A need not have a fully definite communicative intention: what A actually does is to create an interpersonal
affordance for B to participate in the collective construction
of joint meaning. If we are right on this, the classical theory
of indirect illocutionary acts should be replaced by a different view, which highlights the power of situated communicative acts to create and manage interpersonal affordances at
all layers of interpersonal communication (Carassa & Colombetti, 2009b).

Conclusions
We have argued that interpersonal communication is
basically a matter of creating and managing a fragment of
interpersonal reality. We dealt with interpersonal reality in
terms of joint commitments, and analyzed how these are
created in conversation. We distinguished between three
layers of joint commitments, and argued that at each layer
the relevant joint commitments are made by producing and
negotiating interpersonal affordances in a concrete social
situation, so that the interactants can retain suitable freedom
of movement.
We believe that recognizing the central role of joint
commitment in human interaction involves a crucial enlargement of the classical view of human cognition. Indeed,
it is interesting to see that important contributions in this
direction are being produced by empirically oriented research on the origin of human communication and cooperation (Tomasello, 2008; Gräfenhain et al., 2009).
In the future, we plan to develop our approach in two
main directions: first, by extending our treatment to
communicative interactions that are significantly affected by
elements of superpersonal social reality, thus covering
communication in institutional contexts; second, by
providing a more articulated account of joint commitment,
with the aim of showing how to extend the classical
conceptual toolkit of Cognitive Science, in order to deal
with the intrinsically normative nature of human
interactions.

References
Alston, W. P. (2000). Illocutionary acts and sentence meaning. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Austin, J. L. (1962). How to do things with words. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Bach, K., & Harnish, R. M. (1979). Linguistic communication and speech acts. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Brandom, R. B. (1994). Making it explicit. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Bunt, H. C. (1998). Iterative context specification and dialogue analysis. In H. C. Bunt & W. J. Black (Eds.), Abduction, belief, and context. London: University College
Press.

Carassa, A., & Colombetti, M. (2009a). Joint meaning.
Journal of Pragmatics, 41, 1837–1854.
Carassa, A., & Colombetti, M. (2009b). Situated communicative acts: A deontic approach. Proc. CogSci 2009 (pp.
1382–1387), Amsterdam, July 2009.
Carassa, A., & Colombetti, M. (2009c). Creating interpersonal reality through conversational interactions. Presented at the Inaugural Conference of the European Network of Social Ontology, Constance, CH, 16-17 October
2009 (http://www.common.unisi.ch/pdf_pub5326).
Carassa, A., Morganti, F., & Tirassa, M. (2005). A situated
cognition perspective on presence. Proc. CogSci 2005
(pp. 510–516), Stresa, I, July 2005.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual perception. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Gilbert, M. P. (1987). Modeling collective belief. Synthese,
73, 185–204.
Gilbert, M. P. (1989). On Social Facts. London and New
York: Routledge.
Gilbert, M. P. (1996). Living together. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Gilbert, M. P. (2000). Sociality and responsibility. Lanham,
MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Gilbert, M. P. (2006). A theory of political obligation. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Gräfenhain, M., Behne, T., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M.
(2009). Young children’s understanding of joint commitments. Developmental Psychology, 45, 1430–1443.
Hamblin, C. L. (1970). Fallacies. London: Methuen.
Harnish, R. M. (2005). Commitments and speech acts. Philosophica, 75, 11–41.
Levinson, S. C. (1981). The essential inadequacies of
speech act models of dialogue. In H. Perret, M. Sbisà & J.
Verschueren (Eds.), Possibilities and limitations of pragmatics. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Mey, J. L. (2001). Pragmatics (2nd ed.). Oxford: Blackwell.
Norman, D. A. (1988). The psychology of everyday things.
Basic Books, New York.
Schiffer, S. R. (1972). Meaning. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Searle, J. R. (1969). Speech acts. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Searle, J. R. (1975). Indirect speech acts. In P. Cole & J. L.
Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and semantics 3: Speech acts. New
York: Academic Press.
Searle, J. R. (2010). Making the social world. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Strawson, P. F. (1964). Intention and convention in speech
acts. The Philosophical Review, 73, 439–460.
Tomasello, M. (2008). Origins of human communication.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Walton, D. N., & Krabbe, E. C. W. (1995). Commitment in
dialogue. Albany, NY: State University of NY Press.
Winograd, T., & Flores, F. (1986). Understanding computers and cognition. Norwood, MA: Ablex.

1060

