UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Local statistical learning under cross-situational uncertainty

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8vb661ts

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Onnis, Luca
Edelmann, Shimon
Waterfall, Heidi

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Local statistical learning under cross-situational uncertainty
Luca Onnis (lucao@hawaii.edu)

Department of Second Language Studies, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA
Center for Second Language Research, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA
Shimon Edelman (edelman@cornell.edu)

Department of Psychology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, 14853, USA
Heidi Waterfall (heidi.waterfall@gmail.com)

Department of Psychology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, 14853, USA
Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA
Abstract
Statistical learning research often assumes that learners
collect global statistics across the entire set of stimuli they are
exposed to. In naturalistic settings, this assumption of global
access to training data is problematic because it implies that
the cognitive system must keep track of an exponentially
growing number of relations while determining which of
those relations is significant. We investigated a more
plausible assumption, namely that learning proceeds
incrementally, using small windows of opportunity in which
the relevant relations are assumed to hold over temporally
contiguous objects or events. This local statistical learning
hypothesis was tested on the learning of novel word-to-world
mappings under conditions of uncertainty. Results suggest
that temporal contiguity and contrast are effective in
multimodal learning, and that the order of presentation of data
can therefore make a significant difference.
Keywords: statistical learning; cross-situational learning;
variation sets; language acquisition.

What principles guide learning from multiple
parallel streams of sensory information? How can
humans find structure in sustained exposure to
auditory and visual stimuli? Much of learning can
be characterized as finding patterns in space and
time under conditions of high uncertainty – from
deriving categories from experience (e.g.,
Tenenbaum & Griffiths, 2001), through learning
word meanings from their co-occurrence with
perceived events in the world (e.g., Frank,
Goodman, & Tenenbaum, 2009), to acquiring the
different levels of linguistic structure (e.g., Solan,
Horn, Ruppin, & Edelman, 2005).
Behavioral studies in statistical learning (e.g.,
Gómez & Gerken, 2000) indicate that infants,
children, and adults can extract regularities across
a set of exemplars distributed in time and/or
space. A core assumption of such studies is that
to extract such regularities, learners collect global

statistics across the entire set of stimuli they are
exposed to, often over multiple trials or training
sessions.
When applied to naturalistic learning, this
‘global’ assumption is problematic: it requires that
the cognitive system keep track of an
exponentially growing number of relations among
various pieces of data while identifying the
significant relations.
A more plausible
assumption, investigated here, is that learning
proceeds incrementally, using small windows of
opportunity in which the relevant relations are
those that hold over spatially and/or temporally
neighboring objects or events.
For example, in a study by Onnis, Waterfall, &
Edelman (2008), adult learners were asked to
individuate the novel words of an “alien”
language from unsegmented sentences such as
kedmalburafuloropesai. In the absence of acoustic
and prosodic cues (sentences were generated by
speech synthesis software), each sentence could in
principle be composed of a range of possible
words ranging from a single long word (as is not
uncommon in polysynthetic languages such as
West Greenlandic), to as many words as there
were syllables. Onnis et al. (2008) found that
learners were significantly better at the word
segmentation task when some consecutive
sentences in the training set overlapped in some of
their syllables (e.g., kedmalburafuloropesai
followed by rafuloro), compared to a control
condition in which the order of the same set of
sentences was scrambled so that no parts of
adjacent sentences matched. When aligned, the
partially matching sentences suggest candidate

2697

units (here, kedmalbu, rafuloro, pesai) without the
need for learners to entertain all possible
candidates over a long series of sentences. Local
partial repetitions across sentences thus facilitate
learning. Importantly, the study also found
evidence for a “trickle-down” learning effect: not
only did learners more reliably prefer word units
heard in pairs of partially matching sentences, but
also other valid units that never occurred in such
pairs (e.g., gianaber, kiciorudanamjeisulcaz).
While the Onnis et al. (2008) study provided
evidence for contingency and proximity as basic
principles of structure inference from auditory
cues, it did not investigate the alignment of
linguistic structures with perceptual data from
other modalities such as vision. Typically, there
are many potential word-to-world mappings, and
the learner must solve this correspondence
problem in the face of uncertainty (Quine, 1980).
Can local learning based on principles of
alignment
and
comparison
reduce
the
combinatorial explosion of hypotheses arising in
the process of matching words to their referents?
Although statistical regularities alone can drive
learning of word reference (e.g., Yu & Smith,
2007), the contribution of partial matches of
adjacent stimuli to such learning was unknown.
The experiments described below were
modelled after Yu & Smith’s (2007) crosssituational word learning paradigm in adults. In
each learning trial, participants saw multiple novel
pictures and simultaneously heard multiple novel
words, creating ambiguity regarding correct wordto-picture mappings. For instance, if four words
and four pictures were presented on a single trial,
there could be 4 x 4 = 16 possible word-referent
combinations. The participants’ task was to infer
word-picture mappings across these training trials.
At test, participants heard a single novel word and
had to select one picture out of four that went with
that word. Importantly, the subjects’ ability to
learn in this task indicates that they tracked the
relations between words and referents across
multiple trials, hence the term cross-situational
learning. Other studies have shown that children
can also make cross-situation comparisons when
learning novel word-world pairings (e.g., Akhtar
& Montague, 1999; Childers & Paik, 2009).

How exactly are the ambiguities in such
learning tasks resolved? According to Yu & Smith
(2007), cross-situational learning works as
follows. Consider a simple learning scenario that
consists of 4 trials as in Table 1, with each trial
ambiguously presenting two words (in lowercase) and two referents (in upper-case). In trial 1,
learners could mistakenly link the word a to the
referent B; later they could successfully rectify
their mistake and discover the correct a-A
mapping, if all the following conditions applied:
1) they registered that word a occurred in trial 4
without the incorrect referent B; 2) they
remembered the prior word-referent pairing; 3)
they registered both co-occurrences and non cooccurrences among all possible pairings; and 4)
they calculated the right statistics.
Trial
1
2
3
4

Words
ab
cd
ef
ga

Table 1
Potential referents in scene
BA
DC
EF
GA

Trial
1
2
3
4

Words
ab
ga
cd
ef

Table 2
Potential referents in scene
BA
GA
DC
EF

Clearly, the proposed mechanism is capable of
tracking multiple statistical relations both locally
(over adjacent trials) and globally (over the entire
learning experience). For the purposes of this
study, we refer to this mechanism as a global
statistical learner.
There are reasons to believe that this mechanism
may be unrealistic, especially when scaled up to
naturalistic learning situations. First, it would be
difficult for learners to keep track of all possible
pairings while noting which did and which did not
occur at any given time. Indeed, there is evidence
that learners often fail to track the non-occurrence
of two elements in artificial language experiments
(e.g., Smith, 1966). Second, the results of Onnis et
al. (2008) suggest that local alignment and
comparison aid the discovery of structural
relations in artificial language learning, but the

2698

global statistical learner makes no special use of
local cues.
The hypothesized distinction is
supported by Smith & Yu’s (2008) finding that
some word-picture correspondences were learned
better than others when the cross-situational
paradigm was adapted to infants, leaving open the
possibility that chance consecutive alignments in
the uncontrolled presentation order of the stimuli
were responsible for the differences.
We were able to confirm this hypothesis
empirically: a bootstrap analysis of the training
trials of Yu & Smith (2007) (see Experiment 1
below) showed that the mean percentage of
consecutive trials that had partial overlapping
word-reference pairs was 90.4% (SD=5.1%; the
bootstrap procedure generated 100 randomized
sequences of the given set of trials). We thus
surmise that partially overlapping consecutive
trials were likely to have been present in the
randomly generated learning sequences of Yu &
Smith (2007) and contributed to the
disambiguation of the word-scene mappings. Such
accidental local alignment may have played an
important role in enabling fast mapping in both
the adult and the infant studies of Yu & Smith.
To better understand the distinction between
local and global accounts of statistical learning,
let us compare the scenario described in Table 1
with a new learning scenario. In Table 2, the pair
a-A occurs in trial 2 immediately after trial 1. In
the Words column, there is a single word a that
stays constant across two successive trials;
likewise, in the Scenes column there is a single
constant referent A across two successive scenes.
Thus, by simultaneously keeping track of the two
constant elements in Words and Scenes (the
auditory and visual modality), the learner can
identify a unique word-mapping that remains
constant over any two successive trials, without
the need to hold in memory other potential
relations, as the global learning strategy would
require.
These considerations allow us to make the
following predictions. If, on the one hand, global
cross-trial statistics accumulated over all learning
trials is what drives cross-situational learning,
then learning in scenarios 1 and 2 above should be
equally successful (the global statistics are the

same—the only difference is the order of
presentation of the trials). If, on the other hand,
local alignment is partly responsible for learning,
the scenario depicted in Table 2 should lead to
significantly better learning than the scenario
depicted in Table 1. A stronger case could be
made that, in the absence of partially overlapping
trials in the learning phase, learning of wordreferent mappings would not differ from chance.
Experiment 1
Method
Participants. Seventeen students at the University of
Hawaii participated and were compensated $5 each.
Materials. Each trial in a set of 18 learning trials contained
four spoken words and four pictures of individual objects,
with no information about specific word-picture
correspondence. The task was to learn nine word-referent
pairs, each repeated eight times, over the 18 training trials.
This 4 (auditory) x 4 (visual) learning scenario yields a large
number of possible word-referent associations: 16 per trial.
Because the referent of a word cannot be unambiguously
determined during any single trial, disambiguation must rely
on information from multiple trials.
Procedure. We assigned participants to one of two
conditions: 1) a Contiguous condition, in which 80% of
trials had one word-referent pair in common between two
consecutive trials, and 2) a Scrambled condition, in which
only 5% of consecutive trials contained auditory or visual
overlap. At test, participants received nine test trials each
with a single word from among those heard during training
and had to choose the correct referent among four
possibilities. Importantly, because the two conditions
differed only in the order of trials, the global statistics of
word/picture co-occurrence were identical. This allowed us
to make differential predictions, as follows. On the global
statistical learning account, learners solve the
indeterminacy problem by keeping track of multiple wordreferent statistics across many individually ambiguous
words and scenes, possibly over the entire experiment (Yu
& Smith, 2007). Thus, learning should not differ across our
two conditions. Conversely, on the local statistical learning
account (see also Onnis, Waterfall, & Edelman, 2008),
learners benefit from the contiguous arrangement of
partially overlapping trials and should therefore learn better
in the Contiguous condition.

Results

Our results supported the local learning
hypothesis: a one-way ANOVA revealed a main
effect of Condition, F(1,15)=5.4, p<.05). Separate
t-tests showed that participants in the Contiguous
condition learned better than theoretical chance

2699

(2.25), M=3.67, SD=1.23, t(8)=2.86, p<.03.
Conversely, learners in the Scrambled condition
failed to learn above chance, M=2.5, SD= 0.75,
t(7)=.00, p=1.0. A nonparametric Kruskal-Wallis
rank sum test yielded a marginal difference
between the conditions (chi-squared = 2.81, df =
1, p < 0.09). A mixed model with Subject and
Item as random effects (R procedure lmer, with a
binomial link function) yielded a similar marginal
advantage for the Contiguous condition (z=1.703,
p < 0.09).
Contrary to an exclusively global account of
statistical learning, this pattern of results suggests
that learning proceeded on a more local trial-bytrial basis, exploiting temporally contiguous
relations.
Experiment 2
Experiment 1 suggests that in the absence of
local statistics in the form of partial selfrepetitions learners found it much harder to
discover the correct word-reference pairings.
However, the specifics of how presentation order
affected learning in the Contiguous condition
remained unknown. For instance, it is possible
that learning occurred in the last two trials,
driving this effect in its entirety (i.e., learners
could just be remembering the last few trials, and
if they happened to contain repetition, that is what
was learned). In Experiment 2, we thus divided
the word-referent items into two categories; for
one, the repetitions always happened in the first
half of training, and for the other – in the second
half. If learning is indeed driven by a ‘recency’
effect, items in the second half should be learned
better than those in the first half.
Method
Participants. We recruited 36 students at the University of
Hawaii who had not participated in Experiment 1. Each
received $5.
Materials. The same training and test materials as
Experiment 1 were used. The only difference was that four
of the word-referent pairings occurred across overlapping
trials in the first half of the training set (i.e., in the first 9
trials, Early Pairs), while another four occurred in the last 9
trials (Late Pairs). There was no Scrambled condition.

Procedure. The same procedure as Experiment 1 was used.

Results

A one-way ANOVA revealed a main effect,
F(1,17)=101.2, p<.0001), thus replicating the
positive effect of contiguous trials on learning
obtained in Experiment 1. Furthermore, there was
no effect of Order between Early and Late Pairs,
F(1,17)=0.596, p=.451. This was confirmed by
Kruskal-Wallis and mixed-effect tests. Separate ttests showed that both Early and Late Pairs were
learned better than chance (Early Pairs, M= 1.94,
SD=.93, t(17)=4.27, p<.001; Late Pairs, M= 2.22,
SD=1.35, t(17)=3.83, p<.01), although the mean
for Late Pairs was numerically higher. Thus
learning did not appear to be driven by a ‘recency’
effect: subjects learned equally well items
presented in either halves of training.
Experiment 3
How dependent are the effects found in
Experiments 1 and 2 on the degree of uncertainty
in the training data? In Experiment 3, we raised
the level of cross-situational uncertainty by
increasing the number of word-referent pairs to be
learned from 9 to 18, while keeping the same
within-trial ambiguity as in the previous
experiments (4 x 4 =16 possible mappings in each
individual trial), and reducing the number of
repetitions of the individual word-referent pairs
with respect to Experiments 1 and 2. Learners
were assigned either to a Contiguous condition or
a Scrambled condition, as in Experiment 1.
Two sets of predictions were made. For a global
statistical learner that collects statistics over the
entire set, the 18 word condition should lead to
better learning than in the 9 word conditions of
Experiment 1 and 2. Yu and Smith (2007) argued
that learning more word-referent pairs should be
easier for the global statistical learner because
there would be fewer spurious pairings and thus,
those pairings that do occur would be more
systematic. The prediction for a local statistical
learner is that – although the number of words and
referents to be tracked increases – it should still be
easier to learn 18 word-referent pairs in the
Contiguous condition, where partial self-

2700

repetitions can more immediately winnow out the
correct pairs.
Method
Participants. We recruited 31 students at the University of
Hawaii who had not participated in Experiment 1 or 2. Each
received $5.
Materials. We constructed a set of 18 word-referent pairs to
be learned over 26 learning trials. As in Experiments 1 and
2, a trial contained four spoken words and four pictures of
individual objects, with no information about specific wordpicture correspondence.
Procedure. The same procedure as Experiments 1 and 2
was used. Because there were 18 pairs to be learned, the
Test phase comprised 18 test trials.

Results

A one-way ANOVA revealed no effect of
Condition, F(1,29)=1.134, p=.29), suggesting that
learning occurred both in the Scrambled and
Contiguous conditions. This was confirmed by
separate t-tests: participants in the Contiguous
condition learned better than chance (M= 9.25,
SD=3.57, t(15)=5.325, p<.001, chance level=4.5).
Learners in Scrambled also learned above chance
(M=8, SD= 2.9, t(15)=4.669, p<.001), although
the mean in Contiguous was numerically higher
than in Scrambled. Notice that the means in
Experiment 3 are considerably higher than those
in Experiments 1 and 2, replicating Yu and
Smith’s (2007) finding that a larger lexicon is
actually more manageable to learn than a small
one in cross-situational learning.
Taken together, these data suggest that a global
statistical learning account cannot be entirely
ruled out, consistent with the view that with more
pairs to be learned, the number of spurious
relations diminishes, thus helping global learners
to reduce cross-situational uncertainty. However,
we wanted to explore the data more thoroughly to
investigate the patterns of learning, both by
subjects and by items. We thus computed the
grand mean M and standard deviation S of
learning performance over all subjects, and treated
data from each subject whose personal mean m
was too far below the grand mean as an outlier.
With the bound for outlier detection set to 1.5 S
below the grand mean M (m < M – 1.5 S), the
difference between Scrambled and Contiguous
was not significant. However, when the lower

bound was set to 1.0 S below the grand mean M
(m < M – 1.0 S), data from the 25 (out of 31)
participants
whose
learning
performance
exceeded the threshold revealed a significant
effect of Condition. The Kruskal-Wallis test
yielded a significant difference between
conditions (chi-squared = 5.94, df = 1, p < 0.01).
A mixed-effects model (same procedure as in
Exp.1) also showed a significant effect of
Condition (z = 2.30, p < 0.02).
This pattern of findings can be interpreted as
follows: the presence of partially overlapping
trials helped good learners, but not poor ones.
Indeed, it may be that what makes a good learner
is, in part, the ability to use local information
immediately available in the input (more on this
in the Discussion section).
Finally, we asked whether the effects of partial
self-repetitions in the Contiguous condition are
confined to the specific items that enjoy the
special distributional environment, or whether the
training regimen has more general effects. During
training, half of the word-referent pairs were
presented in contiguous partial-self repetitions (IN
pairs), while the other half were not (OUT pairs;
as an example drawn from Table 2, the pair A-a
would be an IN pair, while C-c would be an OUT
pairs across the learning phase). A one-way
ANOVA with Item Status as factor (IN vs. OUT)
revealed no effect of Item Status, F(1,15)=1.552,
p=.23). Both pair types were learned above
chance (IN Pairs, M= 4.25, SD=1.98, t(15)=4.54,
p<.001; OUT Pairs, M= 5, SD=2.31, t(15)=5.2,
p<.001, chance level=2).
Discussion
Under natural circumstances the joint
presentation of a word and a scene offers many
possible word-object pairings (Quine, 1960). To
explore the potential benefits of temporally local
learning in such a situation, we replicated a study
by Yu and Smith (2007), and investigated whether
local learning yields global benefits that extend
beyond the relations encountered locally, thus
helping the learner manage the computational
complexity of structural inference.
Yu and Smith (2007) and Smith and Yu (2008)
proposed that both adults and children solve the

2701

problem of word-to-world mapping by keeping
track of multiple word-referent statistics across
many individually ambiguous words and scenes.
On this account, a learner could mistakenly link a
word to a referent, but correct the mistake by,
first, registering on a subsequent trial that the
word had occurred without the earlier, wrong
referent; second, by remembering the prior wordreferent pairing; and, third, by registering both cooccurrences and non co-occurrences. Our null
result in the Scrambled condition suggests that
such global statistical accounting may be beyond
learners’ capabilities. In comparison, the learners’
success in the Contiguous condition suggests two
possible cues that may have helped the subjects:
first, the reappearance of a word and its referent
and second, the fact that on the very next trial,
everything changed except that particular wordreferent mapping.
Yu and Smith (2007) reported learning that was
significantly better than chance. How can we
account for their finding? The order of
presentation of learning trials in their experiment
was random (the experiment otherwise contained
the same type and number of stimuli as ours). We
generated 100 separate randomizations of those
trials and found that the number of partially
overlapping contiguous trials was very high
(M=90.4%, SD=5.1%). Thus, the learning regime
of Yu and Smith is more similar to our
Contiguous than to our Scrambled condition.
Taken together, our results suggest that
encountering a consistent pairing of words and
referents in a temporally contiguous manner
facilitates learning, compared to a randomly
scrambled presentation of the very same stimuli
pairs. Moreover, the advantage of contiguous
presentation seems to be lost on poor learners.
Whether this difference is due to working memory
limitations, inattention, or some other factors
would need to be investigated in the future.
Contiguity and contrast were first invoked by
Aristotle (De mem. et rem.) as fundamental laws
of association. Following the early insights of
Hume, researchers have come to appreciate the
crucial role of statistical inference in ensuring the
reliability of experiential learning. In this paper,
we considered the task of establishing word-

referent association using statistical patterns of
experience. A recently proposed theoretical
framework,
ACCESS
(Align
Candidates,
Compare, Evaluate Statistical/Social Significance)
aims to explain the learning of structure in space
and time in terms of general principles of
cognitive computation (Goldstein et al., 2010). In
agreement with those principles, our results
suggest the effectiveness of temporal contiguity
and contrast in multimodal learning under
conditions of uncertainty, and the importance of
order of presentation of learning materials – a
finding that has intriguing implications for various
practical learning situations.
References
Akhtar, N., & Montague, L. (1999). Early lexical
acquisition: The role of cross-situational learning. First
Language, 19, 347-358.
Aristotle, De Memoria et Reminiscentia. On Memory and
Recollection. Available at http://classics.mit.edu/
Aristotle/memory.html.
Childers, J., & Paik, J.H. (2009). Korean- and Englishspeaking children use cross-situational information to
learn novel predicate terms. Journal of Child Language,
36, 201-224.
Frank, M.C., Goodman, N.D., and Tenenbaum, J. B. (2009),
Using speakers’ referential intentions to model early
cross-situational word learning, Psychological Science,
20, 578-585.
Goldstein, M.H., Waterfall, H.R., Lotem, A. Halpern, J.,
Schwade, J., Onnis, L., and Edelman, S. (2010). General
cognitive principles for learning structure in time and
space, Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 14, 249-258.
Gómez, R.L., & Gerken, L.A. (2000) Infant artificial
language learning and language acquisition. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 4, 178-86.
Onnis, L., Waterfall, H. & Edelman, S. (2008). Learn
locally, act globally: Learning language from variation set
cues. Cognition, 109, 423-430.
Quine, W. V. O. (1960). Word and Object. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Smith, L. B., & Yu, C. (2008). Infants rapidly learn wordreferent mappings via cross-situational statistics.
Cognition, 106, 1558–1568.
Solan, Z., Horn, D., Ruppin, E. and Edelman, S. (2005).
Unsupervised Learning of Natural Languages, PNAS,
102, 11629-11634.
Tenenbaum, J.B., and Griffiths, T.L. (2001). Generalization,
similarity, and Bayesian inference, Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 24, 629-641.
Yu, C., and Smith, L. B. (2007) Rapid word learning under
uncertainty via cross-situational statistics. Psychological
Science, 18(5), 414-420.

2702

