UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Making SNAP Judgments: Rethinking the Spatial Representation of Number

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/93q0r800

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Marghetis, Tyler
Walker, Esther
Bergen, Benjamin
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Making SNAP Judgments: Rethinking the Spatial Representation of Number
Tyler Marghetis (tmarghet@cogsci.ucsd.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science, 9500 Gilman Dr.
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093 USA

Esther J. Walker (e1walker@cogsci.ucsd.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science, 9500 Gilman Dr.
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093 USA

Benjamin K. Bergen (bkbergen@cogsci.ucsd.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science, 9500 Gilman Dr.
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093 USA

Rafael Núñez (nunez@cogsci.ucsd.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science, 9500 Gilman Dr.
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093 USA
Abstract
Interactions between number and space, exemplified by the
SNARC (Spatial-Numerical Association of Response Codes)
effect, are often taken as evidence for a privileged spatial
representation of number. Naturally, research on the spatial
representation of number has typically focused on spatial
tasks. But in order to make inferences about numerical
cognition more generally, one must take care to tease apart
spatial mental representation from spatial action. The present
study asked participants to judge the relative magnitude of
numbers, and to respond by producing sounds of different
pitches. There was a significant interaction between pitch and
number magnitude, analogous to the interaction between
space and number: participants were faster to produce “high”
pitches in response to “high” numbers. Moreover, the strength
of this effect was unrelated to the strength of the traditional
SNARC. We argue that these results undermine the privileged
status of space as a representational substrate for number.
Keywords: number; pitch; SNARC; spatial representation.

Introduction
Number and space are intimately connected. For instance,
Dehaene and colleagues (1993) found that participants are
faster to classify smaller numbers when responding in left
space, but faster to classify larger numbers when responding
in right space—the so-called Spatial-Numerical Association
of Response Codes, or SNARC. Research over the past two
decades has confirmed automatic, unconscious interactions
between number and space (see Hubbard, Piazza, Pinel, &
Dehaene, 2005 for a review). In order to account for this
effect, some researchers have posited the existence of a
mental number line (e.g., Dehaene, Piazza, Pinel, & Cohen,
2003), a directed spatial representation of number with
smaller numbers associated with left space, and larger

numbers with right space. On this account, the SNARC
effect falls out of this spatial representation of number.
Space has been argued to play a similar representational
role for other conceptual domains. For example, Rusconi
and colleagues (2006) demonstrated an automatic
association between pitch and space, such that participants
were faster to respond to lower pitches when responding in
lower space, and vice versa—the Spatial-Musical
Association of Response Codes, or SMARC. On the basis of
this pitch-space correspondence, the authors concluded that
the mental representation of pitch, like number, is spatial.
Note, however, that for both the SNARC and the SMARC
tasks, the very nature of the task forces participants to
respond spatially. It is not surprising that experimentalists
have often looked to space as a response medium, especially
when one considers how space is ready-to-hand as a tool
more generally (Kirsh, 1995), well-suited to lending
structure to more abstract domains (Lakoff & Johnson,
1980). As a result, space has become the default medium for
investigating number representation, while other possible
response modalities have been ignored (Núñez, in press;
Núñez, Doan, & Nikoulina, under review). For example,
Treccani and Umilta (2010), responding to claims that
number may not be inherently spatial, suggested that, “in
order to clarify this issue, it would be necessary to evaluate
whether other symbols and/or stimuli conveying ordinal
meaning are equally readily associated with space” (2010, p.
5). But associations between space and other conceptual
domains—time, pitch, etc.—say nothing about the mental
representation of number representation, per se. Inquiring
into the role of space for the representation of number
requires investigating situations where space is not forced
upon the participant as a representational tool.

1781

Alternate explanations of the SNARC
A few researchers have begun to question whether the
SNARC is best explained by invoking an inherently spatial
representation of number, let alone a directed, unidimensional mental number line (Proctor & Cho, 2006;
Landy, Jones, & Hummel, 2008; Fischer, 2006; Santens &
Gevers, 2006). One alternative proposal, the polaritycorrespondence hypothesis (Proctor & Cho, 2006), argues
that, when performing binary categorization tasks, both
stimuli and the response categories will naturally have a
“polarity,” and response times will be faster when there is a
match between stimuli polarity and response polarity
(Proctor & Cho, 2006). According to this hypothesis, the
SNARC is the result of privileging both larger numbers and
rightward space, and thus assigning these the same
“polarity”—and not to any spatial representation of number.
It’s unclear, however, exactly how this polarity is ascribed.
Another explanation is due to Walsh (2003), whose A
Theory of Magnitude (ATOM) posits a single shared
magnitude system for space, time, and number. Cohen
Kadosh, and colleagues (2008) suggest that the common
cortical mechanism proposed by Walsh could support “any
comparison that can be classified as “more” or “less””
(2008, p. 475). Indeed, Núñez et al. (under review) found
that participants readily map number onto non-spatial
responses, including representations in terms of force and
intensity of vocalizations.
Fischer (2006) notes that the SNARC is likely be related
to one's embodied experience of associating number and
space—whether in writing, grouping objects, or counting on
one's fingers—and not necessarily due to an innate spatial
encoding. He also notes individual differences in and
flexibility of space-number associations. Fischer’s proposal
has much in common with claims in Conceptual Metaphor
Theory (Lakoff & Johnson, 1980), which claims abstract
concepts are structured by cross-domain inferencepreserving mappings, often from a more concrete domain
(e.g. space) to a more abstract domain (e.g. number). The
SNARC effect may reflect a metaphorical mapping between
number and space that emerges through experience and is
shaped by culture (Núñez, 2009). Crucially, a single domain
often has more than one metaphorical conceptualization,
which suggests that the association between number and
space may be one of many possible cross-domain mappings.
Interestingly, even critical work on the spatial
representation of number continues to use experimental
designs in which space holds a place of prominence. For
example, Santens and Gevers (2006) found that participants
responded faster to small numbers when their response was
close to a central reference, and faster to large numbers
when far away. They argued that these results point to a
more general response discrimination effect, rather than a
stable mental number line. While this addresses important
questions about the specificity of the spatial encoding of
number, it does not tease apart the spatial from the nonspatial.

The question remains: Is the connection between number
and space exceptional, or is it one among many crossdomain mappings? In this vein, Landy, Jones, and Hummel
(2008) had participants use non-spatial responses to number
stimuli. Participants made both parity and magnitude
judgments, responding with either a verbal “yes” or “no”.
Participants were quicker to say “yes” to large numbers and
“no” to small numbers. The authors concluded that the
results suggest that polarity correspondence (Proctor &
Cho, 2006) may account for the kinds of interactions that
are observed in the SNARC effect, even when space is not
implicated.

Space, number, and pitch
These results highlight the fact that the pattern of results
found in the SNARC effect is not restricted to spatial
responses. Nevertheless, in many ways space is particularly
well suited to represent other conceptual domains: it’s
multidimensional, continuous, even metrically structured.
Other conceptual and perceptual domains are similarly rich
in structure—such as pitch. The structure of pitch perception
is highly complex (Cohen Kadosh et al, 2008), and like
space, seems rich in representational affordances. And yet
nobody seems to argue for, or even expect, a pitchedrepresentation of number. The present study takes this as its
starting point, and investigates the similarities between
space and pitch as response media during numerical tasks.
In two experiments, participants were presented with a
single-digit number and had to make a magnitude judgment,
indicating whether the number was greater or less than five.
Unlike previous studies in which spatial representation was
confounded with spatial reporting (almost always in the
form of manual response), the present study required
participants to respond via pitch, by producing un-sustained
high or low-pitched “ahs.” If the pattern of results exhibited
by the SNARC is the result an exceptional spatial
representation of number, then either: (i) we should not
expect a selective interaction between response pitch and
number magnitude, analogous to the interaction seen in the
SNARC, or (ii) if we do find such an interaction, we should
be prepared to argue that number is inherently tonal.
However, if the SNARC is but one manifestation of a
more general cognitive phenomenon, then one might even
expect selective interactions between pitch and number.
High and low pitches are often associated with small and
large objects, respectively (imagine a squeaking mouse, a
roaring dinosaur). Alternatively, we use “high” and “low”
for both numbers and pitches, and this learned association
may manifest itself in automatic cognitive processing. In
either case, the observation of a selective interaction
between pitch and number would suggest that participants
are “Seeing Number as Pitch” —the SNAP effect.

1782

Methods

Results
Seven subjects were removed from analysis due to low
accuracy (< 70%), leaving 44 participants for analysis. For
these remaining subjects, accuracy was quite high for both
tasks: 97% for the spatial response task, and 96% for the
pitch-response task. Incorrect trials were removed for
subsequent analysis.

Participants
51 undergraduates at the University of California, San
Diego, received partial course credit for participating in the
experiment.

Procedure
Participants completed two experiments: a Pitch Response
task, and a Spatial Response task. The experiments were
programmed using E-Prime (Psychology Software Tools,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA). Each experiment consisted of two
blocks of 80 randomly presented stimuli, for a total of 160
trials. Both involved a number magnitude judgment, but
differed in the response modality. The mapping between
number magnitude and required response was changed
between blocks. Blocks began with written instructions,
followed by practice trials, and then 80 experimental trials.
The stimuli consisted of the Arabic numerals 1 through 9,
excluding the number 5, presented visually in the middle of
the screen. Each digit was presented 10 times in each block.
Trials began with a fixation cross in the center of a
computer monitor, presented for 1000ms. Then the number
stimulus was presented in the center of the computer
monitor for a maximum of 3000 ms. Participants had to
judge where the number was greater or less than 5, and
respond by either vocalizing (Experiment 1) or pressing a
button (Experiment 2). Participants were told to respond as
quickly and accurately as possible.
Since we were interested in whether number and pitch
would interact spontaneously, the Pitch Response
experiment was always completed before the Spatial
Response experiment.
Pitch-Response Task: Participants were asked to produce
either “high-pitched” or “low-pitched” un-sustained “ahs”
as vocal responses, spoken aloud into a microphone, for
numbers greater than 5 or less than 5, depending on the
mapping. The ordering of blocks and mappings were
counterbalanced. Before the beginning of each block,
participants were presented with 16 practice trials in order to
ensure they understood the task. Each trial began by playing
a short reference tone. Responses were coded online by an
experimenter blind to the stimuli. During the experiment,
the experimenter sat facing away from the computer and
recorded whether each response was high- or low-pitched.
Spatial-Response Task: Participants also completed the
classic, explicit SNARC task (Dehaene et al., 1993), in
which they had to respond spatially by pressing buttons on a
serial response box: either the leftmost button with their left
hand, or the rightmost button with their right hand. Buttons
were identified by their color (green or red). Participants
were presented with 8 practice trials before each block, and
responses were automatically collected by the computer,
and thus were not coded by an experimenter as above.

Pitch-Response
Median RTs for correct responses were calculated for each
subject, number, and pitch response, following Dehaene
(1993). Next, number magnitude was collapsed across
number pairs, so that 1 was combined with 2, 3 with 4, 6
with 7, and 8 with 9. We conducted a 3x4x2 mixed design
ANOVA, with pitch response (high, low) and number
magnitude (1-2, 3-4, 6-7, 8-9) as within-subjects factors,
and block order as between subjects. Analyses used R
statistical software (R Development Core Team, 2008).

Figure 1: Median RTs in the pitch-response task.The
interaction between Pitch and Number is significant.
There was no main effect of block order or pitch. An
interaction between block order and number approached
significance (F(1,126)=2.56, p=0.058), but is difficult to
interpret. There was a main effect of number,
  
(F(3,126)=27.49, p<0.01, !!! = 0.40), probably driven by the
known Distance Effect, where number comparison is faster
for more distant number pairs.
The only other effect approaching significance was a the
interaction between pitch and number (F(3,126) = 18.67,
  
p<0.01, !!! = 0.31)—the SNAP effect. For numbers less than
5, participants were faster to respond with a low-pitched
response than a high-pitched response (median RTs of
514ms and 585ms, respectively), while for larger numbers,
participants were faster to respond with a high-pitched

1783

response than a low pitched response (median RTs of
581ms and 515.5ms, respectively). See Figure 1.
These effects were also significant in an analysis of
accuracy. We conducted a 2 (pitch) x 4 (number magnitude)
x 2 (block order) mixed design ANOVA with mean
accuracy as the dependent measure. The interaction between
block order and number was again approaching significance
(F(1,42)=3.18, p=0.08), and the main effect of number was
  
highly significant (F(3,126)=10.19, p<0.01, !!! = 0.20).
The SNAP was again significant (F(3,126)=2.7544, p <
  
0.05, !!! = 0.06).

Spatial-Response
Analysis for the Spatial Response task was similar. Median
RTs for correct responses were calculated for each subject,
number, and left-right response, and analyzed using a 2 x 4
x 2 mixed design ANOVA, with response location (Left,
Right) and number magnitude (1-2, 3-4, 6-7, 8-9) as withinsubjects factors, and block order as between-subjects.

The SNARC effect was again significant (F(3,126),
  
p=0.001, !!! = 0.12).

Comparing Pitch and Spatial Responses
To compare subjects’ performance on the Pitch- and
Spatial-Response tasks, the effects were analyzed using the
regression approach introduced in Fias et al (1996). Linear
regressions were performed for each subject’s performance
in both the Pitch- and Spatial-Response tasks. The
difference in median reaction time (dRT) between response
category (high vs. low; or left vs. right) was calculated for
each subject and number. For instance, the dRT in the Pitch
task was the difference between high-pitched and lowpitched responses for each number. Next, for each subject,
dRT was regressed onto number magnitude. The weight of
the number magnitude predictor can then be used as a
measure of the size of the SNAP or SNARC effect.
Over the 44 participants, the size of the SNAP and the
SNARC effects were significantly different (paired twotailed t-test, t(43)=-3.05, p<0.01). To see if the size of the
SNARC effect was predictive of the strength of the SNAP
effect, they were put into a linear regression analysis with
SNARC size as a predictor. The weight of the SNARC size
predictor did not approach significance (β=-0.015, t(42) = 0.464, p > 0.6, r^2 = 0.005). Thus, there was no evidence of
a relation between the sizes of the SNARC and SNAP.

Discussion

Figure 2: Median RTs for left and right responses for each
digit in the spatial-response task.
There were no effects of block order. There was a main
  
effect of number (F(3,126)=26.10, F<0.001, !!! = 0.38),
again probably driven by the Distance Effect. The only
other effect was a significant interaction between response
location and number magnitude (F(3,126)=8.4667, p<0.01,
  
!!! = 1.8)—the SNARC effect. All other effects were p>0.1.
We also did an analysis on accuracy, using a 2 (response)
x 4 (number magnitude) x 2 (block order) mixed design
ANOVA. The main effect of number magnitude was again
  
highly significant (F(3,126)=16.33, p<0.01, !!! = 0.28).
There was also a three-way interaction between response,
number magnitude, and block order (F(3,126)=4.6628,
  
p=0.004, !!! = 0.10), although this is difficult to interpret.

We investigated the mental processing of number by
extending the SNARC paradigm to a novel response
modality: pitch. Participants had to judge the relative
magnitude of a single digit number, but instead of
responding spatially—as has traditionally been done—
participants responded using modulations in pitch, with
either a high or a low pitched vocalization. If the interaction
between number and space exhibited in the SNARC effect is
truly indicative of an inherently spatial representation of
number, then we should not expect to find analogous
interaction effects for other response modalities. However,
when given the opportunity to respond non-spatially,
participants exhibited exactly such an interaction between
number and pitch—the SNAP (Seeing Numbers as Pitch)
effect. Furthermore, for each subject, the strength of the
SNAP effect seemed independent of the strength of the
SNARC effect.
These results add to a growing body of research that
questions the primacy and stability of an underlying spatial
encoding of number. On the basis of results like the SNARC
effect, researchers have concluded that the mental
representation of number is fundamentally spatial (e.g.,
Dehaene, Piazza, Pinel, & Cohen, 2003), with some going
so far as to posit an innate, directed “mental number line.” If
the SNARC is only one manifestation of a more general
cognitive capacity to think about or represent one domain in
terms of another—as the present results suggest—then this
undercuts any conclusions one might draw about the
primacy of space as a representational medium.

1784

This is not to deny that space is often used to represent
number. Cultural artifacts that map number to space are
ubiquitous in Western culture, and artifacts such as number
lines—of the material, not mental, sort—are particularly
useful as representational aids during numerical cognition.
But these spatial representations are neither universal nor
eternal, and care must be taken when drawing conclusions
about the underlying cognition that led to their development
(Núñez, 2009). Space, as a ready-to-hand representational
medium, is highly privileged in the creation of concrete
artifactual representations of abstract concepts, number
included. The ease and ubiquity of spatial representation
does not, in itself, entail the fundamentality of space in the
mental representation of number. Recent experimental
evidence has shown that, when given the opportunity,
participants can systematically map number to various
modalities—including intensity of squeezing and amplitude
of vocalization—in ways which show many of the hallmark
features found in spatial representations (e.g., logarithmic
compression), but which also differ in precise ways related
to enculturation (Núñez et al., under review). The ability to
map numbers to a concrete line, therefore, is less
exceptional than it might appear.
Claims about mental representation of number, of course,
are not based on the mere observation of concrete,
artifactual space-number mappings. The discovery of the
SNARC effect suggested a much more fundamental
connection between number and space: fast, automatic, and
unconscious. If number interacts with space even when
relations between number and space are irrelevant to the
task, then this seems to point to some privileged and
fundamental role for space in the representation of number.
However, the reasoning applied to arrive at this conclusion
also applies to the pitch data we have reported here:
Namely, if one takes SNARC data and from it posits that
number is represented spatially, perhaps in the form of a
mental number line, then one must also claim, given the
present results, that number is represented in terms of pitch.
Indeed, the same would hold for any experiment that shows,
like this one, that number interacts with some other response
medium. This seems untenable. Few would accept, without
serious reservations, the claim that the mental representation
of number is, in some fundamental sense, musical. And yet
number interacts with both space and pitch in the same
selective and automatic way.
If the pattern of interaction between number and space is
not exclusive to these domains, but also shows up when
pitch is mapped to space (Rusconi et al, 2006) or when
number is mapped to pitch (the SNAP effect found in this
study), then this points to a much more general
phenomenon. This may be an instance of a general polaritycorrespondence effect (Proctor & Cho, 2006). Or, it may
emerge from strategic problem solving, whereby the
participants opportunistically recruit whatever resources are
at hand, even when those resources are not necessarily
germane to the task (Santens & Gevers, 2006). It could also
be the result of more general magnitude extraction (e.g.,

Walsh, 2003) or of a domain-general capacity to map
between conceptual domains (Lakoff & Johnson 1980).
Regardless of the ultimate explanation, the present
demonstration, that number interacts with non-spatial
domains in systematic and selective ways, adds to the
growing body of research that, at the very least, space is but
one of the resources that contribute to the rich conceptual
structure of number, and that the particular combination of
these resources can vary across cultures and individuals
(e.g., Núñez, in press).
While previous research has looked at how other nonspatial responses interact with performance on numeric
tasks, these have all involved binary responses—such as
“yes” and “no” (e.g., Landy et al., 2008)—which readily
lend themselves to polarity-correspondence (Proctor & Cho,
2006). Pitch, on the other hand, provides participants with a
continuous, graded, directed and experientially-rich
response domain, and thus is more analogous with spatial
representation than with a simple binary choice. That is,
pitch is a rich continuum that may allow people to map finer
distinctions than with “yes” and “no” responses. Such
gradation is unavailable when the available responses are a
priori restricted to two strict alternatives by the very
structure of the response modality, and so could not be
captured in the non-spatial stimuli used in previous
experiments (e.g., Landy et al., 2008). While the present
study also had participants perform a binary categorization,
the possibility exists that participants modulated their pitch
in a manner that corresponds to the increases or decreases in
numerical distance from a central pitch. Though we did not
fully exploit the continuous nature of pitch in the present
study, we are currently investigating whether such nuanced
modulations in pitch occur during the task.
One deflationary account of these results is that the SNAP
effect is the result of the composition of a number-space
mapping (SNARC) and a space-pitch mapping (SMARC),
and therefore is ultimately spatial. Recall that the SMARC
is an association between “higher” pitches and higher space,
and between “lower” pitches and lower space (Rusconi et
al., 2006; Cohen Kadosh et al, 2008). This is unsurprising
given the way we talk about pitch (high versus low) in
English, particularly in the light of research showing that
metaphorical language (e.g., “high pitch”) is often the
surface manifestation of underlying conceptual mappings—
for instance, between pitch and space (Lakoff & Johnson,
1980). Furthermore, the instructions of the present study
included the terms “high pitch” and “low pitch,” and such
spatial terms may have primed a spatial construal of pitch.
Such a “spatial-mediation” account is interesting and
provocative, in that it suggests that cross-domain mappings
of the sort that underlie the SNARC and SMARC effects are
compositional during online, low-level cognition. However,
it is unlikely, for a number of reasons. For one, the SNARC
is notoriously fragile, and can disappear in the face of very
slight priming (Fischer et al, 2010). Even more problematic
are the results of Beecham et al. (2009), who found that, for
each individual, performance on a SNARC task was

1785

independent of performance on a SMARC task. These
findings are problematic for a spatial-mediation account,
which requires reliable and coordinated mappings between
both number and space, and space and pitch. Moreover, we
found that the strength of an individual’s SNARC effect did
not predict the strength of their SNAP, a surprising finding
if the latter is parasitic on the former.

Conclusion
The present investigation suggests that conclusions drawn
on the basis of observed space-number interactions may be
premature, particularly if those effects are not viewed in the
context of cross-domain mappings more generally. The
current results in no way undermine the robust evidence for
automatic activations of parietal regions involved in spatial
cognition during numerical cognition (Hubbard et al, 2005).
However, they do highlight the ways in which the
pragmatics of experimental design can influence theorybuilding. Experimental designs in which participants
respond spatially are easy to set up and conduct; indeed,
space is particularly salient and ready-to-hand tool for
thinking and acting (Kirsh, 1995). But the jump from the
availability and accessibility of space, to its importance as a
basic domain for the mental encoding of abstract concepts,
is premature until we have documented the ways in which
spatial responses differ from the myriad other ways in
which we can respond. Pitch is but one example—and we've
seen here that already, when compared to pitch, space loses
its singular luster. Rather than speaking directly to the
mental representation of number, results like the SNAP
effect—and the SNARC effect before it—highlight the
ways in which cognition depends on the recycling of diverse
resources (Anderson, 2010). Such assemblages may be more
or less stable, and may increase in stability over time –
whether as a result of enculturation or mere co-activation
(Núñez, 2009). While number and space are certainly
related in interesting and complex ways, the nature of this
relationship may be best investigated by studying the
relationships between number and other conceptual domains
or response modalities—and avoiding snap judgments about
the nature of mental representation.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Kensy Cooperrider for
valuable suggestions. Thanks to Jeremiah Palmerston,
Richard Chen, and Gylmar Moreno for data collection.

References
Anderson, M. L. (2010). Neural reuse: A fundamental
organizational principle of the brain. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences 33, 245–313
Beecham, R., Reeve, R.A., & Wilson, S.J. (2009). Spatial
representations are specific to different domains of
knowledge. PlosOne, 4, 1-5.
Cohen Kadosh, R., Brodsky, W., Levin, M., & Henik, A.,
(2008). Mental representation: What can pitch tell us
about the distance effect?, Cortex, 44, 470-477.

Dehaene, S., Bossini, S. & Giraux, P., (1993). The mental
representation of parity and number magnitude. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 3, 371-396.
Dehaene, S., Piazza, M., Pinel, P., & Cohen, L., (2003).
Three parietal circuits for number processing, Cognitive
Neuropsychology, 20, 487-506.
Fias, W., Brysbaert, M., Geypens, F., & d’Ydewalle, G.
(1996). The importance of magnitude information in
numerical
processing: Evidence from the SNARC
effect. Mathematical Cognition, 2(1), 95–110.
Fischer, M.H., (2006). The future for SNARC could be
stark..., Cortex, 42, 1066-1068.
Fischer, M.H., Mills, R.A., & Shaki, S. (2010). How to cook
a SNARC: Number placement in text rapidly changes
spatial-numerical associations, Brain and Cognition, 72,
333-336.
Hubbard, E.M., Piazza, M., Pinel, P., & Dehaene, S.,
(2005). Interactions between number and space in parietal
cortex, Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 6, 435-448.
Kirsh D (1995) The intelligent use of space. Artificial
Intelligence 73, 31–68
Lakoff, G. & Johnson, M. (1980) Metaphors we live by.
University of Chicago Press.
Landy, D.H., Jones, E.L., & Hummel, J.E., (2008). Why
spatial-numeric associations aren't evidence for a mental
number line. Proceedings of The 30th Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society. Washington, D.C.
Núñez, R. (in press). No innate number line in the human
brain, Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology.
Núñez, R. (2009). Numbers and arithmetic: Neither
hardwired nor out there, Biological Theory, 4, 68-83.
Núñez, R., Doan, D., & Nikoulina, A. (2011). Squeezing,
striking, and vocalizing: Is number representation
fundamentally spatial? Manuscript under review.
Proctor, R.W., & Cho, Y.S., (2006). Polaritycorrespondence: A general principle for performance of
speeded binary classification tasks, Psychological
Bulletin, 132, 416-442.
R Development Core Team (2008). R language and
environment
for
statistical
computing.
R
Foundation,Vienna, Austria. http://www.R-project.org.
Rusconi, E., Kwan, B., Giordano, B.L., Umilta, C., &
Butterworth, B. (2006). Spatial representation of pitch
height: the
SMARC effect, Cognition, 99, 113-129.
Santens, S., & Gevers, W., (2006). The SNARC effect does
not imply a mental number line, Cognition, 108, 263-270.
Treccani, B., & Umilta, C., (2010). How to cook a SNARC?
Space may be the critical ingredient, after all, Brain and
Cognition, in press
van Dijck, J.P., Gevers, W., & Fias, W., (2009). Numbers
are associated with different types of spatial information
depending on the task, Cognition, 113, 248-253.
Walsh, V. (2003). A theory of magnitude: Common cortical
metrics of time, space and quantity. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 7, 483-488.

1786

