UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Making Inferences: The Case of Scalar Implicature Processing

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2jn9g3gf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Degen, Judith
Tanenhaus, Michael K.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Making Inferences: The Case of Scalar Implicature Processing
Judith Degen (jdegen@bcs.rochester.edu)
Michael K. Tanenhaus (mtan@bcs.rochester.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627-0268, USA
Abstract
Scalar implicature has served as a test case for investigating
the nature of inference processes in language comprehension.
Specifically, the question of whether or not scalar implicatures
are computed by default has been extensively investigated in
recent years. We argue that the question of default is overly
simplistic and propose instead to think of scalar implicature
computation as a problem of optimal cue combination within a
constraint-based framework. We provide evidence from three
experiments supporting the view that multiple constraints of
differing strength operate in parallel to provide probabilistic
support for or against an implicature.
Keywords: experimental pragmatics; scalar implicature; eyetracking; subitizing

Introduction
Successful communication requires comprehenders to infer a
speaker’s intended meaning from an underspecified utterance.
While some information is transmitted via an utterance’s semantic content, additional meaning is computed by taking
into account pragmatic information about the discourse context, as in the sample discourse in (1).
(1)

Alex: Did you submit your paper?
Thomas: Some of the sections are written.
Thomas didn’t submit his paper.
Some, but not all, of the sections are written.

Here, Alex might infer that Thomas, being a cooperative
speaker, intends to convey both that he hasn’t yet submitted
his paper and that some, but not all, of the sections are written.
The former of these inferences is what Grice (1975) termed
a particularized conversational implicature (PCI), while the
latter is a prototypical example of a generalized conversational implicature (GCI). According to Grice, both of these
inferences arise because comprehenders assume that speakers conform to certain conventions of rational communicative
behavior. The crucial difference between GCIs and PCIs lies
in the role that context plays: PCIs are assumed to arise in
virtue of special features of the context, while GCIs are assumed to arise unless blocked by context. Applied to (1): the
inference that Thomas did not submit his paper is tied tightly
to Alex’s question and would not have arisen if Thomas’s utterance was, for example, an answer to the question whether
Thomas had written the introduction yet. However, the inference that some but not all of the sections are written is taken
to arise independently of the context. This particular kind of
inference, that arises in virtue of a speaker not uttering a relevant stronger alternative, is called a scalar implicature.
In the example there is a stronger statement the speaker
could have made but didn’t (e.g. All of the sections are writ-

ten). Under the assumption that a speaker is being as informative as possible, a weak implicature, that the speaker doesn’t
know whether all of the sections are written, is licensed. If
the hearer further assumes that the speaker is competent with
respect to the truth of the stronger statement, the implicature
that the speaker believes that some, but not all of the sections
are written, is licensed.
In recent years the representation and processing of scalar
implicatures has emerged as perhaps the defining problem in
experimental pragmatics – a subfield of cognitive science that
seeks to combine theoretical proposals from linguistics, computer science and philosophy with state-of-the-art experimental methods.
Importantly for the experimental investigation of the phenomenon, scalar implicatures are cancelable, that is, they are
defeasible inferences. There are cases in which the scalar implicature does not contribute to achieving the discourse goal
(Horn, 1984, Sperber & Wilson, 1995, Levinson, 2000). In
such cases, where all that is relevant or can be known, is the
lower bound (in our example that at least some of the sections
are written), the implicature does not arise. Following Katsos,
Breheny, and Williams (2005), we will call these contexts
lower-bound contexts, and contexts in which pragmatic inference is required to achieve the discourse goal upper-bound
contexts.
Emphasising the GCI-PCI distinction, Levinson (2000) argues that GCIs are pragmatic default inferences that have
evolved to maximize the speed of communication. It is only
in special contexts that the inference has to be cancelled,
where cancellation proceeds in a second, effortful step.
In contrast to this default approach, a variety of approaches
have viewed scalar implicature as a context-driven process
(e.g. Hirschberg, 1991, Sperber & Wilson, 1995). Under
these accounts, scalar implicatures are generated as part of
the same process as PCIs. The strongest formulation of such
accounts is a modular one, whereby pragmatic processing begins only once semantic processing is under way (Huang &
Snedeker, 2009). That is, generating the implicature requires
computing the literal meaning first. A notion of implicit cancellation is not necessary under the context-driven account
since the implicature does not arise in lower-bound contexts
in the first place.
The default and context-driven approach make different
empirical predictions. Under the default model, generating
a scalar implicature should be very rapid, indeed as rapid as
computing an expression’s literal meaning. An increase in
processing effort is predicted only for cases where the implicature is cancelled. In contrast, the modular context-driven

3299

account predicts increased processing effort for implicature
generation as compared to literal meaning.
Support for the context-driven account comes from
reaction-time experiments (Noveck & Posada, 2003, Bott &
Noveck, 2004), reading-time experiments (Breheny, Katsos,
& Williams, 2006), and visual-world eye-tracking (Huang &
Snedeker, 2009). Response times associated with the pragmatic inference are longer than both response times to the
scalar item’s literal meaning and to other literal controls (typically statements including all or number terms instead of the
scalar item some). For example, Huang and Snedeker (2009)
found that participants’ gaze was slower to converge on a target that required pragmatic inference for disambiguation than
one that did not. Participants saw displays with a contrast
between e.g. a girl with a proper subset of all socks in the display and a girl with all of the soccer balls in the display, and
heard auditory stimuli such as Point to the girl with some of
the socks. If some was automatically enriched to some but not
all, disambiguation should be just as rapid for some as for all.
However, since both girls are compatible referents of lowerbound some, increased looks to the target should be delayed
if the enrichment is not automatic. This is indeed what Huang
and Snedeker (2009) find.
However, Grodner et al. (2010) found evidence of rapid implicature generation. Their design differed from Huang and
Snedeker (2009) in three major ways: first, they did not use
instructions with exact number. Second, each trial began with
a prerecorded statement describing the total number and type
of objects in the display, to draw participants’ attention to the
total cardinality of each type of item. And finally, they included the quantifier none. In this setup, convergence on the
target in the some and all condition was equally fast.
Under an approach to scalar implicatures as either default
GCI or context-driven PCI (in the modular sense), these results are puzzling. If scalar implicatures associated with some
are defaults, there should be no delays. If, however, implicature computation only occurs after an initial stage of semantic processing, the fast implicatures found by Grodner et al.
(2010) cannot be explained.
In other domains of language processing initial arguments
for an encapsulated early stage (Frazier, 1987) of contextfree processing (akin to computing the literal interpretation)
followed by a second stage of evaluation and re-analysis
(akin to a second stage of pragmatic inference) have been
superceded by models in which evidence from multiple constraints is evaluated from the earliest moments of processing
(e.g. Trueswell, Tanenhaus, & Garnsey, 1994, MacDonald,
Pearlmutter, & Seidenberg, 1994). A crucial step in developing these accounts has been to understand and quantify the
relevant constraints.
We propose that the robustness of a scalar implicature and
the speed with which it is computed depends on the strength
and reliability of multiple probabilistic cues that are integrated as soon as they become available; the stronger and
the more reliable the cues to the implicature are, the faster

it should become available and the more robust it should be.
This account raises two related questions. First, what are
the cues that contribute to or inhibit the implicature? And
second, do we see the predicted effect of cue strength and
reliability reflected in measures of processing difficulty?
The cues we investigate are a) the syntactic form of
the some-NP, specifically whether partitive some of the is a
stronger cue to the implicature than simple some; b) the availability of lexical alternatives to some; and c) the set size relative to which some is interpreted. The investigation of the
tradeoff between b) and c) was directly motivated by features
of the studies reported in Huang and Snedeker (2009) and
Grodner et al. (2010).
In both of these studies the referent of the some-NP was
a girl or boy that had a set of objects. The size of this set
was always within the subitizing range (1 - 4 items). In this
range judgments of number are rapid, accurate, and confident (Kaufman, Lord, Reese, & Volkmann, 1949). Number
judgments for larger set sizes require counting, with response
times dramatically increasing for each added item. The crucial difference between the two studies is that number terms
(two, three) were present in Huang and Snedeker (2009) but
not in Grodner et al. (2010). Our studies are motivated by
the following argument: Given that subitizing is accompanied
by a strong sense of number “popping out”, it is conceivable
that number terms are more natural labels for set sizes in this
range. From a Gricean perspective, speakers should use the
most natural label available to establish reference. If instead
a vague quantifier like some is used, it is likely that this will
result in increased processing effort on the comprehender’s
part. This is one potential explanation for the different results found by Huang and Snedeker (2009) and Grodner et
al. (2010). In the former study, number terms were available
to refer to the intended referent, while this was not the case
in the latter study. Thus, the presence of number terms as a
more natural cue to the referent might have led to the delay
in processing of some. In addition, the presence of none in
Grodner et al. (2010) but not in Huang and Snedeker (2009)
might have made the hall, some, nonei scale more salient, potentially resulting in even faster processing of some. Thus, if
it is the case that number terms are preferred over some for referring to sets in the subitizing range, use of some should lead
to processing delays in the subitizing range but not outside of
it. Similarly, if all is preferred over some for referring to unpartitioned sets, use of some for referring to an unpartitioned
set should lead to processing delays.
Experiment 1 asks whether some is indeed dispreferred in
the predicted ranges via naturalness ratings. Experiment 2
asks whether the preferences found in Experiment 1 are reflected in response times. Experiment 3 replicates the finding from Experiment 2 in an eye-tracking paradigm to ensure comparability with the studies reported by Huang and
Snedeker (2009) and Grodner et al. (2010). Experiments 1
and 2 additionally test the effect of the partitive as a cue to
scalar implicature.

3300

The gumball paradigm
All experiments were conducted in a “gumball paradigm”.
Participants see a display of a gumball machine that initially
has a full upper chamber and an empty lower chamber. After
2.5 seconds a “ka-ching” sound is followed by a new display in which some number of gumballs has “moved” to the
lower chamber. Participants then hear a pre-recorded statement of the form You got X gumballs, where X is a quantifier
or number term. Depending on the task, they are asked to rate
the naturalness of the statement as a description of the scene
(Experiment 1), press a button indicating whether or not they
agree with the statement (Experiment 2), or click on the mentioned gumballs if they agree with the statement while eye
movements are recorded (Experiment 3). Then the next trial
begins.
The flexibility of this paradigm thus allows for manipulating a number of key variables, e.g. the size of the set in the
lower chamber, the quantifier employed in the statement, and
the behavioral measure.

(0, 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, or 13 gumballs) and the quantifier
construction in the statement (some, some of the, all of the,
none of the, one of the, two of the, three of the, seven of the,
eleven of the). Table 1 shows how often each quantifier occurred with each set size. To limit the number of trials, only
a subset of the total range was sampled, and not every quantifier occurred with every set size. See Figure 1 for sample
displays.
Table 1: Number of trials with each set size/quantifier. some
column contains number of stimuli for both simple and partitive some. All other quantifiers occurred only in the partitive.
0
1
2
3
5
7
8
11
12
13

Experiment 1
If number terms are more natural labels than some in the
subitizing range, naturalness ratings should be lower for some
than for number terms. Moreover, naturalness of some should
be lower than that of all for the unpartitioned set of 13 gumballs. In addition, if partitive some of the is a better cue to an
implicature than simple some, naturalness ratings for simple
some should be higher than for the partitive when used with
the unpartitioned set but not with partitioned sets of 1 - 12
gumballs.
Methods
PARTICIPANTS . Twenty undergraduate students from the
University of Rochester were paid to participate. All were
native speakers of English who were naı̈ve as to the purpose
of the experiment.

some all none one two three seven eleven
4
2
4
1
1
1
1
1
2
4
2
2
2
4
4
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
4
2
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
4
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
4
4
4

No number of gumballs occurred more often with any other
quantifier than with its correct exact number. Table 1 shows
how often each number of gumballs occurred with each quantifier or number term. There were two versions of every visual display to prevent participants from learning the number
of displayed gumballs based on the visual pattern.
Results and Discussion We fitted a series of mixed effects
linear models predicting mean naturalness rating from quantifier (some, some of the, correct exact quantifier or number
term) with random subject intercepts for each range of gumballs (subitizing range: 1-4 gumballs, mid range: 5-8, high
range: 9-12, unpartitioned set: 13). Ratings for some/some
of the were lower in each comparison (see Figure 2), but the
difference was largest in the subitizing range (β = 3.68, SE =
0.48, p < .001) and for the unpartitioned set (β = 3.98, SE =
0.47, p < .001), where we hypothesized the greatest effect of
salient lexical alternatives interfering with the interpretation
of some. As predicted, ratings for partitive some were lower
than for simple some when used with the unpartitioned set (β
= 1.55, SE = 0.39, p < .01).

Experiment 2
Figure 1: Display types in Experiments 1 and 2 (left) and
contrast display types in Experiment 3 (right).
P ROCEDURE AND M ATERIALS . Participants rated the naturalness of the statement they heard as a description of the
scene using a seven point Leikert scale on a total of 112 trials. We varied both the size of the set in the lower chamber

Using the same paradigm and stimuli, we asked participants
to respond to the statements by pressing one of two buttons
depending on whether they agree with the statement or not,
and measured their response times. We predicted that the
availability of more natural alternatives to some as established
in Experiment 1 should result in a delay in response time, regardless of the response itself. This stands in contrast to a
simple modular view of implicature, where a delay is only

3301

7

6

Mean rating

5

4
Quantifier

exact
some
some of the

3

2

1

0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12 13

Set size

Figure 2: Mean naturalness ratings. For none, all, and number terms only the rating for the correct number of gumballs
is shown (exact). Dotted lines show mean ratings for simple
some and partitive some of the.

ear models predicting log reaction times, with random effects
of speaker and item.
Replicating earlier reaction time results (Bott and Noveck
(2004)), semantic YES responses to some for the unpartitioned set are faster than pragmatic NO responses (β = .14, SE
= .06, p < .01). In addition, pragmatic responses to some, reflecting the implicature, are slower than YES responses to all
for the unpartitioned set (β = 0.18, SE = 0.0004, p < 0.001).
However, it is illustrative to compare mean response times
of YES responses to some in the mid range (5 - 12 gumballs)
vs. the unpartitioned set (where it constitutes a semantic response) and vs. the subitizing range (1 - 4 gumballs). Recall that there are more natural lexical alternatives both in the
subitizing range (number terms) and for the unpartitioned set
(all). YES responses to some are slower both in the subitizing
range (β = 0.08, SE = 0.02, p < 0.001) and for the unpartitioned set (β = 0.13, SE = 0.02, p < 0.001) than in the mid
range. In addition, responses to some in the subitizing range
are slower than to number terms (β = 0.16, SE = 0.02, p <
0.001). These effects are demonstrated in Figure 3.
7.6

Quantifier

expected for the pragmatic response to the unpartitioned set.
Methods
PARTICIPANTS . Twenty-seven undergraduate students from
the University of Rochester were paid to participate. All were
native speakers of English who did not participate in Experiment 1.
P ROCEDURE AND M ATERIALS . The procedure and materials were the same as in Experiment 1, except participants
responded by pressing one of two buttons to indicate that YES,
they agreed with the heard statement, or NO, they disagreed.
Participants were asked to respond as quickly as possible. If
they did not respond within four seconds of stimulus onset,
the trial timed out and the next trial began. Both participants’
judgments and reaction times were measured.
Results and Discussion
Judgments. The condition that replicates the underinformative conditions from Bott and Noveck (2004) is when participants received the unpartitioned set and heard You got some
(of the) gumballs. Under a semantic interpretation of some,
participants should respond YES, while a pragmatic interpretation yields a NO response. The judgment data replicates the
findings from these earlier studies: 99% of participants responded YES to all, while only 58% responded YES to some
of the. Interestingly, 91% of participants gave a semantic response to simple some, which is significantly more than for
partitive some (β = 2.39, SE = 0.4, p < .0001). We conclude
that the partitive is a better cue to the implicature than is simple some.
Response times. Response times ranged from 567 3961ms (mean: 1461ms, SD: 512ms). Response time results for some and some of the are not reported separately,
as they never differed. We fitted a series of mixed effects lin-

all
number
some

Mean log reaction time

7.4

7.2

7.0

6.8

6.6

6.4
subitizing (1-4)

mid (5-12)

unpartitioned (13)

Range

Figure 3: Mean log reaction times for YES responses.
The availability of salient lexical alternatives thus intrudes
even on the semantic, lower-bound interpretation of some.
This result cannot be accounted for by a view in which pragmatic information is not integrated until after an initial stage
of semantic processing.

Experiment 3
This experiment monitored eye movements. Critical trials
contained a contrast between a partitioned and an unpartitioned set in the lower chamber (see Figure 1). Importantly,
we varied whether the target set size was in the subitizing
range. In contrast to the previous eye-tracking studies (where
some always referred to a set that was smaller than the set that
all referred to), this allowed for direct comparison of quantifiers while controlling for size-driven baseline differences

3302

that have been observed in previous visual world studies (for
discussion see Grodner et al., 2010).
We predict delayed convergence on the target after some
relative to all and number terms within the subitizing range,
where more natural lexical alternatives to some are available.
Methods
PARTICIPANTS . Twenty-four undergraduate students from
the University of Rochester were paid to participate. All were
native speakers of English who had not participated in either
of the two previously reported experiments.
P ROCEDURE AND M ATERIALS . This setup differed from
Experiments 1 and 2 in four ways. First, two colors of gumballs were available to create the contrast between partitioned
and unpartitioned set. This led to a slight modification in the
statement that participants heard, which was modified to contain a color adjective: You got Q of the C gumballs, where
Q was one of some, all, two, or six and C was either blue or
orange. Second, to ensure that participants’ gaze location at
stimulus onset was comparable across trials, the “kaching”
sound was replaced with a visual cue: after viewing the first
display for 2 seconds, the central button on the gumball machine began to flash. Once participants clicked the button the
display changed (the gumballs “moved”). The auditory stimulus began 500ms later.
The third difference is that the upper chamber did not initially contain the same number of gumballs on every trial.
Instead, it either contained six gumballs of each color or two
gumballs of one color and nine of the other. This ensured
that on critical trials the machine’s lower chamber in the second display contained a contrast between two gumballs of one
color and six of the other that was crucially the same for both
display types (see Figure 1). Some was used to refer either
to the small (subitizable) or the big (non-subitizable) set, and
vice versa for all.
Finally, the participants’ task was to respond to the statement by clicking on the set of gumballs in the lower chamber
that had been mentioned if they believed that the person uttering the statement was right. If they thought the person was
wrong, they were instructed to click on the button in the center of the machine.
We manipulated four variables. First, one of four quantifiers occurred in the statement. Second, the lower chamber
either contained a contrast between a set of two and a set of
six gumballs or not, resulting in a hypothesized early (in the
contrast condition) vs. late (no contrast) point of disambiguation. In the no-contrast condition, set size was the same for
both sets of gumballs in the lower chamber (either two for
some/two or six for all/six). The no-contrast condition served
as a baseline: there should be no difference in convergence
time for the different quantifiers when there is no contrast cue
to the intended referent. Third, within the contrast condition,
we manipulated whether some and all referred to the big or
small set and analogously, whether two and six referred to the
partitioned or unpartitioned set. Finally, we included garden
path trials that were either semantically false (e.g. You got all

of the blue gumballs with the symmetric display in Figure 1)
or underinformative (e.g. You got some of the orange gumballs with the same display). The former served as a test that
participants were in fact doing the intended task and were not
just following a strategy of clicking on the gumballs whose
color was mentioned in the statement. The latter served to
establish whether implicature rates are comparable to Experiment 2.
How often the target set occurred on either side of the
chamber was counterbalanced, as was the color of the target set and whether the target set was the big set or the small
set (for some and all) and the partitioned or unpartitioned set
(for two and six), yielding a total of 120 trials. Two versions
of each display type were created to prevent an association of
particular displays with particular quantifiers. Table 2 shows
the distribution of trials over conditions.
Table 2: Number of trials in each condition. Target sets for
some/all were either big or small, for two/six either unpartitioned or partitioned.
Trial type
regular

Contrast Target set
present
absent

garden path

present
absent

big
small
big/small
big
small
big/small

Quantifier
some all two six
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
2
2
2
2

Participants’ eye movements were recorded with an SR
Eyelink II head mounted eye-tracker with a sampling rate of
250 Hz. Auditory stimuli were presented over Sennheiser HD
570 head phones at a comfortable listening level.
Results and Discussion In the underinformative garden
path trials there were 54% pragmatic responses, which is
comparable to the implicature rates found in previous studies.
We fitted a series of mixed logit models (with random intercepts for subjects and items) to the subset of the data in
the contrast condition on which participants were not already
looking at the target at quantifier onset, in order to assess the
probability of switching to the target after hearing the quantifier, given that the target set was either in the subitizing range
or not. We further included control variables coding whether
participants were looking at the target on the previous sample; trial number (to control for learning effects); participants’
predominant response type (pragmatic or semantic); and nonlinear effects of time.
Because we only had two set sizes in the lower chamber,
participants quickly learned that two referred to the small set
and six referred to the big set, resulting in a rapid increase in
looks to the target regardless of whether number was used in
the subitizing range.
Participants were faster to converge on the target for all

3303

"You got

some of the

Acknowledgments

blue gumballs"

This work was partially supported by NIH grant HD 27206.
We thank Dana Subik for running participants, Daniel Pontillo for help with stimulus creation and Patricia Reeder for
being a competent voice.

0.8

Proportion of fixations

0.6

References

0.4
Quantifier

some
all
two
six

0.2

TargetSet

big
small
0.0

0

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

1400

1600

Time from sentence onset

Figure 4: Looks to target for contrast trials on which there
were no looks to target at quantifier onset. Ribbons represent
95% confidence intervals. Solid lines indicate big set, dotted
lines small set target conditions.
than for some when the quantifier referred to the small set,
but not when it referred to the big set (β = 1.12, SE = 0.56, p
< .05, see Figure 4). Similarly, number was faster than some
in the subitizing range, but not when some referred to the big
set (β = 1.13, SE = 0.49, p < .05). Further, looks to big set all
increased faster than to small set some (β = 0.75, SE = 0.36,
p < .05), replicating the finding from Huang and Snedeker
(2009).
We conclude that some may give rise to a rapid implicature
outside the subitizing range (indeed, as fast as number terms
within the subitizing range), but is delayed in the presence of
salient lexical alternatives within the subitizing range.

General Discussion
We identified three linguistic and extra-linguistic constraints
that comprehenders are sensitive to in processing scalar implicatures. The syntactic form of the some-NP affects implicature rate but not response times. The availability of more
natural lexical alternatives inhibits computation of both the
upper-bound and lower-bound meaning of some. And subitizing directly affects the naturalness of some.
These results have both methodological and theoretical
consequences. Methodologically, it is important to either control for or explicitly model the effect of set size
when using visual-world eye-tracking to study scalar implicature. This sheds new light on the findings from Huang and
Snedeker (2009) and Grodner et al. (2010).
Theoretically, our results show that scalar implicatures may
be computed with the speed associated with default inferences if strongly supported by probabilistic constraints, but
may require the processing effort associated with typical PCIs
if constraints are weak or in competition. Thus scalar implicature does not fit neatly into the GCI-PCI dichotomy.

Bott, L., & Noveck, I. A. (2004). Some utterances are underinformative: The onset and time course of scalar inferences. Journal of Memory and Language, 51, 437-457.
Breheny, R., Katsos, N., & Williams, J. (2006). Are generalised scalar implicatures generated by default? An on-line
investigation into the role of context in generating pragmatic inferences. Cognition, 100, 434 - 463.
Frazier, L. (1987). Sentence processing: A tutorial review.
In M. Coltheart (Ed.), Attention and performance xii: The
psychology of reading. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Grice, P. (1975). Logic and conversation. Syntax and Semantics, 3, 41-58. (Reprinted in Grice 1989, pp. 22-40)
Grodner, D., Klein, N. M., Carbary, K. M., & Tanenhaus,
M. K. (2010). ”some”, and possibly all, scalar inferences
are not delayed: evidence for immediate pragmatic enrichment. Cognition, 116, 42 - 55.
Hirschberg, J. (1991). A theory of scalar implicature. New
York: Garland.
Horn, L. (1984). Toward a new taxonomy for pragmatic inference. In D. Schiffrin (Ed.), Meaning, form and use in context: Linguistic applications, proceedings of gurt 84 (p. 11
- 42). Washington D.C.: Georgetown University Press.
Huang, Y., & Snedeker, J. (2009). On-line interpretation
of scalar quantifiers: Insight into the semantics-pragmatics
interface. Cognitive Psychology, 58, 376-415.
Katsos, N., Breheny, R., & Williams, J. (2005). The interaction of structural and contextual constraints during the online generation of scalar inferences. In B. Bara, L. Barsalou, & M. Bucciarelli (Eds.), Proceedings of the 27th annual conference of the cognitive science society.
Kaufman, E. L., Lord, M. W., Reese, T. W., & Volkmann, J.
(1949). The discrimination of visual number. American
Journal of Psychology, 62(4), 498 - 525.
Levinson, S. C. (2000). Presumptive meanings - the theory of
generalized conversational implicature. The MIT Press.
MacDonald, M. C., Pearlmutter, N. J., & Seidenberg, M. S.
(1994). Lexical nature of syntactic ambiguity resolution.
Psychological Review, 101(4), 676 - 703.
Noveck, I., & Posada, A. (2003). Characterizing the time
course of an implicature: an evoked potentials study. Brain
and Language, 85, 203-210.
Sperber, D., & Wilson, D. (1995). Relevance: Communication and cognition. Oxford: Blackwell.
Trueswell, J. C., Tanenhaus, M. K., & Garnsey, S. (1994).
Semantic influences on parsing: Use of thematic role information in syntactic ambiguity resolution. Journal of Memory and Language, 33, 285 - 318.

3304

