UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Markers of Discourse Structure in Child-Directed Speech

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1t39j1m4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Rohde, Hannah
Frank, Michael

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Markers of Discourse Structure in Child-Directed Speech
Hannah Rohde

Michael C. Frank

rohde@stanford.edu
Department of Linguistics
Stanford University

mcfrank@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

Abstract
Although the language we encounter is typically embedded
in rich discourse contexts, existing models of sentence processing focus largely on phenomena that occur sentence internally. Here we analyze a video corpus of child-caregiver interactions with the aim of characterizing how discourse structure is reflected in child-directed speech and in children’s and
caregivers’ behavior. We use topic continuity as a measure of
discourse structure, examining how caregivers introduce and
discuss objects across sentences. We develop a variant on a
Hidden Markov Model to identify coherent discourses, taking
into account speakers’ intended referent and the time delays
between utterances. Using the discourses found by this model,
we analyze how the lexical, syntactic, and social properties
of caregiver-child interaction change over the course of a sequence of topically-related utterances. Our findings suggest
that cues used to signal topicality in adult discourse are also
available in child-directed speech and that children’s responses
reflect joint attention in communication.
Keywords: Language acquisition; discourse; social interaction; reference tracking; Bayesian modeling.

Introduction
Extracting meaning from linguistic input requires listeners to
infer a variety of dependencies both within sentences and
across larger sequences of structured discourse. Within a
sentence, listeners must infer relationships among words and
phrases, deploying a body of knowledge regarding lexical and
syntactic dependencies. Across sentences, listeners must figure out what common themes tie a series of utterances together into a coherent whole. These two types of inferential processes—one local and one global—are at the core of
language understanding, and yet our processing models have
tended to focus largely on the former. Although researchers
have begun to capture the broader structures that characterize coherent discourse and dialog, that work has been limited
in scope to adult discourse. Such work has made progress
in formally modeling the properties of coherent discourses
(Asher & Lascarides, 2003; Grice, 1975; Kehler, 2002; Mann
& Thompson, 1988) and even in showing how such properties can influence sentence-internal structure building (Altmann & Steedman, 1988; Rohde, Levy, & Kehler, in press),
but there has been little work asking whether child-directed
language shows evidence of these properties as well.
Work in language acquisition has begun to explore the issue of processing in children (Snedeker & Trueswell, 2004;
Fernald, Pinto, Swingley, Weinberg, & McRoberts, 1998),
but this work remains at the level of classic sentence processing and treats sentences as independent units. The goal
in this paper is to reconsider the child-directed sentence unit
in context, recognizing the increased informativity of spoken
language when it is encountered in a rich discourse context.

We examine discourse structure in child-directed speech
through the lens of topic continuity. Topic continuity, observed in repeated references to a set of related discourse entities, is part of what allows listeners to infer that sentences
they hear do not appear together arbitrarily but rather relate in meaningful ways. Research on reference tracking in
adults has addressed a variety of questions, including how
listeners identify referents, how speakers signal shifts in referents, and what inferences are involved in resolving ambiguities between sentences. Answers to these questions have
highlighted the range of information sources that are brought
to bear in sentence processing—from domain-general cognitive reasoning about events and causality to language-internal
principles about grammatical roles and pronominal forms
(Grosz, Joshi, & Weinstein, 1995; Kehler, Kertz, Rohde, &
Elman, 2008). The importance of topic continuity in acquisition lies in word learning, a task which requires the establishment of mappings between referring expressions and realworld objects.
Topic continuity in word learning is central to a recent
study by Frank, Goodman, Tenenbaum, and Fernald (2009).
Frank et al. propose that by attributing utterance proximity to topic continuity, early word learners may be better
able to aggregate information across multiple utterances and
thereby make more effective inferences about speakers’ referential intentions and the meanings of words. Their proposal is based on the generalization that, in a coherent discourse, utterances that are close in time are likely to refer to similar things. Frank et al.’s study showed that a
discourse-continuity prior within a Bayesian word-learning
model could provide enough information about probable topichood in child-directed speech to allow learning in otherwise
ambiguous contexts.
In this paper, we follow this previous work by investigating the availability of topic-marking cues in child-directed
speech. We ask (i) whether caregivers signal topicality in
ways consistent with properties reported in adult-directed
speech and (ii) how, over the course of a sequence of topically related utterances, caregivers’ and children’s behavior
reflects joint attention. In the next section, we describe the
video corpus we used and its annotations. We then introduce
a variant of a Hidden Markov Model that we developed to
identify discourses over time. We use these model-identified
discourses to analyze how discourse markers change from the
onset of a new topic over the course of subsequent utterances
about a particular discourse topic (henceforth a topical discourse or simply a discourse). As we will show, lexical and
syntactic properties of caregivers’ speech undergo predictable

1607

changes during a topical discourse, as do features related to
the social interaction between caregiver and child.

Corpus & Annotation
The corpus we use consists of a set of videos showing mothers and children involved in object-centered play in their
homes, collected by Fernald and Morikawa (1993). A preliminary version of this corpus was analyzed by Frank et
al. (2009), who selected it because the videos make it possible to identify both the objects being talked about and the objects present in the physical context. The play session settings
are sufficiently restricted to permit annotation of the full set
of alternative referents. The 24 available videos of Englishspeaking children range in length from 3 to 22 (M=12.2)
minutes and contain between 56 to 397 utterances (M=202).
Children in these videos fall into three age groups: 6 months
(N=8), 11–14 months (N=8), and 18–20 months (N=8). Each
video captures a single mother-child play session in which
mothers were given several pairs of toys by the experimenter
and asked to play with each pair for a 3-5 minute period.
The corpus was annotated with the following properties:
intended referent, objects present, mother’s and child’s points
of gaze, location of the mother’s and child’s hands, and direction of mother’s points. Intended referent was operationalized
as an intention to refer linguistically to an object, restricted to
the use of an object’s name (“look at the doggie”) or a pronoun (“look at his eyes and ears”). Excluded were cases in
which the object was evoked only with a property like “red,”
a super-/subordinate terms like “animal”, or a part term like
“eye”. Likewise, exclamations like “oh” were not judged to
be referential, even if they were directed at an object.
We further added timestamp annotations that marked the
onset time of each utterance. Because the goal of this study is
to characterize topical discourses in child-directed speech, we
excluded utterances that were not part of a minimal discourse,
defined as at least 3 successive utterances on the same topic.
The removal of utterances that did not participate in a minimal discourse was based on the smoothed topic assignments
from the model described in the next section. One video was
also excluded due to the limited amount of data available.

Model
Although the Frank et al. study identified topic continuity as
a valuable information source in word learning, their treatment of topical discourse relied on a fairly coarse measure of
topicality, based solely on the annotation of referential intention. For their analysis, a topical discourse consisted of any
sequence of successive utterances that referred to the same
entity. This approach may have both under-estimated and
over-estimated the number of utterances that belong to particular topical discourses. For example, a series of same-referent
utterances that are close in time may be interleaved with a
small number of non-referential utterances that have the effect of fragmenting what might otherwise be interpreted as a
single longer discourse. Alternatively, a long pause following

noise
process

ε

topic
distribution

switching
distribution

τ

γ

implied
discourse
topic

observed
referent

r

time
distributions

πb,w

d
time before
utterance

t
sentence

s

Figure 1: Schematic graphical model for the dependencies in
our discourse-finding model.
a sequence of referentially related utterances may signal an
intended topic break, such that a subsequent utterance may
be more appropriately assigned to a new discourse even if it
mentions the referent of the previous discourse.
Figure 5 gives an example of this phenomenon. In this
conversation, the mother occasionally pauses in her descriptions of the pig to encourage the child to look, saying “hi
CHI” in order to bring his attention back to the pig. Simply identifying discourses as consistent sets of references to
the same objects, as in Frank et al. (2009), may understate
the continuity of these conversations. To investigate whether
there were longer coherent discourse strings when these interruptions were taken into account, we created a probabilistic
model designed to smooth across short interruptions to discover longer discourses. This model is not a cognitive model
of discourse processing but instead a tool for data analysis,
allowing us to identify discourse units in a principled way in
order to examine corresponding linguistic and social cues.

Model details
To discover discourses, we created a variant of a Hidden
Markov Model (HMM), shown in Figure 1. For each sentence s in the corpus, we assume that we observe both what
the referent rs is (if any; many sentences have no referenced
object), and the time interval ts preceding the sentence. On
the basis of this information, our goal for each sentence is to
infer the implied (hidden) discourse topic ds .
The model assumes that for each sentence, ds is generated
by the following process. First, flip a coin with weight γ to
decide whether ds will be the same as ds−1 or will start a new
discourse (switching process). If it starts a new discourse,
draw the new topic from the topic distribution τ and draw
wait time t from the between-topic waiting time distribution
πb . If not, ds = ds−1 and draw t from the within-topic distribution πw . Now flip a coin with weight ε to decide whether

1608

Raw annotations

Model assignments

Model results
The resulting topic assignments from the model reduce the
total number of topical discourses, in comparison with the
number of discourses calculated with the raw reference annotations. The raw topics yield a total number of topical
discourses per video that ranges from 8 to 65 (mean=31.6),
whereas the model-assigned smoothed topics yield a total
number per video that ranges only from 3 to 31 (mean=14.7).
Figure 2 shows a pair of histograms that display the differences in discourse length between the reference-annotated
topics and the model-assigned topics. Discourses are considerably longer in the smoothed data. When we consider utterance onset times, we find that the gaps between utterance
onsets are shorter within topical discourses than at discourse
boundaries. Figure 3 shows the distribution of these gaps,
based on the smoothed topic discourses.
To visualize the model results, Figure 4 shows a “Gleitman plot” (see Frank et al., 2009) for one video in the corpus. A sequence of green dots or a stretch of black bar indi-

Density

0.8

0.4

0.0

0.4

0.0
1

6

26 116

1

length (log scale)

6

26 116

length (log scale)

Figure 2: Mean discourse length (number of utterances). Left
gives the distribution for raw annotations; right gives the distribution for the discourses found by the model. Model discourses are right-shifted because they were constrained to be
3 or more utterances in length.
Within Discourses

Between Discourses

0.6
Density

0.6
Density

rs will be the same as ds , or whether rs will be another topic
from τ chosen uniformly at random. Aside from the time distributions, this model resembles an HMM in that it encodes
an immediate sequential dependency between hidden states.
Because this procedure contains many exponential-family
distributions (the noise distribution ε, the switching distribution γ, the topic distribution τ, and the two time distributions
πb and πw ), we assign conjugate prior probability distributions to each and replace each with an integrated conjugate
distribution (Gelman, 2004), so that the topic distribution is a
multinomial-dirichlet, the switching and noise distributions
are beta-binomial, and the time distributions are gammapoisson (with corresponding parameter values for each).
Inference within this model can then be accomplished via
a Gibbs sampler: a Markov-chain Monte-Carlo algorithm for
estimating the posterior distribution over values of d for each
sentence. Because model performance proved to be sensitive to the hyperparameter values of the conjugate distributions, we implemented a hyperparameter inference scheme in
which, after each Gibbs sweep, a Metropolis-Hastings sampler modified hyperparameters for each distribution (we omit
this step from Figure 1 and the generative process description
above for simplicity). All hyperparameters were assumed to
be drawn from an exponential distribution with rate 2, except
for the Dirichlet parameter αt , which was assigned rate 10 (so
as not to promote excessive sparsity in the topic distribution).
For the simulations reported here, the model was run independently on the data for each video for 2000 Gibbs sweeps.
Each sentence was assigned its modal discourse topic from
the posterior samples (for discrete categorization tasks, this
method is an estimator of the maximum a posteriori category
assignment). In cases where no topic was favored in more
than 50% of samples, the topic was set to be null.

Density

0.8

0.3

0.0

0.3

0.0
0

2

9

43

seconds (log scale)

0

2

9

43

seconds (log scale)

Figure 3: Mean time between utterance onsets. Left gives distribution of times between within-discourse utterances; right
gives distribution of times at discourse boundaries.
cates a topical discourse in the raw reference annotations or
in the smoothed topic assignments, respectively. The fact that
some black bars are longer than any sequences of red or green
(reference-marking) dots shows the effect that smoothing had
on the discourses: Topics extend through time even when intervening utterances do not reference the topic directly.

Analyses of Topical Discourses
In order to determine what discourse markers change over the
course of a topically related sequence of utterances, we consider caregivers’ speech and social cues between caregiver
and child. We analyze topical discourses generated from the
raw topic annotations and the smoothed model-identified topics. The observed markers are modeled using mixed-effects
multinomial regressions with random caregiver-specific and
referent-specific intercepts (Gelman & Hill, 2007).
Figure 5 shows the behavior in the smoothed topic discourses of the 7 discourse markers we analyze. It also shows
an excerpted transcript from one video in the corpus. In Table
1, we report the logistic- or linear-regression coefficient estimates and p-values for the factors child age (coded as age,
a categorical factor) and utterance position within the topical
discourse (coded as time, a numeric factor) and an interaction
between the two. Both predictors were centered.

1609

Gleitman Plot: A2merge.csv
truck
pig
dog
car
brush
box
Present
Talked about
Both
Model

book
ball
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

time (min)

Figure 4: Sample Gleitman plot for a Fernald and Morikawa video. Rows denote objects; the x-axis marks time. Dots appear at
utterance onset times; dot color reflects the raw video annotation of object presence and object reference. Blue denotes that the
object was present when the utterance was uttered but not referenced; red denotes that the object was referenced but not present;
green denotes that the object was present and referenced. The black bars show topical discourses identified by the model.
Discourse marker
Pronoun use:
time
age
time×age
Sentence-final:
time
age
time×age
Utterance length:
time
age
time×age
Children’s eyes:
time
age
time×age
Children’s hands:
time
age
time×age
Mother’s points:
time
age
time×age
Mother’s hands:
time
age
time×age

βRAW

p-val

βSMOOTH

p-val

0.156
-0.266
-0.035

*.005
*.043
.560

0.280
-0.170
-0.049

*.001
.091
.383

-0.228
-0.222
-0.011

*.001
.153
.855

-0.338
-0.143
-0.062

*.001
.318
.300

-0.013
0.140
-0.133

.818
.331
*.010

-0.010
0.167
-0.073

.848
.356
.292

0.000
0.053
0.013

.990
.604
.827

0.136
0.085
0.039

*.010
.400
.438

0.124
0.278
-0.106

*.004
*.021
.062

0.259
0.345
0.014

*.001
*.026
.795

0.094
0.260
0.435

.375
.206
*.001

-0.139
0.235
0.055

.199
.269
.598

0.055
-0.137
-0.100

.323
.348
.079

0.050
-0.085
-0.025

.328
.592
.615

Table 1: Predictors for modeling discourse markers in mixedeffect models. The * marks significant predictor coefficients.
Lexical Trends Many studies have identified a correlation
between the information status of a discourse entity and the
linguistic form used to reference that entity, whereby familiar
entities are more likely to be realized with pronouns, whereas
unfamiliar entities tend to be realized with full noun phrases
(Ariel, 1990). We therefore test whether the rate of pronom-

inalization increases over the course of a topical discourse.
The results confirm that in the raw and smoothed discourses,
time is a significant factor for modeling the binary outcome
of pronominalization, with more pronouns (3rd person nominative/accusative/possessive forms plus one) being used later
in the discourse. The rate of pronominalization also varied by
age with mothers of younger children using more pronouns
overall, though this effect was marginal in the smoothed discourses. It is possible that caregivers use more adult-like rates
of pronominalization with children who they believe are too
young to be engaged in serious word learning.
Syntactic Trends The position of a referring expression
within a sentence often correlates with the information status
of the referenced discourse entity, such that (relatively) familiar entities are referenced earlier in a sentence whereas (relatively) unfamiliar entities are referenced later (Lambrecht,
1994). We therefore test whether references to a discourse
topic occur later in a sentence in the early parts of a discourse.
For this analysis, we consider the final word of each utterance
with the prediction that topical entities are less likely to be
referenced utterance-finally as a discourse progresses and an
entity becomes more familiar. Fernald and Morikawa (1993)
noted the strong prevalence of referential nouns at the ends of
sentences in the English caregivers’ speech, hence our choice
to not test subject/object position. The results confirm that in
the raw and smoothed discourses time is a significant factor
for modeling the binary outcome of sentence-final mention,
with fewer sentence-final references later in the discourse.
We also test whether sentence complexity increases as the
topical discourse progresses. Information-theoretic models
of language production (Genzel & Charniak, 2002; Levy &
Jaeger, 2007) posit that, as discourse entities become more
familiar, the processor is better equipped to handle longer
and more complex structures. For this analysis, we measure
complexity as mean utterance length to test the prediction
that length increases over the course of a topical discourse.
Contrary to prediction, the raw discourses showed an interaction between time and age whereby mothers of older children

1610

slightly decreased their utterance length over time, and there
were no reliable effects in the smoothed discourses. This lack
of an effect may be due in part to the nature of the video
transcripts and the difficulties in identifying sentence units in
naturally-occurring speech (see excerpt in Figure 5).
Social Interaction Trends When a new topic is introduced,
speakers are likely to draw attention to that entity, both in
their words and with other social cues. We therefore evaluated cues related to joint attention (Baldwin, 1995; Carpenter,
Nagell, & Tomasello, 1998), namely the position of mothers’
and children’s hands and their points of gaze. The results
show that children looked more to the referenced object over
the course of a topical discourse, an effect apparent only in
the smoothed discourses. Children also touched the referenced object more over the course of a discourse, an effect
apparent in both the raw and smoothed discourses. It appears
6 months

12 months

18 months

6 months

12 months

18 months

that children only gradually became engaged in the discourse,
rather than shifting their attention immediately to the topic.
For mothers’ pointing, the raw discourses revealed an interaction between time and age whereby the rate of pointing to the
topical object climbed most quickly for the oldest age group
group. For mothers’ hands, there were no reliable effects.

General Discussion
As one of the first investigations of discourse structure in
an acquisition setting, the study presented here shows that
topical discourse is characterized both by linguistic markers of topichood and by social cues related to joint attention.
Across the discourses, we see patterns of pronominalization
and sentence-final reference that are consistent with patterns
observed in adult discourse: Less familiar information is referenced later in an utterance, and more familiar information
Raw/Smooth
pig/pig
pig/pig
/pig
/pig
pig/pig
/pig
pig/pig
pig/pig
pig/pig
/pig
/pig
/pig
pig/pig
pig/pig
pig/pig
/pig
pig/pig
pig/pig
pig/pig
/pig
pig/pig
pig/pig
pig/pig
pig/pig
pig/pig
pig/pig
pig/pig
pig/pig
pig/pig
pig/pig
dog/dog
dog/dog
dog/dog

100

% Pronouns

50

0
100

% Sentencefinal
reference

50

0
10

# Words per
utterance

5

0
100

% Children's
looks to topic

50

0

100

% Children's
hands on topic

50

0
100

% Mothers'
points to topic

50

0
100

% Mothers'
hands on topic

50

0

1

3

5

time

7

9

1

3

5

time

7

9

1

3

5

7

9

time

Utterance
this a pig
oink pig oh where you going
where you going
yes
what’s he saying
look see
he’s got little ears
see the eyes
can you see the piggy’s eyes
what
CHILD look
ha
it squeaks
look it he’s got a tail too
oh look i can put his hand in it
hi CHILD
look at his eye
can you see his eyes and his little nose
he gonna give you a kiss
yeah
what’s this look
can you touch him
he’s got fur
look it look at his tail
CHILD look at his tail
look at his tail
see his tail
its different huh
it feels different
there’s a tail
can you say tail oh look at the puppy
look at the puppy
oh where’d it go

Figure 5: Discourse markers. Graphs on left plot caregiver means at successive utterance positions within smoothed discourses;
points are jittered on the x-axis to avoid overplotting; superimposed regression lines correspond to logistic and linear models
built with the smoothed-topic data. Topic assignments and transcript excerpt on right from a video with 12-month-old child.

1611

is likely to be referenced with a pronoun. Also, across the discourse segments, children’s patterns of hand and eye movements show increased attention to the topical object; mother’s
hand and eye movements are less reliable (potentially due to
their concurrent task of monitoring the child).
The benefit of our HMM modeling can be seen in the analysis of social cues, where we see a reliable effect of utterance
position in children’s looking in the smoothed discourses but
not the raw discourses. This may be attributed to the fact that
eye gaze is not manifested only at individual utterance times
and may instead span multiple utterances, only some of which
may have been identified as topical within the raw annotation.
As noted in the introduction, researchers studying processing in acquisition have tended to focus on word-level acquisition and, in so doing, have treated sentences as largely independent units. The results presented here establish that larger
discourse-level regularities are available in child-directed
speech, such that children may have access to the topical nature of human discourse even if they cannot understand individual sentences in their entirety. The full extent of children’s
understanding of discourse structure remains unclear, but the
progression of topical discourses may be apparent especially
if children are hearing sentences with supporting context regarding what is present and what could be referred to.
If one of the functions of language is to provide the structure necessary to permit meaningful communication, one
might hypothesize that discourses would be structured to increase the amount of information a speaker can convey. This
is the argument put forward in work on the strategies that
speakers employ to achieve communicative efficiency (Levy
& Jaeger, 2007), on the complexity of sentences found later
in a discourse (Genzel & Charniak, 2002), and on the growth
of speaker-listener common ground over the course of a conversation (Clark, 1996). Our results are consistent with these
models of language use: Speakers use reduced referring expressions such as pronouns when topical entities are easily
retrievable and listeners show signs of engaging in joint attention to entities that have become part of the common ground.
In sum, we take these exploratory results as an invitation to
reconsider discourse-level phenomena in the acquisition setting, even for very young children. Discourse topics wax and
wane over the course of a conversation with subtle repercussions in communication and common ground, and our results
suggest that child-directed speech presents a new and rich domain for analyses of discourse structure.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Noah Goodman and Eve Clark for helpful discussion and Allison Kraus for research assistance. A Mellon
postdoctoral fellowship to H. Rohde supported this research.

References
Altmann, G. T. M., & Steedman, M. (1988). Interaction with
context during human sentence processing. Cognition, 30,
191-238.

Ariel, M. (1990). Accessing Noun-Phrase Antecedents. London: Routledge.
Asher, N., & Lascarides, A. (2003). Logics of Conversation.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Baldwin, D. A. (1995). Understanding the link between joint
attention and language. In C. Moore & P. J. Dunham (Eds.),
Joint attention: its origins and role in development.
Carpenter, M., Nagell, K., & Tomasello, M. (1998). Social
cognition, joint attention, and communicative competence
from 9 to 15 months of age. Monographs of the Society for
Research in Child Development, 63(4).
Clark, H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge Univ Press.
Fernald, A., & Morikawa, H. (1993). Common themes
and cultural variations in Japanese and American mothers’
speech to infants. Child Development, 64, 637-656.
Fernald, A., Pinto, J. P., Swingley, D., Weinberg, A., &
McRoberts, G. W. (1998). Rapid gains in speed of verbal processing by infants in the second year. Psychological
Science, 9(3), 228-231.
Frank, M., Goodman, N., Tenenbaum, J., & Fernald, A.
(2009). Continuity of discourse provides information for
word learning. In Proceedings of the 31st Annual Meeting
of the Cognitive Science Society (p. 1418-1423).
Gelman, A. (2004). Bayesian data analysis. CRC press.
Gelman, A., & Hill, J. (2007). Data analysis using regression
and multilevel/hierarchical models (Vol. 625). Cambridge
University Press Cambridge.
Genzel, D., & Charniak, E. (2002). Entropy rate constancy
in text. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole &
J. L. Morgan (Eds.), Speech acts. NY: Academic Press.
Grosz, B. J., Joshi, A. K., & Weinstein, S. (1995). Centering: A framework for modeling the local coherence of
discourse. Computational Linguistics, 21, 203-225.
Kehler, A. (2002). Coherence, reference, and the theory of
grammar. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.
Kehler, A., Kertz, L., Rohde, H., & Elman, J. (2008). Coherence and coreference revisited. Jo. of Semantics, 25, 1-44.
Lambrecht, K. (1994). Information structure and sentence
form: Topic, focus, and the mental representations of discourse referents. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Levy, R., & Jaeger, T. (2007). Speakers optimize information density through syntactic reduction. In B. Schlökopf,
J. Platt, & T. Hoffman (Eds.), Advances in neural information processing systems. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Mann, W. C., & Thompson, S. A. (1988). Rhetorical structure theory: Toward a functional theory of text organization. Text, 8, 243-281.
Rohde, H., Levy, R., & Kehler, A. (in press). Anticipating
explanations in relative clause processing. Cognition.
Snedeker, J., & Trueswell, J. (2004). The developing constraints on parsing decisions: The role of lexical-biases and
referential scenes in child and adult sentence processing.
Cognitive Psychology, 49, 238-299.

1612

