UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Memory Representations Supporting Speakers’ Choice of Referring Expression: Effects of
Category Overlap and Shared Experience

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9qm0q88s

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Gorman, Kristen S.
Gegg-Harrison, Whitney
Marsh, Chelsea R.
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Memory Representations Supporting Speakers’ Choice of Referring Expression:
Effects of Category Overlap and Shared Experience
Kristen Skovbroten Gorman (ksgorman@bcs.rochester.edu)
Whitney Gegg-Harrison (wgharrison@bcs.rochester.edu)
Chelsea R. Marsh (chelsea.marsh@rochester.edu)
Michael K. Tanenhaus (mtan@bcs.rochester.edu)
Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14607 USA
Abstract
Speakers must take their addressee’s knowledge into account
in choosing to refer to an object using a name or a description.
Do speakers keep track of partner-specific information about
the common ground status of names? And if so, what
mechanisms support this ability? We present a series of
experiments that investigate the nature of the memory
representations involved in supporting speakers’ ability to
distinguish shared from privileged information. The results of
these experiments suggest that category information can be
used as a cue to aid retrieval of ground status, and that shared
experience plays an important role in helping speakers to
distinguish privileged information from shared information.
Keywords: language production; common ground; memory
representations; referring expressions; shared experience.

Introduction
One of the most basic things we do with language is use it
to refer to a particular object or individual in the world. In
order to successfully refer, speakers must choose a referring
expression that is likely to be understood by their
addressees. One of the decisions that speakers face is
whether to use a name (e.g. Inta) or a description (e.g. the
yellow thing that looks like a worm). A name will be the
shorter and more precise referring expression, but only if the
addressee knows the name.
The distinction between names and descriptions has been
especially significant within the domains of philosophy of
language, semantics, and pragmatics, due to debates about
the nature of their meanings and the means by which they
refer. Though some (e.g. Searle, 1950) have argued that
names are simply shorthand for sets of descriptions and thus
refer similarly, more widely accepted accounts (following
Kripke, 1980) hold that names like John do not carry any
descriptive content which addressees could use to ascertain
the reference; instead, they refer directly, by virtue of
having a special connection to the referent. Thus a name
tells an addressee which thing is being picked out by the
speaker, but does not tell them anything about it.
In their account of reference in interactive dialog, Clark
and Wilkes-Gibbs (1992) describe the process involved in
successful reference as a collaboration between speaker and
addressee. They examine conversations in which speakers
and addressees must work together to arrange a set of cards
printed with complex “tangram” figures, and find that over

the course of these conversations, speakers and addressees
seem to work together to establish mutually acceptable
referring expressions, often starting with descriptions and
eventually entraining upon shorter, more name-like
expressions. Subsequent studies have shown that these
shortened expressions are difficult to understand for
individuals who did not participate in the collaborative
process, lending further credence to the view that successful
reference requires coordination during conversation (Clark
& Shober, 1992).
Notions of common ground, coordination, and
perspective-taking are central to understanding reference in
interactive conversation, and for developing dialog systems
that can successfully interact with human users using natural
language (e.g. Brennan 2000), and are particularly important
for understanding the difference between a name and
description. In order to understand a name, the addressee
needs to know that the name is linked to the particular
referent, and in order to felicitously use a name to refer to an
object, the speaker must believe that their addressee has that
knowledge; thus, in order to successfully refer using a name,
interlocutors must have some way of establishing and
representing what knowledge is shared with their
conversational partner. Clark and Marshall (1978) provide
an account of this process in which interlocutors build up
detailed representations of shared knowledge over the
course of conversation; speakers then use these detailed
“reference diaries” in deciding what to say. However, many
have argued that the process of building up and maintaining
such detailed representations may be too computationally
intensive to realistically account for what happens during
ordinary conversation (e.g. Keysar, Lin & Barr, 2003).
Because speakers’ use of names provides a window into
their beliefs regarding their addressee’s knowledge, names
are a valuable tool for investigating our abilities for
perspective-taking and representing common ground.
Recent work involving name usage has begun to explore the
limits on these abilities, and what those limits might tell us
about the nature of the processes and representations
involved. For example, Wu and Keysar (2007) argue that
instead of tracking whether or not individual pieces of
knowledge are shared with a particular addressee, speakers
might instead use a global Information Overlap Heuristic.
Using such a heuristic, speakers could safely assume that
they could rely on their own knowledge when the overlap in

1551

information between themselves and their addressee is
extensive; the overall amount of information shared by a
speaker and addressee can serve as a cue to whether a
particular item is shared. In their experiment, pairs of naïve
participants learned novel names for novel shapes. They
either had high information overlap and learned 18 of the 24
names together or low overlap and learned only 6 of the 24
names together. The remaining names were taught only to
the speaker, making them privileged information. During a
subsequent matching task in which speakers had to instruct
their partner to select a target shape from an array of three
shapes, speakers used substantially more names (rather than
descriptions) when a name was shared than when it was
privileged. Speakers also used more names overall in the
high overlap condition, which Wu and Keysar interpreted as
support for their Information Overlap Heuristic.
Heller, Gorman and Tanenhaus (in press) used the same
paradigm and replicated the basic Wu and Keysar findings,
but a more detailed analysis revealed a difference in the
form of the utterances speakers used when names were
shared versus when they were privileged. Heller et al. found
that when speakers used names for shared shapes, they
primarily used a Name-Alone form (a name without any
description) and on the small portion of trials where
speakers used names for privileged shapes, they primarily
used a Name-then-Description form (where a speaker uses a
name immediately followed by a description). Their
analyses suggest that this Name-then-Description form is
not a repair but rather the utterance is planned with the
intention to include the description. Therefore, this
difference in form suggests that speakers can track whether
or not an individual piece of information is shared or
privileged with respect to their conversational partner, and
can use this partner-specific information during production.
Likewise, evidence from comprehension studies suggests
that addressees can use speaker-specific information when
comprehending words or referring expressions (e.g. Creel,
Aslin & Tanenhaus, 2008; Metzing & Brennan, 2003;
Brennan & Hanna, 2009). Creel et al. (2008) showed
sensitivity to speaker-specific lexical representations in an
experiment where participants were exposed to pairs of
cohort competitors (e.g. candle and candy). Members of
each cohort pair were spoken either by the same speaker or
by different speakers. In the second half of the experiment,
participants showed less competition between the target and
its cohort competitor when each member of the cohort pair
was spoken by a different speaker.
Brennan and colleagues (Metzing & Brennan, 2003;
Brennan & Hanna, 2009) have shown that addressees also
use speaker-specific information when comprehending
referring expressions. In their experiments, participants
played a referential communication game where the speaker
(a confederate) used consistent referring expressions for
particular items. Later, participants played the referential
communication game again with either the same speaker or
a different speaker. Participants were slower to identify the
target and searched the display more when the original

partner used a referring expression that was different than
the one used in the first part of the study, suggesting that
participants store partner-specific information about the use
of particular referring expressions.
But if detailed representations of common ground are too
computationally expensive to maintain, then how could
interlocutors store and use partner-specific information to
the extent these studies suggest? Galati and Brennan (2010)
suggest that simple “one-bit” representations of partner
knowledge may underlie these abilities; if information about
the addressee’s knowledge is readily available, it can be
easily used. Horton and Gerrig (2005) have proposed that
information about common ground may be represented as a
by-product of ordinary memory processes, which contain
context-specific episodic traces, rather than being separately
tracked and represented. They suggest that when speakers
want to refer to something, they activate episodic memories
for that object. If the episodic memory links the name for
the referent with their addressee, the speaker uses that name.
Using a paradigm in which participants are given training
that leads them to associate particular item categories with
particular partners, they find stronger effects of audience
design when partner-specific associations were easier to
distinguish in memory (Horton & Gerrig, 2005b). Horton
(2007) provides further evidence that these sorts of effects
do not depend on explicit recall of a partner-specific link.
In the current series of experiments, using a paradigm
similar to Wu and Keysar (2007) and Heller et al. (in press),
we investigate the nature of the memory representations that
might underlie speakers’ ability to distinguish shared from
privileged information. In Experiment 1, we manipulate the
categorical structure of the information and find modest
effects of category structure on speakers’ choice of referring
expression. In Experiment 2, we examine the role of
partner-specific shared experience, and find that speakers
have more difficulty using felicitous referring expressions
without the shared experience of learning the material with
their addressee.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 examined whether speakers use categorical
knowledge when evaluating the ground status of a referent.
If speakers use categorical knowledge to aid retrieval, the
Horton and Gerrig model predicts that names may be used
infelicitously when some knowledge in a category is shared
while some is privileged. Additionally, when an entire
category is shared or privileged, this category information
could improve speakers’ ability to distinguish shared and
privileged names, since the category of a particular item
could serve as a reliable cue to its ground status.

Method
Participants Thirty pairs of native English speakers from
the University of Rochester community were paid for their
participation. Each pair knew each other prior to the
experiment and chose to participate together. One
participant was randomly assigned the role of “director”,

1552

and the other the role of “matcher”. Three additional pairs
were excluded from analysis due to equipment failure.
Materials Eighteen novel clipart images of monsters and 6
of robots from clipart.com were used for the training phase
of this experiment (see Figure 1 for sample items). Each was
randomly assigned an artificial name (e.g. Grampent,
Molget) from those used by Wu and Keysar (2007). An
additional 30 images of monsters and robots were used as
distractor images or for practice trials during testing.
The distribution of monsters and robots across shared and
privileged ground varied between conditions. In the mixedcategory condition, monsters and robots were evenly
distributed between shared and privileged ground with 9
monsters and 3 robots in shared ground and 9 monsters and
3 robots in privileged ground. In the shared-category
condition, all 6 robots were shared, and most monsters (12
of 18) were privileged. In the privileged-category condition,
all robots were privileged and most monsters were shared.
When robots and monsters were both in privileged or shared
ground, the items were interleaved within training blocks.

Figure 1. Sample of monsters (left) & robots (right).
Procedure
Training phase The names of the 24 items were taught using
5”x8” flashcards of each item in four blocks of six items
each. During the first two blocks, the two participants sat
together across from the experimenter and during the third
and fourth blocks, the director learned the remaining names
with the experimenter while the matcher played a nonlinguistic computer game while listening to instrumental
music over headphones.
For each item, the experimenter presented a card showing
the picture of that item, said the name, and waited for both
participants to repeat the name before proceeding to the next
card. After going through the six items in the block twice,
the experimenter just presented the card and waited for the
participants to name the shape. The experimenter then said
the name or corrected any errors if the participants could not
name the item correctly. The experimenter repeated this
procedure until both participants could name all six items
flawlessly, and then moved on to the next block.
After all of the blocks had been learned, the experimenter
had the participants name the shapes in each block a final
time before proceeding to the testing phase.
Testing phase During the testing phase, participants played
a referential communication game. Participants sat in front
of two different computers and were free to converse over a
network, but they could not see each other. The director was
presented with one item: Shared Monster, Privileged
Monster, Robot (either shared or privileged) or New (half
monsters and half robots). The director instructed the

matcher who saw three items, to click the target item “as
quickly and accurately as possible”. The matcher’s display
contained the target item, another named item from the
training set and one unnamed item from the set of distractor
items.
Trials were advanced when the matcher clicked on any
item: if the matcher clicked the wrong item, an error sound
was heard, but participants could not correct the error. The
referential communication task had two practice trials
followed by 24 experimental trials, six of each type (Shared
Monster, Privileged Monster, Robot, New). The same test
items were presented for all training conditions.
The participants’ utterances were recorded to a computer
and later transcribed by the experimenter.
Post-tests After completing the referential communication
task, the speaker completed two additional tasks. First, the
director was presented with each of the 24 items she had
learned during training and had to determine whether both
she and her partner learned the name of that item or if only
she learned it. The computer presented the items one at a
time in random order, and the director had to click “learned
together” or “learned alone”.
The director then completed a task where she had to name
each of the shapes. The computer presented the items one at
a time in random order, and the director had to say its name,
which was recorded. A response was coded as correct when
no more than one phoneme was incorrect.

Results
Task performance Overall task performance was excellent.
Matchers clicked on the correct item on 99% of the trials.
Directors’ accuracy on the first post-test, which tested their
ability to explicitly distinguish between items they and their
partners both learned and which they learned alone, was
97% with no significant differences between the training
conditions.1 Director’s accuracy on the second post-test,
which tested their knowledge for the names of the items,
was 76% (70% for privileged-category, 75% for sharedcategory, 84% for mixed) with no significant differences
between the training conditions.
Directors’ Utterances We assigned the directors’ first turn
of each trial to one of six categories: No-Name (a
description without using a learned name), Name-inDescription (a shared name used non-referentially as part of
the description; e.g. looks like Grampent), Description-thenName (a description followed by a name), Name-thenDescription (a name followed by a description),
Knowledge-Query (asking if their partner knows the name)
and Name-Alone (a name without any description of the
item). Our analyses will focus on the Name-Alone form
since Heller et al. (in press) showed that speakers use
1
To test significance for task performance, we conducted oneway ANOVAs on quasi-logit transformed proportions and for
Experiment 2 we conducted two-tailed paired t-tests on quasi-logit
transformed proportions.

1553

Figure 2. Experiment 1: Each panel shows the distribution of directors’ utterances for different types of items (new,
privileged monster/robots & shared monsters/robots). The distribution of the categories (monsters & robots) varied based on
the training conditions (mixed, privileged-category & shared-category).
this form to mark information that they believe to be shared.
For statistical analyses, we collapsed the shared-category
and privileged-category conditions and used a multilevel
logistic regression model to predict whether directors used
Name-Alone with the presence of category cues (category;
mixed), the ground status of the test item (shared;
privileged), the category type of the test item (robot;
monster) and their two-way interactions as fixed effects and
subjects and items as random intercepts. The three-way
interaction could not included in the model because the data
for privileged items was too sparse.
Each panel of Figure 2 shows the distribution of the
speakers’ utterance types for a particular type of item in
each condition (i.e. for each distribution of monsters and
robots). Directors almost exclusively used the No-Name
form for new items (far left panel), which is expected since
they did not learn names for these items. Overall, directors
distinguished between shared items (far right panels ) and
privileged items (the 2nd and 3rd panels ) in the form of their
referring expressions. Directors rarely used the Name-Alone
form for privileged items and use it frequently for shared
items regardless of whether the items were monsters or
robots. In the model, there was a significant main effect of
ground status (ß=2.60, SE=0.32, p<0.001) such that NameAlone was used more for shared items.
Additionally, for shared monsters (the 4th panel), speakers
used the Name-Alone form less in the two category
conditions. Remember that this is when the distribution of
robots could be used as a cue to their ground status but the
monsters spanned both shared and privileged ground. In the
model, this was reflected by a significant interaction of
category cues and an item’s category type (ß=-1.31,
SE=0.61, p<0.04) such that Name-Alone is used more for
monsters when there are no category cues, but this pattern is
reversed for robots. The presence of category cues makes

directors more likely to use the Name-Alone form for items
when all of the items in that category are shared, but less
likely to use the Name-Alone form when there is a category
cue and only some of items in that category are shared,
indicating that directors are sensitive to the category
manipulations.
Finally, it is interesting to note the trend for shared
monsters that directors used the Name-Alone form more in
the privileged-category (57%) than the shared-category
condition (62%). In the privileged-category condition twothirds of the monsters are shared, whereas in the sharedcategory condition only one-third of the monsters are
shared. This pattern is similar to the difference between the
high and low overlap conditions in Wu & Keysar (2007)
and Heller et al. (in press).

Discussion
Overall, speakers are adept at distinguishing between shared
and privileged names when shared knowledge is established
via shared experience. The category manipulation produced
only modest changes in their behavior, namely, reduced use
of shared names for items in a category that is both shared
and privileged. This shift in behavior suggests that
categorical knowledge may play some role in how speakers
distinguish between shared and privileged knowledge.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 was designed to investigate the role of
partner-specific shared experience on speakers’ ability to
distinguish shared and privileged knowledge. In this
experiment, directors and matchers learned the same items
as participants in the mixed condition of Experiment 1, but
training was conducted separately. The matcher was alone
when learning shared items and the director was either alone

1554

or with a different partner who was not the matcher;
participants were still aware of which items both had
learned and which only the director learned. In the condition
where directors learned shared items with a third party, the
shared learning experience corresponds to the common
ground they have with the matcher but does not provide a
speaker-specific memory association that could be used
during the referential communication task.

Method
Participants Ten pairs and 10 trios of participants
participated in Experiment 2. Six additional pairs/trios
participated but were excluded from analysis due to
experimenter error (3 pairs), equipment failure (1 pair) or
failure to follow task instructions (1 pair & 1 trio).
Materials The materials were identical to those used for the
mixed condition of Experiment 1.
Procedure The same procedure as in Experiment 1 was
used, except that the participants learned shared items
separately rather than sitting next to each other. In the alone
condition, the participants were told that the director would
learn the names for some of the items, then the matcher
would learn the same items, and then the director would
learn the names for the remaining items, which would not be
subsequently taught to the matcher. After all of the blocks
were taught, the participants reviewed the names separately.
In the third-party condition, the procedure for directors and
matchers was identical to the alone condition, except that
the director learned the shared items with a third participant.
This additional participant was only present during training
of items that the matcher also learned; the directors were
alone when they learned privileged items.

Alone form between the training conditions. However, for
privileged items directors’ use of the Name-Alone form
increased when they had less shared experience, suggesting
that directors were prone to errors (i.e. using names when
the matcher didn’t know them) when the director and
matcher’s shared knowledge was established without direct
shared experience.
This pattern was confirmed when we compared a
multilevel logistic regression model that predicts the
likelihood of the Name-Alone form with item (shared;
privileged), training type (matcher, third party, alone) and
their interaction as fixed effects and with items and subjects
as random intercepts to a similar model that did not contain
the interaction. This comparison indicated that the addition
of the interaction was significant (χ2 = 23.47, p<0.002). To
confirm the linear trend, we also constructed another
multilevel logistic regression model containing the
interaction term, but included the matcher, third party and
alone conditions as -1, 0, 1, respectively, rather than as
categorical predictors. This analysis showed a significant
interaction of training and item type (ß=-0.54, SE=0.16,
p<0.001)
Another notable difference in directors’ utterances when
they don’t have a shared learning experience with the
matcher is that directors used the Knowledge-Query form
(e.g. Do you know Inta?), which further suggests that they
were less certain about ground status of privileged items in
the alone and third-party conditions than they were in the
matcher condition.

Results
Task performance Matchers’ task performance was
excellent (they clicked on the correct item on 99% of the
trials), but there was a notable difference in speakers’ posttest performance. Directors’ accuracy on the first post-test
(distinguishing between items both they and their partners
know and those only they learned) was 91% for the alone
condition, which was significantly less than the third-party
condition (96%; t=2.47, p<0.03) and the mixed condition of
Experiment 1, which we will call the matcher condition here
(98%; t=4.78, p<0.001). However, director’s accuracy on
the second post-test (memory for the items’ names) was
78% for the alone condition and 85% for the third-party
condition, which do not significantly differ from the
matcher condition (84%).

Discussion

Directors’ Utterances Each panel of Figure 4 shows the
distribution of directors’ utterances for a different type of
item used in Experiment 2. The alone and third-party
conditions are compared to the matcher condition (the
mixed condition of Experiment 1). For shared items (the
right panel), there was no difference in the use of the Name-

When directors learn the same information as their partner
without experiencing the learning process together, even
when they have another person who can act as a cue to their
partner’s knowledge, directors seem to have difficulty
distinguishing between shared and privileged names, as
shown in their explicit judgments in post-tests as well as
their utterances. Although they use the Name-Alone form

Figure 4. Experiment 2: Each panel shows the distribution
of directors’ utterances for new, privileged & shared items
for each training condition (alone, third party & matcher).

1555

equally often for shared items in all conditions, directors
they use the Name-Alone form more for privileged items
when there was not shared experience with the matcher.

General Discussion
These experiments demonstrate a remarkable ability in
speakers for tracking the common ground status of a
particular name with respect to a particular addressee, and
shed some light on the nature of the memory representations
that support that ability. When shared knowledge is
established through shared experience, speakers are quite
adept at tracking the status of names and using them
appropriately in a referential communication task. This
lends support to Horton and Gerrig’s (2005a) memory-based
hypothesis. Shared learning experience should create a
strong episodic memory cue linking the partners to names,
thus encoding ground status.
When the learning experience is instead shared with a
third-party whose knowledge perfectly corresponds with the
addressee, speakers are less certain about ground status, as
demonstrated by their use of names for privileged items and
explicit knowledge queries. This suggests that while this
type of indirect cue can help speakers to distinguish between
shared and privileged knowledge, it is not as helpful as
having a shared learning experience with a conversational
partner. However, it is more helpful than having no shared
experience at all, which suggests that the speaker’s
confidence about ground status varies based on the quality
of the evidence linking the addressee to the name of an item;
that is, speakers appear to be relying on representations that
are more graded than a “one-bit” model of their partner
would seem to allow.
Shared experience clearly played the largest role in
determining the ground status of a name. However, we also
found that category structure can serve as a cue to ground
status. Speakers were more likely to use the Name-Alone
form in situations when all of the members of a category
were learned together, and are less likely to do so when
some members of a category were learned together and
others were not. This, along with the third party condition in
Experiment 2, suggests that speakers are also able to use
sources of information about their partner’s knowledge that
are not based on having shared learning experience directly
with them. In everyday conversations, we are likely to have
more in common ground with our interlocutor than could
possibly have been established strictly through shared
experience, and as such, sources of information that do not
depend on shared experience, such as category-based
inferences about what an interlocutor knows, may become
more important in those settings.
Horton and Gerrig (2005a) provide a useful model for
how memory representations could underlie a speakers’
ability to use felicitous referring expressions. Further study
will need to address the question of how these memory
processes scale up to more realistic kinds of world
knowledge in more realistic conversational settings and how

speakers use cues like shared experience and categorical
structure under these conditions.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Dana Subik for recruiting participants
and providing technical support. This research was partially
supported by NIH grant HD-27206 to MKT and an NSF
Graduate Research Fellowship to KSG.

References
Brennan, S.E. (2000). Processes that shape conversation and
their implications for computational linguistics. In
Proceedings of the 38th Annual Meeting of the ACL. Hong
Kong: Association for Computational Linguistics.
Brennan, S.E., & Hanna, J.E. (2009). Partner-Specific
Adaptation in Dialog. Topics in Cognitive Science, 1(2),
274-291.
Clark, H.H., & Marshall, C. (1978). Reference Diaries. In
D.L. Waltz (Ed.), Theoretical issues in natural language
processing, TINLAP-2 (pp. 57-63), ACM: New York.
Clark, H.H., & Schober, M. (1992). Understanding by
Addressees and Overhearers. In Clark, H.H., ed., Arenas
of Language Use, Chapter 6. University of Chicago Press.
Clark, H.H., & Wilkes-Gibbs, D. (1992). Referring as a
collaborative process. In Clark, H.H., ed., Arenas of
Language Use, Chapter 1. University of Chicago Press.
Creel, S.C., Aslin, R.N., & Tanenhaus, M.K. (2008).
Heeding the voice of experience: The role of talker
variation in lexical access. Cognition, 106, 633-664.
Galati, A. & Brennan, S. E. (2010). Attenuating repeated
information:
For
the
speaker,
or
for
the
addressee? Journal of Memory and Language, 62, 35-51.
Heller, D., Gorman, K.S., and Tanenhaus, M.K. (in press).
To name or to describe: shared knowledge affects
referential form. Topics in Cognitive Science.
Horton, W.S. (2007). The influence of partner-specific
memory associations on language production: Evidence
from picture naming. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 22, 1114-1139
Horton, W.S., & Gerrig, R. (2005a). Conversational
Common Ground and Memory Processes in Language
Production. Discourse Processes, 40(1), 1-35.
Horton, W.S. & Gerrig, R. (2005b). The impact of memory
demands on audience design during language production.
Cognition, 96, 127-142.
Keysar, B., Lin, S. & Barr, D.J. (2003) Limits on theory of
mind use in adults. Cognition, 89(1), 25-41
Kripke, S. (1980). Naming and Necessity. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Metzing, C., & Brennan, S. (2003). When conceptual pacts
are broken: Partner-specific effects on the comprehension
of referring expressions. Journal of Memory and
Language, 49(2), 201-213.
Searle, J. (1950). Proper Names. In Mind, 59, 320-344.
Wu, S., & Keysar, B. (2007). The effect of information
overlap on communication effectiveness. Cognitive
Science, 31, 1-13.

1556

