UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Metacognitive Prompting Aids Dynamic Decision-Making

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/621736nr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Evans, Jarrett
Guss, Dominik
Boot, Walter

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Metacognitive Prompting Aids Dynamic Decision-Making
Jarrett Evans (evans@psy.fsu.edu)
Florida State University, Department of Psychology, 1107 W. Call Street
Tallahassee, FL 32306 USA

C.Dominik Güss (dguess@unf.edu)
University of North Florida,
Department of Psychology, 1 UNF Drive, Jacksonville, FL 32224 USA

Walter R. Boot (boot@psy.fsu.edu)
Florida State University, Department of Psychology, 1107 W. Call Street
Tallahassee, FL 32306 USA

decision-makers slow down and process information
analytically to reduce errors (Alter, Oppenheimer, Epley, &
Eyre, 2007). Findings from the previous studies are
somewhat limited because they focused on either incubation
or metacognition and each study used a different task
making it difficult to directly compare incubation and
metacognition strategies. The current study addresses these
limitations by assessing the performance outcomes of both
metacognition and incubation strategies on the same task
using the microworld approach.

Abstract
Recent research suggests that incubation is superior to
metacognition in tasks involving many decision alternatives
(Dijksterhuis et al., 2006). One explanation for these findings
is the limited information processing capacity of working
memory. The current study further investigates this topic by
using more complex tasks as many errors in Dynamic
Decision-Making (DDM) are thought to be related to limited
processing. Our results indicate that metacognitive prompting
results in better performance in DDM over incubation via a
better strategy selection. Results are explained referring to
methodological reasons and to literature on metacognition. In
addition to the theoretical relevance, findings may be relevant
for training programs using DDM simulations.
Keywords: Dynamic Decision Making, Conscious
Processing,
Incubation,
Unconscious
Processing,
Metacognition

Microworlds

Introduction
Humans have the remarkable ability to find new strategies
to solve problems. Have you ever been working on a
problem and noticed a better way to do it? Have you started
to work on a problem, went to lunch, and thought of a better
strategy while you were eating? The first example, where
you consciously monitored your performance, we will refer
to as metacognition, or awareness of one’s own performance
and regulation of cognitive processes (Flavell, 1981). The
second example, where you arrived at a solution
unconsciously, or without attention directed at performance
(Dijksterhuis, Bos, Nordgren, & van Baaren, 2006), we will
refer to as incubation as improvements that occur after one
task is set aside and an unrelated task is started have been
referred to as the ‘incubation effect’ (Vul & Pashler, 2007;
Sio & Ormerod, 2007).
Previous research has indicated that incubation improves
the quality of choices as people attempt to select the best
apartment, roommate, or automobile (Dijksterhuis, 2004;
Dijksterhuis, et al., 2006) and helps decision makers to
overcome misleading information (Vul & Pashler, 2007). In
contrast, other researchers have found that metacognition,
rather than incubation, improves the retention of lecture
information (Berthold, Nückles, & Renkl, 2007), and helps

The microworld approach is a compromise between a field
study and the control of the laboratory and has been used to
study individual differences in complex problem solving
strategies in situations that are expensive, difficult, or
unethical to reproduce (e.g., Güss, Tuason, & Gerhard,
2010). Microworlds are usually computer simulations that
require the same cognitive resources as the real-world
situation they model (Brehmer & Dörner, 1993). There are
four basic requirements for a Dynamic Decision-Making
(DDM) microworld: It must be dynamic, complex, contain a
hidden variable, and have dynamic complexity (Gonzalez,
2005). To preview, the present study used a simulated firefighting task that met these requirements as fires continue to
burn in the absence of user input and change due to shifting
wind direction (dynamic), there were multiple pieces of
equipment and several decision alternatives (complexity),
participants did not know where fires would start (hidden
variable), and letting a small fire burn would have future
consequences as it grew (dynamic complexity).
Successful DDM required participants to use their
cognitive, perceptual, and motor skills. In addition to these
basic skills, they also needed to form a representation of
how they believe the system operated so they could decide
the appropriate level of response at the right time while
maintaining a higher-order goal (Dörner, Nixon, & Rosen,
1990; Gonzalez, 2005). In sum, goals are established and
updated as needed, information is collected and a mental
model of the system is also established and updated as
needed, from goals and collected data future system states

3217

are predicted, a plan of action is chosen and executed from
the predictions, the effects of the action taken are monitored,
and self-reflection is needed to determine the goodness of
the action taken (Dörner & Schaub, 1994; Osman, 2010).
DDM is very demanding and we are only focusing on the
cognitive skills while ignoring the perceptual skills and
motor outputs. Furthermore, the environment, or system
behavior in our study, is changing with the uncertainty of
where the next fire may start. The inherent difficulty of
DDM tasks, and often what is encountered in the real world,
is the interaction between the changing environment and the
additive effects of prior decisions and acquired knowledge.

Major Sources of Error in DDM
Previous work has identified many sources of error that are
of interest. First, is the low capacity of conscious processing
which relates to people often restricting future planning and
data collection about the current state of the environment as
they try to preserve cognitive resources. This makes the
understanding of a complex system difficult as important
developments may escape attention. Second, people tend to
put too much weight on the current problem or system state
such that the important short and long-term effects (i.e.,
dynamic complexity) are not considered. Third, is
forgetting, which makes strategy change difficult because
even if an optimal strategy was found it may not be adopted
if it is not recalled adequately. Finally, is the tendency to
guard one’s competence, which becomes problematic when
control is lost and swift action is taken without regard to the
consequences (Dörner, Nixon, & Rosen, 1990; Gonzalez,
2005). Because humans often need to solve complex and
dynamic problems, consideration of two possible ways to
enhance performance in these tasks by escaping these limits
follows.

Unconscious Thought Theory and Incubation
Effects
The Unconscious Thought Theory (UTT) was posited by
Dijksterhuis and Nordgren (2006) as theoretical framework
applicable to decision making. The Unconscious Thought
principle states that thought consists of two modes:
conscious and unconscious with attention or inattention to a
task as the distinguishing feature. The Weighing principle
infers that metacognition, as a limited capacity and rulebased mode, would be ineffective for weighing important
task attributes. The authors did not suggest that incubation is
always superior as some tasks, like solving a math problem,
need precise and rule-based thinking. However, the main
prediction of UTT is that increasingly complex decisions
need less metacognition and more incubation (Dijksterhuis,
et al., 2006). Because complex decisions often do not have a
single solution they may require more capability than online
processes, which may be limited by bottlenecks like
working memory or attention (Pashler, 1992), can provide.
Unconscious processing is hypothesized to have an
unlimited processing capacity as it is not limited by
bottlenecks, making it more capable of handling and

integrating large amounts of information. The logical
prediction from UTT is that continuing active work on a
complex problem is detrimental to finding a solution as
continued effort would not help, but an incubation period
would help one find a solution that would simply be
unavailable during limited conscious processing. Previous
research supported this prediction as off-line processes
(Strick, Dijksterhuis, & van Baaren, 2010) and weighting of
attributes during a period of incubation (Dijksterhuis, Bos,
van der Leji, & van Baaren, 2009) resulted in improvement
during static decision-making tasks like the choice of a car
or apartment. It would be an important finding if the core
prediction of UTT held in dynamic decision-making.
A second line of research indicated that a filled
incubation period, meaning that participants were
interrupted and worked on an unrelated task as opposed to
simply resting, improved performance. One inference made
from incubation effect studies is that it helps people
overcome fixations as they forget irrelevant details that
hinder problem-solving. We also used a filled incubation
period because a major source of error in DDM is focusing
too much on the current state of the system while ignoring
side and long-term effects which limits learning how the
system operates.

Metacognition
Flavell (1981) observed that problem solvers often
monitored and evaluated their knowledge and strategies and
could update both in real time. Osman's (2010) Monitoring
and Control (MC) framework suggests that real-time
updating is not simply an observed phenomenon, but a
critical and important component for complex DDM. The
principles of MC posit that people effectively control
dynamic systems by task monitoring (understanding through
continued hypothesis testing), self-monitoring (tracking
decisions), and control behaviors (tracking actions). MC
predicts that effortful monitoring is beneficial as the
transaction between effort and feedback reduces uncertainty
about the task. Reducing uncertainty, via continued and
effortful interaction, is the key to improvement in DDM. In
other words, reducing uncertainty means that once the basic
skills needed to make dynamic decisions are in place, and
possibly automated, limited cognitive resources can be
allocated toward improving performance instead of system
control. Osman notes that when uncertainty is reduced
people tend to rely less on biases, are better at noticing and
correcting maladaptive strategies, and improve their
knowledge regarding actions and outcomes addressing some
of the major errors in DDM. The tenets of the MC
framework predict improved performance through
continued effort and these beneficial processes would likely
stop during time away from active work.
The inclusion of the metacognitive prompting questions
in this study addressed a limitation of the studies by
Dijksterhuis (2004; Dijksterhuis, et al., 2006) as he had
participants look at a blank computer screen for 4 minutes
with the instruction to think carefully about their decision. It

3218

is not clear that participants did consciously think about the
items presented previously. More recent work (Payne,
Samper, Bettman, & Luce, 2008) suggests that 4 minutes of
deliberation was unnaturally long as they found that when
deliberation was self-paced and participants decided when
they felt ready to continue, conscious processing out
performed unconscious. In order to create the best possible
paradigm for the benefits of conscious thought to emerge,
we used a filled and self-paced metacognition period and
this type of prompting has been previously shown to be
effective (Berthold et al., 2007).

4

3
2

1

The Present Study
In this study, we investigated the impact of metacognition
and incubation on the performance of a DDM task. The
general question is how does metacognitive processing,
operationalized as managing or monitoring the current
strategy activated by prompting (Berthold et al., 2007),
affect performance in comparison to incubation,
operationalized as performing an unrelated task designed to
allow processing outside of awareness (Dijksterhuis, 2004)?
Proponents of UTT argue that it overcomes the limits of
online cognitive processing and weighs important decision
attributes more accurately which, as mentioned above, often
influence errors in DDM and is why we seek to replicate
and extend UTT into DDM. UTT predicts improved
performance via bypassing the limits of working memory
and attention allowing more information to be integrated
and important attributes to be identified, while
metacognition and the MC framework (Osman, 2010)
predicts improved performance through continued effort in
the presence of limited cognitive resources. If the proposed
benefits of UTT extend into DDM it would offer an
alternative to intense, and possibly maladaptive, cognitive
effort.
We tested the following hypothesis: Because both
incubation and metacognition have been positively
implicated in decision-making we predict that both groups
will show superior performance over a control group and
consider the difference between metacognition and
incubation as exploratory.

Methods
Participants and Design
Participants were 69 (49 females and 19 males, one
participant did not report a sex) undergraduate students who
participated for course credit. The mean participant age was
21.12 years (SD = 3.94) ranging from 18 to 42.
This experiment was a between subjects design with
Processing Condition (metacognition, incubation, and
control) as the randomly assigned three level independent
variable. The dependent variable was percent saved area of
forest.

4
Figure 1. Screenshot of FIRE showing only one truck and
helicopter. The grey menu shows how commands are given by
selecting specific units. The blue circle around the truck indicates
the area it can seek fires in automatically. The red circles indicate
the locations and order that the fires started.

Materials and Procedure
In the FIRE microworld a participant acted as a fire chief
charged with protecting an area of forest that contained two
small villages. The participant protected the forest for ten
minutes using six semiautonomous firefighting units: four
trucks and two helicopters. There are three basic commands:
Patrol, extinguish, and seek. When the patrol command is
activated the fire-fighting units will move at random in a
circular area. When the extinguish command is activated the
fire-fighting units will spray water to extinguish a fire. If the
extinguish command is not activated a unit will not spray
water even if it is near a burning area. Dörner and Pfeifer
(1993) noted that this may seem foolish, but a unit may need
to pass a small fire en route to a larger one. When the seek
command is activated a unit will search for fires
independently within a circular area, but even with the seek
command active a far away fire will not be detected so
participants still need to move the unit and if the extinguish
command is not active the unit will not spray water when it
finds a fire. Each unit can have 0, 1, 2 or all 3 commands
active in any combination and the given commands stay
active until they are changed. Right mouse-clicking on an
individual unit brought up a menu to change and display the
active commands on that unit alone, or by using the
keyboard shortcuts (e.g., ‘E’ for extinguish) participants
could give a command to all the units at once. The
movement of the units was accomplished by clicking and
holding the left mouse button on an individual unit, which
allowed participants to ‘drag’ an individual unit to a
destination. Clicking and holding the left mouse button over
any area on the screen and pressing ‘M’ on the keyboard
directed all the units to the location under the cursor (see
Figure 1).
The computerized incubation task consisted of a series of
34 anagrams (e.g. ouseh becomes house) presented to the

3219

participants one at a time for a maximum of 40 seconds
each. Participants could attempt unlimited solutions within
the time limit, but the correct solution or time expiring
advanced to the next anagram. The incubation task lasted
for six minutes and no participant completed all 34
anagrams. Anagrams, as verbal tasks, are not related to the
temporal-spatial demands for FIRE and have been
effectively used to activate unconscious thought in prior
research (Dijksterhuis, 2004; Dijksterhuis, et al., 2006).
The computerized metacognition task consisted of three
open-ended prompting questions adapted from Berthold
(2007) and colleagues (Which aspects of the game do I
understand well? Which aspects of the game do I not
understand well? When I go back to the game, what will I
do differently to increase my performance?). The first two
prompts were designed to activate positive and negative
knowledge about the task to encourage understanding of the
task while the third question required hypothesis generation
about the relationships between actions and outcomes.
Participants were limited to six minutes, two minutes per
question, to complete the questionnaire. Although the
questions had time limits, it was still self-paced as
participants could proceed to the next question when ready.
In practice, most participants were proficient typists and did
not use all six minutes as Payne and colleagues’ (2008)
suggested that in order to produce the best results, conscious
processing interventions should be self-paced.
After giving informed consent, participants were seated at
a computer in a lab setting and were provided with
earphones and paper instructions for FIRE that they kept for
the duration of the experiment. Participants assigned to the
experimental conditions were interrupted at the 5-minute
mark during FIRE and those in the metacognition condition
completed the prompting questionnaire while those in the
incubation condition completed the anagram task.
Participants in the control condition were not interrupted. At
the end of FIRE all participants completed a computerized
demographic survey and were then de-briefed.

Results
To assure a comparable baseline the data were analyzed
with a one-way ANOVA comparing performance between
the processing conditions at 300 seconds (the interruption
time). The difference between the groups on percent forest
saved was not significant F(2, 66) = 1.33, p = .271.
To test our primary hypothesis the data were analyzed
with a one-way ANOVA comparing final percent forest
saved between the three Processing Conditions. The
difference between the groups was significant F(2, 66) =
4.03, p = .022, η2 = .111. Follow up tests revealed that the
metacognition group (M = 78.95, SD = 19.71) significantly
F(1, 66) = 7.94, p = .006, η2 = .11 outperformed the control
group (M =60.83, SD = 23.03) and marginally F(1, 66) =
3.05, p = .085, η2 = .04 outperformed the incubation group
1
MSE=474.82 for the overall omnibus and the one degree of
freedom F-tests.

(M = 67.61, SD = 22.34). The difference between the
control and incubation group was not significant F(1, 66) =
1.14, p = .29, η2 = .01.
We narrowed our large dataset for further analysis by
conducting a series of one-way ANOVA’s at each 30
second interval (data were saved every 30 seconds) after the
break at 300 seconds. The first reliable group by percent
forest saved difference F(2, 66) = 3.30, p = .043, MSE =
125.49, η2 = .09 was at 420 seconds. The group differences
mirrored the final performance with metacognition reliably
(p = .013) outperforming the control group and the
difference between the metacognition and incubation
approached significance (p = .118) while the difference
between control and incubation was unreliable (p = .339).
Further support identifying 420 seconds as a critical time
was indicated by the pre-programmed pattern of fires as two
started simultaneously in the lower right and upper left of
the forest at 390 seconds (fire number 4, see Figure 1). In
order to explain why one group did better than another,
subsequent analysis focused around this critical interval.
Did one group keep more units closer to the fires? We
defined a unit as near a fire if it was within a radius of 32
pixels of any burning section. Participants could have
between zero and six units near a fire. At the 300 second
baseline the difference between the groups was not
significant F(2,66) = 1.52, p =.226. We used Tukey’s HSD
for Type I error control for the pair-wise comparisons at the
only two time points the overall omnibus was significant. At
390 seconds the control group (M = 4.75, SD = 1.73) had
significantly (p = .048) more units near active fires than the
metacognition group (M = 3.32, SD = 2.34), but not more
than the incubation group (M = 4.35, SD = 1.95). There
were no other reliable group differences at 390 seconds. At
420 seconds the control group (M = 4.83, SD = 1.63) had
significantly (p = .024) more units near active fires than the
metacognition group (M = 3.36, SD = 2.13), but not more
than the incubation group (M = 4.22, SD = 1.78). There
were no other reliable differences at 420 seconds. These
results indicate that the control and incubation groups
appropriately kept units near the burning areas as both
groups had more fires burning than the metacognitive group
(see Figure 2).
Why did the metacognitive group perform better with
fewer units near the fires? We investigated the command
selections for each unit. As with the units near a fire,
participants could have between zero and six units with any
command active. At the 300 second baseline the difference
between the groups was not significant on number of units
with extinguish, patrol, or seek commands active (all F’s <
1). Furthermore, no reliable differences were found at any
time period for the patrol or seek commands as they were
used infrequently. The extinguish command is the last
source of variance. We again used Tukey’s HSD for Type I
error control for all pair-wise comparisons at the only two
time points the overall omnibus was significant. At 330
seconds the metacognition group (M = 4.82, SD = 1.18) had
significantly (p = .029) more units with the extinguish

3220

command active than the control group (M = 3.58, SD =
1.93), but not more than the incubation (M = 4.57, SD =
1.56) group. There were no other reliable group differences
at 330 seconds. At 360 seconds the metacognition group (M
= 4.64, SD = 1.47) had marginally significantly (p = .066)
more units with the extinguish command active than the
control group (M = 3.54, SD = 1.64), but not more than the
incubation (M = 4.52, SD = 1.76) group. There were no
other reliable differences at 360 seconds. These results
indicate that the metacognition group gave extinguish
commands to the units right after the break explaining the
sudden improvement in performance indicated on the lower
panel of figure 2 at 360 seconds and kept them active
allowing them to fight the fires with fewer units near the
fires. In the same interval the incubation and control groups
de-activated units in the presence of active fires until around
390 seconds when the two critical fires started. It appears
that the metacognition group could have handled more fires
with their reserve units while the other groups were still
learning how to use the commands.
Inspecting the upper panel of figure 2 it is clear that the
difference for number of units with the extinguish command
active between metacogntion, control, and incubation is
small at one to one and half units. To estimate what each
additional unit with the extinguish command active
contributed to performance at each time interval we
regressed percent forest saved on number of units number of
units extinguishing 30 seconds prior with our groups
dummy coded (control group as the reference). Number of
units with the extinguish command active at 330 seconds
significantly (β = 1.20, t = 2.50, p = .015, partial r =.30)
predicted percent forest saved at 360 seconds with each
additional unit saving an additional 1.2 % of the forest.
Units with the extinguish command active at 360 seconds
also significantly predicted performance at 390 seconds (β =
1.50, t = 2.34, p = .022, partial r =.28) with each unit with
the extinguish command active saving an average of 1.5 %
of the forest in 30 seconds. The number of units with the
extinguish command active remained a marginally
significant or significant predictor over and above group at
every interval after 330 seconds. The additive effect of one
additional unit saving 1.5% additional every 30 seconds for
300 seconds, or ten intervals, adds up to 15% almost
matching the 18% difference between the control and
metacogntion group at the end of FIRE.

Discussion
Our results indicate how metacognition improved DDM
in our task. The use of the extinguish command reliably
predicted performance while controlling for group
differences with each additional unit extinguishing saving
significantly more forest area with the passage of time.

Figure 2. Comparing the group differences over time, starting at
the break at 300 seconds. The upper panel indicates the number of
units with the extinguish command active. The lower panel shows
percent forest saved by group and the repeated measures quadratic
component collapsed across groups was significant F(1,68) =
110.57, p < .001, MSE=9.49.

This occurred because the fires were programmed to spread
exponentially (see figure 2) to mimic their natural behavior
and is an important element of DDM highlighting the
interaction between user decisions and the influence of the
changing environment as a small fire that was neglected
turned into a larger one.
The group results at each time period indicate that the
important difference was learning that the units would not
extinguish until activated and the results illustrate how the
effects of earlier decisions enabled the metacognition group
to stay ahead of the fires. Our data suggest that all the
groups learned this, but the metacognition group learned
faster than incubation and control and this advantage kept
the fires from spreading out of control. The control group
had more units near the burning areas even though they
would not extinguish. Osman's (2010) MC framework
predicts this behavior when a person doubts their ability to
control or predict future events. The inability to connect
actions to outcomes, maladaptive strategies, and important
details escaping attention occur under conditions of high
uncertainty. FIRE may have been more difficult than
anticipated and may explain why the advanced commands

3221

were rarely used. Ten minutes may not have been enough
time for participants to learn the relationships between the
commands even though participants were provided with
detailed written instructions.
Our results showed little support for incubation effects.
Our study is novel because we directly compared incubation
and metacognitive prompting using a dynamic task. It may
be that the benefits of UTT only occur for static, not
dynamic decisions when the environment itself and not the
individual in a hurry, is creating time pressure. Also, in our
task learning was an important factor and UTT may not help
learning as Dijksterhuis and Nordgren (2006) noted,
"decisions are of course likely to be best when they are
based on information that is encoded thoroughly and
consciously" (p.106). Our participants may have needed
more time or trials with FIRE to show incubation effects.
Our results fit well into the existing literature on
metacognition as our participants showed improvement
when they followed one of the many paths suggested by
Flavell (1981) such that when metacognitive knowledge, or
thinking about your own knowledge, is activated it can lead
to a metacognitive experience that adds to, deletes, or
revises that knowledge and this is likely to occur in
situations where conscious thought is required. Selfreflection and learning are critical in DDM (Osman, 2010).
Our study was limited as we cannot determine how our
participants learned to activate the extinguish command or
how they determined it was not active. Our participants had
three options to discover how to activate the command.
They could have looked at the instruction sheet, recalled the
information from memory, or happened to come across the
solution by trial-and-error during FIRE. All three of these
alternatives are intriguing for education and training if
prompting helps learners refer to text, search their memory,
or continue exploring. This could be a form of electronic
scaffolding similar to how a skilled teacher prompts a
student to learn and continue working on a problem.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a Humboldt Fellowship for
Experienced Researchers to the second author. We would
also like to thank Kristen Ballentine, Devon Murray, and
Erik Krueger for their help during data collection.

References
Alter, A. L., Oppenheimer, D. M., Epley, N., & Eyre, R. N.
(2007). Overcoming intuition: Metacognitive
difficulty activates analytic reasoning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 136, 569-576.
Berthold, K., Nückles, M., & Renkl, A. (2007). Do learning
protocols support learning strategies and
outcomes? The role of cognitive and metacognitive
prompts. Learning and Instruction, 17, 564-577.
Brehmer, B., & Dörner, D. (1993). Experiments with
computer-simulated microworlds: Escaping both
the narrow straits of the laboratory and the deep

blue sea of the field study. Computers in Human
Behavior, 9, 171-184.
Dijksterhuis, A. (2004). Think different: The merits of
unconscious thought in preference development
and decision making. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 87, 586-598.
Dijksterhuis, A., Bos, M. W., Nordgren, L. F., & van
Baaren, R. B. (2006). On making the right choice:
The deliberation-without-attention effect. Science,
311, 1005-1007.
Dijksterhuis, A., & Nordgren, L. F. (2006). A theory of
unconscious
thought.
Perspectives
on
Psychological Science, 1, 95-109.
Dijksterhuis, A.,Bos, M.W., van der Leji, A., & van Baaren,
R. B. (2009). Predicting soccer matches after
unconscious and conscious processing as a
function of expertise. Psychological Science, 20,
1381-1387.
Dörner, D., Nixon, P., & Rosen, S.D. (1990). The logic of
failure. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society of London: Series B. Biological Sciences,
327, 463-473.
Dörner, D., & Pfeifer, E. (1993). Strategic thinking and
stress. Ergonomics, 36, 1345-1360.
Dörner, D., & Schaub, H. (1994). Errors in planning and
decision-making and the nature of human
information processing. Applied Psychology: An
International Review, 43(4), 433-453.
Flavell, J.H. (1981). Cognitive monitoring. In W.P.
Dickinson (Ed.), Children’s oral communication
skills (pp. 35-60). New York, NY: Academic Press.
Gonzalez, C. (2005). Decision support for real-time,
dynamic decision-making tasks. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 96, 142154.
Güss, C. D., Tuason, M. T., & Gerhard, C. (2010). Crossnational comparisons of complex problem-solving
strategies in two microworlds. Cognitive Science,
34, 489-520.
Osman, M. (2010). Controlling uncertainty: A review of
human
behavior
in
complex
dynamic
environments. Psychological Bulletin, 139, 65-86.
doi: 10.1037/a0017815
Pashler, H. (1992). Attentional limitations in doing two
tasks at the same time. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 1, 44-48.
Payne, J.W., Samper, A., Bettman, J.R., & Luce, M.F.
(2008).
Boundary conditions on unconscious
thought
in
complex
decision
making.
Psychological Science,19, 1118-1123.
Strick, M., Dijksterhuis, A., & van Baaren, R. B. (2010).
Unconscious thought effects take place off-line, not
on-line. Psychological Science, 21, 484-488.
Vul, E., & Pashler, H. (2007). Incubation benefits only after
people have been misdirected. Memory &
Cognition, 35, 701-710.

3222

