UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Modeling Response Times in the Go/No-Go Discrimination Task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4nz615gd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Trueblood, Jennifer
Endres, Michael
Busemeyer, Jerome
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Modeling Response Times in the Go/No-Go Discrimination Task
Jennifer S. Trueblood (jstruebl@indiana.edu)
Cognitive Science Program, 819 Eigenmann, 1910 E. 10th St.
Bloomington, IN 47406 USA

Michael J. Endres, Jerome R. Busemeyer, and Peter R. Finn
{mjendres, jbusemey, finnp}@indiana.edu
The Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, 1101 E. 10th Street
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
Abstract
The work presented here uses a simple stochastic model as a
cognitive psychometric tool for analyzing response time data
in the Go/No-Go Discrimination task with motivationally distinct conditions. The parameters of the model inform us of
underlying cognitive mechanisms because they have an established psychological meaning and allow us to quantify a subjects ability and response caution. Using these model parameters, we focus on the differences between subjects with varying
degrees of substance abuse and antisocial behavioral disorders
and show that there are reliable differences between the decision mechanisms of these subjects. Using data from executive working memory tasks, we postulate that these differences
in cognitive processes might be due to differences in working
memory capacity. Ultimately, we show that formal cognitive
modeling has the potential to provide valuable insights into
clinical phenomena that cannot be captured by traditional data
analysis techniques.
Keywords: Go/No-Go task, decision-making, working memory capacity, diffusion model, Bayesian parameter estimation

Introduction
Formal cognitive models can capture information about cognitive processes that is often not accessible with traditional
statistical methods. Differences in cognitive functioning between normal and clinical patients can provide insights into
abnormal behavior. Following Batchelder and Riefer (1999)
we argue that parameter estimates from formal cognitive
models provide a methodology for examining differences in
cognitive functioning. Batchelder and Riefer refer to this
methodology as cognitive psychometrics and have shown that
it has advantages over traditional approaches. The present research uses a simple stochastic process as a cognitive psychometric tool for analyzing response time data in clinical studies. Specifically, we show how a cognitive model of response
times can capture underlying cognitive processes in situations
of approach-avoidance motivational conflict.
Response time modeling approaches have been applied
to various cognitive phenomena including memory retrieval
(Ratcliff, 1978) and lexical decision tasks (Ratcliff, Gomez,
& McKoon, 2004; Gomez, Ratcliff, & Perea, 2007). However, there is a dearth of studies using response time modeling approaches to examine approach-avoidance motivation.
Cognitive modeling of choice and accuracy data in approachavoidance situations has provided insights into underlying
cognitive processes (Endres, Rickert, Bogg, Lucas, & Finn,
2011; Yechiam et al., 2006). Through an application to the
Go/No-Go Discrimination task (Newman, Widom, & Nathan,

1985), we show that cognitive models of response time can
also provide insights into cognitive functioning.

The Go/No-Go Discrimination Task
The Go/No-Go Discrimination (GNGD) task is a reliable
measure of passive avoidance (Newman et al., 1985); it is
considered an analog for real world approach-avoidance motivational conflict (Newman & Lorenz, 2003), because both
appetitive (e.g., monetary reward) and aversive (e.g., monetary loss or electric shock) stimuli are used as reinforcement
in the task. The standard GNGD task involves the trial-anderror learning of two sets of operant stimuli: one signaling
’Go’ or reward-approach responses; the other signaling ’NoGo’ or punishment-avoidance responses. The stimuli are usually two-digit numbers, which are counter balanced above
and below fifty such that the Go and No-Go sets are completely indiscriminable or overlapping at the beginning of the
task. There are two key manipulations in the standard GNGD
task. The first is that only correct reward-approach behavior (i.e., hit or Go response given a Go signal) and incorrect
punishment-avoidance behavior (i.e., false alarm or Go response given a No-Go signal) are reinforced. The second is
that of speed discrimination or the need to decide whether to
activate (i.e., Go response) or inhibit (i.e., No-Go response)
reward-approach behavior within a brief time window (e.g.
750 ms).
The most popular measures of GNGD task performance
are commission errors (i.e., passive-avoidance errors or false
alarms) and omission errors (i.e., misses). It is important to
point out that persons with real world problems with substance use and antisocial behavior typically commit a greater
number of passive avoidance errors (i.e., errors of commission or false alarms) on the GNGD task (Endres et al., 2011;
Finn, Mazas, Justus, & Steinmetz, 2002; Finn, 2002). Recent
studies have used stochastic (e.g., Cue-Dependency Learning) and deterministic (e.g., Signal Detection Theory) models
of decision making to investigate the cognitive-motivational
processes that contribute to GNGD task commission and
omission errors (Endres et al., 2011; Smillie & Jackson,
2006; Yechiam et al., 2006). Consistent among these studies
is the implication that cognitive processes, such as attention
and working memory, aid in the self-regulatory control over
both Go/No-Go response biases and Go/No-Go signal learning. The present research adds to these findings by estab-

1866

lishing links between decision mechanisms, working memory capacity, and response times. While this paper focuses
entirely on modeling response times, we plan to model response times, choice and learning in the future.

Experiment
Participants
The present study was a part of a much larger investigation
into the cognitive, motivational, and personality correlates
of substance use and antisocial behavior problems. Potential participants were recruited from the local university and
surrounding area using advertisements and fliers designed to
elicit responses from persons with a variety of disinhibited
personality traits and history of substance use and antisocial behavior problems (Finn et al., 2009). A total sample
(N= 484) were recruited into the larger study, but not all participants chose to complete the entire battery of laboratory
measures used in the present research. The present sample
(N=147) was gender balanced (53% women) and consisted
primarily of young adults (mean age 22.4 + 3.1) with 13.8 +
2.1 years of education.

Semi-Structured Diagnostic Interview
History of alcohol and other drug use, childhood conduct
disorder and adult antisocial personality disorder was ascertained with the Semi-structured Diagnostic Interview for the
Genetics of Alcoholism (Bucholz et al., 1994) using the Diagnostic Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders Fourth Edition criteria (APA, 1994). Subjects were classified into one
of three groups based on their diagnostic history: (1) No history (N=31), (2) history of 1 or 2 diagnoses (N=52), and (3)
history of 3 or more diagnoses (N=64). Group 3 subjects had
more severe diagnostic histories, such that the majority presented clinical problems with other drug use (100%) and antisocial personality (82%) disorder, as opposed to group 2 who
presented little or no history with these clinical problems (0%
and 18%, respectively).

Double-Factorial Go/No-Go Discrimination task
Six motivationally distinct versions of the standard GNGD
tasks were administered, representing a 2 x 3 repeated measures experimental design. This design was used to examine
the interactive effects of (1) punishment reinforcement type:
monetary loss versus electric shock and (2) reward versus
punishment reinforcement schedule: equal salience (33% vs.
33%), reward salient (100% vs. 33%), and punishment salient
(33% vs. 100%). Each of the 6 GNGD task versions used 8
different two-digit stimuli that were divided into 2 counterbalanced sets, consisting of 4 stimuli each. Different twodigit stimuli were used in each of the 6 GNGD task versions.
The order in which the 6 versions were administered also was
counterbalanced. Each task consisted of 56 total trials divided
into 7 blocks of 8 trials.

Working Memory Capacity
Working memory capacity was assessed with 5 separate
tasks: 3 simple span and 2 complex span tasks (Conway et
al., 2005). Simple span tasks involve immediate recall of
to-be-remembered list items, and thus, are thought to assess
the short-term activation aspects of working memory. Simple span memory was assessed with the digits forward and
backward span subtests of the Wechsler Adult Intelligence
Scale-Revised (Wechsler, 1981) and the letter-number subtest
of the WAIS-III (Wechsler, 1997). The digits forward, digits
backward, and letter-number tasks operationalize short-term
activation capacity in working memory as the total number of
to-be-remembered items of varying list sizes that can be held
in mind and manipulated in some way. Complex span tasks
involve both a primary memory task, such as recalling word
or letter strings of various sizes in order of presentation, and
the performance of a secondary cognitive task, such as solving a mathematical operation or counting backwards by three
for a predetermined length of time. Complex memory span
was assessed with the operation-word span test (Conway &
Engle, 1994) and a modified auditory consonant delay test
(Brown, 1958; Finn et al., 2009). The operation-word span
and auditory consonant delay tasks operationalize executive
attention and short-term activation capacity in working memory as the total number of to-be-remembered list items that
can be held in mind while performing a secondary cognitive
task. Data from the 5 measures of working memory capacity were reduced into a single latent factor using maximum
likelihood factor extraction. This unidimensional latent factor showed above average reliability (Cronbach’s a = .81) and
accounted for 56.59% of the variance in the working memory
capacity measures.

Procedure
Participants read and signed an informed consent to participate, were free to refuse any assessment, and were paid
$10.00 per hour for their time in the laboratory. Participants
completed 3 testing sessions, lasting approximately 3 hours a
session, and were compensated for both child care costs and
millage to and from the laboratory. Participants were first
administered the diagnostic interview, followed by an interspersed ordering of computer and experimenter administered
laboratory tasks.

Data Analyses and Results
General trends in response times across all subjects for the
six different experimental conditions for correct responses
(hits) and errors (false alarms) were examined. A three-way
ANOVA showed a significant main effect of condition on response times (F(5,1644) = 13.55, p < .001), a significant
main effect of diagnostic group on response times (F(2,1644)
= 5.73, p < 0.003), and no significant main effect of response
type (hit or false alarm) on response times (F(1,1644) = 0.13,
p = 0.720). There were no significant interactions. Seven
of the 147 subjects were excluded from this analysis because
they either produced zero hits or zero false alarms in one of

1867

Diagnostic Group
Group 1
Group 2
Group 3
.493 (.058) .494 (.061) .500 (.048)
.487 (.052) .488 (.055) .491 (.059)
.479 (.060) .490 (.055) .498 (.055)
.508 (.043) .523 (.052) .533 (.049)
.487 (.063) .476 (.057) .498 (.066)
.488 (.064) .492 (.052) .491 (.068)

The relationship between diagnostic group and working
memory capacity was also analyzed (see Figure 1). A oneway ANOVA showed a significant main effect of diagnostic
group on working memory capacity (F(2,137) = 4.97, p <
.008). A Dunn test showed that the working memory capacity
of group 3 was significantly lower (p < 0.05) than the working memory capacity of groups 1 and 2. There was no significant difference in the working memory capacity of groups 1
and 2.

Modeling Response Times
We modeled the decision processes in the GNGD using a sequential sampling model. These models offer a way to understand both speed and accuracy in tasks involving decisions
between a set of alternatives. For the purposes of this paper,
we focus entirely on modeling response times and leave the
discussion of choice probability for a future report. Sequential sampling models assume that performance is based on the

group 1 (N = 29)
group 2 (N = 51)
group 3 (N = 60)
0.5

0

−0.5

−1

Group

Figure 1: Working memory capacity factor by diagnostic
group.

quality of stimulus information and the quantity of information necessary to make a response. Specifically, these models make the assumption that evidence favoring each alternative is integrated over time, the accumulation of evidence is
subject to random fluctuations, and a decision is made when
enough evidence has been accumulated to reach a specified
criterion.

Model Parameters

Table 1: Mean Response Times for Different Diagnostic
Groups
Condition
(Pun., Reinf.)
Money, Equal
Money, Reward
Money, Pun.
Shock, Equal
Shock, Reward
Shock, Pun.

1

Working Memory

the six conditions. Typically, these subjects withheld all responses and treated all trials as No-Go trials. Table 1 gives
the mean and standard deviation of response times collapsed
across hits and false alarms for each condition for the three
different diagnostic groups.
To determine which experimental conditions produced significantly different response times, a pairwise comparison
was conducted. A Dunn test which applies the Bonferroni adjustment to the critical values from the t distribution showed
that the mean response time for the shock condition with
equal reinforcement was significantly longer (p < 0.05) than
the mean response times for the other five conditions. These
were the only significant pairwise comparisons. It is not surprising that we find longer response times in the shock condition with equal reinforcement because the equal reinforcement conditions provided the least amount of feedback in the
form of rewards and punishments, and subjects were typically
adverse to shocks. A Dunn test was also used to determine
which diagnostic groups produced significantly different response times. This test showed that the mean response time
for group 3 subjects (those subjects with more than two disorders) was significantly longer (p < 0.05) than the mean response times for the other two diagnostic groups. This was
the only significant pairwise comparison.

We modeled response times using a simple diffusion process
called a Wiener process that had a single absorbing boundary
associated with Go responses. There was not a corresponding
boundary for No-Go responses because response time data
was not collected in these situations. Future work will model
both response times and choice probabilities by using a two
boundary model with an implicit lower boundary associated
with No-Go responses. A one-boundary Wiener process has
three parameters: a parameter ν reflecting the drift rate of the
process, a parameter a associated with the separation between
the starting point of the diffusion process and the absorbing
boundary, and a parameter Ter used to shift the starting point
of the process forward in time.
The parameters of the one-boundary Wiener process have
an established psychological meaning (Matzke & Wagenmakers, 2009). Specifically, the drift rate parameter is associated with the amount of evidence a subject receives from
a stimulus at each moment in time. Thus, the drift rate quantifies the subject’s ability and task difficulty. The boundary separation parameter reflects the amount of evidence required to
make a response (i.e., response caution). The shift parameter
corresponds to non-decision time and quantifies the amount
of time involved in stimulus encoding and physical execution.
The first passage time distribution of the one-boundary
Wiener process is used to model the experimental response
time distribution. For the one-boundary Wiener process, this
distribution is represented by the shifted Wald distribution.
The probability density function for the shifted Wald distri-

1868

bution is given by
[a − ν(t − Ter
a
exp{−
f (t|ν, a, Ter ) = p
3
2(t − Ter )
2π(t − Ter )

)]2

}

We assumed that different conditions provided varying levels of difficulty resulting in subjects demonstrating differing
ability across conditions. To allow for these differences, a
different drift rate was fit for each condition. Further, we assumed that the two types of stimuli (Go and No-Go) presented
different types of information to the subject. To account for
the different types of stimuli information, different drift rates
for hits (corresponding to Go stimuli) and false alarms (corresponding to No-Go stimuli) were fit. Thus, a total of 12 drift
rates with two for each condition were fit. We also believed
that subjects displayed different levels of response caution for
different conditions. So, six different boundary separation parameters were fit. We assumed that non-decision time was not
influenced by condition so only one non-decision parameter
was fit. In total, the model used 19 parameters to account for
individual behavior in all six experimental conditions.

Parameter Estimation
The model parameters were fit using hierarchical Bayesian
parameter estimation. Because each condition only contained
56 trials, we felt that Bayesian parameter estimation was
preferable to maximum likelihood methods. Furthermore,
Bayesian parameter estimation produces a posterior distribution for each parameter value. The WinBUGS program
(Lunn, Thomas, Best, & Spiegelhalter, 2000) was used to
implement the necessary MCMC algorithms. We used the
shifted Wald density function written in the WinBUGS Development Interface (Lunn, 2003) by Lee and Wagenmakers
(2009).
The 19-parameter model was fit to data for each subject
giving us a set of parameter estimates for every individual. In
other words, 19 parameters were used to model the 336 data
points collected for each subject across the six conditions.
For a single condition, three unique parameters were used to
model the data from that condition: two drift rates for hits
and false alarms and one boundary separation parameter. The
non-decision time parameter was fit to all conditions and was
thus not uniquely specified by any one condition.
We used hierarchical parameters associated with the three
diagnostic groups to capture structured individual differences.
The parameters for each individual were drawn from distributions defined by these hierarchical parameters. For each
diagnostic group, there were a set of hierarchical parameters
associated with drift rates and boundaries separations for each
condition. Specifically, for a single condition, there were
three unique hierarchical parameters associated with each
group: two drift rates for hits and false alarms and one boundary separation parameter. There was also a non-decision time
hierarchical parameter associated with each diagnostic group
which was fit to all conditions.
Three MCMC chains were used to estimate the posterior
distributions for the parameters. The first 1,000 samples of

each chain were discarded as ”burn-in”. Another 10,000 samples were drawn from each chain to estimate the posteriors.
Chain convergence was assessed by using the R̂ statistic. All
parameters had an R̂ of 1.0.

A Qualitative Evaluation of the Model
Model performance was examined by looking at a qualitative comparison between the model predictions and the data.
We calculated the Kendall rank correlation coefficient (or
Kendall’s τ ) for every subject to measure the association between the mean response times and the model predictions for
all six conditions. For calculating the model predictions, the
mean of the posterior distributions of the parameters was used
as a point estimate of these distributions. These means were
then used to calculate the expected value of the model’s response time distribution. Table 2 shows several descriptive
statistics for the τ values. A τ value of 1 implies perfect agreement between the rankings and a τ value of −1 implies perfect disagreement between the rankings. From the table, we
see that the hierarchical model captured the qualitative results
very well.
Table 2: Rank Correlation Between Subjects and Model
mean
0.86

median
0.87

std
0.17

min
-0.20

max
1.0

The hierarchical model allowed for the expression of structured individual differences across all conditions. This gave
us the ability to explore differences in the decision mechanisms between these various conditions. Further, it allowed
us to establish relationships between model parameters and
the working memory capacity factor. Models with fewer
parameters might also provide good predictions of the data
and might even be preferred by traditional model comparison
techniques. However, when models with fewer parameters
were tested, it was found that they did not account for individual differences to the same extent as the current model.
The models with fewer parameters tended to make trade offs
between parameter values in order to fit the data. These trade
offs prevented the models from capturing many of the results
described below.

Modeling Results
We began our analysis of the model by examining the correlation between model parameters and the working memory capacity factor. Across all conditions, we found that the working memory capacity factor was positively associated with
boundary separation parameters. This implies that subjects
with high working memory capacity demonstrated more response caution than subjects with low working memory capacity. In conditions of monetary punishment with reward
and punishment reinforcement, the working memory capacity
factor was highly correlated with drift rate parameters. Because drift rate parameters quantify subjects’ ability to per-

1869

form the task, the strong correlation between working memory capacity and drift rates in these two conditions implies
that subjects with high working memory capacity accumulated stimulus information more quickly than subjects with
low working memory capacity. Table 3 summarizes these results.
Table 3: Correlation between Working Memory and Model
Parameters
Condition
(Pun., Reinf.)
Money, Equal
Money, Reward
Money, Pun.
Shock, Equal
Shock, Reward
Shock, Pun.

Drift Rate
ρ (p-value)
0.17 (0.046)
0.31 (0.000)
0.23 (0.005)
0.11 (0.182)
0.11 (0.179)
0.21 (0.012)

Parameter
Boundary Separation
ρ (p-value)
0.25 (0.003)
0.31 (0.001)
0.28 (0.001)
0.26 (0.002)
0.16 (0.055)
0.17 (0.038)

Next, we examined the hierarchical parameters for the
three diagnostic groups. Figure 2 and Figure 3 show the
mean and standard deviation of the posterior distributions of
these hierarchical parameters. From the figures we see that
the hierarchical drift rates and boundary separation parameters were larger for group 1 subjects than for group 3 subjects. This implies that normal subjects tended to accumulate stimulus information more quickly and showed more response caution than subjects with many clinical disorders. In
the monetary punishment conditions with reward and punishment reinforcement, the hierarchical drift rates and boundary
separation parameters were larger for group 2 subjects than
for group 3 subjects. However, in most of the remaining conditions, the hierarchical parameters associated with group 2
subjects were similar to the hierarchical parameters associated with group 3 subjects. In other words, subjects with one
or two clinical disorders tended to accumulate stimulus information more quickly and showed more response caution than
subjects with three or more clinical disorders only when the
aversive stimulus was monetary loss and the reinforcement
schedule was reward or punishment salient.

Discussion
From the results discussed above, we see that stochastic modeling provided more insight into the cognitive mechanisms
involved in decision making processes than traditional analyses of the data. While the statistical analyses of the response
time data indicated that diagnostic group 3 subjects had significantly longer mean response times than group 1 and 2 subjects, it did not provide any insights into why this occurred.
The cognitive model showed us that in general subjects with
few to no clinical disorders (i.e. group 1 and group 2 subjects)
tended to have higher drift rates and larger boundary separation parameters as compared to subjects with many clinical
disorders (i.e. group 3 subjects). The lower drift rate pa-

rameters of group 3 subjects indicate that these subjects accumulated stimulus information slowly and could explain the
longer response times of these subjects.
The cognitive model also showed differences in the decision mechanisms of group 2 and group 3 subjects in conditions of monetary punishment with reward and punishment
salient reinforcement. We postulate that the differences between group 2 and group 3 subjects in these two conditions
might be due to differences in working memory capacity.
First, we know that group 2 subjects have higher working
memory capacity than group 3 subjects. Second, the relationships between model parameters and the working memory capacity factor as seen in the correlation analysis (Table
3) indicate that working memory is strongly associated with
drift rates and boundary separation parameters in conditions
of monetary punishment with reward and punishment salient
reinforcement. Of course, future research will be needed in
order to fully understand the connections between working
memory capacity and the cognitive mechanisms of clinical
patients.
This research illustrated that simple stochastic models can
be used as cognitive psychometric tools for analyzing response time data in clinical studies. Future work will use a
two boundary diffusion model to account for both response
times and choice probabilities. We hope to make connections
between the parameters of the two boundary diffusion model
and the parameters of a learning model. These two models
will then be used to conduct a full examination of the decision mechanisms involved in the GNGD task. In particular, we will focus on discovering the extent to which working
memory capacity and other factors such as externalizing psychopathology are involved in decision processes. We believe
that cognitive modeling has the potential to provide valuable
insights into clinical phenomena that cannot be captured by
traditional data analysis techniques.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by National Institute of Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism R01 AA13650 awarded to Peter R. Finn. While writing this manuscript, Jennifer S.
Trueblood was supported by the National Science Foundation/IGERT Training Program in the Dynamics of BrainBody-Environment Systems and Michael J. Endres was
supported by National Institute of Mental Health R36
MH092040.

References
Batchelder, W. H., & Riefer, D. M. (1999). Theoretical
and empirical review of multinomial process tree modeling. Psychonomic Bullentin & Review, 6, 57-86.
Brown, J. (1958). Some tests of the decay of immediate
memory. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
10, 12-21.
Bucholz, K., Cadoret, R., Cloninger, C. R., Dinwiddie, S.,
Hasselbrock, V., Nurnberger, J., et al. (1994). A new

1870

Boundary Separation

Drift Rate
Grp1 Grp2 Grp3

Money,
Equal

Grp1 Grp2 Grp3

Money,
Reward

Grp1 Grp2 Grp3 Grp1 Grp2 Grp3 Grp1 Grp2 Grp3 Grp1 Grp2 Grp3

Money,
Pun.

Shock,
Equal

Shock,
Reward

Shock,
Pun.

Money,
Equal

Experimental Condition

Money,
Reward

Money,
Pun.

Shock,
Equal

Shock,
Reward

Shock,
Pun.

Experimental Condition

Figure 2: Drift rates for hits and false alarms by diagnostic
group and experimental condition.
semistructured psychiatric interview for use in genetic linkage studies: A report of the reliability of the ssaga. Journal
of Studies on Alcohol, 55, 149-158.
Conway, A. R. A., & Engle, R. W. (1994). Working memory and retrieval: A resource-dependent inhibition model.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 123, 354-373.
Conway, A. R. A., Kane, M. J., Bunting, B. F., Hambrick,
Z. D., Wilhelm, O., & Engle, R. W. (2005). Working memory span tasks: A methodological review and users guide.
Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 12, 769-786.
Endres, M. J., Rickert, M. E., Bogg, T., Lucas, J., & Finn,
P. R. (2011). Externalizing psychopathology and behavioral disinhibition: Working memory mediates signal discriminability and reinforcement moderates response bias in
approach-avoidance learning. Journal of Abnormal Psychology.
Finn, P. R. (2002). Motivation, working memory, and decision making: A cognitive-motivational theory of personality vulnerability to alcoholism. Behavior, Cognition, and
Neuroscience Review, 1, 183-205.
Finn, P. R., Mazas, C. A., Justus, A. N., & Steinmetz, J. E.
(2002). Early-onset alcoholism with conduct disorder: Go /
no go learning deficits, working memory capacity, and personality. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research,
19, 148-157.
Finn, P. R., Miller, M., Rickert, M. E., Lucas, J., Bogg, T.,
Bobova, L., et al. (2009). Reduced cognitive ability in alcohol dependence: Examining the role of covarying externalizing psychopathology. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
2009, 100-116.
Gomez, P., Ratcliff, R., & Perea, M. (2007). A model of the
go/no-go task. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 136,
389-413.
Lee, M. D., & Wagenmakers, E.-J. (2009, August). A workshop in bayesian modeling for cognitive science. 42th Annual Meeting of the Society for Mathematical Psychology,
Amsterdam, Netherlands.

Figure 3: Boundary separation parameters by diagnostic group
and experimental condition.
Lunn, D. J. (2003). Winbugs development interface (wbdev).
ISBA Bulletin, 10, 10-11.
Lunn, D. J., Thomas, A., Best, N., & Spiegelhalter, D. (2000).
Winbugs - a bayesian modeling framework: Concepts,
structure, and extensibility. Statistics and Computing, 10,
325-337.
Matzke, D., & Wagenmakers, E.-J. (2009). Psychological
interpretation of exgaussian and shifted wald parameters:
A diffusion model analysis. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 16, 798-817.
Newman, J. P., & Lorenz, A. R. (2003). Response modulation and emotion processing: Implications for psychopathy
and other dsyregulatory psychopathology. In R. J. Davidson, K. R. Scherer, & H. H. Goldsmith (Eds.), Handbook
of affective sciences (p. 904-929). New York: Oxford University Press.
Newman, J. P., Widom, C. S., & Nathan, S. (1985). Passive
avoidance in syndromes of disinhibition: Psychopathy and
extraversion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 5, 1316-1327.
Ratcliff, R. (1978). A theory of memory retrieval. Psychological Review, 85, 59-108.
Ratcliff, R., Gomez, P., & McKoon, G. (2004). Diffusion
model account of lexical decision. Psychological Review,
111, 159-182.
Smillie, D. L., & Jackson, C. J. (2006). Functional impulsivity and reinforcement sensitivity theory. Journal of Personality, 74, 48-84.
Wechsler, D. (1981). Manual for the wechsler adult intelligence scale (rev.). New York: The Psychological Corporation.
Wechsler, D. (1997). Wechsler adult intelligence test-iii. The
Psychological Corporation, Harcourt Brace and Co.
Yechiam, E., Goodknight, J., Bates, J., Busemeyer, J. R.,
Dodge, K. A., Pettit, G. S., et al. (2006). A formal cognitive model of the go / no-go discrimination task: Evaluation
and implications. Psychological Assessment, 18, 239-249.

1871

