UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Modeling Verb Lexicalization Biases using Hierarchical Bayesian Models

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6p85w1p0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Havasi, Catherine
Speer, Robert

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Modeling Verb Lexicalization Biases using Hierarchical Bayesian Models
Catherine Havasi (havasi@media.mit.edu)
MIT Media Lab, 20 Ames Street
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA

Robert Speer (rspeer@mit.edu)
MIT Media Lab, 20 Ames Street
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA
Abstract

a single example (Gentner & Boroditsky, 2001), and they can
even learn words for events they are unable to observe (Landau
& Gleitman, 1985).
Two faster and more noise-resistant strategies have been
hypothesized by researchers. One is syntactic bootstrapping
(Gleitman, 1990). In this theory, the syntactic frame of the
verb is used to constrain hypotheses to those which makes
sense in the given frame and are similar to known verbs with
similar frames. In the manner/path example given earlier, you
would be more likely to think the meaning of the novel verb
was related to its motion if you had heard the semantically
rich fame “Jesse gorped the frisbee to Edison.”
Another hypothesis is that we are able to quickly learn
words from few examples because we rely on our learned
lexicalization biases about the meanings of words (Gentner
& Boroditsky, 2001). Learners select word meanings that
align with the features that are dominant in the learner’s native
language (Naigles, 1990), indicating that language learners
observe general features of the meanings of other words and
apply them to new words as well.
Modern evidence suggests that children use a combination
of these strategies (Papafragou & Selimis, 2010). But how
are these biases learned and regulated? In this paper, we
explore the possibility that biases for certain components of
meaning are associated with language and semantic frame.
These biases represent examples of Bayesian overhypotheses
about what a word is likely to mean, and these overhypotheses
can themselves be learned from examples (Kemp, Perfors,
& Tenenbaum, 2007). The overhypotheses can depend on
observable features such as whether the referent is animate
(Smith, Jones, Landau, Gershkoff-Stowe, & Samuelson, 2002),
the syntactic patterns in which the word appears (CifuentesFérez & Gentner, 2006), or known lexical relations to other
words (Pustejovsky, 1998).
Return momentarily to the analogous results for shape biases in nouns — that early nouns that children learn tend to
be easily clustered by the shape of their referents. In order to
model this bias, it was postulated that children learn a “secondorder generalization” that objects are often categorized by their
shape (Samuelson & Smith, 1999). Smith et al. demonstrated
this generalization by teaching 17-19 month old children a
precocious shape bias (Smith et al., 2002). Kemp, Perfors, and
Tenenbaum explained this kind of learning using a hierarchical
Bayesian model, which could learn both base meanings and
overhypotheses simultaneously (Kemp et al., 2007) and cases

The expression of motion verbs differs between languages. The
path of motion, such as crossing or entering, is more prominently featured in path-based languages such as Spanish than
in manner-based languages such as English. Here, we revisit
the data from a study on manner and path biases in verb lexicalization (Havasi & Snedeker, 2004), and create a hierarchical
Baysian computational model to further explore, verify, and
define these biases. With this model, we can discover the large
differences in subjects’ pre-existing manner and path biases
that depend on the syntactic frame in which new verbs appear,
as well as a difference in the learning rate between English
speakers taking the experiment in English and bilingual Spanish speakers taking the experiment in Spanish. We can also use
the model to predict the responses of subjects in the experiment
with more accuracy than before.
Keywords: verb learning; bayesian modeling; hierarchical
Bayes modeling; manner and path verbs

Linguistic lexicalization biases
People have the ability to intuit the meaning of a new verb after
hearing it used to describe just a single event. In the case of a
novel verb, there are many potential hypotheses of the verb’s
meaning which may be consistent with the event witnessed.
Suppose you hear a novel verb, such as “gorp”, being used to
describe an event in which Jesse throws a frisbee across a field
to , her dog. The verb could refer to Jesse throwing the frisbee,
the frisbee’s motion as it glides across the field, the frisbee’s
traverse of the field, or Edison’s act of catching the frisbee. To
understand which aspect of the action the verb refers to, you
must use situational clues and background knowledge.
When one encounters a new object noun, one encounters
the same ambiguity in meaning. In practice, languages systematically favor a few different characteristics such as common ancestry or base level category (Nelson, 1973) for noun
meanings which is often indicated by shape. However, event
categorization tends to be flexible across languages and even
with a language (Talmy, 1975). A motion verb, for example,
could easily refer to the manner, cause, or path of the motion
with no universal preference across languages (Aske, 1989;
Berman & Slobin, 1994; Jackendoff, 1990).
Given the plethora of possible referents for a novel verb,
how do children learn verb meanings? One solution would
be to observe, over several examples, that certain semantic
features seem to always be present and are thus associated with
the verb’s meaning. However, this would require too much
data to match the way that children learn words; children can
often determine the relevant aspect of a word’s meaning from

593

have been made that this approach applies to many aspects of
word learning (Xu, Dewar, & Perfors, 2009).
To further understand how biases shape learning, Havasi
and Snedeker (Havasi & Snedeker, 2004) began to explore the
lexicalization bias for motion verbs. The experiments focused
on the plasticity of the English manner motion verb bias and
its dependence on syntactic frame. As noted by Talmy, the
relative rarity of path verbs in English leads most English
speakers to think of these verbs as secondary (Talmy, 1985).
Like most linguistic biases, we are clearly not born with such
a bias. Through their experiments, they sought to discover if
the manner bias could be reversed to a path bias, and if so, to
explore the possibility that these biases are influenced by the
set of verbs that a subject is exposed to. Their results pointed
to a bias which was surprisingly plastic and adaptable with
training, even in adult subjects.
Prior models of verb learning were Bayesian in nature, but
encountered effects which could not be explained with a singlelevel model. Some of these effects can be accounted for by a
two level model: children are learning verbs and the behavior
of verbs in the language simultaneously. From here on, we
will refer to knowledge about the meanings of particular verbs
as “level-1 knowledge”, and knowledge about verbs in the
language as a whole as “level-2 knowledge”.
In this paper, we design and test a hierarchical model for
which matches the pattern of performance in the Havasi and
Snedeker verb learning studies, with a particular focus on
modeling level-2 knowledge. We are interested in building
a deeper understanding of that work in the context of work,
mentioned above, which models similar problems in noun
learning.

Figure 1: A screenshot from the original Havasi-Snedeker
experiment presenting the subject with a novel verb-event pair.

Figure 2: The information that a subject in the manner-path
experiment encounters. “a” through “h” represent the different
values each aspect may take.

Modeling verb biases
The MIT/Harvard studies on manner/path bias were constructed as a corollary to the shape bias work, showing that
the learned lexical constraint biases extended beyond noun
learning and remained adaptable into adulthood. During these
experiments, we were trying to teach the subjects new words
and adjust their manner-path biases. This adjustment would
determine how plastic these biases were and in what ways they
could and would change.

Experimental setup
In the course of each experiment, adult subjects learned twelve
novel motion verbs. For each verb:
1. Subjects saw a single ambiguous scene with a prominent
path and manner of motion, and a sentence describing the
scene using a novel verb. An example screenshot of this
step can be seen in Figure .
2. Subjects were asked two questions to determine their initial
interpretation of the verb (their bias). Each question asked
if a new scene was an example of the verb; one of the scenes
was consistent with the initial example’s manner, while the
other scene was consistent with the initial example’s path.
This step is called the “initial test”.

3. Subjects saw five additional instances of the new verb which
clarified the meaning, which would be consistent with the
initial scene in either the manner or the path.
4. Subjects answered two more questions to ensure that they
had learned the novel verb. They are again shown two
scenes, one consistent with the initial ambiguous scene in
manner and one in path. This is the learning test step.
A graphical depiction of the steps of the experiment can be
seen in Figure 2.
When discussing how a verb’s meaning is inferred from
examples, we will say that an aspect of a verb is consistent
if it is the same in all examples. In Figure 2, the consistent
aspect is the one with six examples that are the same color.
It is possible for a verb to be consistent in neither its manner
nor its path – perhaps it is defined by some other aspect. We
thus classify the possible beliefs about a verb’s meaning as
“manner”, “path”, and “neither”.
An important part of this experiment was to vary the proportion of path and manner verbs across groups of subjects.
Some subjects learned only manner verbs, some learned only
path verbs, and others saw different proportions of both types

594

( 0%, 25%, 50%, 75% and 100%). The subjects’ answers to
the first initial test – after only one scene had been shown, and
therefore before any level-2 learning could take place – were
taken to represent their initial manner-path bias.
During the first experiment, a “rich frame” was used to
present the novel verbs. In these experiments, the sentences
that were used contained a preposition as well as a ground
element, as in “she is glipping around the tree” where “tree”
serves as the ground. In English, this type of frame is more
frequently used with manner verbs.
The impact of syntactic frame has on the initial assumption
that a verb is a manner or path verb based on a single scene
and utterance pair is also a matter of interest. In the second experiment, we used a different “poor” syntactic frame, lacking
a preposition, to express the novel verb. The ground element
appeared instead as the direct object, as in “she is glipping the
tree”. This poor frame is more commonly used with path verbs
in English than the rich frame. Results for both experiments
were originally published in (Havasi & Snedeker, 2004).
Another version of the experiment was run on native Spanish speakers (who generally spoke English as well), with the
scenes described by Spanish sentences that were similar to
the English rich frame. Another experiment evaluated the
manner-path bias in children, but its results are not directly
comparable, because it required a different experimental setup
(Havasi, Snedeker, & Malik, 2005).

bias toward manner or path verbs. What the early model accomplished with a changing prior, we can now do in a more
principled way. We replace the prior with an overhypothesis
that is informed by the level-2 data, which itself has a prior
that is fixed for the course of the experiment.
This follows a program of research that has been successful
in describing many aspects of language learning. One benefit of hierarchical Bayesian models is that learning can take
place on multiple levels at once; (Perfors & Tenenbaum, 2009)
models how people learn categories at the same time that they
“learn to learn” categories. Another benefit is that it accounts
for how people learn in the absence of counterexamples, as in
the syntax-learning model of (Perfors, Tenenbaum, & Wonnacott, 2010). In this experiment, too, people show that they
gain knowledge of verb meanings at multiple levels, and can
correctly answer that a stimulus is “not gorping” even when
they have seen only positive examples of “gorping”.

The hierarchical model of verb aspect learning
Building on Kemp, Perfors and Tenenbaum’s result (Kemp
et al., 2007) in which they modeled the shape bias with a
hierarchical Bayesian model, we have created a higher-level
hierarchical Bayesian model that describes how these biases
change among different subjects in multiple experimental conditions. We are looking for differences in the way people learn,
and particularly for differences in subjects’ initial biases, when
subjects are presented with text in different languages or different syntax.
We start by assuming (based on the cited previous work)
that a hierarchical Bayesian model adequately describes how
a subject acquires level-2 knowledge, and that the “initial test”
in our experiment reveals information about each subject’s
level-2 knowledge at each step of the experiment. When we
make use of this assumption and observe changes in subjects’
level-2 knowledge over the course of the experiment, we can
discover information that was not directly revealed by the
questions in the experiment.
For example, subjects’ answers to the initial test for the
first verb tell us something about their relative manner and
path biases at the start of the experiment. But to infer how
strong those biases are, or inversely how prone they are to
change, we need to observe how these biases change during
the experiment across many subjects. In other words, we are
using this new hierarchical model not to model how a single
person learns, but to design an experiment that helps us learn
how people learn.
The different experimental conditions will cause subjects to
reveal different biases – not because the subject knows they
are in one of a set of experimental conditions, but because the
conditions naturally draw on different sets of prior knowledge.
We describe these differences in biases with an overhypothesis
that varies according to the experimental condition, representing subjects’ initial level-2 knowledge before the experiment
teaches them any new verb meanings.
We do not extend this model to include level-1 learning,

Early work modeling manner and path biases
In her master’s thesis, Catherine Havasi (Havasi, 2004) used
the results of these experiments in the development of a computer model to explain the human responses during the experiments. This model, which progressed through the training and
evaluation steps in the same manner as the subjects, used a
multinomial distribution to represent the likelihood of seeing
a manner or path verb next. This distribution was updated
at each time step based on its previous value and the most
recently seen example, and its prior distribution was trained
to provide the closest match between the model and human
responses.
However, this initial model did not seem to adequately fit
the observed behavior, because subjects’ manner and path
biases would change significantly during the course of the
experiment. The subjects were acquiring level-2 knowledge
about the language of the experiment.
To account for this, she added a “memory effect”, which
would incrementally change the prior of the manner-path distribution based on an average of the last several observations.
Adding the memory effect improved the ability of the model
to match the experimental data.

Flexible bias as an overhypothesis
The understanding of hierarchical Bayesian models and their
application to cognitive science has grown significantly since
these results. We now know a mathematical way to describe
this “memory effect”: it is an overhypothesis. This overhypothesis itself has a prior, representing the subjects’ pre-existing

595

α ∼ Exponential(λ)
~β ∼ Dirichlet(µ)
~θst ∼ Dirichlet(α~β), s ∈ [1, S],t ∈ [1, T ]
vt 0

∼ Multinomial(~θst ),t 0 ∈ [1,t − 1]

Figure 3: A hierarchical model of the manner-path experiment.
because we have already isolated level-2 learning from level-1
learning in the experimental design. As we have no reason to
believe that people will learn differently at level 1 in different
conditions, starting from the level-2 data gives us a simpler
model with less room for unnecessary variation.
Figure 3 shows this model, using the traditional “plate notation” to show variables that are sampled many times. To
describe the role of the different variables, let us begin at the
innermost plate.
vst 0 represents a subject’s knowledge or hypothesis about
which aspect defines a particular verb. It can take one of
three values in our model: manner, path, and neither. This
is the knowledge that is probed by the initial test, taught by
the five training examples, and confirmed by the learning test.
t 0 is enumerated from 1 to t because the subjects only have
information about the verbs they have seen so far; their set of
knowledge grows as the experiment proceeds.
Note that v contains two different kinds of information. For
all t 0 < t, vst 0 represents what subject s has learned about a previous verb. The case where t 0 = t is different: it represents the
subject’s prediction of what the current verb means, after they
have seen only one example. This comes from the subject’s
response to the initial test.
We assume here that subjects learn the meaning of the previous verbs correctly, given that they have seen six examples of
each. We cannot be sure of what the subjects actually learned,
but on average the subjects answer the learning test question
correctly 89% of the time. A model of level-1 learning instead
of level-2 learning may be able to predict when some of these
errors occur.
The values of v are selected from the multinomial distribution ~θ, representing the subject’s current beliefs about which
semantic aspects typically define verbs in their language. This

is a vector that is specific to the subject and changes over time.
If someone’s ~θ is [0.6, 0.3, 0.1], for example, that means they
believe there is a 60% chance that a verb they have seen one
example of will be defined by its manner, a 30% chance it will
be defined by its path, and a 10% chance that it will be defined
by neither.
Determining where the values in ~θ come from, and how they
tend to change over time, is the goal of the experiment. We
suppose that there are two hyperparameters, α and ~β, which
are similar among a population of people who speak the same
language. These hyperparameters represent whether a population of verb learners expects, in general, to learn manner verbs
or path verbs.
~β represents a person’s initial bias toward manner or path
verbs, as a vector of probabilities. α represents the strength
of this bias: a low α can be easily overridden by evidence in
the experiment, while a high α represents a bias that is hard to
change.
These hyperparameters can still vary according to the language the person is using, and according to other information
such as the syntactic frame that the novel verb appears in.
There may be hyper-hyperparameters that determine the way
that people learn verbs in general, but we do not have nearly
enough data to study what they are. We call these parameters
λ and~µ, and assume neutral and uninformative priors on them:
λ yields α from an exponential distribution with mean 1, and
~µ yields β from the flat Dirichlet distribution with parameter
[1,1,1].
Given the data collected in the experiment, we can discover
likely values of α and ~β for each condition, and therefore
learn what people’s manner and path biases are and how they
depend on the language and its syntax. Then, we can use this
hierarchical model, initialized with the given values, to model
people’s performance in the experiment.

Sampling to find α and ~β
The goal of this experiment has been to discover subjects’
biases in verb learning. We have taken into account the fact
that the biases can change over the course of the experiment
as subjects adapt to what they are being taught. But the result
of the change is not what we are interested in – that mostly
reflects how well the subjects ultimately learn about the class
of novel verbs in the experiment, verbs that they will never
need to use in their life. What we are interested in is what
the experiment reveals about what the subjects’ biases were
before the experiment, at time 0.
These pre-existing biases are represented by ~β, and now that
we have constructed a Bayesian model of the experiment, we
can sample the model to find their likely values. The rigidity of
these biases during the experiment is represented by α. When
a subject’s biases change significantly during the experiment,
this is reflected by a low value of α.
To find a distribution on α and ~β given the hyperparameters
and the experimental data, we use a implement the Markov
Chain Monte Carlo process using the Metropolis-Hastings

596

Figure 5: The prediction error for the model of (Havasi, 2004)
and the hierarchical model presented here.
distance between these vectors of probabilities.
We can evaluate the model of (Havasi, 2004) with the same
methodology, and therefore show that this model is an improvement over the previous model. We run both models on
the same data and compare them with a paired t-test, showing that the new hierarchical model is more accurate when
averaged over all data (t = 2.25, d f = 287, p < .05), and particularly on the poor-frame data (t = 2.43, d f = 120, p < .01),
where people began with very uncertain biases that changed
quickly. These results are plotted in Figure 5.

eng+ = English rich frame; eng– = English poor frame;
spa = Spanish

Figure 4: The distributions of model parameters that are likely
given the data. From top to bottom, the parameters indicated
are α (the strength of the bias), β1 (the manner bias), β2 (the
path bias), and β3 (the “neither” bias).

Analysis of results
The results in figure 4 show very different initial biases for the
different experimental conditions. The clearest difference is,
in fact, not due to language but due to the syntactic frame used
in the experiment. In the rich-frame English experiment, the
typical subject has a prior manner bias of approximately 0.77
(they consider an unknown verb to have a 77% probability of
being a manner verb), and a very small path bias, around 0.02.
Compare this to the poor syntactic frame, in which subjects
reveal a manner bias around 0.41 and a path bias around 0.16
(leaving 43% of the probability for neither manner nor path
verbs).
There is also a striking difference in the strength of the
biases, as indicated by α. The strong manner bias in the
English rich frame is also difficult to overcome, having an
α value that averages around 5.9. The poor frame induces a
much weaker bias, with α ≈ 2.0.
We can evaluate the significance of these differences in
values by sampling from the distributions and establishing
whether one value is larger 95% (or 99%, or 99.9%) of the time.
(The standard error of the mean does not apply, because these
samples are not independent, and they come from distributions
that already reflect our uncertainty about the parameter values.)
For α and all entries in ~β, the difference between the English
rich frame and poor frame is significant at the p < .001 level.
We conclude that the syntax in which a verb originally appears
has a strong effect on a learner’s hypothesis about its meaning.
The pre-existing biases for Spanish actually appear to fall

algorithm. This tells us about the distribution of parameter
values that explain the data, by giving us a number of samples
from that distribution.1
We ran this sampling process separately on the rich frame
and poor frame conditions of the English experiment, as well
as the data from the Spanish experiment (which only had one
verb frame, with similar content to the English rich frame), for
200,000 steps in each case. Figure 4 shows the distributions
of the initial manner bias, initial path bias, and the weight of
the bias (α) for each condition.

Evaluating the predictive accuracy
We evaluate our model by comparing it to the way people
actually predict the meanings of new verbs in the experiment.
When we run the model forwards using the mean of the parameters we found earlier, then for each time step in each
condition, we get a prediction of the probability that a person
will predict a path verb, a manner verb, or neither. We compare this to the proportion of subjects who actually predicted
each option, and calculate the error as the average Euclidean
1 The
Python script that implements this process,
along with the experimental data, are available at
http://github.com/rspeer/verb-aspect-learning.

597

between the two English cases. Spanish-speaking subjects
may have slightly less of a manner bias and slightly more of a
path bias than the English rich-frame subjects, but to an extent
that is not statistically significant over our data. On the other
hand, they have a significantly stronger manner bias than the
English poor-frame subjects. This difference in manner biases
is significant at the p < .01 level, and the differences in other
biases are significant at the p < .05 level.
The very significant difference between the Spanish data
and the English rich-frame data occurs in α, the strength of
the subjects’ pre-existing biases. With an average α around
1.9, the Spanish-speaking subjects adapt to the distribution of
meanings in the experiment as quickly as the English poorframe subjects. Their bias is weaker than the English rich
frame at a significance level of p < .001.
An explanation we propose for the Spanish data is that we
are observing, in addition to the language difference, the fact
that all the Spanish native speakers were bilingual. They have
learned English, along with its lexicalization biases, so they
are apt to learn unfamiliar words in the same way that they
learn English words. On the other hand, their bilingualism has
given them practice at adapting their overhypotheses about
the meanings of words, so they adapt to the “language” of the
experiment more quickly.
Examining the Spanish result further, and determining
whether their initial biases differ from the English rich frame,
would require more experimental data. To further explore this
phenomenon, it would be quite useful to re-run the Spanish
experiment with an equivalent to the poor frame. Additionally,
it would be informative to run the experiment with monolingual Spanish speakers, in order to isolate the possible effect of
bilingualism on adaptiveness in verb learning.

psychological data. Masters thesis, Department of Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science, MIT, Cambridge.
Havasi, C., & Snedeker, J. (2004). The adaptability of language specific verb lexicalization biases. In Proceedings
from the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society
(Vol. 26). Mahwah,NJ: Erlbaum.
Havasi, C., Snedeker, J., & Malik, M. (2005). The adaptability
of lexicalization biases in English speaking five year olds.
In Proceedings of the Tenth Annual International Congress
for the Study of Child Language. Berlin, Germany.
Jackendoff, R. S. (1990). Semantic structures. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Kemp, C., Perfors, A., & Tenenbaum, J. (2007). Learning
overhypotheses with hierarchical bayesian models. Developmental Science, 10, 307 – 321.
Landau, B., & Gleitman, L. R. (1985). Language and experience: Evidence from the blind child. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Naigles, L. (1990). Children use syntax to learn verb meanings.
Journal of Child Language, 117, 357374.
Nelson, K. (1973). Structure and strategy in learning to
talk. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development, 38.
Papafragou, A., & Selimis, S. (2010). Lexical and structural biases in the acquisition of motion verbs. Language
Learning and Development, 6, 87–115.
Perfors, A. F., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2009). Learning to learn
categories. In Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive
Science Society.
Perfors, A. F., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Wonnacott, E. (2010).
Variability, negative evidence, and the acquisition of verb
argument constructions. J. Child Lang, 37, 607–642.
Pustejovsky, J. (1998). The generative lexicon. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Samuelson, L., & Smith, L. (1999). Early noun vocabularies:
Do ontology, category structure and syntax correspond?
Cognition, 71, 1–33.
Smith, L., Jones, S., Landau, B., Gershkoff-Stowe, L., &
Samuelson, L. (2002). Object name learning provides onthe-job training for attention. Psychological Science, 13,
13-19.
Talmy, L. (1975). Semantics and syntax of motion. In J. Kimball (Ed.), Syntax and semantics, volume 4. New York, New
York: Academic Press.
Talmy, L. (1985). Lexicalization patterns: Semantic structure
in lexical forms. In T. Shopen (Ed.), Language typology
and lexical description: Grammatical categories and the
lexicon. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Xu, F., Dewar, K., & Perfors, A. (2009). Induction, overhypotheses, and the shape bias: Some arguments and evidence
for rational constructivism. In B. M. Hood & L. Santos
(Eds.), The origins of object knowledge (pp. 263–284). Oxford University Press.

Acknowledgements
We wish to thank Jesse Snedeker and Josh Tenenbaum for
their helpful discussions and feedback about this model.

References
Aske, J. (1989). Path predicates in English and Spanish: A
closer look. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth Annual Meeting
of the Berkeley Linguistics Society (p. 1-14). Berkeley, CA,
USA: Berkeley Linguistics Society.
Berman, R., & Slobin, D. (1994). Relating events in narrative: A cross-linguistic developmental study. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Cifuentes-Férez, P., & Gentner, D. (2006). Naming motion
events in Spanish and English. Cognitive Linguistics, 17,
443–462.
Gentner, D., & Boroditsky, L. (2001). Individuation, relativity
and early word learning. In M. Bowerman & Levinson
(Eds.), Language acquisition and conceptual development.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Gleitman, L. (1990). The structural sources of verb meanings.
Language Acquisition, 1, 3–55.
Havasi, C. (2004). Bayesian modeling of manner and path

598

