UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Modeling Acute and Compensated Language Disturbance in Schizophrenia

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9nc655w2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Gasemann, Uli
Hoffman, Ralph
Miikulainen, Risto

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Modeling Acute and Compensated Language Disturbance in Schizophrenia
Uli Grasemann1 , Ralph Hoffman2 , and Risto Miikkulainen1
1

Department of Computer Sciences, The University of Texas at Austin
2
Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine

Abstract
No current laboratory test can reliably identify patients with
schizophrenia. Instead, key symptoms are observed via language, including derailments, where patients cannot follow a
coherent storyline, and delusions, where false beliefs are repeated as fact. Brain processes underlying these and other
symptoms remain unclear, and characterizing them would
greatly enhance our understanding of schizophrenia. In this situation, computational models can be valuable tools to formulate testable hypotheses and to complement clinical research.
This work aims to capture the link between biology and schizophrenic symptoms using DISCERN, a connectionist model of
human story processing. Competing illness mechanisms proposed to underlie schizophrenia are simulated in DISCERN,
and are evaluated at the level of narrative language, i.e. the
same level used to diagnose patients. The result is the first
simulation of abnormal storytelling in schizophrenia, both in
acute psychotic and compensated stages of the disorder. Of all
illness models tested, hyperlearning, a model of overly intense
memory consolidation, produced the best fit to the language
abnormalities of stable outpatients, as well as compelling models of acute psychotic symptoms. If validated experimentally,
the hyperlearning hypothesis could advance the current understanding of schizophrenia, and provide a platform for developing future treatments for this disorder.

Introduction
Stories are more than a useful social construct – they are a
crucial part of who we are. We make sense of the world by
fitting our experience into a coherent narrative. In schizophrenia, this ongoing narrative breaks down. Disturbances
in the perception and expression of reality can be observed
through the stories a patient tells. Indeed, narrative language
is the primary diagnostic tool, and clinicians use it every day
to observe and evaluate its manifestations. The purpose of
clinical interviews, then, is to use narrative language as a
window into the schizophrenic mind. The main idea behind
this research is that neural network models of storytelling can
provide mechnistic explanations of what is seen through that
window. These explanations can then be evaluated through
narrative language – at the same level used to diagnose real
patients.
The principal strength of neural network models lies in
their ability to bridge the gap between complex mental states
and behavior on the one hand and underlying neural information processing on the other. This ability is precisely what
is needed in schizophrenia research, where the central challenge for decades has been to explain how underlying illness
mechanisms could cause altered the behavior.
Consequently, the main goal of this research is to demonstrate that a neural network model can be used meaningfully to simulate possible illness mechanisms in schizophrenia. The different illness models will result in different language behavior, which can then be used to generate predictions about the underlying causes. Thus computational illness
models have the potential to complement and guide future
medical research.

On the other hand, progress in understanding schizophrenia is likely to lead to progress in basic cognitive science
as well. Global, emergent faculties like understanding and
telling stories, processing emotions, and forming long-term
memories of real or imagined events are difficult to account
for computationally, and mental illnesses where these faculties break down offer a unique opportunity to investigate how
they emerge from their neural substrate. Developing methods to model such high-level behavior computationally is a
second major goal of the research presented in this paper.

Schizophrenia
Schizophrenia is a common and disabling psychiatric disorder. Symptoms include hallucinations, bizarre behavior, delusions, and disorganized language that is hard for listeners to
follow. These psychotic symptoms tend to wax and wane over
time, and in later stages often give way to negative symptoms, including blunted emotions and reduced language output. This paper focuses on symptoms that are observed directly via language, most prominently
1. Delusions, which are pathological false beliefs. Delusions
often share common themes, like being watched by the
CIA or being controlled by outside forces. Patients with
schizophrenia tend to insert themselves or persons they
know into imaginary narratives. Such agent-slotting errors
are thought to be the cause of the plots and conspiracies
that characterize persecutory delusions.
2. Disorganized speech, which refers to fluent spoken language that fails to communicate effectively. It is believed to
reflect impaired verbal thought (thought disorder). One of
the most prominent signs are derailments, i.e. jumps from
one topic or story to another without apparent cause.
Symptoms in schizophrenia vary among patients. Clinical subtypes of schizophrenia include the paranoid type,
where symptoms include delusions and hallucinations but
not prominent language disorganization, and the disorganized
type, where symptoms are dominated by disorganized language and behavior.
Treatments for schizophrenia mainly rely on medication
that can help manage psychotic symptoms. However, these
drugs often have severe and dangerous side-effects, and do
not help all patients or address all symptoms (Kapur and
Mamo, 2003). These shortcomings make a better understanding of schizophrenia an important goal, because it would
likely lead to more effective drugs, and might suggest new
ways to treat or even prevent schizophrenia (Pearlson, 2000).
However, our understanding of schizophrenia is far from
complete. What is known is that schizophrenia is a physical
disease. Structural brain abnormalities, genetics, and neurochemistry are key components, and virtually every brain
area and major neurotransmitter system has been implicated
(Pearlson and Marsh, 1999; Bogerts et al., 2009; Glenthoj

489

Input text

A

et al., 2009). This wealth of experimental findings has led
to many hypotheses regarding the causes of schizophrenia,
but not to much clarity about its precise nature.
After a century of research, why is schizophrenia is not yet
better understood? One reason is certainly that schizophrenia is both complex and heterogeneous, making the question
of cause and effect extremely difficult. Furthermore, experimental techniques often cannot establish causality.
However, a more basic obstacle (we argue) is the lack of
an adequate formal language in which to express hypotheses. In other words, new and advanced ways to investigate the
schizophrenic brain experimentally should be complemented
by new and equally powerful theoretical tools. Contributing
to the development of these tools is the principal motivation
behind this research.

Sentence
parser

Output text

Seman-c
memory

Sentence
generator

5 6 7

Story
parser

Memory
encoder

Story
generator

Episodic
memory

8.1

8.2

B
Sentence generator

Approach
This paper aims to demonstrate that connectionist models
have the potential to provide these tools. Even though they
are not usually intended as physiologically accurate simulations, they nevertheless tend to exhibit characteristics of
“brain-like” information processing, and high-level cognition
can thus be modeled using plausible analogs of the real neural substrate. A central working hypothesis is that neural networks not only function in a brain-like manner, but can also
break down in the same way, creating an opportunity to advance our understanding of both the healthy and the disordered brain.
Computational neural networks have been used previously
to simulate research findings related to schizophrenia, including altered working memory (Braver et al., 1999; Cohen and Servan-Schreiber, 1992; Monchi et al., 2000), hyperarousal states (Grossberg and Pepe, 1970; Grossberg, 1999),
excessive semantic priming (Spitzer, 1997), alterations of
functional connectivity between brain regions (Winder et al.,
2007), attention (Wang and Fan, 2007), impaired facial affect recognition (Carter and Neufeld, 2007), and hallucinations and delusions (Hoffman and McGlashan, 1997; Ruppin
et al., 1996; Loh et al., 2007). This work is the first, however, to use a model of human storytelling, and therefore the
first where candidate illness mechanisms can be evaluated on
a clinically relevant level.
The model, called DISCERN (Miikkulainen, 1993), is a
complex, multi-modular neural network simulation of human
story learning and memory. In this work, it was extended to
model complex stories consisting of multiple scripts, as well
as emotions and a cognitive filter function (Fidelman et al.,
2005; Grasemann et al., 2007). These extensions make it
possible to model the complex changes in language behavior observed in patients with schizophrenia.

Memory cue

Current sentence
Working memory

Episodic
memory

1.1

1.2

Hidden layer

2
copy

3 4

Memory cue

Current Script

Emo-on

Story generator

Figure 1: A schematic representation of the DISCERN story processing architecture. (A) Remembering and reproducing a story in
DISCERN is achieved by a chain of modules. Tan modules are
simple recurrent networks (Elman, 1990), the memory encoder is a
RAAM network (Pollack, 1990), and the green modules are contentaddressable memory modules. (B) The story generator module
shown in more detail. A new memory cue is produced together with
each sentence, making the transitions from one script to the next explicit. The numbers indicate implementations of the eight simulated
illness mechanisms evaluated as models of schizophrenic language.

DISCERN modules were then trained in their tasks, i.e. understanding and paraphrasing the stories.
For each story, the words are presented to the sentence
parser one at a time as a sequence of activation patterns.
The sentence parser builds a representation of each sentence
by concatenating the word representations that correspond to
agent, predicate, indirect object, modifier, and direct object.
At the end of each sentence, the sentence representation is
passed on to the story parser. The story parser transforms sequences of sentences into script representations. Such a representation consists of the name of the script and the words
and emotion filling its slots. The sequence of script representations that constitute the story is stored in the episodic
memory module in a compressed form, which is created by
the memory encoder using the Recursive Auto-Associative
Memory (RAAM; Pollack 1990) architecture.
Story recall reverses the process, transforming episodic
memories back into the original words: The story generator
translates the episodic memory representation into a sequence
of sentences, and the sentence generator then produces the
word sequence for each sentence. Additionally, the story generator produces a memory cue with each sentence, thus making the script transitions explicit and allowing the system to
process multi-script stories (Fig. 1B). Based on evidence of
an editor function in human speech (Fox Tree, 2000), an out-

The DISCERN Model
DISCERN processes stories via a chain of modules, each
building on the results of the previous module and providing
input for the next (Fig. 1A). The modules communicate using
patterns of neuron activations that represent word meanings.
Word representations are stored in a central semantic memory, and are learned based on their roles in sentences using the
FGREP algorithm (Miikkulainen, 1993). Semantically similar words are reflected by similar activation patterns.
Based on a corpus of 28 stories, DISCERN first learned
a lexicon of word representations in this manner. The other

490

put sentence filter was incorporated into the story generator,
reducing errors at the cost of reduced successful recall.
DISCERN learned fourteen autobiographical stories describing a first-person character (“I”), his relationships with
his boss, girlfriend, etc., and activities such as going to a wedding and getting a traffic ticket. A second group of fourteen
impersonal crime stories described Mafia and police characters and their activities. Each story consisted of a sequence
of three to seven scripts whose slots were filled with a coherent set of words. An emotional valence code, ranging from
very positive to very negative (++, +, +-, -, - -) was also included, biasing memory recall in a fashion analogous to human recall (Bower, 1981). Script organization was shared
between autobiographical and crime stories, but story characters were not. For instance, DISCERN learned the following
crime story about Vito, a Mafia boss, consisting of $driving
and $pulled-over scripts with neutral emotion (slot-fillers in
brackets and underlined in the story):
$driving [Vito,LA,airport,scared,recklessly,+-]
Vito wanted to go to LA.
Vito entered his car.
Vito drove to the airport.
Vito was scared.
Vito drove recklessly.
$pulled-over [Vito,cop,arrested,murder,+-]
Vito was pulled-over by a cop.
The cop asked Vito for his license.
Vito gave his license to the cop.
The cop checked the license.
The cop arrested Vito for murder.

5.

6.

7.

8.

An autobiographical story incorporated the same scripts
with different slot-fillers and a strongly negative emotion:

one of the earliest models of schizophrenia (Grossberg and
Pepe, 1970). Simulated by increasing hidden layer activations in the SG;
Semantic blurring, based on the hypothesis that excessive
spreading activation in semantic maps contributes to disorganized speech in schizophrenia (Spitzer, 1997; Leeson
et al., 2005). Simulated by combining input word representations with their neighbors in the lexicon;
Semantic memory noise, intended to simulate disorganization of semantic memory suggested by studies demonstrating altered word association and fluency in schizophrenia
(Goldberg et al., 1998; Tallent et al., 2001). Implemented
by degrading semantic memory with Gaussian noise;
Semantic memory overactivation, motivated by neuroimaging studies suggesting increased cortical activation
during semantic association tasks (Kuperberg et al., 2007;
Assaf et al., 2006). Implemented by adding a constant bias
to the lexicon’s output;
Hyperlearning, a simulation of aberrant memory consolidation, intended to model memory effects of dopaminedriven, pathologically intense experience (Kapur, 2003;
Kapur et al., 2005; Maher, 1974). Simulated by performing
additional network training at increased learning rates; applied to the memory encoder and/or the generator modules
(i.e. story and sentence generators).

The amount of distortion or damage introduced by an illness
model (or lesion) can be controlled in each case by a “severity” parameter. Fig. 1 illustrates the location of the lesions in
DISCERN. The lesions each result in characteristic language
behavior that can be compared to that of schizophrenic patients.

$driving[I,home,drunk,home,recklessly,--]
I wanted to go home.
I entered my car.
I drove home.
I was drunk.
I drove recklessly.
$pulled-over [I,cop,arrested,DUI,--]
I was pulled-over by a cop.
The cop asked me for my license.
I gave my license to the cop.
The cop checked the license.
The cop arrested me for DUI.

Experiment I: Matching Human Data
The goal of the first experiment is to perform a rigorous and
quantitative comparison of DISCERN and human subjects.
Its foundation is a study of human story recall in schizophrenia, conducted at Yale as part of a joint project with this work
(Hoffman et al., 2011). In the study, 20 healthy controls and
37 medicated outpatients with schizophrenia recalled three
brief, thematically related stories. Several variables measuring different aspects of language and memory performance
were scored, resulting in a unique quantitative characterization of language behavior in schizophrenia.
Four measures were used in the comparison: (1) recall success, measuring overall story recall performance; (2) derailment errors, measuring difficulty in maintaining a consistent
storyline; (3) agent-slotting errors, measuring delusion-like
confusions among story characters; and (4) lexical misfire errors, measuring difficulty in slotting words other than agents.
The errors were represented as penetrance scores, i.e. divided
by the number of error-free outputs. Patients scored lower
on recall success, and produced more derailments and agentslotting errors than controls. Lexical misfires did not differentiate patients from controls.
To measure how well the language profile of DISCERN
simulations matched the experimental data, a novel meansquare deviation metric (Marchiori and Warglien, 2008)
based on the four outcome variables was developed, measuring the goodness-of-fit (GOF) to human patients and controls.
Lesion damage and output filtering were adjusted to optimize

Such common structure provides opportunities for
schizophrenia-like language behavior to emerge, including
derailments and delusion-like narratives.
Starting from different initial weights, 30 independent
DISCERN systems were trained using baclpropagation. After
training, average sentence-level recall was 95.6% (SD 0.8%).
The “healthy” DISCERN systems were then used to simulate
a range of candidate illness mechanisms:
1. Working memory (WM) disconnection, prompted by neuroimaging and other studies suggesting cortical disconnection, (especially involving WM networks) in schizophrenia
patients (Kim et al., 2003; Karlsgodt, 2008; Sakkalis et al.,
2006)). Implemented in DISCERN by cutting context-tohidden-layer connections in the story generator (SG);
2. WM noise, prompted by reports of excessive cortical noise,
and reduced efficiency in frontal cortical systems linked to
WM in schizophrenia (Potkin et al., 2009; Tan et al., 2007;
Winterer and Weinberger, 2004). Simulated by adding
Gaussian noise to the context layer of the SG network;
3. WM gain reduction has been used previously to simulate
hypo-dopaminergic neuromodulation of cortical networks
in schizophrenia (Cohen and Servan-Schreiber, 1992). Implemented in DISCERN by changing the slope of the sigmoid activation functions in the SG’s hidden layer;
4. Excessive arousal could produce both the under- and overactivation at a neuronal level seen in schizophrenia (Kuperberg et al., 2007; Loh et al., 2007), and was the basis of

491

20

A

15

HLM

HLG

WMN

SO

Figure 3: Percentages of

10

2

% Ungrammatical

Log(GOF) to control profile

3

1
0

5
0
20
15
10
5

-1

-2

-2

-3

-3

hyperlearning

-1

semantic overpriming

0

semantic overactivation

0

semantic memory noise

1

abnormal arousal

1

WM gain reduction

2

WM noise

2

C

80

60

40

100

% Recall

80

60

40

The main result is that hyperlearning can match the storyrecall profile of patients better than other illness models.
That all models were equivalent in matching healthy controls suggests that hyperlearning captures specific aspects of
schizophrenia, rather than general sources of human errorproneness.

Experiment II: Psychotic Language
Whereas the human subject study (necessarily) focused on
medicated outpatients, psychosis is the hallmark of schizophrenia (Kapur, 2003). Its manifestations are the most distinctive signs of schizophrenia, and tend to dominate the early
stages where models of intervention could be most useful.
The second experiment consequently aimed to recreate language characteristic of acute psychosis, and to evaluate the
ability of the illness models to do so.
Ten DISCERN systems were subjected to varying degrees
of damage using the same eight lesions investigated earlier.
Additionally, hyperlearning was applied to DISCERN’s generator modules, for a total of nine lesions. The main goal
was to determine whether any lesions are able to produce
language abnormalities suggestive of (and consistent with)
the psychotic symptoms of schizophrenia. First, syntax and
morphology in schizophrenia tend to be normal or nearly so
(Covington et al., 2005). However, most lesions (i.e. all except the hyperlearning models) cause frequent grammatical
errors (Fig. 3). For example, the following was produced by
DISCERN after WM-disconnection (target words in parentheses):

3D hyperlearning

3

3D disconnection

B

WM disconnection

Log(GOF) to patient profile

3

0
100

ungrammatical sentences
caused by four representative lesions is shown as
recall performance drops
in response to increasing
damage. Solid lines are
averages over ten DISCERN systems. Dots are
individual lesioned systems.
All lesions except hyperlearning (HLM,
HLG) produce frequent
grammar errors, which are
not usually seen in schizophrenia.

Figure 2: Goodness-of-fit of each illness model to human storyrecall data. GOF is measured using a mean-square deviation metric to the language profile of controls (A) and patients (B,C). GOF
was log-converted to normalize distributions; smaller values represent a better fit. Illness models are equivalent in matching controls.
However, hyperlearning and WM-disconnection fit the patients better than other models. (C) Applying disconnection and hyperlearning in an additional location in DISCERN improves GOF to patients.
Hyperlearning fits significantly better than WM-disconnection, suggesting a more likely illness mechanism of schizophrenia.

The
The
The
The

GOF for each of the eight illness mechanisms applied to each
of the 30 independent DISCERN systems.
A mixed-model analysis with best-fit GOF as the response
variable revealed no significant difference between lesions in
matching healthy controls (p = 0.07; Fig. 2A). In contrast,
the eight illness models differed significantly in how well they
matched the patients’ story-recall performance (p < 0.0001):
WM-disconnection and hyperlearning were robustly superior
to the other six models (p < 0.0005) but were not different
from each other (Fig. 2B).
The two best models, WM-disconnection and hyperlearning, were further studied by applying each lesion in an additional location in DISCERN: hyperlearning was now applied
to both smemory encoder and generator modules, and disconnection was applied to both context-to-hidden and output connections of the story generator. As a result, GOF to patients
improved overall (p < 0.0001), and hyperlearning produced
a significantly better fit than disconnection (p < 0.0001).

Police
Police
Police
Police

thought that *the(Tony) bombed *airport(City-Hall).
wanted to arrest *the(Tony).
found that *to(Tony) *LA(was) *St-Mary’s(in).
planned to arrest *I(Tony) in New-York.

Distorted constructions like “The Police found that to LA
St-Mary’s” make the text appear random and non-sensical
rather than disorganized or delusional, which is typically not
the case in schizophrenia. In contrast, hyperlearning causes
grammatical errors very rarely. Furthermore, hyperlearning
applied to generator modules (HLG) causes consistent patterns of agent-slotting errors to emerge:
*I(Tony) hated *my(his) job.
*I(Tony) was a bad gangster.
*I(Tony) wanted to go to City-Hall.
*I(Tony) entered his car.
*I(Tony) drove to City-Hall.
*I(Tony) was *on-time(scared).
*I(Tony) drove *recklessly(carefully).
*I(Tony) entered City-Hall for *wedding(bombing).
Tony bombed City-Hall.

Such stable error patterns are very frequent following
HLG, and virtually absent in other lesions. As in the example above, grammar remains intact. Often, meaningful
and locally consistent new narratives emerge, suggesting how

492

50

100

150 0

50

100

150

Other Agent-Slotting Errors
200

HLG

HLM

150

Across Context

100
50
0
200

SN

150

EA

100
50
0

0

50

100 150 200 0

50

Hyperlearning (Generators)

0

Hyperlearning (MemEnc)

0

Working Memory Noise

50

0

Semantic Overactivation

SN

WMN

100

5

Excessive Arousal States

150

Types of
agent-slotting errors for
different illness models in DISCERN. Solid
lines are averages at increasing levels of lesion
severity. Top: Hyperlearning applied to generator modules (HLG)
tends to insert the selfcharacter into crime stories.
Bottom: HLG
frequently causes autobiographical characters
to intrude across contexts into crime stories. Note that HLM,
the other hyperlearning lesion, causes very
few agent-slotting errors, suggesting fundamentally different language behavior.

WM Gain Ruction

Figure 4:
0

Semantic Noise

Self-Insertions

50

WM Disconnection

HLG

HLM

100

Semantic Blurring

Ratio of derailments vs word errors

150

Figure 5: Frequency of derailed language vs. word-level errors.
Lesion severity was adjusted so that recall was close to 40%. Hyperlearning causes frequent derailments and few word-level errors.
In all other lesions, word-level errors dominate derailments.

derlying brain mechanism occuring at two different locations.

Discussion and Future Work
The results show that DISCERN can indeed be used to simulate and compare alternative illness mechanisms in schizophrenia. Creating a computational framework where this is
possible was one of the two main goals of this research. A
more ambitious goal was to create an illness model that captures important aspects of schizophrenic language. The hyperlearning hypothesis is such a model.
In sum, hyperlearning can match the story-recall profile of
human patients with schizophrenia (but not healthy controls)
better than other models, and only the hyperlearning models produce compelling simulations of psychotic language.
An account of delusion formation based on stable patterns
of agency shifts is supported by human data showing that patients with narrative delusions make more agent-slotting errors (Hoffman et al., 2011). Applied to the memory encoder
network, hyperlearning causes signs of language disorganization but not delusions. Hyperlearning thus models different
symptoms depending on where in the model it is applied, suggesting how clinical subtypes of schizophrenia could emerge
through a shared mechanism. Interestingly, although it is
a new hypothesis, hyperlearning converges with a number
of recent neurobiological findings linking schizophrenia, increased DA transmission and hippocampal activation, and elevated prediction-error response (Schott et al., 2006; Corlett,
2006; van Os and Kapur, 2009; Schobel et al., 2009).
The most important next step will be to investigate whether
hyperlearning really occurs in humans, which should be possible with standard experimental techniques. Neural correlates of exaggerated memory consolidation are accessible to
fMRI, and behavioral studies could investigate changes in the
speed and intensity of memory consolidation. Further, since
hyperlearning was able to simulate the language in both acute
and compensated stages of schizophrenia, it may be able to
model the transition between the two, which could lead to the
first model of antipsychotic drug action.
More generally, hyperlearning serves to demonstrate the
strengths of the computational modeling approach: First, hyperlearning was not part of the initial set of illness models,
but instead emerged from preliminary experiments. In this

100 150 200

Agent-Slotting Errors Within Context

agent-slotting errors could give rise to the spurious plots
that characterize grandiose or persecutory delusions. Interestingly, in the human subject study, patients with narrative
delusions made significantly more agent-slotting errors than
other groups (p = 0.015, corrected post-hoc comparison,
α = 0.05), which supports this view of how delusions are
formed. Furthermore, agent-slotting errors tend to intrude
into crime stories and often involve the “I”-character (Fig.
4), as is common in schizophrenia.
When hyperlearning is applied to the memory encoder
(HLM), the resulting language is very different: DISCERN
makes few agent-slotting errors, but frequently jumps from
one story to another, creating the impression of disorganized
speech:
I went to Four-Seasons.
I sat at a table.
I ordered wine.
I drank the wine.
I met *Stacy(Kate) at
Four-Seasons.
[jumping to story #16]
Stacy was in her 20s.
Stacy had a ponytail.
Stacy was from New-York.

Here, DISCERN jumps from a story about meeting his
mother Kate to a similar story about his girlfriend Stacy. Such
derailments are driven by content rather than random memory
errors; as in the example above, they tend to involve another
similar story, and are often “foreshadowed” by content intruding from that story. Other lesions (except HLG) often jump
between stories as well, but only in HLM are derailments the
dominant error pattern (Fig. 5), and thus create a plausible
model of disorganized speech in schizophrenia.
Each version of hyperlearning thus simulates one psychotic
symptom but not the other. Since delusions and derailments
are two hallmark symptoms of (respectively) paranoid-type
and disorganized-type schizophrenia, hyperlearing suggests
how these clinical subtypes could emerge from a shared un-

493

way, computational models can suggest novel, alternative hypotheses through unexpected behavior. Second, several predictions, like the existence of a shared illness mechanism for
different clinical subtypes, were equally unexpected, demonstrating how computational models can tie together explanations of seemingly disparate symptoms. Third, hyperlearning
demonstrates the conceptual reach of neural network modeling: It makes explicit, ties together, and converges with theories and research findings from psychology, psychiatry, linguistics, and theoretical and experimental neuroscience. In
this way, connectionist models can make possible progress
that would be difficult to achieve in any single discipline
alone.

Kapur, S., and Mamo, D. (2003). Half a century of antipsychotics
and still a central role for dopamine D2 receptors. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiat, 27(7):1081–90.
Kapur, S., Mizrahi, R., and Li, M. (2005). From dopamine to
salience to psychosis – linking biology, pharmacology and phenomenology of psychosis. Schizophr Res, 79(1):919.
Karlsgodt, K. et al. (2008). Diffusion tensor imaging of the superior longitudinal fasciculus and working memory in recent-onset
schizophrenia. Biol Psychiat, 63:512–8.
Kim, J. et al. (2003). Functional disconnection between the prefrontal and parietal cortices during working memory processing in
schizophrenia: a [15(O)]H2O PET study. Am J Psychiat, 160:919–
23.
Kuperberg, G. R., Deckersbach, T., Holt, D. J., Goff, D., and West,
W. C. (2007). Increased temporal and prefrontal activity in response to semantic associations in schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiat, 64:138–151.
Leeson, V., Simpson, A., McKenna, P., and Laws, K. (2005).
Executive inhibition and semantic association in schizophrenia.
Schizophr Res, 74:61–7.
Loh, M., Rolls, E., and Deco, G. (2007). A dynamical systems
hypothesis of schizophrenia. PLOS Comput Biology, 3:e228.
Maher, B. (1974). Delusional thinking and perceptual disorder. J
Indiv Psychol, 30:98–113.
Marchiori, D. & Warglien, M. (2008). Predicting human interactive
learning by regret-driven neural networks. Science, 319:1111–3.
Miikkulainen, R. (1993). Subsymbolic Natural Language Processing. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Monchi, O., Taylor, T., and Dagher, A. (2000). A neural model of
working memory processes in normal subjects, parkinson’s disease and schizophrenia for fMRI design and predictions. Neural
Networks, 13:953–73.
Pearlson, G. (2000). Neurobiology of schizophrenia. Ann Neurol,
48:556–66.
Pearlson, G., and Marsh, L. (1999). Structural brain imaging in
schizophrenia: a selective review. Biol Psych, 46:627.
Pollack, J. (1990). Recursive distributed representations. Art Intell,
46(1):159–216.
Potkin, S. et al. (2009). Working memory and DLPFC inefficiency
in schizophrenia: the FBIRN study. Schizophr Bull, 35:19–31.
Ruppin, E., Reggia, J., and Horn, D. (1996). Pathogenesis of schizophrenic delusions and hallucinations: A neural model. Schizophr
Bull, 22:105–23.
Sakkalis, V. et al. (2006). Time-significant wavelet coherence for
the evaluation of schizophrenic brain activity using a graph theory
approach. In Proc IEEE Eng in Med and Biol Soc, volume 1,
4265–8.
Schobel, S. et al. (2009). Differential targeting of the CA1 subfield
of the hippocampal formation by schizophrenia and related psychotic disorders. Arch Gen Psychiat, 66(9):938–46.
Schott, B. et al. (2006). The dopaminergic midbrain participates in
human episodic memory formation: evidence from genetic imaging. J Neurosci, 26(5):1407–17.
Spitzer, M. (1997). A cognitive neuroscience view of schizophrenic
thought disorder. Schizophr Bull, 23(1):29–50.
Tallent, K., Weinberger, D., and Goldberg, T. (2001). Associating semantic space abnormalities with formal thought disorder in
schizophrenia: use of triadic comparisons. J Clin & Exp Neuropsychol, 23:285–96.
Tan, H., Callicott, J., and Weinberger, D. (2007). Dysfunctional and
compensatory prefrontal cortical systems, genes and the pathogenesis of schizophrenia. Cereb Cortex, 17 Suppl 1:i171–81.
van Os, J., and Kapur, S. (2009). Schizophrenia. Lancet, 374:635.
Wang, H., and Fan, J. (2007). Human attentional networks: A connectionist model. J Cogn Neurosci, 19:1678–89.
Winder, R., Cortes, R., Reggia, J., and Tagamets, M. (2007). Functional connectivity in fMRI: A modeling approach for estimation
and for relating to local circuits. Neuroimage, 34:1093–107.
Winterer, G., and Weinberger, D. (2004). Genes, dopamine and cortical signal-to-noise ratio in schizophrenia. Tr Neurosci, 27:683.

References
Assaf, M. et al. (2006). Abnormal object recall and anterior cingulate overactivation correlate with formal thought disorder in
schizophrenia. Biol Psychiat, 59:452–9.
Bogerts, B., Steiner, J., and Bernstein, H. (2009). Brain abnormalities in schizophrenia. In Kasper, S., and Papadimitriou, G., editors,
Schizophrenia, chapter 9. NY: Informa Healthcare, second edition.
Bower, G. (1981). Mood and memory. Am Psychologist, 36.
Braver, T., Barch, D., and J, C. (1999). Cognition and control
in schizophrenia: A computational model of dopamine and prefrontal function. Biol Psychiat, 46:312–28.
Carter, J., and Neufeld, R. (2007). Cognitive processing of facial
affect: Connectionist model of deviations in schizophrenia. J Abnormal Psychol, 116:90–305.
Cohen, J., and Servan-Schreiber, D. (1992). Context, cortex and
dopamine: A connectionist approach to behaviour and biology in
schizophrenia. Psychol Review, 99:45–77.
Corlett, P. e. a. (2006). Frontal responses during learning predict vulnerability to the psychotogenic effects of ketamine: linking cognition, brain activity, and psychosis. Arch Gen Psychiat, 63:611–21.
Covington, M. et al. (2005). Schizophr and the structure of language:
The linguist’s view. Schizophr Res, 77:85–98.
Elman, J. (1990). Finding structure in time. Cog Sci, 14:179–211.
Fidelman, P., Miikkulainen, R., and Hoffman, R. E. (2005). A subsymbolic model of complex story understanding. In CogSci’05.
Fox Tree, J. (2000). Coordinating spontaneous talk. In Wheeldon,
L., editor, Aspects of language production, 375–406. New York,
NY: Psychology Press.
Glenthoj, B., Christiansen, L., Rasmussen, H., and Oranje, B.
(2009). Biochemical alterations in schizophrenia. In Kasper, S.,
and Papadimitriou, G., editors, Schizophrenia, chapter 11. New
York: Informa Healthcare, second edition.
Goldberg, T., Aloia, M., Gourovitch, M., Missar, D., Pickar, D., and
Weinberger, D. (1998). Cognitive substrates of thought disorder,
I: the semantic system. Am J Psychiat, 155:1671–6.
Grasemann, U., Miikkulainen, R., and Hoffman, R. (2007). A subsymbolic model of language pathology in schizophrenia. In Proc
CogSci’07. Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
Grossberg, S. (1999). How hallucinations may arise from brain
mechanisms of learning, attention, and volition. J Internat Neuropsychol Soc, 6:579–588.
Grossberg, S., and Pepe, J. (1970). Schizophr: possible dependence
of associational span, bowing and primacy versus recency on spiking threshold. Behav Sci, 15:359–62.
Hoffman, R., Grasemann, U., Gueorguieva, R., Quinlan, D., Lane,
D., and Miikkulainen, R. (2011). Using computational patients to
evaluate illness mechanisms in schizophrenia. Biol Psychiat. In
press.
Hoffman, R., and McGlashan, T. (1997). Synaptic elimination,
neurodevelopment and the mechanism of hallucinated ‘voices’ in
schizophrenia. Am J Psychiat, 154:1683–1689.
Kapur, S. (2003). Psychosis as a state of aberrant salience: a
framework linking biology, phenomenology, and pharmacology in
schizophrenia. Am J Psychiat, 160(1):13–23.

494

