UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Motivational Influences on Attentional Scope

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0gc9d9tj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Nadler, Ruby
Minda, John Paul

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Motivational Influences on Attentional Scope
Ruby Theresa Nadler (rnadler@uwo.ca)
Department of Psychology, The University of Western Ontario
London, ON N6A 5C2

John Paul Minda (jpminda@uwo.ca)
Department of Psychology, The University of Western Ontario
London, ON N6A 5C2
Abstract
The influence of motivation on attentional scope was
investigated using two triad classification tasks. Both tasks
allowed subjects to make holistic matches or analytic
matches. One of two situational regulatory focus states
(promotion, prevention) was induced in subjects before
completion of the triad tasks. It was predicted that a
promotion focus would engender a preference for holistic
matches while a prevention focus would engender a
preference for analytic matches. In the first experiment,
promotion-focused subjects made more holistic matches than
prevention-focused subjects. In the second experiment
chronic regulatory focus was also measured, and subjects who
experienced regulatory fit made more holistic matches than
subjects who experienced regulatory mismatch, and
situational regulatory focus alone did not significantly predict
the proportion of holistic responses. These results suggest that
both regulatory focus and regulatory fit states broaden
attention, and that uncontrolled regulatory fit may be driving
promotion focus effects.
Keywords: Triad classification; motivation; regulatory focus
theory; regulatory fit; perception.

Introduction
Regulatory focus theory (Higgins, 1997) is a framework that
can be used to explore the influence of motivation on
perception and cognition. There are two regulatory focus
systems: promotion and prevention. When someone is
thinking about something they would like to achieve or
attain, they can be said to be in a promotion-focused state,
and are more eager and focused on making gains in the
environment. When someone is thinking about something
they do not want to lose or a state they want to maintain,
they can be said to be in a prevention-focused state, and are
more vigilant and focused on avoiding mistakes that will
result in losses (Higgins & Spiegel, 2004). People are
theorized to have a chronic, unchanging regulatory focus,
and in addition to this regulatory focus can be temporarily
manipulated experimentally by focusing the subject on
promotion or prevention concerns (Higgins, 1997). People
living in individualistic cultures (like Canada and the United
States) tend to have a chronic promotion focus, while people
in more collectivistic cultures tend to have a chronic
prevention focus (Elliot, Chirkov, Kim & Sheldon, 2001;
Lee, Aaker & Gardner, 2000).
Regulatory focus states have been hypothesized to
differentially affect attentional processing. Forster and

Higgins (2005) hypothesized that a promotion focus
broadens attention and supports holistic processing while a
prevention focus narrows attention and supports analytic
processing. Reaction times on a holistic processing task
were positively correlated with a chronic promotion focus
and negatively correlated with a chronic prevention focus,
while reaction times on an analytic processing task were
positively correlated with a chronic prevention focus and
negatively correlated with a chronic promotion focus.
In addition to the idea that one’s chronic regulatory state
(promotion or prevention) can influence one’s processing
abilities, one’s chronic regulatory focus can either match or
mismatch with manipulated situational/experimental
regulatory focus. If one has a chronic promotion focus and
is placed in a condition where a situational promotion focus
is induced, they can be considered to be in a state of
regulatory fit, whereas a person with a chronic promotion
focus placed in a situational prevention condition can be
considered to be in a state of regulatory mismatch. The
converse is also true; thus if one has a chronic prevention
focus and is placed in a situational promotion condition, this
would be a regulatory mismatch, whereas being placed in a
situational prevention condition would create a state of
regulatory fit. When regulatory fit occurs, one is
hypothesized to feel right about what they are doing, and
this increases motivation (Higgins, 2000).
It has recently been hypothesized that another
consequence of regulatory fit is broadened attention
(Memmert, Unkelbach & Ganns, 2010). The authors
measured subjects’ chronic regulatory focus using a selfreport questionnaire and also manipulated situational
regulatory focus states using a maze task. Following this
induction subjects completed a well-known inattentional
blindness task. Subjects who experienced a fit between their
chronic regulatory focus and the situational focus induction
were more likely to notice a gorilla while counting
basketball passes than subjects who experienced a
mismatch. The situational focus manipulation did not
significantly predict the likelihood of noticing the gorilla.
This leads to the question of whether it is a promotion
focus that broadens attention, or regulatory fit. Forster and
Higgins (2005) measured chronic regulatory focus but did
not control for or manipulate regulatory fit, making it
impossible to assess the influence of fit in their study. The
results of Memmert et al. (2010) strongly suggest that it is
regulatory fit, and not a promotion focus, that broadens

1318

attention. We sought to connect these two lines of research
by investigating the influence of both manipulated and
chronic regulatory focus states (and the fit or mismatch
between them) on attentional scope. We chose triad
classification because it provides a simple paradigm where
there are no correct or incorrect responses, and holistic
versus analytic responses are juxtaposed. Such triad
classification tasks have previously been used to measure
attentional scope (see Frederickson & Branigan, 2005;
Gable & Harmon-Jones, 2010).
We used two similar triad classification tasks in two
separate experiments. In Experiment 1 we employed a triad
classification set that allowed subjects to make a holistic
match, an analytic match, or a random match on each trial.
In Experiment 2 we employed a triad classification set that
was designed specifically to measure holistic versus analytic
preferences. Subjects were presented with a target shape and
two comparison shapes on each trial. Subjects could make a
triad classification based either on holistic or analytic
elements of the shapes. In Experiment 2 we also measured
subjects’ chronic regulatory focus, so that the influence of
regulatory fit versus mismatch could also be investigated.
Subjects were put into either a promotion or a prevention
focus before completing one of the triad classification sets.
For Experiments 1 and 2 we predicted that promotionfocused subjects would make more holistic matches
(matches in which overall similarity mattered most) than
prevention-focused subjects, while prevention-focused
subjects would make more analytic matches (matches in
which a single attribute mattered most) than promotionfocused subjects. For Experiment 2 we made the additional
prediction that subjects experiencing regulatory fit (a match
between their chronic and situational regulatory focus)
would make more holistic responses than subjects in
regulatory mismatch conditions.

Experiment 1
This experiment was designed to measure the attentional
scope of promotion and prevention-focused subjects using a
situational regulatory focus manipulation. A control
condition was also employed to allow comparison to the two
regulatory focus groups.

Method
Subjects 120 undergraduate university students from The
University of Western Ontario participated for course credit:
40 in each condition (Promotion, Prevention, Control).
Materials Triads containing holistic, analytic, and random
matches were created by the authors using two stimulus
dimensions of a Gabor patch: orientation of the light/dark
bands and the spatial frequency of the alternating light and
dark bands. Each individual stimulus was defined by one of
7 values of orientation (O1—O7) and on of seven values of
frequency (F1—F7). Values were distributed such that
analytic, holistic, and, random matches were created for
each triad. All triads were created so that two stimuli were
perfectly matched on orientation (analytic match), two

stimuli shared a similar frequency and orientation but were
not perfectly matched (holistic match), and two stimuli did
not share a match on frequency or on orientation (random
match). The complete stimulus set is shown below in Table
1. For instance in Triad 1 A and B create an analytic match
because they share the same orientation value. B and C
create a holistic match because they do not share the same
frequency or orientation, but have very similar dimension
values for both frequency and orientation. A and C create a
random match because they do not share a perfect match on
orientation, and are quite dissimilar in terms of frequency.
Twenty-six triads were created, and the positions of each
stimulus (A, B, and C) were randomized across the triads to
prevent predetermined responding. An example triad is
shown in Figure 1.
Procedure The experiment was presented to subjects as
separate studies on “student life”, and “perception” that
were being run together to save time. No suspicions about
the deception were raised during debriefing.
All subjects completed the triad classification task after
being randomly assigned to one of three conditions
(promotion, prevention, control). In all conditions subjects
were told that they would be presented with a series of triads
on a computer screen after completing a writing task (the
regulatory focus manipulation). A corresponding sheet of
paper was labeled with triad numbers and subjects were
instructed to enter their classification decisions on this
response sheet. Subjects were informed that there were no
incorrect or correct responses, and were instructed to select
the two that “go together best”.
Triads were self-paced; once subjects had circled a
response they were instructed to advance to the following
triad until the triads were completed.
Regulatory Focus Manipulation. In the promotion
condition subjects were asked to write a short essay about
their goals and aspirations on a sheet of paper with the
instructions at the top. Subjects were instructed to spend
between five and seven minutes writing their response. The
prevention condition was identical to the promotion
condition except that subjects were asked to write instead
about their duties and responsibilities. This manipulation
has been designed and used to manipulate situational
regulatory focus (Higgins, Roney, Crowe, & Hymes, 1994).
In the control condition, subjects were asked to write a
short essay describing what they did on a typical day in their
life, for the same amount of time as subjects in the
promotion and prevention conditions. Following completion
of the writing task subjects were instructed to complete the
triad classification task.

1319

Table 1: Experiment 1 Triad Stimuli.
Triad
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26

A
F 10 1
F 2O 1
F 6O 1
F 7O 1
F 1O 2
F 2O 2
F 6O 2
F 7O 2
F 1O 3
F 2O 3
F 6O 3
F 7O 3
F 1O 4
F 2O 4
F 6O 4
F 7O 4
F 1O 5
F 2O 5
F 6O 5
F 7O 5
F 1O 6
F 2O 6
F 6O 6
F 7O 6
F 1O 7
F 2O 7

B
F 50 1
F 6O 1
F 2O 1
F 3O 1
F 5O 2
F 6O 2
F 2O 2
F 3O 2
F 5O 3
F 6O 3
F 2O 3
F 3O 3
F 5O 4
F 6O 4
F 2O 4
F 3O 4
F 5O 5
F 6O 5
F 2O 5
F 3O 5
F 5O 6
F 6O 6
F 2O 6
F 3O 6
F 5O 7
F 6O 7

relative to the promotion condition. For the control
condition we reasoned that if the average person is more
likely to be promotion-focused than prevention-focused that
they would resemble the promotion condition more than the
prevention condition. To test our predictions we computed
the proportion of holistic, analytic, and random triad
responses for each subject across the three conditions.

C
F 60 2
F 7O 2
F 1O 2
F 2O 2
F 6O 3
F 7O 3
F 1O 1
F 2O 1
F 6O 4
F 7O 4
F 1O 3
F 2O 3
F 6O 5
F 7O 5
F 1O 3
F 2O 3
F 6O 6
F 7O 7
F 1O 4
F 2O 4
F 6O 7
F 7O 7
F 1O 5
F 2O 5
F 6O 6
F 7O 6

Results
The proportion of each response type (holistic, analytic,
random) was calculated for each subject by counting the
number of selections of each response type and dividing
each number by the total number of triads presented in the
task (26). These proportions were averaged within each
condition to create three proportions for each condition. The
mean proportions of each response type are presented in
Table 2.
A mixed analysis of variance was conducted to see if
there were any group differences, with condition
(promotion, prevention, control) as a between-subjects
variable and response type (holistic, analytic, random), as a
within-subjects variable. A significant interaction between
condition and response type was found, F (2, 117) = 4.60, p
< .05, η2 = .073. A multiple analysis of variance was
conducted to further explore the significant interaction
between condition and response type. The proportion of
holistic responding differed significantly by group, F
(2,117) = 3.93, p < .05, η2 = .063. The proportion of analytic
responding approached significance, F (2,117) = 2.96, p <
.06, η2 = .048, and the proportion of random responding did
not reach significance, F (2,117) = 2.44, p < .09, η2 = .040.
Tukey’s Honestly Significant Difference tests showed that
the promotion condition made significantly more holistic
responses than the prevention condition, p < .05. No other
differences reached significance (p > .05).

Discussion

Figure 1: Triad 1 from Experiment 1. A and B create a
single-dimensional, analytic match. B and C create a holistic
match. A and C create a random match.
We predicted that subjects in the promotion condition
would make a greater number of holistic matches relative to
the prevention condition and that subjects in the prevention
condition would make a greater number of analytic matches

We wanted to investigate whether situational regulatory
focus would influence attentional scope, as measured by
response preferences on a triad classification task. We
predicted that promotion-focused subjects would make more
holistic matches than prevention-focused subjects, while
prevention-focused subjects would make more analytic
matches than promotion-focused subjects. Our predictions
were partly confirmed: promotion-focused subjects made a
greater proportion of holistic matches compared to
prevention-focused subjects. However prevention-focused
subjects did not make significantly more analytic matches
than promotion-focused subjects.
We found that control condition subjects performed very
similarly to subjects in the promotion condition. This most
likely reflects the fact that the majority of people in
individualistic cultures have a chronic promotion focus
(Elliot, Chirkov, Kim & Sheldon, 2001; Lee, Aaker &
Gardner, 2000). However because we did not measure
subjects’ chronic regulatory focus we cannot go beyond
speculation based on our results.

1320

Table 2. Proportion of response types by condition.
Standard deviations for these averages are shown in
parentheses.
Promotion
Prevention
Control

Holistic
0.67 (0.30)
0.49 (0.31)
0.65 (0.33)

Analytic
0.31 (0.29)
0.46 (0.31)
0.33 (0.31)

Random
0.02 (0.07)
0.05 (0.09)
0.01 (0.03)

Our results are consistent with prior research that shows
that a chronic promotion focus broadens attention (Forster
& Higgins, 2005). However the current research used a
novel paradigm (triad classification) and manipulated
situational regulatory focus instead of measuring chronic
regulatory focus. Because we did not measure subjects’
chronic regulatory focus we cannot compare our results with
those of Memmert et al. (2010), although if the majority of
our subjects had a chronic promotion focus it is likely that
they experienced a state of regulatory fit when they were in
the situational promotion condition and a state of regulatory
mismatch when they were in the situational prevention
condition, which would mirror their results.
Experiment 1 demonstrated that a promotion focus
broadens attention. To test the hypothesis that regulatory fit
broadens attention, we used the same regulatory focus
manipulation, a triad classification set that has been
previously validated for measuring attentional scope, and
added a measure of chronic regulatory focus in Experiment
2.

Experiment 2
This experiment was designed to replicate Experiment 1
using an established triad classification task, as well as
investigate whether regulatory fit broadens attentional scope
compared to regulatory mismatch.
As in Experiment 1, we predicted that subjects in the
Promotion condition would make a greater number of
holistic matches relative to the Prevention condition and that
subjects in the Prevention condition would make a greater
number of analytic matches relative to the Promotion
condition. Additionally we predicted that if regulatory fit
broadens attention, then subjects experiencing a fit between
their randomly assigned situational regulatory focus and
their measured chronic regulatory focus would make more
holistic responses than subjects who experienced a
mismatch between their chronic and situational focus.

shape on each trial shared holistic elements with the target
while the other comparison shape shared analytic elements
with the target. For instance the target shape could be a
square made of squares, one comparison shape could be a
square composed of smaller triangles (holistic match, see
bottom left of Figure 2) and the other comparison shape
could be a triangle composed of squares (analytic match, see
bottom right of Figure 2). The triad set contained 12 triads
of varying compositions and shapes, and these triad sets
were also presented with the comparison shapes reversed to
prevent subjects from following a predetermined response
pattern making 24 triads in total. However while 24 triads
were presented to subjects, a subset of 8 triads that have
been previously found to be most sensitive to attentional
scope were included in our analyses (Fredickson &
Branigan, 2005). An example triad is shown in Figure 2.
Chronic focus measure. The Regulatory Focus
Questionnaire (Lockwood, Jordan & Kunda, 2002) was used
to measure chronic regulatory focus. This measure has
previously been used to study regulatory fit effects (Keller
& Bless, 2006; Memmert, Unkelbach & Ganns, 2010). In
this measure subjects assign a numeric value alongside 18
questions concerned with promotion and prevention goals.
Half of the questions are used to compute a promotion
subscale and the other half are used to compute a prevention
scale. A measure of chronic ‘regulatory strength’ can be
computed by subtracting the promotion subscale total from
the prevention subscale total.
Regulatory focus manipulation. The same regulatory
focus manipulation was used as in Experiment 1.
Procedure The same deception as in Experiment 1 was
used. All subjects completed the triad classification task
after being randomly assigned to one of two situational
regulatory focus conditions (promotion, prevention) and
completing a measure of their chronic regulatory focus. In
both conditions subjects were told that they would be
presented with a series of triads on a computer screen.
Subjects were informed that there were no incorrect or
correct responses, and were instructed to select the
comparison shape (A or B) that looked most like the target
shape using key presses (two keys were labeled A and B).
Triads were self-paced; once students made a classification
response via key press they were automatically advanced to
the following trial until all of the trials were completed.
Triads were presented in a randomized order.

Method
Subjects Ninety adult undergraduate university students
from The University of Western Ontario participated for
course credit or for monetary compensation: 44 in the
Promotion condition, and 46 in the Prevention condition.
Materials Triad set. A set of triads originally created by
Kimchi and Palmer (1983) were used. On each trial subjects
are shown a target shape with two comparison shapes below
it. Subjects were asked which of the two comparison shapes
looked most similar to the target shape. One comparison

1321

and the interaction between situational regulatory focus
condition and chronic regulatory strength as predictor
variables. The results of this analysis are shown in Table 3.
The analysis of variance for the regression was significant,
F (3,89) = 3.097, p < .05, meaning the model significantly
predicted the data. Main effects of chronic regulatory focus
strength and situational regulatory focus did not reach
significance. However the interaction between chronic
regulatory strength and situational regulatory focus was
significant, and the regression weight for the term was
positive, indicating that the proportion of holistic responses
was greater when the situational regulatory focus
manipulation matched the chronic regulatory focus strength.
In other words, subjects made more holistic matches when
regulatory fit was present. Figure 3 shows a scatterplot of
the subject data as well as the linear model fits.

Figure 2: Example triad stimulus used in Experiment 2.
The upper shape is the target shape. Selecting A in this case
would be considered a holistic match while selecting B
would be an analytic match.

Discussion

Table 3. Regression analysis results. CRS=chronic
regulatory strength, SF=situational regulatory focus. The
criterion is the proportion of holistic matches on the triad
task, ranging from 0 to 1. CRS was centred before entering
the analysis to control for effects of multicollinearity. B =
regression coefficient, unstandardized and standardized,
respectively.
Term
CRS
SF
CRSxSF

B
.002
.033
.006

SE B
.002
.002
.029

B
.098
.118
.273

t
.948
1.149
2.662

p
.346
.254
.009

Results
The proportion of holistic and analytic responses was
calculated for each subject by counting the number of each
response type and dividing each number by the total number
of triads included in the analysis (8). These proportions
were averaged within each condition.
An analysis of variance was conducted to see if subjects
assigned to the situational promotion condition made more
holistic matches (M = .56, sd = .27) than subjects assigned
to the situational prevention condition (M = .45, sd = .29),
but the analysis did not reach significance, F (1,88) = 3.16,
p < .08.
To explore whether subjects made more holistic responses
when they experienced a match between their chronic focus
and their situational focus (i.e. regulatory fit) than subjects
who did not experience a match between their chronic and
situational focus, a measure of regulatory focus strength was
computed by subtracting the prevention scale scores from
the promotion scale scores for each subject. Higher values
indicate a stronger promotion focus. The majority of our
subjects exhibited a chronic promotion focus (M = .84),
meaning the promotion scale scores were greater than the
prevention scale scores.
We conducted a multiple regression with the proportion
of holistic matches used as the criterion variable and
situational regulatory focus condition (promotion was coded
as 1, prevention as -1), chronic regulatory focus strength,

We were interested in the effects of regulatory focus and
regulatory fit on attentional scope. Unlike Experiment 1, we
did not find that the experimental regulatory focus
manipulation significantly affected the proportion of holistic
triad responses. However when we examined the fit between
chronic regulatory focus and the situational regulatory focus
manipulation, we found that fit significantly predicted the
proportion of holistic matches. This supports the hypothesis
that regulatory fit broadens attentional scope. Past research
suggests that regulatory fit enhances cognitive flexibility
(Grimm, Markman, Maddox, & Baldwin, 2008; Maddox,
Baldwin, & Markman, 2006; Markman, Maddox, Worthy,
& Baldwin, 2007). Memmert et al. (2010) suggest that the
“feeling right” associated with regulatory fit also broadens
attention, and our results are consistent with this hypothesis,
and extend this research with a previously unused paradigm
(triad classification).
An interesting question to consider is whether our
Experiment 1 results are also the consequence of regulatory
fit and regulatory mismatch, instead of situational regulatory
focus. Although we did not measure Experiment 1 subjects’
chronic regulatory focus, it seems likely that the majority of
subjects would have responded similarly to our Experiment
2 subjects, with the majority exhibiting a chronic promotion
focus. If the majority of subjects placed randomly into a
situational promotion focus have a chronic promotion focus,
then they would experience regulatory fit and broadened
attention, whereas if they were placed into a situational
prevention focus condition, they would experience
regulatory mismatch and narrowed attention.

1322

Figure 3: Scatterplot of subject data by situational
regulatory focus condition (promotion or prevention). Lines
show linear model fits.

Conclusions
Experiment 1 demonstrates that a situational promotion
focus broadens attention relative to a situational prevention
focus. Experiment 2 demonstrates that when people
experience a match between their chronic regulatory focus
and situational regulatory focus their attention is wider than
when they experience a mismatch. Experiment 2 also
suggests that past research that manipulated regulatory focus
but did not measure chronic regulatory focus, including our
own Experiment 1, may be confounding a promotion focus
with regulatory fit.
Future research should see whether similar regulatory fit
effects are present in populations where the average person
has a chronic prevention focus instead of a chronic
promotion focus, such that a situational prevention focus
manipulation would broaden attention.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by a scholarship from the
Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of
Canada to the first author. Correspondence should be
addressed to Ruby Nadler by email at rnadler@uwo.ca.

References
Elliot, A. J., Chirkov, V. I., Kim, Y., & Sheldon, K. M.
(2001). A cross-cultural analysis of avoidance (relative to
approach) personal goals. Psychological Science, 12(6),
505-510.
Förster, J., & Higgins, E. T. (2005). How global versus local
perception fits regulatory focus. Psychological Science,
16(8), 631-636.
Fredrickson, B. L., & Branigan, C. (2005). Positive
emotions broaden the scope of attention and thoughtaction repertoires. Cognition and Emotion, 19(3), 313332.

Gable, P., & Harmon-Jones, E. (2010). The blues broaden,
but the nasty narrows: Attentional consequences of
negative affects low and high in motivational intensity.
Psychological Science, 21, 211-215.
Grimm, L., Markman, A., Todd Maddox, W., & Baldwin,
G. (2008). Differential effects of regulatory fit on
category learning. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 44, 920–927.
Higgins, E. T. (1997). Beyond pleasure and pain. American
Psychologist, 52, 1280-1300.
Higgins, E. T. (2000). Making a good decision: Value from
fit. American Psychologist, 55, 1217-1230.
Higgins, E. T., Roney, C. J. R., Crowe, E., & Hymes, C.
(1994). Ideal versus ought predilections for approach and
avoidance distinct self-regulatory systems. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 66, 276-286.
Higgins, E. T., & Spiegel, S. (2004). Promotion and
prevention strategies for self-regulation: A motivated
cognition perspective. In R. F. Baumeister, & K. D. Vohs
(Eds.), Handbook of self-regulation: Research, theory,
and applications. (pp. 171-187). New York, NY, US:
Guilford Press.
Keller, J., & Bless, H. (2006). Regulatory fit and cognitive
performance: The interactive effect of chronic and
situationally induced self-regulatory mechanisms on test
performance. European Journal of Social Psychology, 36,
393-405.
Kimchi, R., & Palmer, S. E. (1982). Form and texture in
hierarchically
constructed
patterns.
Journal
of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 8, 521-535.
Lockwood, P., Jordan, C. H., & Kunda, Z. (2002).
Motivation by positive or negative role models:
Regulatory focus determines who will best inspire us.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 854864.
Maddox, W., Baldwin, G., & Markman, A. (2006). A test of
the regulatory fit hypothesis in perceptual classification
learning. Memory & Cognition, 34, 1377-1397.
Markman, A., Maddox, W., & Baldwin, G. (2007). Using
regulatory focus to explore implicit and explicit
processing in concept learning. Journal of Consciousness
Studies, 14, 132–155.
Memmert, D., Unkelbach, C., & Ganns, S. (2010). The
impact of regulatory fit on performance in an inattentional
blindness paradigm. Journal of General Psychology, 137,
129-139.

1323

