UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Motivation-biased design

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8qx8b4h2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Author
Shelley, Cameron

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Motivation-biased design
Cameron Shelley (cam_shelley@yahoo.ca)
Centre for Society, Technology, and Values, 200 University Ave. W.
Waterloo, ON, N2L 3G1 Canada

Abstract
Motivation-biased design concerns how positive attitudes of
designers can inhibit critical evaluation of their designs.
Good intentions, admiration for certain design elements, or
even concern to make a good impression on others can inhibit
designers from being sufficiently critical of their designs.
The result may be designs that are not as good as they would
be otherwise. This article presents examples of motivationbiased design, explores cognitive mechanisms that might
explain it, and considers how knowledge of the phenomenon
might be useful in improving design practice.
Keywords: design; motivation-biased design, bounded
rationality; good intentions; just a tool; social cognition;
moral capital; positive attitudes; errors.

Best laid plans
The City of Los Angeles experiences chronic water
shortages, making water conservation increasingly pressing.
In the summer of 2009, the City instituted measures
designed to conserve water usage by citizens. Included in
the measures were items such as lawn-watering restrictions:
Citizens in a given area were allowed to water their lawns,
for example, only on Mondays or Thursdays. The measure
proved to be highly successful: City officials claimed that
water usage by citizens in 2009 was the lowest in 31 years
(Zahniser and Garrison, 2009).
Curiously, the summer of 2009 also saw a record number
of water main leaks and bursts. A “blue ribbon” panel of
scientists was convened in order to investigate the plague of
breakages. The panel concluded that the water conservation
measures themselves were partly to blame. On days when
lawn-watering was allowed, water pressure dropped
considerably as Angelenos took the opportunity to water the
grass. On days when lawn-watering was not allowed, water
pressure rose considerably. In the opinion of the expert
panel, the unaccustomed swings in water pressure were too
much for many of the City’s aging pipes. They accelerated
the effects of corrosion and metal fatigue, resulting in the
record number of breakages (Zahniser and Garrison, 2009).

Good intentions
How did the City engineers and counselors not anticipate
this serious problem with their design for water
conservation? The implications of the measure for pressure
in the pipes, and the subsequent effect on the pipes
themselves, seem straightforward enough. Also, these
effects are clearly quite relevant for the effectiveness of the
plan. Yet, the problem was not anticipated by its designers.

Undoubtedly, the full explanation is a complicated one.
Other cities, such as Long Beach, had instituted similar
plans, without suffering similar consequences. In addition,
however, the attitudes of the planners themselves may well
have been a contributing factor. In fact, Councilman Paul
Koretz summarized this issue succinctly (Zahniser and
Garrison, 2010):
‘“It was such a well-intentioned program," he said. "But I
think intuitively, once somebody raised the idea, it made
perfect sense; you have brittle pipes and you have
dramatically increasing and decreasing water pressure.”’
Koretz identifies the good intentions as a contributory
factor. Briefly put, the fact that the engineers and council
members had a good feeling about the goal of the design
helped to make them less critical in evaluating it. Water
conservation is a good thing, and is a pressing priority for a
huge city with low water supplies. Unfortunately, if Koretz
is correct, this feeling itself helped to prevent the council
members and the City engineers from identifying problems
that were, certainly in retrospect, reasonably evident.

Motivation-biased design
The potential for good intentions to suppress critical
appraisal of designs is an instance of what I will call
motivation-biased design. Motivation-biased design occurs
when a designer’s motivations tend to inhibit rational
assessment of the design at issue. In the case of the Los
Angeles water-conservation plan, the positive attitude that
the designers held towards the goal of the plan, namely
water conservation, inhibited their assessment of its relevant
consequences.
The purpose of this article is to provide a broad
characterization of motivation-biased design and to sketch
out an explanation for it. This sketch will then set the scene
for further investigation.
Naturally, all design is motivated. That is, the act of
designing usually includes a set of goals that the designer
attempts to satisfy. Those goals constitute the designer’s
motivation. However, motivations can also arise in other
ways. The example above suggests that some of the effects
of motivations arise not because of their status as goals per
se but because of an attitude of the designer towards those
goals. A positive attitude towards a goal helps to motivate
the designer to achieve it but may also inhibit the designer
from evaluating promising candidates as carefully as
possible.
Social scientists have long recognized a similar
phenomenon involving the effects of motivations on
inference. Kunda (1987) explored the nature of motivated

2956

inference, that is, biasing effects that a person’s goals can
have on the conclusions that they draw. Basically, people
are motivated to believe in things that they want to believe
in, or that it is in their interest to believe in. People who
score highly in an intelligence test, for example, are more
likely to believe in the aptness of the test than are people
who score less highly. This bias occurs not because people
merely believe what they want to believe but because their
goals bias how they gather and evaluate the relevant
evidence. They may pay more attention to evidence that
supports their views, or they may seek out evidence via a
method that is biased towards producing confirmatory
evidence. The result is that people’s motivations can
undermine the rationality of their beliefs.
Motivation-biased design points to a similar phenomenon.
In both cases, the attitudes of designers involved skew their
evaluation of some cognitive construct. In motivated
inference, the construct is a belief. In motivation-biased
design, the construct is a design.

Bounded rationality
One important characteristic of motivation-biased design is
that it has the potential to lead to sub-optimal design results.
In other words, motivation-biased design can be considered
irrational. To see how, the concept can be compared with
Simon’s (1981) general treatment of rational design and
design under bounded rationality.
As Simon characterized it, the general form of a design
problem consists of a set of means, laws, and ends. The
means comprise the available design components, the laws
comprise the unalterable constraints on how the means may
operate, and the ends comprise the set of goals the design is
to achieve. The problem faced by the designer is to
configure the means, none of which solves the problem on
its own, so that the configuration does solve the problem.
This characterization applies to any kind of design problem,
from the design of an item of material technology, to the
design of a medical treatment, a foreign policy, etc.
On this view, a design is rational insofar as it satisfies the
goals and laws in an optimal way. Simon recognized that
this model of design did not apply to many real-world
instances of design. This issue arises because the model
assumes an idealized designer with (1) a perfect knowledge
of the design situation, (2) an indefinitely large
computational capacity to foresee all the consequences of
each design alternative, and (3) an objectively true
representation of the world in which the design is to operate.
To acknowledge these limitations, Simon described the
concept of bounded rationality. A design is boundedly
rational insofar as it satisfies the goals and laws in an
optimal way, within the limitations of the designer. These
limitations include (1) an imperfect knowledge of the design
situation, (2) a limited computational capacity to foresee all
the consequences of each design alternative, and (3)
subjective representations of the design and the world in
which the design is to operate.
In short, Simon
acknowledged that any real-world designer would labor

under certain cognitive limitations but that designs could
still be considered rational once these limitations were taken
into account.

Design with attitude
Much of the response to Simon’s characterization of
rationality and design has focused on methods that people
may employ to deal with their limitations as cognitive
agents. For example, Gigerenzer & Todd (1999) discuss
heuristic methods that people adopt to optimize their plans
and inferences.
Until recently, research in this area tended to overlook the
importance of attitudes as opposed to methods. Perhaps this
oversight is a result of the traditional view of attitudes as
inherently irrational. However, attitudes constitute an
important part of human problem-solving cognition
(Thagard 2006) and, perhaps, the problem-solving apparatus
of any limited cognitive agent. Thus, attitudes should be
expected to play an important role in design thinking,
whether to the betterment or to the detriment of the result.
Before sketching a model of motivation-biased design, I
will provide further examples that illustrate additional
aspects of the phenomenon.

Just a tool
The water-conservation example illustrates how the attitude
of a designer towards their design goals can influence the
outcome of the design process. However, designers may
have attitudes towards other components of the design
situation that can generate similar results. They may, for
example, have influential attitudes towards the means
available.
Corrigan (2008) discusses the plans of the Irish
government to introduce e-voting in that country’s national
elections. There are many reasons to support such a plan.
Other nations have used e-voting technology with some
degree of success. Networked computers are very good at
acquiring and manipulating all kinds of data, so adding
votes from a distributed network of polls seems like a
straightforward application of this technology.
In addition to these sound reasons, there is the simple sex
appeal of computerized voting. It is futuristic. Thus,
anyone who wants to see progress in the pursuit of
democracy should consider instituting e-voting as an
integral part of that progress. Corrigan (2008, p. 147) notes
that the Irish Prime Minister of the time, Bertie Ahern,
seemed to love the idea of e-voting in Ireland:
‘“We are not going to go back to pushing pieces of
paper around the place” and [he] accused critics of
wanting “to keep old ways, old things, the old nonsensical
past”.’
Ahern continued to hold this attitude in the face of
obvious problems with the scheme.
By 2004, the
government had spent €60 million but still felt unable to go
ahead with it. In 2006, the Commission on Electronic
Voting presented a report saying it could not recommend the
system. The system was deemed less reliable, less secure,

2957

and more confusing than the existing paper-and-pencil
system. Even so, Ahern and his government pressed ahead,
stating that Ireland would be a laughing stock if it did not
get rid of its old-fashioned system with “our stupid old
pencils” (Seaver, 2009). The scheme was finally abandoned
in 2009.
The persistence of the government in the face of obvious
and serious problems has many sources. One of those
sources appears to be motivation-biased design. In this
case, the Irish Prime Minister had a highly positive attitude
towards electronic voting machines. They were attractive
and futuristic, in contrast to the paper-and-pencil system that
Ireland inherited from the 19th-Century. Because of this
attitude, Ahern seemed to be convinced that the machines
must be a part of any electoral reform. It took many years
and millions of dollars in fruitless outlay before the
difficulties of this position were properly acknowledged.
Corrigan notes that this sort of problem is not unusual,
especially with respect to computerization. Many designers
view computers very positively, and thus seek to incorporate
them into their designs, whether it would otherwise seem
appropriate or not. Corrigan does not have a negative view
of computers but argues, instead, that they should be treated
as “just a tool.” In other words, designers should not let
their admiring attitude towards computers influence them to
incorporate computers into their designs where that would
not otherwise be rational.

Social attitudes
Construction of the main (or “high”) Aswan Dam in Egypt
commenced in 1960 and took ten years to complete. There
were many reasons for its construction at this time. The
most obvious reason was to control the flooding of the Nile.
The “low” Aswan dam, built in 1902 by the British, had
nearly been overtopped by a flood in 1946. A larger dam,
located downstream, would achieve a greater degree of
control over the flow of the Nile through Egypt. A second
reason was to cement an incipient relationship between
Egypt and the USSR. The United Sates and the USSR were
competing for influence in the Middle East in that era,
providing Egyptian leadership with an opportunity to elicit
assistance with the project. The USSR provided a large loan
on favorable terms. The third reason was that a major
construction project would demonstrate the vitality of the
newly independent nation of Egypt, which had overthrown
the pro-British king Farouk I in 1952. The Chinese
government under Mao had constructed the Banqiao
Reservoir Dam on the Ru river in 1951, with Soviet
assistance. Likewise, the construction of a major dam on
the Nile would signify that the Egyptian republic was a fully
modern nation (McCully, 2001).
It is the third reason that is relevant here. In effect, the
Egyptians decided to construct the dam, in part, because of
the attitudes of other nations towards huge public projects of
the type. The Egyptian policy makers reckoned that other
nations saw such projects as a symbol of vitality and
modernity. Wanting to associate that attitude abroad with

respect to the Egyptian republic further motivated planners
in their desire to build the dam.
The case is similar in many respects to the Irish
government’s plan to adopt e-voting discussed above.
However, an additional element comes to the fore in this
case. The Egyptian planners were influenced not merely by
their own attitudes towards the dam but also by the attitudes
of others towards dams. Put another way, one of the
purposes of the dam was to impress citizens of Egypt and
politicians abroad. The fact that those people saw dams as
more than “just a tool” fostered an admiring attitude in the
planners of the dam themselves.
As with the case of e-voting in Ireland, the result was an
uncritical approach to the design of the dam itself. Wahhid
Moufaddal, a remote-sensing scientist at the National
Institute of Oceanography & Fisheries in Alexandria, notes
that the attitude of planners towards the dam compromised
their sense of caution regarding it (Bohannon, 2010):
‘“There was no discussion” about the merits of such a
potent source of pride for the newly independent nation,
says Moufaddal. “It was a giant experiment,” yet, he
notes, there was no plan for collecting environmental
data.
In fact, the Dam has had a number of significant
detrimental effects that, because of the lack of oversight,
were not detected until fairly recently. These include (1)
subsidence of the Nile Delta due to lack of incoming
sediment from Nile floods, (2) diversion of the entire river
flow before reaching the Mediterranean, leaving no flow to
wash pesticides and other toxic chemicals away from the
Delta, and (3) salt water leaching into the Delta’s water
table from the Mediterranean, threatening the supply of
fresh water in the Delta.
The decision to build the Dam and, moreover, not to
monitor the consequences, displays the symptoms of
motivation-biased design. In this case, the influence of the
attitudes of others towards dams, as the planners understood
them, inhibited the planners from evaluating their design
critically enough.
The result is that the Egyptian
government is facing the prospect of another massive public
works project in order to mitigate the problems generated by
the Dam.

The design situation
The examples above suggest that designing can indeed be
significantly affected by the attitudes of the designer(s).
Moreover, these examples suggest that the role and
influence of attitudes can be systematically accounted for.
Motivation-biased design may occur in a design situation
containing the following elements:
1. A set of means and ends;
2. A design to meet the ends using the means;
3. A set of designers’ attitudes towards (1); and
4. A set of designer’s attitudes and beliefs about the
attitudes of others towards (1).
The interactions among these elements in a design
situation is captured in Figure 1Error! Reference source

2958

Design
Means

Designer

Ends

Observer

not found.. In the figure, the solid arrows represent
Figure 1: Attitudes in motivation-biased
design.
attitudes that the participants have towards other elements of
the design situation. The dashed arrow represents the
uncritical attitude that the designer has towards the design as
a result of the other attitudes and elements in play. It is this
uncritical attitude that can make motivation-biased design
problematic.

the social situation at hand. When the member discusses the
matter with friends, who are also probably members of the
party, they will also engage in a one-sided process of
evidence collection that further supports the conclusion.
A similar process may occur in cases of motivation-biased
design. In these cases, designers have a positive attitude
towards some means or end involved. This attitude may
influence how evidence for the appropriateness of the item
is characterized. Instead of asking themselves, as it were,
“What makes this design better than the alternatives?” they
ask themselves, “What makes this design a good one?” This
way of framing the project of design evaluation biases the
evaluation process by leaving relevant but negative evidence
out of consideration. As a result, an uncritical evaluation is
reached.
This explanation does seem to capture important aspects
of motivation-biased design. In the water-conservation
plan, for example, the laudability of the goal of water
conservation did seem to direct attention towards how the
plan could meet the goal and also away from examination of
the plan’s effects on the water system itself. So, it seems
plausible to say that the characterization of relevant
evidence was biased in this case.
It also comports well with the social causes that can apply
to motivation-biased design. The Aswan Dam example
illustrates that designers may be led to consult others who
are themselves biased in the matter at hand. The result is,
again, a one-sided characterization of what counts as
relevant evidence for design evaluation.

Positive illusions

Explaining motivation-biased design
Given the existence of motivation-biased design, we come
to the matter of how it occurs. There are at least four
perspectives to help explain the phenomenon, based on (1)
explanations of motivated inference, (2) positive illusions,
(3) explanations of conflicts of interest, and (4) explanations
based on the concept of moral capital. Each explanation is
considered in this section.

Motivated inference
Motivated inference concerns the undue influence that
people’s goals can have on the conclusions that people draw
(Kunda 1987). For example, a member of one political
party might uncritically accept the conclusion that a
politician of another party is a liar, even where this
conclusion is not justified by the full body of evidence. The
personal goal in this case is the party-member’s opposition
to the politician. Having this goal influences the way that
people identify the evidence that is relevant: Instead of
asking themselves, as it were, “What evidence makes the
liar hypothesis better than other hypotheses?” they ask
themselves, “What evidence justifies the liar hypothesis?”
Some evidence can doubtless be found to support the liar
hypothesis, so the party member weighs the evidence and
reaches a biased conclusion.
This bias in the
characterization of relevant evidence can be amplified by

However, there is an issue in play in these examples that
is not present in mechanisms posited to explain motivated
inference. As Corrigan points out, designers sometimes
have an exaggerated sense of the command they have over
the situation in which the design is to operate. In other
words, designers may believe that they are in a better
position to determine the outcome of their decisions than
they truly are in.
If so, then the problem of positive illusions may be at
work in motivation-biased design. In particular, Langer
(1982) notes that people may labor under the illusion of
control, that is, the exaggerated impression that they control
the outcome of some operation, especially if the operation
requires a degree of skill. Designing a dam or an e-voting
system requires a degree of skill, so it is plausible to think
that illusions of control may come into play.
An illusion of control could contribute to motivationbiased design in the following manner: Instead of asking
himself, as it were, “What things could go wrong with this
design?” the designer asks himself, “What things can I
prevent from going wrong?”
The two questions
characterize the relevant data in different ways. Any kinds
of problems might be relevant to the first question.
However, only those problems that the designer is familiar
with and used to controlling are relevant to the second
question. The second question focuses designers’ attention

2959

on design elements that they are familiar with, and problems
that they are used to dealing with. Confusing the second
question with the first one could result in an uncritical
evaluation of a design.

Affective afflictions
Thagard (2007) provides a discussion of conflict of interest
that is relevant here. He discusses the case of a city official
who, after a few rounds of wining and dining by a private
company, endorsed a contract on ruinous terms between the
company and the city. The official seemed to display no
awareness that the good treatment he received from the
company might have compromised his ability to evaluate
their proposals. Thagard seeks to address the question,
“How could someone in that situation be so blind?”
Thagard frames the issue in terms of affective afflictions,
that is, the systematic distortion of decisions by emotional
attachments. These distortions result from facts about
human neuroanatomy that are outside the scope of this
article. However, he raises two points that are relevant here.
First, he points out that conflicts of interest involve not
only the past situation but anticipations of the future (2007,
p. 373). Because of their mutual past, the city official may
have made his uncritical decision because he anticipated
further, pleasant occasions with company executives. Also,
he may have feared to disappoint his new friends there by
examining their proposed contract too thoroughly.
Second, Thagard explains why people tend to be unaware
that this sort of thing is going on with their cognitive
processes. In rough terms, the emotional calculations going
on in these situations occur not in brain areas associated
with conscious thinking, e.g., the prefrontal cortex, but in
areas associated with unconscious, affective thinking, e.g.,
the nucleus accumbens (2007, p. 374). Although people
may be aware of their positive or negative feelings about a
given thing, they may well not be aware of the role that
those feelings play in determining the relevant of data for
their cogitations.
Both points are important for explaining motivationbiased design. When designers evaluate their designs, they
are thinking about the future. They may imagine the praise
that others will bestow on them for a particular design or
design element. They may also imagine the scorn or
disappointment others will feel for their omission of some
element or goal. This issue seems to be particularly relevant
for the Aswan Dam example, in which designers were
motivated, in part, to display their competence before their
peers abroad, and to show off the modernity of their nation
before Egyptians and foreigners. The dam was not merely a
material object but a performance before an audience whose
response the designers were concerned to manipulate as
much as the waters of the Nile.

Moral capital
Another important aspect of motivation-biased design
concerns the attitude of the designer towards herself. In the
water-conservation example, for instance, it seems plausible

that having good intentions about water conservation also
implies having a positive attitude towards oneself. That is,
having good intentions implies that one is a good person.
This sort of positive self-image may also contribute to the
inhibition of critical reflection evident in motivation-biased
design.
This aspect of motivation-biased design may be captured
by the concept of moral capital. Mazar and Zhong (2010)
describe moral capital as a person’s sense of their own
moral credentials. A person who feels that they have acted
in a morally upright manner will feel that they have
acquired strong moral credentials. Oddly, this feeling can
license a drop in performance of moral behavior.
Mazar and Zhong found that people who bought “green”
or environmentally friendly products were more likely than
others who bought similar, non-green products to
subsequently lie or steal. It is as if, having acquired a
quantity of moral capital through patently good actions,
these people then spent the capital on themselves through
morally dubious actions. The behavior is reminiscent of the
medieval practice of indulgences, an indulgence being a
pardon from a sin or a duty to the Church granted in
exchange for a cash payment. The Church reckoned that it
had a store of excess merit from which it could make up the
shortfall created by the indulgence. Mazar and Zhong
observed that people who had behaved in a moral manner
conspicuous to themselves then acted as through they had
acquired excess moral capital that they could then spend on
themselves through indulging in a dubious act.
A designer with a positive attitude, conspicuous to
themselves, towards some design element they have
incorporated into a design could fall prey to the same effect.
Engineers examining a water-conservation measure, for
example, might feel that this good deed gave them a fund of
moral capital that they could then redeem by saving
themselves some of the trouble of examining the scheme
very thoroughly.
One advantage of this perspective is that it takes into
account the temporal unfolding of design evaluation. That
is, designers may begin the design process possessed of a
positive attitude towards some design element. As the
design comes together and the admired element is included,
the designer acquires moral capital. In later phases of
design, where evaluation becomes more important than
configuration, the moral capital is available to be expended
and licenses a more cursory effort.
The previous
perspectives examined, such as motivated inference, tend to
overlook the temporal element of design reasoning, which
this perspective helps to capture.

Design fixation
The phenomenon of motivation-biased design may help to
explain other aspects of design cognition. For example,
Jannson and Smith (1991) demonstrated design fixation, that
is, the tendency of designers to over-commit to design
elements or principles that they had recently been reminded

2960

of, even where the result is inappropriate or sub-optimal.
One reason why designers might display fixation is that they
have a positive attitude towards the element or principle in
question. Ahern could be said to have fixated on the use of
computers in Ireland’s new electoral system, for example,
because he thought so highly of them and how they would
reflect well on the technological progressiveness of the Irish
government.

Conclusions and future work
Motivation-biased design describes how the attitudes of
designers towards elements of the design situation affect
their evaluation of the design in question. In particular, the
examples discussed above suggest that positive attitudes
towards the means, ends, or observers of a candidate design
can inhibit the designer from viewing the design with a
sufficiently critical eye. The result is the adoption of
designs that, at least in retrospect, are clearly sub-optimal.
The reasons for the occurrence of motivation-biased
design are complex. To a first approximation, they seem to
concern how designers’ attitudes affect:
1.
How they characterize data relevant to evaluation
of the design;
2.
Which consequences of the design’s operation are
within their control;
3.
Their perception of the impressions of others and
its consequences for their evaluation of the design;
and
4.
Their self-impression and its consequences for their
evaluation of the design.
Further research is needed to better characterize the
phenomenon and its cognitive mechanisms. This research
would consist of investigation of this phenomenon in actual
practice, laboratory studies under controlled conditions, and
computational simulations.
Further questions concern relationships between
motivation-biased design and other cognitive phenomena.
For example, how is it related to lapses of judgment
occurring in the presence of conflicts of interest? Also,
what are the effects of negative attitudes on design
evaluation? It seems plausible to think that negative
attitudes could make designers more critical in evaluation,
even hypercritical.
Finally, it is appropriate to wonder how the problems
brought on by motivation-biased design can be mitigated.
One possibility would be to make a study of design errors
that occur as a result of motivation-biased design. The
Canadian NGO Engineers Without Borders has recently
issued an “error report”, containing mistakes that members
have made in their projects in Africa (Bunting 2011):
“While working in a project in Zambia, Mark
Hemsworth thought his task to support local enterprise
was straightforward – a carpentry business needed a
planing machine. He supplied the machine but it was
badly damaged when fitted. Like plenty of unused
machinery lying around rural Zambia, parts and repairs
were hugely difficult to arrange.”

It might help if such reports were a more regular part of
design practice and the errors studied and available for
others to learn from.

References
Bohannon, J. (2010). The Nile Delta’s sinking future,
Science 327: 1444–1447.
Bunting, M. (2011, 17 January). NGO hopes to benefit
from
failure.
The
Guardian
Web
site:
http://www.guardian.co.uk/global-development/povertymatters/2011/jan/17/ngos-failure-mistakes-learnencourage
Corrigan, R. (2007). Digital decision making: Back to the
future. New York: Springer.
Gigerenzer, G., & Todd, P. M. (1999). Simple heuristics
that make us smart. New York: Oxford University Press.
Jannson, D. G., & Smith, S. M. (1991). Design fixation.
Design Studies, 12(1): 3–11.
Kunda, Z. (1987). Motivated inference: Self-serving
generation and evaluation of causal theories. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 53: 636–647.
Langer, E. J. (1982). The illusion of control. In Kahneman,
D., Slovic, P., & Tversky, A. (Eds.). Judgment under
uncertainty: Heuristics and biases.
New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Mazar, N., & Zhong, C. (2010). Do green products make us
better people? Psychological Science 21: 494–498.
McCully, P. (2001) Silenced rivers: the ecology and politics
of large dams. London: Zed Books.
Seaver, M. (2009, 26 April). Pencils, not pixels: Ireland
scuttles electronic voting machines.
The Christian
Science
Monitor.
Web
site:
http://www.csmonitor.com/World/GlobalNews/2009/0426/pencils-not-pixels-ireland-scuttleselectronic-voting-machines
Simon, H. A. (1981). Sciences of the artificial. (2nd ed.)
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Thagard, P. (2006).
Hot thought: Mechanisms and
applications of emotional cognition. Cambridge MA:
MIT Press.
Thagard, P. (2007). The moral psychology of conflicts of
interest: Insights from affective neuroscience. Journal of
Applied Philosophy 24: 367–380.
Zahniser, D., & Garrison, J. (2010, 13 April) Lawn-watering
rules contributed to L.A. main breaks, experts find. Los
Angeles
Times.
URL:
http://articles.latimes.com/2010/apr/13/local/la-me-watermains14-2010apr14

2961

