UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Motor Simulation and Verbal Association in Idiom-Idiom Verification: Effects of
Imageability

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5s2119bf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Gradinarova, Galina
Janyan, Armina

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Motor Simulation and Verbal Association in Idiom-Idiom Verification: Effects of
Imageability
Galina Gradinarova (ggradinarova@nbu.bg)
Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology, New Bulgarian University
21 Montevideo Str., 1618 Sofia, Bulgaria

Armina Janyan (ajanyan@cogs.nbu.bg)
Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology, New Bulgarian University
21 Montevideo Str., 1618 Sofia, Bulgaria

Abstract
Two experiments were conducted to test the hypothesis that
motor simulation contributes to the processing of idioms. A
semantic interference paradigm was applied. Critically,
imageability of idioms was manipulated. Results of the
experiments suggested that processing of highly imageable
idioms involved motor simulation in both meaning and
familiarity verification tasks. However, low-imageable idioms
showed indifference in semantic verification task and a verbal
associative facilitation in a familiarity verification task.
Keywords: motor simulation; embodiment;
understanding; imageability; idioms; RT.

language

Introduction
According to the embodiment paradigm higher-level
cognitive processing is based in people’s interaction with
the environment and is grounded in lower-level sensorymotor processes. From this perspective, language is of great
interest since it has traditionally been viewed as a highly
symbolic and abstract system. The embodiment paradigm
predicts that language should also be grounded in sensorymotor experience and therefore interactions with the lowerlevel perceptual and motor systems should occur. A variety
of experiments have been devoted to looking into this
hypothesis. For example, Glenberg and Kaschak (2002)
demonstrated the so called “action-sentence compatibility
effect”. Sentences were presented describing movement to
or away from the body and the participants had to respond
by actually performing a movement to or away from the
body. People were faster if the direction of movement
implied by the sentence matched the direction of their actual
movement, as opposed to when the two directions did not
match. Thus, sentence comprehension and motor processes
were found to interact. Moreover, this effect was also
present when the sentences described transfer of abstract
entities (e.g. You told Liz the story) which means that the
effect is not restrained to highly literal language describing
strictly physical experience, but is also observed at different
levels of abstraction. Richardson, Spivey, Barsalou and
McRae (2003) also showed that both concrete (e.g. push,
lift) and abstract (e.g. respect, own) verbs tend to invoke a
particular horizontal or vertical image schema, and that this
image schema interacted with people’s performance on both
an unrelated object categorization task and a related picture
recognition task. Scorolli and Borghi (2007) presented

participants with phrases that contained verbs referring to
actions with different effectors (HAND, FOOT, MOUTH)
and they were asked to make a sensibility judgment by
either speaking into a microphone or pressing a pedal. A
facilitation effect was observed when the effector involved
in the motor response and the one implied by the phrase
matched. Thus, the modulation of the motor system appears
to be effector-specific. In a study by Bergen, Narayan and
Feldman (2003) participants were presented with pictures
representing actions performed by the hand, leg, or mouth.
After that they saw a verb and were asked to indicate
whether the verb described the picture they had just seen.
On the critical trials the verbs did not match the actions on
the pictures, but they either referred to actions preformed by
the same effector or to actions performed by a different
effector. If linguistic input triggers activation in a specific
motor circuit then it can be expected that a person will need
more time to respond if overlapping motor circuits are
activated (i.e. responsible for actions with the same effector)
rather than non-overlapping ones (responsible for actions
with different effectors). Indeed, Bergen et al. (2003)
demonstrated a semantic interference effect - participants in
their study were slower when both the picture and the verb
referred to actions with the same effector rather than to
actions with different effectors. Brain imaging also provides
evidence for effector-specific motor activation during
comprehension of verbs (e.g. Pulvermüller, Haerle &
Hummel, 2001) and idioms (Boulenger, Hauk and
Pulvermüller, 2009). The results above are at odds with the
traditional view on language as highly abstract and
operating on amodal symbolic structures.
An alternative to the traditional approach on symbolic
systems was proposed by Barsalou (Barsalou, 1999;
Barsalou, Solomon, &Wu, 1999). According to the theory
of perceptual symbol systems (PSS) schematic
representations are derived from actual sensory-motor
activations, these representations are stored in memory and
function as symbols for certain referents. That is, knowledge
representation is not abstract and amodal, but grounded and
multimodal (based in different modalities). Perceptual
systems are organized in frames called simulators that allow
entities, states and events to be simulated in the absence of
perceptual input. Simulation is defined as “reenactment of
perceptual, motor and introspective states acquired during

3052

experience with the world, body, and mind” (Barsalou,
2008, p.618). Barsalou and colleagues emphasized that
simulation does not have to be a conscious process and
happens automatically. Barsalou, Solomon and Wu (1999)
compared people’s performance on a feature listing and
feature verification task when half of the participants in each
study were given an explicit imagery instruction and the
other half were not (neutral instruction). The results
supported the hypothesis that both instructions were
equivalent (that is, there was no difference in performance)
in triggering simulation. However, Solomon and Barsalou
(2004), point out that in the imagery condition simulations
seem to be richer in detail. It seemed that two mechanisms
were at work when people had to verify whether a certain
property was related to a particular category, one being deep
conceptual processing and the other one activation of lexical
associations. Words referring to properties of a particular
category are usually also highly associated on a lexical level
with the word standing for the category (e.g. a TREE has
leaves, but these words are also highly associated on the
lexical level). If in the experiment the properties that were
not associated with the category were also not lexically
associated (e.g. TREE and bricks), then people would adopt
a word-association strategy and simulation effects seemed
to be overridden. If on the other hand, the non-related
properties were lexically related (for example CRAB is
associated with fin but fin is not a property of CRAB), this
strategy was blocked and simulation effects were found.
This data is also in keeping with Paivio’s (1991) Dual
Coding Theory which states that there are two systems, a
verbal and a sensorimotor one, responsible for performing
manipulations on information, and that these systems are
richly interconnected. Different linguistic stimuli can be
coded not only as logogens in the verbal system, but also to
a different extent as imagens in the non-verbal system.
Thus, imagery can be automatically activated and closely
connected with simulation, as shown in other studies, as for
example that of Zwaan and Madden (2005). Participants
were presented with sentences such as The ranger saw the
eagle in the sky followed by a picture-naming task. People
responded faster if the visual properties of the picture
corresponded to the ones implied by the sentence, which
suggests that visual imagery must have been automatically
employed and is closely linked with the process of
simulation.
In research on idiom processing, Janyan and Andonova
(2000) received a facilitation effect of an explicit imagery
instruction on the comprehension of unfamiliar transparent
idioms (semantically transparent idioms are those meaning
of which can be guessed from the meaning of the individual
words forming the phrases). These results emphasize the
importance of two factors in the processing of idioms:
imagery on the one hand, and transparency on the other. The
effect of transparency, especially in unfamiliar idioms,
demonstrates an important point, namely that individual
words in an idiomatic phrase do contribute to the overall
processing and comprehension of the idiom which

contradicts the traditional view, in which idioms have been
viewed as separate lexical units that function as a whole,
rather than having a compositional nature. According to the
Idiom Decomposition Hypothesis by Gibbs and Nayak
(1989), individual words actively contribute to the
processing of the whole idiom. If this is so, it could be
expected that if a simulation process occurs during idiom
processing, then it would be at least partly due to the
simulation triggered by the individual words. Furthermore,
if an idiomatic expression contains verbs referring to actions
with a particular effector, this would cause effector-specific
motor simulation despite the fact that the overall figurative
meaning of the idiom might have nothing to do with actual
movement.
The present study steps on the above assumption, while at
the same time it is expected that imagery unconsciously
evoked by the idiomatic phrase as a whole would also play a
most important role due to its connection to simulation
processes. In our previous series of experiments
(Gradinarova & Janyan, submitted) the possible effects were
studied of idioms’ imageability (i.e. the ease with which an
idiom evokes a mental image) and transparency (i.e. the
extent to which the idiomatic meaning can be guessed from
the individual meaning of the constituent words). Some
evidence was found for effector-specific motor simulation in
highly imageable idioms, while transparency did not seem
to be as important for triggering a simulation process.
However, in the experiments mentioned participants were
given a task requiring fairly superficial processing on the
lexical level. They were presented with idiomatic
expressions followed by a single verb and had to indicate
whether the verb contained in the idiom and the one
presented afterwards were the same word or not. The critical
trials required a NO response – to the verbs referring to
either an action performed with the same effector or a
different effector as the action referred to by the verb in the
idiom (a procedure adopted and modified from Bergen et
al., 2003). In the following two experiments, a different task
was implemented requiring a deeper level of conceptual
processing. Also, only idiomatic expressions were used as
stimuli, creating a focus on processes characteristic purely
of comprehension of idiomatic language. In the first
experiment, pairs of idioms were presented and participants
had to indicate whether the two idioms in each pair had
approximately the same meaning. In the second experiment,
a more superficial task was implemented, requiring subjects
to indicate whether they are familiar with (have ever heard)
the idioms presented. In both experiments, imageability of
the target idioms was varied, while familiarity (the extent to
which a person has had experience with a particular
expression) and transparency were kept comparatively high
and controlled. We expected to find a semantic interference
effect/evidence of motor simulation in highly imageable
idiom processing and not in low-imageable one.

3053

Experiment 1: Meaning Verification
Method
Participants 26 native Bulgarian speakers participated in
the experiment. 21 were female and 5 were male (mean
age=20.5 and SD=11.38).
Stimuli and Design A 2 (Effector Matching: Same Effector
vs. Different Effector) x 2 (Imageability: High vs. Low)
factorial design was implemented. All target idioms
contained verbs that referred to movement with a particular
effector: HAND (e.g. hvashtam mu kraya, literally catch its
end, meaning manage to understand, where the verb
hvashtam/catch refers to an action performed with the
hand); FOOT (e.g. klatya si krakata, literally dangle one’s
legs, meaning not do anything) or MOUTH (e.g., glatvam si
gramatikata, literally swallow your grammar, meaning not
be able to say anything). 16 high-imageability idioms were
paired with 16 high- imageable idioms with same effector or
with 16 high-imageability idioms with a different effector.
Similarly, 16 low-imageability idioms were paired with 16
low-imageability idioms with same effector or 16 lowimageability idioms with different effector. All 32 idioms
that appeared in the first position in a pair contained a verb
referring to a HAND motion. In the Same Effector condition
the second member of the pair also contained a HAND
motion verb, while in the Different Effector condition the
second idiom contained a verb referring to an action with
the FOOT or MOUTH effector. Table 1 shows examples of
idiom pairs in the different conditions.

The idioms in the target pairs were controlled for their
familiarity, transparency and length (measured in numbers
of words and number of characters including spaces). Table
2 shows idiom characteristics collapsed over effector
matching conditions, and Table 3 shows idiom
characteristics separately for each Effector Matching
condition for the second idiom in a presentation row. Low
and high imageable items were significantly different in
their imageability ratings (p<0.001). T-test showed no
significant differences between conditions in idioms’
characteristics: familiarity, transparency, number of
characters, and number of words in the phrases (all ps>0.1).
Table 2: Means and standard deviations (in parenthesis)
for characteristics of target idiom pairs.

Imag.
Famil.
Transp.
N.char.
N.word

Idiom1

Idiom 2
Same
Effector
Idiom 2
Different
Effector
Idiom1

Idiom 2
Same
Effector
Idiom 2
Different
Effector

Low Imageability
idiom 1
idiom 2
3.6 (0.4) 3. 6 (0.3)
6.1 (0.5)
6.0 (0.7)
4.9 (0.7)
4.9(0.8)
18.4 (4.6) 18.3 (4.8)
3.1 (1.1)
3.1 (1.0)

Table 3: Means and standard deviations (in parenthesis)
for characteristics of second idiom in a presentation row.

Table 1: Examples of target idiom pairs
High Imageability
hvashtam bika za rogata
(literally: catch the bull by the horns;
meaning: act with confidence and
determination)
nosya nyakogo na ratse
(literally: carry someone on your hands;
meaning: to surround somebody with a lot of
care and attention)
uhilvam se do ushi
(literally: grin to the ears; meaning: grin
very broadly)
Low Imageability
hvashtam se za dumite
(literally: hold on to the words; meaning:
pay too much attention to something said
incidentally or without a specific intention)
nalivam um v glavata
(literally: pour brains into the head;
meaning: teach or advise someone)
otritvam kasmeta si
(literally: kick one’s luck aside; meaning: not
to take advantage of a good situation)

High Imageability
idiom 1
idiom 2
5.7 (0.5)
5.4 (0.27)
6.1 (0.3)
6.2 (0.40)
5.0 (0.6)
5.0 (0.61)
17.4(4.0) 18.0 (3.7)
3.1 (0.9)
3.0 (1.0)

Imag.
Famil.
Transp.
N.char.
N.word

High Imageability
Same
Different
effector
effector
5.4 (0.3)
5.4 (0.3)
6.2 (0.5)
6.2 (0.3)
5.1 (0.5)
5.0 (0.7)
19.0 (3.3) 16.9 (3.9)
3.3 (1.2)
2.8 (0.8)

Low Imageability
Same
Different
effector
effector
3.6 (0.3)
3.6 (0.3)
6.1 (0.7)
6.0 (0.7)
4.9 (0.8)
5.0 (0.8)
17.6 (5.9) 18.9 (3.4)
2.9 (1.1)
3.2 (0.9)

Note. Imageability, familiarity, and transparency represent a
7-point subjective rating (7 – the most imageable, familiar,
and transparent) based on a number of pretests conducted
with native Bulgarian speakers; N. char. and N. word refer
to idiom length measured in number of characters and
number of words, respectively.
In addition to 32 target idioms (requiring a NO response),
18 pairs of filler idioms containing verbs with different
effectors requiring a NO response, and 50 synonymous pairs
of idiomatic expressions (requiring a YES response) were
constructed.
Procedure A phrase verification task was used. Participants
saw two idioms presented on a screen one after the other
and had to press a YES button if the phrases had
(approximately) the same meaning, or press a NO button if
the meaning of the idioms was different. Examples of

3054

idiom (1517 ms) than for one with low imageability (1589
ms; cf. Table 4). This effect is in accordance with studies
showing advantage of concrete words over abstract ones in a
variety of linguistic and memory tasks (e.g.,
Schwanenflugel, Harnishfeger & Stowe, 1988; Hamilton &
Rajaram, 2001; Allen & Hulme, 2006). Dual Coding Theory
(Paivio, 1991) posits that imageable concrete entities have
both verbal and non-verbal representations which ‘ensure’
their advantage over abstract entities that have a
representation in the verbal modality only.
1700
1650
1600

RT, ms

idioms requiring a YES and a NO responses were given in
the instruction text.
Effector matching condition was counterbalanced across
idioms. For that two lists were devised so that each initial
idiom in a pair appeared in one Effector Matching condition
in the first list and in the other Effector Matching condition
in the second list. Each participant saw every target idiom
only once. At the beginning of the experiment, participants
were randomly assigned to one of the two lists, presented
with a written and oral instruction, and were then run
through a short practice session. After that the experiment
started and participants were presented with the respective
list in a unique for each participant pseudorandomized order
so that the same condition did not appear on more than 3
consecutive trials. Every trial started with a fixation cross
(“+”) for 1000 ms followed by an idiom that stayed on the
screen for 1500 ms, and then a blank screen for 500 ms.
After that a second idiom was presented and stayed on the
screen for 4000 ms or until the participant’s response. The
intertrial interval was 1500 ms.
E-prime software (Schneider, Eschman, & Zuccolotto,
2002) was used to present the stimuli and record the RTs.
Participants had to press a YES or NO button on a serial
response box with a 1 ms time resolution. The experiment
was run in a sound-proof booth and took about 12 minutes.
Participants took a short break in the middle of the
experiment.

Table 4: Mean response times (in ms) and standard
deviations (in parenthesis) for the experimental conditions,
item (i) and subject (s) means, Experiment 1.

Different Effector, i
Same Effector, i
Different Effector, s
Same Effector, s

Low Image

High Image

1597 (150)
1578 (239)
1597 (215)
1580 (282)

1442 (164)
1575 (124)
1443 (256)
1590 (257)

Predictably, repeated measures ANOVA revealed a main
effect of imageability in subject means though not in item
means (Fs(1, 25)=5.51, p<.05, ηp2=.18; Fi(1, 30)=2.81, p>.1,
ηp2=.09). The significant main effect suggested that response
times were faster for processing of a high-imageability

1500

***

1450
1400
1350

high
low
Imageability

Effector:
different
same

Figure 1: Imageability by Effector Matching, subject
means (vertical bars denote standard error).
*** - p<0.001.

Results and Discussion
Prior to the analysis, erroneous responses (5.4%) and
response times lying more than ±2 standard deviations from
the RT mean per condition were excluded (3.5%).
A 2 (Imageability: Low vs. High) x 2 (Effector Matching:
Same vs. Different) repeated measures ANOVA was
performed for item means, with effector type as a withingroup variable and imageability a between-group variable,
and for subject means, with effector type and imageability
as within-group variables. Table 4 shows mean response
times and standard deviations per condition for each mean
type.

1550

ANOVA obtained main effect of effector matching again
in subject analysis but not in item analysis (Fs(1, 25)=4.41,
p<.05, ηp2=.15; Fi(1, 30)=2.04, p>.1, ηp2=.06). Overall,
idioms with different effector were processed faster (1520
ms) than idioms with the same effector (1585 ms). Finally, a
significant interaction was found in subject means (Fs(1,
25)=10.37, p<.01, ηp2=.30) and a marginal one in item
means (Fi(1, 30)=3.61, p<.07, ηp2=.11). The interaction is
presented in Figure 1. It is seen that semantic interference
effect is present in processing of high-imageability idioms
(p<0.001) and absent in the processing of low-imageability
ones.

Experiment 2: Familiarity Verification
The experiment sought to test if the semantic interference
effect would be strong enough and ‘survive’ a task that does
not require explicit semantic processing and meaning
activation of idioms and their constituents. A familiarity
decision task was used in such a way that target phrases
required a NO response, too, as it was in the Experiment 1.

Method
Participants 24 native Bulgarian speakers participated in
the experiment. 18 were female and 6 were male (mean
age=24.7 and SD=3.46).

3055

Stimuli and Design The same target stimuli and design
were used as in Experiment 1. Because of the difference in
the task, other 50 pairs of idioms were used as YES fillers.
In these pairs either the first or the second idiom (or rarely
both) were unfamiliar idioms translated into Bulgarian from
other languages. 30 pairs of stimuli were taken from a
previous study on processing of unfamiliar/unknown idioms
(Janyan & Andonova, 2000). The rest were taken from
another (unpublished) study on memorizing unfamiliar
idioms.

‘superficial’ processing probably triggered activation of
verbal/lexical associations in low-imageability idioms
though still on the level of concrete individual constituents
of the idioms (verbs).
1600
1550
1500
1450

RT, ms

Procedure A familiarity verification task was used.
Participants had to judge whether at least one of the idioms
they saw in a pair was unfamiliar by pressing the YES
button if there was an unfamiliar idiom and the NO button if
there was not. Everything else was the same as in
Experiment 1.

1350

**
**

1300
1250
1200

Results and Discussion
Errors (5.6%) and response times lying more than ±2
standard deviations from the RT mean per condition were
excluded (4.7%) from the analyses. A 2 (Imageability: Low
vs. High) x 2 (Effector Matching: Same vs. Different)
repeated measures ANOVA was performed for item and
subject means with the same within- and between-group
variables as in Experiment 1. Table 5 presents mean
response times and standard deviations per condition for
subject and item means.
Table 5: Mean response times (in ms) and standard
deviations (in parenthesis) for the experimental conditions,
item (i) and subject (s) means, Experiment 2.

Different Effector, i
Same Effector, i
Different Effector, s
Same Effector, s

1400

Low Image

High Image

1455 (216)
1337 (171)
1452 (366)
1349 (276)

1277 (115)
1370 (108)
1293 (311)
1394 (328)

Repeated measures ANOVA replicated a main effect of
imageability in subject means but not in item means (Fs(1,
23)=4.72, p<.05, ηp2=.17; Fi(1, 30)=2.82, p>.1, ηp2=.09). The
significant main effect showed that response times on the
second phrase were faster for a high-imageability idiom
(1344 ms) than for a low-imageability idiom (1401 ms; cf.
Table 5). ANOVA obtained no main effect of effector
matching (Fs(1, 23)=0.001, p>.9, ηp2=.00; Fi(1, 30)=0.11,
p>.7, ηp2=.004) and a significant interaction in subject and
item means (Fs(1, 23)=18.44, p<.001, ηp2=.44; Fi(1,
30)=8.62, p<.01, ηp2=.22). The interaction is presented in
Figure 2. The interaction showed a surviving semantic
interference effect in processing of high-imageability idioms
(p<0.01). However, processing of low-imageability idioms
elicited an opposite pattern: idioms with same effectors
facilitated processing in comparison to idioms with different
effectors (p<0.01). Thus, here a task requiring a more

high
low
Imageability

Effector:
different
same

Figure 2: Imageability by Effector Matching, subject
means (vertical bars denote standard error).
** - p<0.01.

Conclusion
Most previous studies have been trying to find support for
links between language/semantic processing and sensorymotor experience by investigating processing of single
words/pictures or literal sentences. Very little is done on
seeking grounded links in figurative language processing.
The present studies aimed at testing whether motor
activation is involved in the processing of idioms that
contain a verb denoting an action. Based on previous
research that suggested imagery as an important part of
mental simulation (e.g. Zwaan & Madden, 2005) we
reasoned that presentation of highly imageable transparent
idioms would evoke a mental image that would trigger the
motor simulation. However, idioms with low imageability
would not evoke a mental image, hence, would not trigger
mental simulation. To test these assumptions, we used a
semantic interference paradigm (Bergen et al., 2003) pairing
each idiom (that contained a verb denoting an action
performed by the hand) with two other idioms. The paired
idioms contained a verb denoting an action that is performed
with either the same (hand) or a different effector (foot,
mouth). The expected indicator of motor simulation during
imageable idiom processing would be the semantic
interference effect. In the case of a shared effector the
activation of corresponding parts of the motor cortex
responsible for the actions would overlap and the
interference effect would appear. The interference effect
should not appear in the case of non-shared/different
effectors – the motor circuits would be activated without
any overlap (Bergen, 2006). This is exactly what was found
for high-imageability idioms in the first experiment which

3056

used a task that required an explicit semantic processing and
idiomatic meaning activation of both idioms. Lowimageability idioms remained indifferent to the effector
manipulation in meaning verification task. However, while a
superficial familiarity task did not change the overall pattern
of semantic interference for high-imageability idioms, it did
change the pattern of low-imageability idioms dramatically.
The results showed a directly opposite pattern to the
semantic interference one - facilitation in response times in
the case of shared effectors. Following the Dual Coding
Theory (Paivio, 1991), we argue that low-imageability
idioms may have mostly/predominantly one representation
modality, a verbal* one. A superficial idiom familiarity task
has, probably, triggered verbal/lexical associations within a
logogen system of verbs. Hence, verbs that shared an
effector (e.g., touch and knock) were associatively activated
and facilitated overall idiom processing.
In conclusion, the study provided unambiguous evidence
that transparent high-imageability idiom processing
involves motor simulation during semantic and familiarity
tasks. This result is strengthened by the effector-indifference
of low-imageability idioms during a semantic task and by
the associative facilitation during a familiarity task. Overall,
the study showed the differentiation effect of imageability in
motor simulation in idiom processing.

References
Allen, R., & Hulme, C. (2006). Speech and language
processing mechanisms in verbal serial recall. Journal of
Memory and Language, 55, 64–88.
Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual Symbol Systems.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 577-660.
Barsalou, L. W., Solomon, K. O., & Wu, L. L. (1999).
Perceptual simulation in conceptual tasks. In M.K.
Hiraga, C. Sinha, & S. Wilcox (Eds.), Cultural,
typological, and psychological perspectives in cognitive
linguistics: The proceedings of the 4th conference of the
International Cognitive Linguistics Association, 3.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Barsalou, L.W. (2008). Grounded cognition. Annual Review
of Psychology, 59, 617-645.
Bergen, B. (2006). Experimental methods for simulation
semantics. In: M. Conzalez-Marquez, I. Mitteberg, S.
Coulson, & M.J. Spivey, (Eds.). Methods in cognitive
linguistics. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing
Company.
Bergen, B., Narayan, S., & Feldman, J. (2003). Embodied
verbal semantics: Evidence from an image-verb matching
task. Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society.
Boulenger, V, Hauk, O., & Pulvermüller, F. (2009).
Grasping ideas with the motor system: Semantic
*

Note that neuroimaging studies suggest that concrete and
abstract words have access to different neural processing structures
(Swaab, Bayhes & Knight, 2002; Zhang, Guo, Ding, & Wang,
2006).

somatotopy in idiom comprehension. Cerebral Cortex,
19(8), 1905-1914.
Gibbs, R. W., & Nayak, N. (1989). Psycholinguistic studies
on the syntactic behavior of idioms. Cognitive
Psychology, 21, 100-138.
Glenberg, A. M. & Kaschak, M. P. (2002). Grounding
language in action. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9(3),
558-565.
Gradinarova, G., & Janyan, A. (submitted). Effectorspecific motor simulation in idiom processing. European
Conference on Cognitive Science.
Hamilton, M., & Rajaram, S. (2001). The Concreteness
Effect in Implicit and Explicit Memory Tests. Journal of
Memory and Language, 44, 96–117.
Janyan, A. & Andonova, E. (2000). The role of mental
imagery in understanding unknown idioms. In L.
Gleitman & A. Joshi (Eds.), Proceedings of the 22nd
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
693-698), Philadelphia, PA: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Paivio, A. (1991). Dual coding theory: Retrospect and
current status. Canadian Journal of Psychology, 45(3),
255-287.
Pulvermüller, F., M. Haerle, & F. Hummel (2001). Walking
or talking?: Behavioral and neurophysiological correlates
of action verb processing. Brain and Language, 78, 143168.
Richardson, D.C., Spivey, M. J., Barsalou, L. W., &
McRae, K. (2003). Spatial representations activated
during real-time comprehension of verbs. Cognitive
Science, 27, 767-780.
Schneider, W., Eschman, A., & Zuccolotto, A. (2002). EPrime user’s guide. Pittsburgh: Psychology Software
Tools Inc.
Schwanenflugel, P. J., Harnishfeger, K. K., & Stowe, R. W.
(1988). Context availability and lexical decisions for
abstract and concrete words. Journal of Memory and
Language, 27, 499–520.
Scorolli, C. & Borghi, A.M. (2007). Sentence
comprehension and action: Effector specific modulation
of the motor system. Brain Research, 1130, 119 -124.
Solomon, K.O., & Barsalou, L.W. (2004). Perceptual
simulation in property verification. Memory & Cognition,
32, 244-259.
Swaab, T.Y., Baynes, K., & Knight, R.T. (2002). Separable
effects of priming and imageability on word processing:
an ERP study. Cognitive Brain Research, 15, 99-103.
Zhang, Q., Guo, C., Ding,J., Wang, Z. (2006). Concreteness
effects in the processing of Chinese words. Brain and
Language, 96, 59-68.
Zwaan, R. A., & Madden, C. J. (2005). Embodied sentence
comprehension. In: D. Pecher & R. A. Zwaan (Eds.), The
grounding of cognition: The role of perception and
action in memory, language, and thinking, 224–245,
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.

3057

