UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Mowgli in the jungle of words: Comprehension and later lexical development.

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5043r8x9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Ameel, Eef
Malt, Barbara
Storms, Gert

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Mowgli in the jungle of words:
Comprehension and later lexical development
Eef Ameel (eef.ameel@psy.kuleuven.be) and Gert Storms (gert.storms@psy.kuleuven.be)
Department of Psychology, University of Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium

Barbara C. Malt (barbara.malt@lehigh.edu)
Department of Psychology, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA 18015 USA

Abstract
Production data suggest that meanings of common nouns
continue to change well past the early years of language
acquisition (Andersen, 1975; Ameel, Malt, & Storms, 2008).
Here we used two comprehension tasks to further evaluate the
nature of later lexical learning. In a name applicability task,
seven- to 13-year old Dutch-speaking children judged
whether each of three names applied to common household
containers. In a typicality judgment task, participants judged
how good an example the containers were of the three names.
Both tasks revealed continued evolution of word use up to age
13. However, all names were overextended by the children, in
contrast to the production data in which both over- and
underextension were found. Moreover, the child lexical
categories showed considerable overlap, indicating strong
inter-category relatedness. With age these overextensions as
well as the overlap gradually disappeared and the lexical
categories became more distinct over time.
Keywords: word learning; later lexical development; lexical
categories; typicality judgments

Introduction
The speed with which young children add words to their
vocabulary seems to suggest that word learning is a
relatively easy process. By age two, they are able to produce
about 600 words. In the period from age two to six, they are
estimated to acquire around 14.000 words, at a rate of ten
words a day (Carey, 1978). The meanings assigned to these
words, however, only partially correspond to the meanings
adults attach to the words. The incomplete word meanings
inevitably cause children to commit errors. Some words are
used too broadly, a phenomenon called overextension, for
example, when the word cow is applied to all four-legged
animals. A category is underextended when its name is
assigned to too few items, for example, when the word cow
is only applied to the child’s cuddly animal.
These errors disappear when the full conventional
meaning is grasped, but this may take months, or even
years. A number of studies have shown learning periods for
verb meanings extending to age 8 or 9 (e.g., for pour and
fill, Gropen, Pinker, Hollander, & Goldberg, 1991; see also
Bowerman, 1974; Pye, Loeb, & Pao, 1996). But even for
common nouns, the time frame for fully acquiring their
meaning and use seems to extend beyond the early years of
language acquisition. This reflects the broad and complex
extension of common nouns referring to concrete, simple
objects. Ball for English speakers, for example, often refers

to smooth, bouncy, spherical, deflatable things made for
play, but it can also refer to non-smooth balls of paper, nonbouncy beanbag balls, non-spherical footballs, nondeflatable baseballs and billiard balls, and things not for
play such as balls of yarn, balls of string, and tea balls. A
few studies clearly demonstrated the extended learning
trajectory for nouns that are used to refer to common
household objects.
Andersen (1975), for example, asked English-speaking
children aged 3 through 12 to name drinking vessels, and
she found that children’s naming did not match adult
naming until the age of 12. Ameel et al. (2008) had Dutchspeaking Belgian children of ages 5, 8, 10, 12 and 14 name
common household containers, which were mostly called
fles, bus, and pot by adults (Ameel, Storms, Malt, Sloman,
2005). They found that early use of fles and pot was
overextended and gradually narrowed from 5-year-olds to
adults, while the opposite pattern was found for bus.
Gradually, the children converged toward the adult naming,
but even the 14-year-olds still slightly differed in their word
use from the adults.
The results of Ameel et al. (2008) were obtained using a
production task in which participants named the object in
each picture however they chose. A production task offers
several advantages as opposed to a comprehension task in
which participants are generally asked to make a forced
choice decision between two or more options. A first
advantage is that it does not constrain responses to be from
a set pre-determined by the experimenter to be suitable.
Production is also a purer measure of what participants
know because they have to come up with a name without
having any suggested to them. Given a forced choice
between fles and bus (or any other word pair), participants
will pick one regardless of how little knowledge they may
have of the words. Finally, production has a certain
ecological validity in that outside the laboratory, children
and adults frequently select names for objects for purposes
of communication, and they do so without having options
presented to them.
However, there are also some disadvantages related to
production tasks. First, production tasks might be
cognitively more demanding than comprehension tasks,
since they require not only a sense of familiarity with the
presented material but also retrieval from memory. Children
have had less language exposure than adults, so even if they
have some knowledge of a word and of appropriate word-

2018

object pairings, in a production task they may have greater
trouble retrieving a particular word from memory. In such
instances, they may resort to use of a more easily retrieved
but less appropriate word. Also, they may sometimes
successfully retrieve a word from memory in connection
with an object to which it is strongly linked but fail to
retrieve it in connection with an object to which it is more
weakly linked. These retrieval failures could produce a
pattern of overextension of some words and underextension
of others, even if the child has a more adult-like pattern of
knowledge encoded in memory. Second, it has long been
noted that children’s appropriate responses to words (such
as picking up an object named by an adult) often precede
their production in development (e.g., Benedict, 1979;
Kuczaj, 1982; Rescorla, 1981). Children may have good
implicit knowledge of the adult pattern but be unable to
fully deploy that knowledge in production.
Children’s implicit knowledge can be studied by means of
a comprehension task in which participants are asked about
the appropriateness of names for an object. For adults,
artifacts can often be called by more than one name at the
same level of abstraction (e.g., bottle or jug for a squat glass
container with handles), indicating overlapping word
meanings and extensions. However, production tasks are
generally intended to elicit only a single name for an object
which
prevents
overlap
from
being
revealed.
Comprehension tasks that do not require forced choice and
allow children to accept as many names as they feel are
appropriate for the object is more suited to tackle this job.
The present work uses a comprehension-based
methodology to further investigate the artifact word learning
process. We ask three questions about what comprehension
data show relative to production data about later lexical
development: (1) Is the evidence for an extended lexical
development period still present in comprehension tasks?
(2) If evidence for an extended learning period is not
eliminated by comprehension measures, does the specific
developmental trajectory for individual words resemble that
seen in production? (3) What is the nature of later lexical
development with regard to lexical category overlap?

Study 1: Name Acceptability Judgments
The first comprehension-type task was a name
acceptability judgment task in which participants judged
whether or not offered names were acceptable for a set of
stimuli.

Method
Five age groups made name judgments: 20 7-year-olds, 21
9-year-olds, 20 11-year-olds, 20 13-year-olds, and 36 adults.
For each object of the 73 storage containers, taken from
Ameel et al. (2005), participants had to judge whether it did
or did not belong to each of a series of category names (e.g.,
Is this object a fles?). There were two possible answers: yes
or no. Participants made typicality judgments for three
category names - fles, bus, and pot -which were the most
frequently generated names by adults (Ameel et al., 2005).

Figure 1: Typical examples of fles (upper left), pot
(upper right), and bus (lower left and right).
Figure 1 shows typical examples of each of these names1.
Participants were queried at two different points in time to
maximize the ability to treat each judgment as independent
of previous ones. A participant could agree that a particular
object could be called fles and also agree that it could be
called bus when asked at a different time. She also could
accept just one name, or neither. Stimulus order and
category name order were randomized across participants.

Results and Discussion
Reliability of the data for each name and age group was
calculated by applying the Spearman-Brown formula to the
split-half correlations between the frequencies of “yes”
responses. The reliabilities were all very high, varying from
.87 to .99, and they increased over age, though not
significantly (ρ = 0.82, p = .09).
To evaluate evidence for an extended lexical development
period for artifact names in comprehension tasks, we
examined the size of individual categories at each age by
calculating the percentage of objects that were accepted for
each name by each participant in an age group. The
percentages were averaged across participants of the same
age group. An ANOVA was performed with two factors:
age (5 levels: 7-, 9-, 11-, 13-year-olds and adults) and
category name (3 levels: fles, bus and pot). There were
significant differences among the age groups (F(4,411) =
11.92, p <.0001). Linear trend tests were used to test the
change in percentages of objects granted a given name over
time. All trends were significantly decreasing (fles: F(1,285)
= -6.07, p <.0001; bus: F(1,285) = -4.62, p <.0001; pot:
F(1,285) = -5.60, p <.0001). Thus, there is evidence for an
extended learning trajectory when using comprehension
measures rather than production measures.
The production data of Ameel et al. (2008) showed that
among the names tested in the current study, fles and pot
1

For bus, two typical examples are shown, since this word picks
out a very heterogeneous category, encompassing a wide variety of
objects (see also Ameel et al., 2008).

2019

were used more broadly by the youngest children than by
adults and their use narrowed over time, while bus was
initially used more narrowly and broadened over time. In
contrast, here we found that across ages, the names were
gradually applied to smaller groups of objects. This trend
toward narrowing over time is significant for all names, as
indicated by the linear trend tests reported above. Thus,
these data contrast with the production data in showing only
narrowing of use over time.
Since the preceding analysis showed that the children’s
lexical categories were uniformly larger than adults’, we can
deduce that overall, there must be more overlap, or, less
differentiation, among the categories for children than for
adults. To quantify the overlap, we calculated the mean
number of names accepted for each object across ages. A
linear trend test of age showed that the mean number of
names that each object is assigned to significantly decreased
over age (F(1,7295) = -24.29, p <.0001).
To visualize the changes in overlap, we projected the
lexical categories of the youngest children and adults onto a
geometrical representation of the stimuli, which was also
used in Ameel, Malt, Storms, and Van Assche (2009). The
multidimensional scaling (MDS) representation was based
on non-linguistic similarity judgments derived from adult
sorting data collected by Ameel et al. (2005). Even though
children’s sorting data were available (Ameel et al., 2008),
we decided to use the MDS solution based on adult sorting
data to project categories onto because the adult data were
more reliable than the child data. In such a geometrical
representation, each exemplar of a category is represented
by a vector of M coordinates, one for each of the M
underlying dimensions. Distances between exemplars reflect
similarity relations: The closer objects are located to each
other in the multidimensional space, the more similar they
are to each other.
Figures 2 and 3 show the two-dimensional MDS
representations for the 7-year-olds and the adults. Shaded
areas show the sets of exemplars that were accepted as fles,
bus, and pot. An object was assigned to a category if at least
65 per cent of the participants judged the name to be
appropriate for the object. The figures nicely show that with
age, the categories shrink, their overlap decreases and they
become more distinct.
In sum, in this study, name appropriateness judgments
were used to assess lexical knowledge. For each name, the
percentage of assignments decreased over time, from the
youngest children to the adults, which is clear evidence for
an extended lexical development period, as was found in the
production task of Ameel et al. (2008). However, while they
found a narrowing pattern for some categories (fles, and pot)
over time and a broadening pattern for others (bus), the
comprehension task used in here resulted in a narrowing
pattern for each category name. Overlap between categories
decreased with age, indicating that categories gradually
become more distinct.

Figure 2: Two-dimensional MDS representation of the 73
stimuli (black diamonds) with the fles (dark grey cluster),
bus (light grey) and pot (white) categories of 7-year-olds.

Figure 3: Two-dimensional MDS representation of the 73
stimuli (black diamonds) with the fles (dark grey cluster),
bus (light grey) and pot (white) categories of adults.

Study 2: Typicality Judgments
Another way to assess lexical category knowledge using a
comprehension measure is through typicality judgments.
Some instances of a name are more representative or typical
than others (Mervis & Rosch, 1981; Rosch, 1973). For
example, cars are more typical examples of things called
vehicle than submarines are. Typicality judgments allow us
to investigate the extended learning trajectory of common
nouns (question 1 and 2) and the nature of later lexical
development with regard to lexical category overlap
(question 3). Furthermore, the last question can be
approached in a novel way: by computing the locations of
the category centers in a multidimensional space and
evaluating whether these typicality-determined centers
approach each other or drift further apart from each other
across development.

Method
Again, the 73 storage containers were used. These objects
were randomly presented three times to 21 children aged 7,
21 children aged 9, and 23 children aged 11, as well as to 28
adults (taken from Ameel et al., 2005). None of the

2020

participants had taken part in Study 1. Each time, they
judged how good an example the objects were for one of the
three names fles, bus and pot. The order of the names was
randomized across participants.
To judge typicality, the participants used a 7-point rating
scale, which was accompanied by three schematic faces,
each having a different expression: the “frowning” face,
located below number 1, corresponded to “very poor”
examples of the target category, the “smiling” face, located
below number 7, corresponded to “very good” examples of
the target category, and the “straight” face, located below
number 4, corresponded to “okay” examples of the category
name. The schematic faces were similar to the ones used in
a study of Bjorklund, Thompson, and Ornstein (1983) who
used a 3-point rating scale with only schematic faces. The
use of a 7-point rating scale with number was justified by
the greater age of our participants. For the children, the test
phase was preceded by a practice phase to ensure that
children understood the instructions correctly.
To make sure that the children did not make preference
judgments instead of typicality judgments (MaridakiKassotaki, 1997), the experimenter stressed that the child
should not rate how much she liked/disliked the items.

Results and Discussion
Reliability of the typicality data for each category name and
each age group was evaluated by applying the SpearmanBrown formula to the split-half correlations. The reliabilities
were again very high, varying between .75 and .99, and they
significantly increased over age (ρ = 1.00, p <.0001).
To evaluate evidence for an extended lexical development
period for artifact names in comprehension tasks, we first
calculated the mean typicality rating for each name for each
age group. For all names children’s ratings were higher than
adults’. In an overall ANOVA with two factors: age (4
levels: 7-, 9-, 11-year-olds and adults) and category name (3
levels fles, bus and pot), significant differences were found
among the age groups (F(3, 864) = 99.11, p <.0001). For all
names, the mean ratings decreased linearly over age, as
shown by significant linear trend tests (fles: F(1, 864) = 9.24, p <.0001; bus: F(1,864) = -8.64, p <.0001; pot:
F(1,864) = -11.92, p <.0001). These analyses provide more
evidence that an extended developmental trajectory for
artifact word knowledge exists in comprehension.
As noted earlier, Ameel et al. (2008) found that in
production the use of fles and pot narrowed over time, while
bus broadened over time. To derive the evolution in naming
from the typicality data, we computed for each participant
the number of objects receiving a typicality score of 5 or
more for each name. These frequencies were subjected to an
ANOVA with two factors: age (4 levels: 7-, 9-, 11-year-olds
and adults) and category name (3 levels: fles, bus and pot).
Only the age effect was significant (F(3, 251) = 37.96, p
<.0001), showing that for each name children consider more
objects to be good examples of the lexical category than
adults do. With age, this discrepancy is reduced. So, again,

Figure 4: Two-dimensional MDS representations of
the category centers of fles, bus and pot for each age
group.
comprehension and production data yielded contradicting
results as far as evolution of lexical category breadth.
The evolution of overlap was investigated by looking at
how close the centers of lexical categories are at each age.
Given the result from the name applicability study that
categories become more distinct over time, we expect that
the distances between category centers will increase with
age. Increasing distances with age, together with the finding
of decreasing category size (see Study 1), implies that
overlap between categories decreases. Analogous to the
method applied in Ameel et al. (2009), the positions of the
category centers for the different age groups were computed
across all the objects of a stimulus set, weighed by their
mean typicality rating for the name, and imposed on the
MDS solutions2. This method allows objects rated as more
typical for the name to affect the position of the category
center to a larger degree than objects rated as less typical for
the name. For example, to compute the coordinates in the
MDS solution of the category center of fles for the 7-yearolds, the coordinates of each object given by the sorting data
were multiplied by its typicality rating for fles averaged
across all 7-year-olds. Next, the weighted coordinates were
summed and the coordinates of the weighted category center
were calculated as the weighted sum divided by the sum of
all typicality ratings. Figure 4 shows, for each age group the
weighted prototypes for the three target categories,
projected in the 2-dimensional MDS representation. Note
that only the weighted prototypes are displayed, not the
positions of the individual stimuli, to enhance the clarity of
the figures. From Figure 4 it is clear that the distances
between each pair of lexical categories (fles-bus, fles-pot,
bus-pot) gradually increased over age. The increasing
pattern of distances between category centers indicates that
the categories gradually become more differentiated over
2

In Study 1, MDS is used as a visualization technique, in Study
2, MDS is a means to quantify the inter-category relations. We
could have used them for both purposes in both studies, however,
due to space restrictions, only one purpose was elaborated in each
study.

2021

age. In other words, overlap between categories gradually
decreases over time. To quantify this change, distances
between the weighted category centers, averaged across
name pairs (rather than the locations of the individual
centers, as in Figures 4) were computed in 2 to 5
dimensional representations, since the choice of the number
of underlying psychologically relevant dimensions is not
always obvious (see Verheyen, Ameel, & Storms, 2007).
For each dimensionality, we found the clear-cut age effect
of gradually increasing distances, but distances increased
with increasing dimensionality. The age differences in
distances between the different category pairs in 2 to 5
dimensions were tested by means of a linear trend test
which was significant (F(1,44) = 65.34, p <.0001). This
analysis confirms that on average, lexical categories become
more differentiated over time.
In sum, Study 2 assessed lexical knowledge through
typicality judgments. As in Study 1, evidence for an
extended lexical development period was found, as
indicated by the gradually decreasing mean typicality
ratings from 7-year-olds to adults. The results suggest that,
generally, children’s lexical categories are broader than
adults in comprehension, consistent with the name
acceptability judgments and not entirely consistent with the
production data of Ameel et al. (2008), where some
categories were found to start narrow and broaden over
time. To assess the changes in overlap, distances were
calculated between weighted prototypes of the different
categories in multidimensional scaling representations. We
found that the distances between name pairs increased over
age, suggesting that the lexical categories become more
distinct over time, or, that categories gradually show less
overlap over time.

General Discussion
While past research on the artifact word learning process
has been based on production tasks (Andersen, 1975; Ameel
et al., 2008), the present paper used two comprehension
tasks to further understand later lexical development: a
name applicability task and a typicality judgment task. In
both comprehension tasks, evidence was still present for an
extended lexical development period, as was found with a
production task. The percentages of assignments to the
names as well as the mean typicality ratings gradually
decreased with age and converged upon, respectively, the
adult percentages and the adult mean typicality ratings. The
specific developmental trajectory for individual words,
however, did not completely resemble that seen in
production. While Ameel et al. (2009) found narrowing for
fles and pot, and broadening for bus, the comprehension
data showed only narrowing of use over time. Finally, in
contrast to the production data, the comprehension data
allowed us to investigate the evolution of overlap between
the lexical categories. Overlap gradually decreased over age,
as demonstrated by the decreasing number of names
assigned to objects and as visualized in the MDS plots
(Figure 2 and 3). Further, the distances between the

typicality-based category centers increased with age,
indicating that the categories gradually became more
distinct over time.
The difference in the developmental trajectories between
comprehension and production data can be explained in
terms of the performance constraints imposed by
production, in combination with the evolution of featural
knowledge (see Ameel et al., 2008, in which word use was
predicted by features at each age). In production,
underextension only occurred with names that entered the
vocabulary at a later age. The word bus, for example, did
not appear into the productive vocabulary until the age of 8,
suggesting that this word is less familiar, less frequently
encountered, and less retrievable than the ones produced
earlier (fles and pot). The 8-year-olds have this word
represented with a few adult features plus some irrelevant
features that do not help differentiate this word from
contrasting words (e.g., “is round”, see Appendix C, Ameel
et al., 2008). Given this representation, overextension would
be expected. However, other more easily retrieved words
may out-compete bus for production at this age. In this case,
especially the word fles, which shows considerable overlap
with bus in comprehension (see Figure 2), takes over a large
part of the extension of bus in production. In the
comprehension task, the incomplete (by adult standards)
representation of bus makes children excessively liberal in
applying the name to objects, resulting in overextension.
Features may be added to the representation of bus and
others deleted or weighted less over time so that its
representation becomes more distinct from the
representation of fles (and of possibly other overlapping
categories) over time.
Ameel et al.’s (2008) production study also revealed that
children initially attended to different features from adults
when naming objects, but gradually learned to attend to the
adult set of features and assign them the appropriate
weights. This finding is in line with Mervis’ (1987) view of
lexical development which implies that both over- and
underextensions can occur. The findings of our
comprehension study – only overextensions –, however,
seem to imply that Mervis is wrong. Given the current
findings, Mervis may be right about the process children go
through to arrive at adult representations, which may
involve adding relevant features, dropping irrelevant ones,
and/or adapting feature weights to arrive at adult featural
knowledge. Regarding the initial category representation,
Mervis may be wrong in one respect. Consistent with her
view, naming (both comprehension and production) may be
initially controlled by a subset of adult features plus some
irrelevant features. The number of features for adults and
children will be similar due to the addition of these
irrelevant features. However, according to Mervis, these
irrelevant features, if too specific and assigned a high
feature weight, can produce underextension. But no
underextension was found in comprehension, suggesting
that the irrelevant features generally are rather too broad and
together with the smaller subset of the adult features cause

2022

overextension. Over time, the irrelevant features are
replaced by relevant ones, so that children gradually arrive
at the correct set of adult features.
It must be acknowledged that comprehension tasks are like everything else - an indirect measure of actual featural
knowledge. Given the finding that children easily
overestimate their own capacities (Stipek & MacIver, 1989),
it could be that younger children also tend to accept offered
words more readily in the name acceptability task, and rate
things higher in typicality than adults. So, we have to take
into account that more than just featural changes may
contribute to developmental changes in patterns of
production and patterns of comprehension judgments.
However, the patterns of word acceptance make clear that a
bias to accept names more generously than adults cannot be
the whole story. Even the youngest children are not just
saying yes to whatever is offered to them too often. The
regions of semantic space covered by each adult word and
the peculiarities of the irregular shapes of the adult regions
are substantially mirrored in the children’s choices (see
Figures 2 and 3), indicating that their responses are guided
by specific word knowledge.
Our data highlight the importance of understanding later
lexical development in order to develop a complete view of
word learning. Like Mowgli who lives in a jungle full of
intertwining lianas and gradually has to disentangle them on
his developmental path through the jungle, children’s words
meanings are initially strongly intertwined. Children
gradually have to disentangle them in order to arrive at adult
featural knowledge.
Acknowledgments
Eef Ameel is postdoctoral fellow at the Fund for Scientific
Research, Flanders. We thank An Van Brusselen, Caroline
Marsinelle and Sofie Tijskens for assisting in the data
collection.
References
Ameel, E., Malt, B. C., & Storms, G. (2008). Object naming
and later lexical development: From baby bottle to beer
bottle. Journal of Memory and Language, 58, 262-285.
Ameel, E., Malt, B. C., Storms, G., & Van Assche, F.
(2009). Semantic convergence in the bilingual lexicon.
Journal of Memory and Language , 60 , 270–290.
Ameel, E., Storms, G., Malt, B. C., & Sloman, S. A. (2005).
How bilinguals solve the naming problem. Journal of
Memory and Language, 53, 60-80.
Andersen, E. S. (1975). Cups and glasses: learning that
boundaries are vague. Child Language, 2, 79–103.
Benedict, H. (1979). Early lexical development:
Comprehension and production. Journal of Child
Language, 6, 183-200.
Bjorklund, D. F., Thompson, B. E., & Ornstein, P. A.
(1983). Developmental trends in children’s typicality
judgments.
Behavior
Research
Methods
and
Instrumentation ,15 , 350–356.

Bowerman, M. (1974). Learning the structure of causative
verbs: a study in the relationship of cognitive, semantic
and syntactic development. Papers and Reports on Child
Language Development, 8, 142–178.
Carey, S. (1978). The child as word learner. In M. Halle, J.
Bresnan, & G. A. Miller (Eds.), Linguistic theory and
psychological reality (pp. 264–293). Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Clark, E. V. (1973). What’s in a word? On the child’s
acquisition of semantics in his first language. In T. E.
Moore (Ed.), Cognitive development and the acquisition
of language (pp. 65–110). New York: Academic Press.
Gropen, J., Pinker, S., Hollander, M., & Goldberg, R.
(1991). Syntax and semantics in the acquisition of
locative verbs. Journal of Child Language, 18(1), 115–
151.
Kuczaj, S. A. (1982). Young children's overextensions of
object words in comprehension and/or production:
Support for a prototype theory of early object word
meaning. First Language, 3, 93-105.
Maridaki-Kassotaki, K. (1997). Are rating-based procedures
reliable for derivation of typicality judgments from
children?
Behavior
Research
Methods
and
Instrumentation, 29(3), 376-385.
Mervis, C. B. (1987). Child-basic object categories and
early lexical development. In U. Neisser (Ed.), Concepts
and conceptual development: ecological and intellectual
factors in categorisation (pp. 201–233). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Mervis, C. B., & Rosch, E. (1981). Categorization of natural
objects. Annual Review of Psychology, 32, 89-115.
Pye, C., Loeb, D. F., & Pao, Y. Y. (1996). The acquisition
of breaking and cutting. In E. V. Clark (Ed.), The
proceedings of the twenty-seventh annual child language
research forum (pp. 227–236). Stanford: Center for the
Study of Language and Information.
Rescorla, L. (1981). Category development in early
language. Journal of Child Language, 8, 225-238.
Rosch, E. (1973). On the internal structure of perceptual and
semantic categories. In T. E. Moore (Ed.), Cognitive
development and the acquisition of language (pp. 111144). New York: Academic Press.
Stipek, D., & MacIver, D. (1989). Developmental change in
children’s assessment of intellectual competence. Child
Development, 60(3), 521-538.
Verheyen, S., Ameel, E., & Storms, G. (2007). Determining
the dimensionality in spatial representations of semantic
concepts. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, and
Computers, 39, 427-438.

2023

