UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Partial Representations of Scenes in Change Blindness: In the Eyes and in the Hands

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0r24t2s1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Benesh, Nick
Fonville, Brent
Dale, Rick

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Partial Representations of Scenes in Change Blindness:
In the Eyes and in the Hands
Nick Benesh (nbenesh@memphis.edu)
Brent Fonville (jbfnvlle@memphis.edu)
Rick Dale (radale@memphis.edu)
Department of Psychology / Institute for Intelligent Systems
University of Memphis
Memphis, TN 38152 USA
Abstract
Change blindness is a person‟s inability to notice changes in a
visual scene that seem obvious when pointed out. Recent
experiments using eye tracking techniques have suggested
that even though participants do not detect a change they
fixate on the changing area more. Two studies test whether
this finding is present across different change blindness
paradigms and whether it is detectable after fixation. In the
first study we compare behavior in flicker and gradual change
paradigms. Results reveal that across paradigms participants
do spend more time on the changing area yet do not detect the
change. In the second study we test whether we can capture
the traces of change blindness in mouse movement. Findings
indicate that accuracy has more of an impact on mouse
movement than presence of change.
Keywords: change blindness, mouse movement, eye
tracking, decision making.

Introduction
Change blindness occurs when a seemingly obvious
occurrence within one's range of vision escapes attention.
Many studies have investigated the notion of change
blindness. These studies have shown that people fail to see
changes in videos, photographs, and even in real life
situations about 50% of the time, although these changes are
obvious after they have been pointed out (Hollingworth,
2003; Levin, Simons, Angelone, & Chabris, 2002; Rensink,
O'Regan, & Clark, 1997; Simons & Chabris, 1999; Simons
& Levin, 1997). Evidence for change blindness has been
found in both lab and in real life settings and can be induced
in various ways (see Rensink, 2002 for an overview). Two
of the more common ways to induce change blindness are
flicker and gradual changes (Rensink et al., 1997; Simons,
Franconeri, & Reimer, 2000). The flicker technique induces
change blindness by rapidly presenting two images of the
same scene each followed by a blank slide to act as a
disruptor (Rensink et al., 1997). The gradual change
technique induces change blindness by changing part of the
visual scene gradually over a ~12 second viewing time
(Simons et al., 2000).
David, Laloyaux, Devue, and Cleeremans (2006)
compared flicker and gradual change techniques and found
that participants were better able to detect changes in flicker
videos than in gradual videos, suggesting these two

techniques are different and might tap into different
perceptual and cognitive processes.
Hollingworth, Williams, and Henderson (2001) suggested
that change attracts attention. Using a flicker paradigm they
found that participants fixated for longer duration on the
changing aspect of a scene when they detected the change.
More interestingly, they also found participants fixated
more on the changing scene even when they did not detect
the change.
Hollingworth et al. (2001) reported an important finding,
because they suggest that change blindness might say more
about cognitive processes than visual perceptual processes.
Thus far, Hollingworth et al.‟s finding is limited to flicker
techniques and might therefore be an artifact of the
technique rather than a conclusion for change blindness in
general. However, Hollingworth et al.‟s finding has not been
investigated for the possibility that cognitive processes
might explain the change blindness effect. In this paper, we
showcase two studies intending to test whether partial
detection of changes may take place even when detection
may not occur. The first experiment shows that two
commonly used change blindness techniques have similar
effects, suggesting that it is not low-level perceptual features
that are driving this sub-threshold processing. The second
experiment tests whether this processing makes its way to
post-viewing decisions, which would shed further light on
how detailed these representations are. We first begin with a
background summary of action dynamics measures to
justify its use in this design.

Action Dynamics and Cognition
Cognition is not a rigid set of processes, but can be thought
of as a continuous, dynamic system that is ever changing
from moment to moment. Research in the area of action
dynamics has shown that cognitive processes can be tracked
at a continuous rate by looking at continuous motor actions
such as arm movements (Dale, Roche, Snyder, & McCall,
2008). Rather than using static response measures, the
action dynamics approach taps into the evolution of a
cognitive process, as it approaches one or another option
present in a task environment. Dale, Kehoe, and Spivey
(2007) found that arm trajectories differ when competing
categories are presented with images of animals. Asking
participants to choose the correct category for whale when

2890

presented with mammal and fish causes a competition in
cognition, which is then represented in a differing pattern of
physical movement than when non-competing categories are
present (mammal and bird). Contrasting information in
decision-making may literally pull us into differing
directions. McKinstry, Dale, and Spivey (2008) found that
when participants are deciding on the truth values of
statements there is a distinct index in arm movement
reaction to the decision-making process. Participants show a
greater curvature in movement when deciding on statements
with a low truth value and less curvature on higher truth
value statements. When decision-making takes more effort
due to higher levels of ambiguity (e.g. low truth value
statements) physical movements mirror the dissonance
being experienced within the mind. The same is true for
when there is little cognitive dissonance (i.e. less curvature
in movements regarding high truth value statements).
Spivey, Grosjean, & Knoblich (2005) found that arm
movement trajectories do not move directly to an intended
item, but will curve towards a competitor option before
selecting the correct item. Dale, Roche, Snyder, & McCall
(2008) used an action dynamics approach to map out
learning as it took place. By mapping the arm movements of
participants, paired-associate learning expressed particular
patterns and changes to those patterns as the learning
progressed and deepened. Just as learning and lexical
decision-making can be mapped out using this action
dynamics approach, decision-making in other cognitive
aspects can also be analyzed using this process. In change
blindness, participants are asked if they perceive a change in
the visual stimuli presented. However, previous studies of
change blindness have not looked directly at the decisionmaking process that is taking place during this particular
question.
The current study employs eye tracking in both flicker
and gradual change paradigms to investigate Hollingworth
and Henderson‟s (2002) findings at a perceptual level. In
addition, we also investigate at a cognitive level by utilizing
the motor movements involved in the decision-making
process of change blindness. Using the action dynamics
approach, the continuous process of decision-making can be
tracked as they take place in real time. Indices present in
subtle arm curvature may also reveal that participants have
detected a subtle change just beneath the level of conscious
perception.

participants did not notice a change, they would fixate on
the changing area longer than participants in a non-changing
baseline condition.

Experiment 1

The experiment was set up with a 2 (change or no-change) x
2 (flicker or gradual change) within subject factorial design.
Participants saw 36 videos (12 change, 12 no-change, 12
filler), each ~10 seconds in length.
Participants were asked one question after each video they
saw and their responses were recorded via yes/no response
buttons on the keyboard. The question was (“did you notice
a change in the video?”) provided a basic measure of
whether participants noticed a change.

In order to expand on Hollingworth and Henderson‟s (2002)
findings we performed an eye-tracking experiment where
participants‟ eye gaze was monitored while they watched
flicker and gradual change inducing videos. Following the
viewing of each video, they were asked whether they saw a
change and what the change was. We hypothesized that
participants who noticed the change in flicker and gradual
change videos would fixate on the changing areas more than
participants who did not notice the change. More
importantly, however, we hypothesized that even if

Participants
Thirty undergraduate students (17 female, 13 male)
participated for Psychology course credit. All participants
had normal or corrected-to-normal vision.

Stimuli
Materials included flicker and gradual video materials from
Simons‟ (2003) Surprising Studies of Visual Awareness
DVD, existing public domain images made available on the
Internet by R. Rensink, and Robinson (2003). In order to
increase the number of items, additional videos were created
using a similar format and procedure as the Rensink et al.
(1997) and Simons et al. (2000) videos.
In the study, 24 change videos were used each ~10
seconds long. The content of the various videos included
scenes of ordinary things such as farms, office desks,
beaches, and street scenes. One video, for instance, showed
a scene with a wheat field in the foreground and a barn with
a silo and trees in the background. In this video, the
changing component consisted of the disappearance of a
section of the wheat field.
The change videos were manipulated to obtain no-change
control videos. To ensure that participants never saw the
same video twice, the number of change videos displayed
was lowered. These no-change control videos combined
with filler videos, which never included a change, were
included with the stimuli videos to obtain a 1:2 ratio of
change/no-change stimuli so that participants were unlikely
to strategically pick up on change patterns.

Apparatus
An SMI Hi-Speed eye tracker was used and had a 240 Hz
sampling rate with a viewing angle of (horizontal/vertical) ±
30° / 30° (up), 45° (down). Participants‟ heads were
stabilized by an adjustable ergonomic chin rest and forehead
rest while they viewed the stimuli. All participants made
responses using the keyboard. All stimuli were presented on
an 800 x 600-pixel computer screen, and a 9-point
calibration procedure was used for calibrating participants.

Design

2891

participants were looking at the changing AOI even though
they did not detect a change.

Procedure
Participants were initially shown two examples of change
videos: one flicker and one gradual change and were told
that their task was to determine if there was a change in the
video and to report their conclusion by pressing the
appropriate response button. After the first eye gaze
calibration, the experiment started. Participants viewed the
videos and responded to the two questions. Calibration was
monitored and corrected when needed throughout the
experiment.

Response Data
Response accuracy for the question regarding whether or
not there was a change showed that participants performed
at about chance (50%). More specifically, participants
detected a change in the flicker stimuli (M = .48) more often
than in the gradual change stimuli (M = .21) F(1, 22) = 15.9,
p < .001, d = .57. This difference between paradigms was
similar to what David et al. (2006) found in their study
using a somewhat different procedure.

Results
Data for the filler videos were excluded from all analysis.
Only fixation duration information was used for eye
tracking analyses. For the fixation data outliers were
identified as 2.5 standard deviations above the mean by
subject by condition and were also removed from the
analysis. This affected 3.4% percent of the data.
The areas of interests (AOIs) were identified as the
changing area in the change videos, and the corresponding
identical (but not changing) area in the no-change videos.
Because not all of the videos were played for the same
length of time and not all of the AOIs were the same size,
data was normalized for time on task and space in pixels.
This allowed for the comparison of both flicker and gradual
change techniques. Total fixation time was divided by the
total duration time of the video played, and this normalized
fixation time was divided by the pixel area. The same
algorithm was used to normalize regressions for time on
task and space in pixels:
Normalized fixation =

For all analyses reported here we used a mixed effects
model for analysis of the data. In mixed effect models both
participants and items are treated as random effects.
We checked for an order effect by initially putting
participants into two groups. A mixed-effects model
analysis was conducted on the total fixation time between
the two groups. No differences between the groups were
found. Therefore the data of the two groups were collapsed
into one.
One concern in answering the question whether
participants looked at an AOI without detecting the change
was that participants used a strategy, for instance by looking
at one specific area for the duration of the video and
detecting changes. Even though we discouraged strategies
by using a large proportion of filler videos, we verified that
participants did not have a bias towards detecting a change
by looking at proportions of signal detection „hit‟ and „false
alarm‟ rates. The calculated d’ = 1.575 and C = .692
showed that participants were sensitive to changes in the
videos, and a bias towards saying there was not a change.
This allowed for an ideal data set to examine whether

Eye gaze
Previous eye tracking studies have shown that a changing
area attracts more attention in general (Hollingworth &
Henderson, 2002; Hollingworth et al., 2001) even when not
detected. To test the aforementioned hypotheses we
analyzed only the fixation times for those cases where a)
participants reported no change and the video indeed did not
display a change, and b) participants reported no change but
the video did display a change, and ignored those cases of
no-change videos where participants did (incorrectly) notice
a change. We found that under the flicker condition, fixation
times were longer on changing areas than non-changing
areas, (Changing M = 7,000ms vs. Not Changing M =
5,073ms) F(1, 369.1) = 7.1, p < .01. However, for the
gradual change condition there was not a significant
difference when there was no detection between changing
area and no-changing area, (Changing M = 3,897ms vs. Not
Changing M = 3,624ms) F(1, 214.6) = .1, p = .74. This
suggests that flicker conditions attract attention more readily
than videos in the gradual condition. This is most likely due
to gradual change videos presenting only one instance of a
change per video to a participant.
A main effect was also found for change and no-change,
showing that fixations on the area of interest in the change
condition were significantly longer (M = 3,702ms, SD =
3,323ms) than those in the no-change condition (M =
2,837ms, SD = 2,685ms), F(1, 837.3) = 3.8, p = .05, d = .29.
This finding is similar to what Hollingworth et al. (2001)
found for flicker videos, confirming that a change in the
video does attract attention even if people are not aware of
the change. This finding could however be attributed to the
flicker paradigm. Such an interpretation was not warranted
by our data though, because no interaction was found
between flicker and gradual change on the one hand and
change and no change on the other F(1, 821.5) = 1.7, p =
.19.

Discussion
Many change blindness studies have investigated the
various conditions under which participants detect the
changes in scenes, either in flicker or gradual change
paradigms. Fewer studies have used eye tracking techniques
to investigate what people fixate on during the change
blindness task. One study in particular (Hollingworth et al.,

2892

2001) has found that people can fixate on a changing object
and not detect the change, but only in the flicker paradigm.
The current study has gone a step further by considering
whether this finding is unique to the perceptual
characteristics of the flicker paradigm by including gradual
change. The results suggest that gradual changes are more
difficult to detect, but overall the results are identical. Even
when participants do not detect a change, they do fixate on
the changing area significantly more than a no-change
baseline. This suggests that change blindness is not simply a
visual perception phenomenon. If it were then we might
expect to see more substantial differences in eye behavior.
However, this could mean that change blindness is partially
a cognitive phenomenon. Even if participants have
physically seen the change, they are not cognitively aware
that they have seen the change. The follow up study looks at
whether the cognitive phenomenon aspects can be captured
using an action dynamic approach.

Experiment 2
We wondered whether the decision-making process
regarding change detection could still carry information
about fixation in the cognitive system. If so, it may show up
in action dynamics measures described in the introduction.
We then conducted a similar experiment, but prompted
participants to respond to a change using the computer
mouse. For the second experiment we were interested in
capturing the decision making process in change detection.
To do this we looked at distance and deviation of mouse
movements when responding. Based on findings from
experiment one, we would predict that videos with no
change should have less variability in curvature than videos
with change because they should attract less attention. In
addition, if participants spent more time looking at the target
they should have less variability in their curvature, because
there are more opportunities to make representational
comparisons. Gradual videos were not used in this
experiment based on the findings mentioned in the first
experiment.

Participants
Twenty-six undergraduate students (20 female, 6 male)
participated for Psychology course credit. All participants
had normal or corrected-to-normal vision.

Stimuli
The same flicker videos from Experiment 1 were used in
Experiment 2 with some additional videos added to fill in
the gap left by removing the gradual videos and to increase
item count. A total of 28 flicker videos with a change were
used.

Apparatus
The same eye tracker, calibration settings, and computer
screen presentation from Experiment 1 were used in
Experiment 2.

Design
The experiment was set up with a 2 (change or no-change)
within subject factorial design. Participants saw 56 videos,
each ~10 seconds in length.
Immediately after the video, participants clicked on a
button at the bottom center of the screen. This caused the
question “did you notice a change in the video?” to appear
at the bottom of the screen, and the available responses
yes/no to appear at the top right and left, respectively.
Mouse-movement trajectories of response were recorded
(Spivey et al., 2005).

Procedure
Participants were initially shown an example change video,
and were told that their task was to determine if there was a
change in the video and to report their conclusion by
clicking the corresponding response. After the first eye gaze
calibration, the experiment started. Calibration was
monitored and corrected when needed throughout the
experiment.

Results
The distances and deviation of the mouse trajectories were
calculated using MATLAB. The distance is defined as the
length the mouse travelled in pixels from the starting x, y
coordinates to the ending coordinates. Maximum deviation
is the maximum distance from the trajectory to an assumed
straight line. We first wanted to compare signal detection
with Experiment 1. The biggest difference in Experiment 2
is that the proportion of False Alarms is much higher. The
calculated d’ = 0.823 and C = .305 showed that participants
were less sensitive to changes in the videos, and less bias
towards saying there was not a change. This could be due to
the videos that were added were more difficult or some bias
in responses.

Eye Gaze
We first carried out a series of exploratory analyses to see if
eye-movement patterns predict mouse-cursor trajectories.
Specifically, we hypothesized that longer overall fixation
times on change area would result in shorter distances and
less deviation in arm trajectories. A linear mixed effects
regression was run with distance as the outcome variable,
fixation duration as the predictor variable and subject as a
random factor. Surprisingly, fixation had a non-significant
effect on distance, F(1, 488) = 0.002, p = 0.96. We then ran
the same analysis with deviation as the outcome variable.
Again, fixation had a non-significant effect on deviation,
F(1, 488) = 0.01, p = 0.98. Digging deeper we then ran a
mixed effects regression including only trials that contained
a change. Distance was the outcome variable, fixation
duration as the predictor variable, and subject as a random
factor. No significant effect was found, F(1, 120) = 2.20, p
= 0.14. The same model was run with only trials in which
no change occurred and a non-significant effect was found,
F(1, 366) = 0.51, p = 0.47. We repeated these models,

2893

substituting deviation with distance and similar nonsignificant effects were found for change F(1, 366) = 0.28, p
= 0.59, and for no change trials F(1, 120) = 0.81, p = 0.37.
Taking all of these results into account would suggest that
mouse movement is not influenced by fixation duration. We
did not find a connection between eye gaze and mouse
movements for change blindness.

Mouse Movement
Change / no change: In our primary set of analyses, we
tested if there were any general effects from the presence or
absence of a change on both mouse measurements. A
mixed-effects regression was run with distance as the
outcome variable, the presence of a change as the predictor
variable and subject as a random factor. We found that the
presence or absence of a change had no significant effect on
the distance of the subjects‟ mouse movements, F(1, 1,850)
= 0.89, p = 0.35. The same analysis was then run with
deviation as the outcome variable with similar nonsignificant results, F(1, 1,850) = 0.68, p = 0.41. This is in
contrast to the eye tracking results from the first experiment.
In short, presence/absence of change by itself does not seem
to induce differences in mouse trajectories.
Accurate / inaccurate: Furthermore we wanted to examine
whether traces of participants‟ general decision making
processes might be captured in the mouse movement.
Participant accuracy was calculated for responding correctly
and incorrectly on all videos. Accuracy was then used as a
predictor variable for deviation/distance. The results
indicate that accuracy was not a significant predictor of
either distance, F(1, 1,850) = 1.57, p = 0.46, or deviation,
F(1, 1,850) = 0.53, p =0.21. This finding suggests that
whether participants were correct or incorrect in their
responses did not by itself influence their mouse movement.
This might be because participants had already come to a
decision of whether a change occurred before moving the
mouse.
Just change trials: We then checked to see if there was
anything going on in the trials where a change occurred
similar to analysis in the first experiment. We ran a mixed
effects regression which only included trials in which a
change occurred using distance as the outcome variable,
accuracy as the predictor variable and subject as a random
factor. We found that distance increased significantly when
participants answered correctly, F(1, 934) = 7.75, p = 0.006.
Another regression was run with only trials that contained
no change and results showed a decrease in distance when
answering correctly, F(1, 914) = 16.02, p < 0.001. Similar
results were found when deviation was substituted as the
outcome variable with the presence of a change resulting in
shorter deviations, F(1, 934) = 7.05, p < 0.001, and no
change resulting in larger deviations, F(1, 914) = 21.37, p =
0.008. These results are the opposite of what we predicted
earlier. To determine why this might be, we looked at
interactions between video and response.

Figure 1: Interaction between participants‟ Accuracy and
the presence of a change for Mean Distance.

Figure 2: Interaction between participants‟ Accuracy and the
presence of a change for Mean Deviation.
Interaction between change and accuracy: To test a
possible interaction with accuracy and presence of change,
both terms were centered and a mixed effects regression was
run with distance as the outcome variable. Results showed a
significant interaction between change and accuracy, F(1,
1,848) = 25.14, p < 0.0001 (See Figure 1). Deviation was
then used as the outcome variable and a significant
interaction was again found, F(1, 1,848) = 27.34, p < 0.001
(See Figure 2). Both results were plotted to see the graphical
interaction between accuracy and change presence (See
Figure 1 and Figure 2). In both plots, participants exhibited
less confidence in their mouse movement when correctly

2894

answering there was a change, as if they were still debating
if they noticed a change. Whereas when they correctly
respond there was no-change they are more confident in
their mouse movement, as if they have already decided there
was no change before being asked.

General Discussion
In the first experiment we compared different types of
change blindness videos to determine whether perceptual
processes could clarify where change blindness occurs. We
noted similar behavior in both types of videos suggesting
that change blindness cannot be completely explained by
perceptual processes. In the second experiment we used an
action dynamic approach in order to capture the cognitive
processes involved in deciding whether a change occurred
or not. We found that confidence in decision making was
only impacted when both the presence of a change and
accuracy of response were taken into account.
These findings taken together imply that the cognitive
processes involved in change blindness detection are most
likely occurring before or as responses are given, but after
the perceptual process of scene searching. This would
suggest that there are two stages to change blindness. The
first stage is during low level visual processing, such as at
the fixation level. Obviously it is necessary for the change
area to be fixated on. The second stage is during higher
levels while processing the visual scene. At this stage, even
though the change has been fixated on, it still needs further
processing to be detected. In the current study, mouse
movement served as an indirect way of measuring this
higher level processing that is hypothesized to lead to
detection. However, the measures employed in the current
study are not fine grained enough to determine specifically
when detection takes place.
We recommend that future research focus on the
integration of perceptual and cognitive processes, such as
metacognition (Smilek, Eastwood, Reynolds, & Kingstone,
2008) in order to better understand why what people see and
what they detect is not always what they get.

References
Dale, R., Kehoe, C.E. & Spivey, M.J. (2007). Graded motor
responses in the time course of categorizing atypical
exemplars. Memory & Cognition, 35, 15-28.
Dale, R., Roche, J. M., Snyder, K., & McCall, R. (2008).
Exploring action dynamics as an index of paired-associate
learning. PLoS ONE, 3, e1728.
David, E., Laloyaux, C., Devue, C., & Cleeremans, A.
(2006). Change blindness to gradual changes in facial
expressions. Psychologica Belgica, 46, 253-268.
Hollingworth, A. (2003). Failures of retrieval and
comparison constrain change detection in natural scenes.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 29, 388-403.
Hollingworth, A., & Henderson, J. (2002). Accurate Visual
Memory for previously attended objects in natural scenes.

Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 28, 113-136.
Hollingworth, A., Williams, C., & Henderson, J. (2001). To
see and remember: Visually specific information is
retained in memory from previously attended objects in
natural scenes. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 8, 761768.
Levin, D., Simons, D., Angelone, B., & Chabris, C. (2002).
Memory for centrally attended changing objects in an
incidental real-world change detection paradigm. British
Journal of Psychology, 93, 289-302.
McKinstry, C., Dale, R., & Spivey, M. J. (2008). Action
dynamics reveal parallel competition in decision making.
Psychological Science, 19, 22-24.
Mitroff, S., Simons, D., & Levin, D. (2004). Nothing
compares two views: Change blindness can occur despite
preserved access to the changed information. Perception
& Psychophysics, 66, 1268-1281.
Rensink, R. (2002). Change detection. Annual Review of
Psychology, 53, 245-277.
Rensink, R., O'Regan, J., & Clark, J. (1997). To see or not
to see: The need for attention to perceive changes in
scenes. Psychological Science, 8, 368-373.
Robinson, A. (2003). [Data File]. Available from Alan
Robinson‟s Change Blindness web site. Retrieved on
February
5,
2010,
from
http://csclab.ucsd.edu/~alan/vision/change_blindness/stim
/practice.zip.
Simons, D. (2003). Surprising studies of visual awareness.
[DVD].
Champaign,
IL:
Viscog
Productions,
http://www.viscog.com.
Simons, D., & Chabris, C. (1999). Gorillas in our midst:
Sustained inattentional blindness for dynamic events.
Perception, 28, 1059-1074.
Simons, D., & Levin, D. (1997). Change blindness. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 1, 261-267.
Simons, D., Franconeri, S., & Reimer, R. (2000). Change
blindness in the absence of visual disruption. Perception,
29, 1143-1154.
Smilek, D., Eastwood, J. D., Reynolds, M. G., & Kingstone,
A. (2008). Metacognition and change detection: Do lab
and life really converge? Consciousness and Cognition,
17, 1056-1061.
Spivey, M., Grosjean, M., & Knoblich, G. (2005).
Continuous attraction toward phonological competitors:
Thinking with your hands. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 102, 10393-10398.

2895

