UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Perceptual and Conceptual Cues in Classification and Inference Tasks

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0wj9h53f

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Sims, Clare
Colunga, Eliana

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Perceptual and Conceptual Cues in Classification and Inference Tasks
Clare E. Sims (clare.holtpatrick@colorado.edu)
Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, 345 UCB
Boulder, CO 80309-0345 USA

Eliana Colunga (eliana.colunga@colorado.edu)
Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, 345 UCB
Boulder, CO 80309-0345 USA
Abstract

the contributions of both perceptual and conceptual
information to several types of category learning and use.
In the current work we explore the contributions of
perceptual and conceptual information to categorization, and
particularly how each type of information is weighed in
different kinds of categorization tasks. We do this in the
domain of animacy in order to take advantage of a wellknown characteristic of animacy categories.

We are able to use many types of information available in the
environment when categorizing or making inferences. This
research explores how two types of information—perceptual
and conceptual—may be used to different extents in different
tasks. The method takes advantage of the distinction between
animate and artifact categories. In two experiments, adult
participants were given perceptual and conceptual
information about the animacy of novel categories, and then
were tested on three tasks. Participants categorized items by
classifying with a given novel name, with a given fact, or by
inferring untrained facts about the items. Results showed that
participants used different sources of information depending
on the task. These results are discussed in terms of how they
could add to an account of the mechanisms of categorization.

Animate and Artifact Categories
Animacy is an apt domain for the exploration of the uses of
different sources of information because people exhibit
distinct patterns of categorization for animates versus
artifacts. One way to characterize these different patterns is
that artifact categories tend to be broader and more inclusive
whereas animate categories tend to be narrower and more
conservative. These distinctive patterns have been shown in
both developmental and adult studies.
Developmental studies have examined how children
categorize animates and artifacts with novel name
generalization tasks. In such tasks, a child is trained on a
novel exemplar with a novel label. The child is then
presented with various other novel test items that match the
original in specific dimensions such as shape, size, and/or
texture, while varying in other dimensions. When asked
which of the test items would be labeled with the same
name, children show distinct generalization patterns
depending on whether the exemplar was presented as an
artifact or as an animate. By three years of age children use
shape as the only critical feature in categorizing novel
artifact-like objects, but they use a more stringent criteria of
both shape and texture for novel objects presented as
animates (Jones, Smith, & Landau, 1991).
The pattern of categorizing animates by multiple
similarities, making for more restrictive categories, and
categorizing artifacts by fewer similarities develops early in
life and endures into adulthood. One study found that adults
tended to classify items with more feature variability as
artifacts, and only classified highly consistent items as
animates (Freeman & Sera, 1996). Another explored the
structural nature of animacy categories and found that
artifact categories tend to be more flexible and spread out in
similarity space whereas natural kinds, including animates,
are more tightly clustered by similarities (Malt, Sloman,
Gennari, Shi, & Wang, 1999).

Keywords: Categorization; classification; inference;
animacy; perceptual and conceptual information.

Introduction
A fundamental question of cognitive psychology centers on
how we use the information available to us in the
environment to accomplish cognitive tasks such as
categorization. An intuitive view is that categorization is
based on similarity information (Shepard, 1987). For
example, objects that have perceptual features in common
are often categorized together; cup-shaped objects tend to be
grouped with other cup-shaped objects. More abstract
commonalities, such as functional attributes, can also be
involved in categorization (Rosch & Mervis, 1975). For
example, the category of vehicles is well characterized by
the functional attribute of being used for transportation.
Categorization is highly complex and based on multiple
types and sources of information.
In this paper we focus on two specific types of
information that contribute to categorization: perceptual and
conceptual. Perceptual information refers to directly
perceptible features of items we encounter, such as size and
shape. Conceptual information refers to more abstract facts
about these items, such as internal characteristics and
function that may not be directly observable. The dichotomy
between perceptual and conceptual information is at the
heart of a lively debate in the developmental literature in
which proponents of either side argue that category learning
is a top-down, conceptually driven process (e.g., Booth &
Waxman, 2008) or that it is a bottom-up, associative process
(e.g., Colunga & Smith, 2008). The research with adults in
this paper contributes by offering a method of comparing

637

Artifact

Animate

categorization tasks. The experiments investigate how these
two types of information influence people’s construal of
objects as animate or artifacts. In two experiments we
offered perceptual cues in the form of visual features and
conceptual cues in the form of written facts. Perceptual and
conceptual cues were crossed so there were four possible
combinations of cues (see Figure 1): two were congruent
(both cues indicated animate or both artifact) and two were
incongruent.
Conceptual
Cues
Animate
Artifact
Perceptual

In sum, previous work indicates that the animacy
distinction is basic and pervasive, emerging early in life;
moreover, there are distinct and consistent patterns in how
people categorize animates compared to artifacts. That is,
people generalize animates more conservatively and
generalize artifacts less conservatively. In the current
research we take advantage of these distinct patterns to
explore the contributions of perceptual and conceptual
information to categorization. To briefly foreshadow our
measure and the logic behind it, we associated each type of
information with an animacy category. In each condition,
we offered both perceptual (the way the item looks) and
conceptual (verbally labeling it as a living or man-made
thing) information. Then we looked at how these different
animacy cues influenced people’s construal of the categories
as animate or inanimate by measuring the shift in
generalization patterns in response to the given cues. Before
further fleshing out the details of this measure, we will
introduce the categorization tasks used in the current
research.

?
?

Figure 1: Diagram of study design and predicted
generalization patterns; bars represent old, new, and
distractor items, respectively.

Tasks
The current experiments explore the question of how
perceptual and conceptual information are used in the
context of three categorization tasks: novel name extension,
ontological category extension, and inference making. The
first two tasks involve generalizing items at test based on
information given at training, that is, a novel name and an
ontological type (animate or artifact). These can also be
thought of as classification tasks because participants must
classify items based on trained information. The third task
involves making an inductive inference about items at test
based on the ontological category information given at
training. For example, if an item were presented as being
alive, the participant would be asked to infer whether it
breathes.
Some previous research has investigated the uses of
perceptual and conceptual information in these types of
tasks, with mixed results. For example, Freeman and Sera
(1996) found that children and adults were able to use either
visual or verbal information in both classification and
induction tasks involving animals and machines. The
resulting patterns of categorization were in line with what
has been discussed about animacy categories, but did not
differ by task. In contrast, a study that focused on induction
found that children preferred perceptual similarity
information to conceptual kind information to guide
inferences about novel items (Sloutsky, Kloos, & Fisher,
2007). These mixed results suggest a need to further
investigate the uses of perceptual and conceptual sources of
information across different tasks. The experiments
presented here will directly compare uses of information
across three tasks to contribute to this area of research.

Generalization behavior at test, measured through the
three tasks, was used to explore whether participants
weighed the perceptual or conceptual dimension more
strongly. It is important to note that this measure captures
implicit patterns of generalization. That is, although we
asked participants questions like “is this alive?” the patterns
of responses could still be in line with either an animate or
artifact category. For example, in looking at the responses to
the “is this alive?” question, a pattern of saying “yes” only
to the old items would be taken as a conservative
generalization pattern, typical of animate categories, but
saying “yes” equivalently to new than old items would
indicate an artifact generalization pattern. In this way our
measure focuses on the implicit patterns of generalization
rather than explicit responses at test.
We also examined these implicit generalization patterns
in terms of whether they were associated with perceptual or
conceptual cues. For example, if the perceptual cue
indicated an animate while the conceptual cue indicated an
artifact, a relatively highly conservative generalization
pattern would indicate that the item was treated as an
animate, and in turn that the perceptual cue was used
preferentially in the task. Based on previous findings about
the relative breadth of animate and artifact categories, we
looked for two distinct generalization patterns: relatively
more conservative generalization to indicate an animate, and
relatively less conservative generalization to indicate an
artifact. The idea of using relative generalization patterns is
key; by this we mean that we will compare patterns on the
incongruent blocks to those on the congruent blocks. This is
illustrated in Figure 1: from the predicted patterns in the
congruent blocks, we can explore whether the incongruent
blocks show similar patterns along the perceptual or
conceptual dimension. In this way we are not arbitrarily
deciding which patterns count as “conservative” and “not

The Current Experiments
The current question of interest is how people use
perceptual and conceptual information in various

638

conservative,” but will instead report generalization relative
to a standard, the congruent blocks.
The two experiments presented here have the same design
but use different stimuli. The perceptual cues in Experiment
1 were implemented using two sets of novel object images
(Tarr, 2006; see Figure 2). The animate stimuli consisted of
the image set called Greebles, which are rounded, uniform
in color and texture, and organized into categories such that
global relations between their features cue to category
membership. Previous research indicates that Greebles are
processed in ways similar to faces (Gauthier, Tarr,
Anderson, Skudlarski, & Gore, 1999). The artifact stimuli
consisted of the Fribble novel image set which are angular,
have distinct parts with varying colors and textures, and are
categorized based on the presence or absence of specific
parts, characteristics typical of artifacts. In contrast, in
Experiment 2 the perceptual manipulation relied on single
visual features, eyes for animates or wheels for artifacts,
added to one type of animacy ambiguous novel image set. In
both experiments conceptual cues were provided as written
facts that explicitly indicated whether the object was an
animate or an artifact (i.e., “is alive” and “was made in a
factory”).
Several specific predictions can be made. First, the
conditions in which perceptual and conceptual cues are
congruent should reveal the distinctive generalization
patterns of animates and artifacts (see Figure 1). When the
cues are congruent and both indicate an animate,
generalization should be more conservative, with
participants generalizing to a more limited variety of items.
Conversely, when cues are congruent and both indicate an
artifact, generalization behavior should be less conservative,
with participants generalizing to a larger variety of items. Of
particular interest are the two conditions in which perceptual
and conceptual cues are incongruent. Within these
conditions, generalization behavior will act as an indicator
of whether one cue type is preferentially used to determine
whether items belong to the animate or artifact category. If
no clear preference emerges from generalization behavior,
both perceptual and conceptual cues may be interacting and
contributing to categorization equivalently.
We are particularly interested in how the perceptual and
conceptual cues are used in the different tasks. The question
is, do different types of information carry more weight in
some tasks than others? For example, is perceptual
information more important for naming, but conceptual
information more important in making inferences?

the perceptual/conceptual cue combinations. Thus, two
blocks used Greebles and two Fribbles. For each block, old,
new, and distractor items were chosen from two subcategories of the respective image set. Six old items and
four new items came from one sub-category, and four
distractor items came from a different sub-category.
Individual images were presented with conceptual cues
consisting of sentences displayed beneath the image. The
animate cue was “This is alive,” and the artifact cue was
“This was made in a factory.” Each item was also presented
with one of the following novel names at training: “wuz,”
“mek,” “sim,” or “dap.”
a
b

Figure 2: Image sets used in Experiment 1: (a) Greebles,
(b) Fribbles.
Training slides consisted of old items (either Greebles or
Fribbles depending on the block) presented with a novel
name and conceptual cue. An example of the text that a
participant saw at training is “This is a [novel name]. It is
alive.” Testing slides consisted of old, new, and distractor
items presented one at a time with each of three questions,
for the name extension, ontological category extension, and
inference making tasks, respectively. On conceptually
animate blocks the questions were “Is this a wuz?” “Is this
alive?” and “Does this breathe?” On conceptually artifact
blocks the questions were “Is this a wuz?” “Was this made
in a factory?” and “Can you get this at a store?” For the
incongruent blocks, the types of questions used (e.g.,
animate or artifact) were consistent with the animacy of the
conceptual cue given at training.
Procedure Participants completed four blocks of training
and testing sets; block order was counterbalanced across
participants. All training and testing slides were presented
on a computer screen using the program E-Prime.
Participants began by reading instructions given on the
computer screen. They then proceeded to the training slides
of the first block. Participants saw 24 training slides in
random order: six old items shown four times each. Training
was unsupervised and self-paced; participants used the
space bar to proceed through the image slides interspersed
with an inter-stimulus blank screen.
At the end of the training slides, participants proceeded to
the testing slides of that block. The six old items from
training, along with four new and four distractor items,
appeared in testing. Each of these 14 items was shown twice
with each of the three categorization questions, for a total of
84 testing slides per block, also presented in random order.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants Thirty-one undergraduate students recruited
from the University of Colorado at Boulder psychology
department subject pool participated for course credit.
Materials Participants were trained on categories drawn
from the Greeble and Fribble novel image sets (Tarr, 2006;
see Figure 2). There were four blocks total, one for each of

Results
The first issue we explored in the data was whether
participants successfully learned the categories of Greebles

639

Table 1: Experiment 1 means (standard deviations) of percentages of “yes” responses to old and new items presented as
either animate or artifact through different cues. P = significant interaction between perceptual cues and trial type, C =
significant interaction between conceptual cues and trial type (F(1, 30) > 4.80, p < 0.05 for all).

Task
NamingP
OntologicalP
InferentialPC

Perceptual
Animate
Artifact
Old
New
Old
New
93.28
62.30
90.59
91.13
(9.54)
(26.63) (13.69) (14.32)
92.74
59.07
91.00
89.00
(10.81) (28.13) (13.13) (16.36)
63.31
45.97
61.69
58.88
(9.54)
(26.64) (13.69) (14.32)

and Fribbles based on responses to old, new, and distractor
items. Percentages of “yes” responses were submitted to a
one-way repeated measures ANOVA. Participants accepted
old items most (M = 82.35, SD = 29.02), followed closely
by new items (M = 68.24, SD = 34.50), but rarely accepted
distractor items (M = 4.84, SD = 12.40), F(2, 60) = 477.52,
p < 0.001. To focus more narrowly on generalization, and
because responses to distractors were below chance (twotailed t(30) = 33.88, p < 0.001), only responses to old and
new items were included in subsequent analyses.
The next question was whether participants showed
distinct generalization patterns for animates and artifacts. To
verify our prediction, we began by looking at the two
congruent blocks of the experiment, in which both cues
indicated either an animate or an artifact. Percentages of
“yes” responses were submitted to a 2 (animacy: animate or
artifact) × 2 (trial type: old or new) repeated measures
ANOVA. Results revealed main effects of both factors (F(1,
30) > 6, p < 0.01 for both) in addition to the key interaction
between animacy and trial type (F (1, 30) = 23.54, p <
0.001). This interaction showed the expected distinct
generalization patterns. On the congruent animate block,
participants responsed “yes” more to old items (M = 85.66,
SD = 24.89) than to new items (M = 57.26, SD = 33.41).
However on the congruent artifact block, responses were
equivalent to both old (M = 79.03, SD = 32.43) and new
items (M = 79.22, SD = 33.41). These patterns are consistent
with previous literature and verify our prediction of more
conservative generalization of animates and less
conservative generalization of artifacts.
Having established the presence of distinct generalization
patterns in responses to the congruent blocks, we went on to
explore the influences of perceptual and conceptual cues
and task. We separated the name extension, ontology
extension, and inference making tasks, and analyzed
responses to all blocks. Percentages of “yes” responses from
each task were separately submitted to a 2 (perceptual cue:
animate or artifact) × 2 (conceptual cue: animate or artifact)
× 2 (trial type: old or new) repeated measures ANOVA. All
three tasks showed a pattern of more “yes” responses to old
items compared to new items (F(1, 30) > 22, p < 0.001 for
all).

Conceptual
Animate
Artifact
Old
New
Old
New
90.19
75.61
93.68
77.82
(13.16) (19.05) (9.09) (21.64)
90.86
72.78
92.88
75.29
(12.71) (22.51) (9.99) (20.61)
72.18
58.67
52.82
47.18
(13.16) (19.05) (9.06) (21.64)

The main question of interest in the separate task analyses
was how the perceptual cue and conceptual cue variable
interacted with trial type. These results are displayed in
Table 1. In all of the significant interactions (indicated by
superscript P and C), the pattern of results are similar to
those discussed above in the context of the congruent
blocks. That is, more conservative generalization of
animates, as shown by more “yes” responses to old than to
new items, and less conservative generalization of artifacts,
as shown by equivalent responses to old and new items. The
perceptual cue significantly interacted with trial type in all
three of the categorization tasks, showing that participants
generalized differently depending on the perceptual cue
given no matter what kind of question they were answering.
The conceptual cue significantly interacted with trial type
only on the inferential task.

Discussion
The results of Experiment 1 revealed that perceptual and
conceptual information had varied influences in the different
tasks. In all three tasks, participants showed more
conservative generalization of the image set with perceptual
animate cues and less conservative generalization of the set
with perceptual artifact cues. In the inference making task in
particular, there was an additional influence of conceptual
cue: the distinct animacy patterns were also found to be in
line with whether the items were described as being alive or
as made in a factory. In sum, participants’ responses in the
two classification tasks were similarly influenced only by
the perceptual cues. In the inferential task, on the other
hand, responses were influenced by both the perceptual and
conceptual cues. This may confirm basic differences
between classification and inferential categorization tasks.
However, the strong perceptual effects throughout
Experiment 1 may also indicate fundamental differences
between the Greeble and Fribble image sets. It is possible
that one of these sets is simply easier to generalize than the
other. To control for any differences between the two sets,
in Experiment 2 we used a single image set and made the
perceptual cue a single added feature: eyes or wheels (see
Figure 3). If the perceptual effects of Experiment 1 are a
function of inherent differences in how easily Greebles and
Fribbles are generalized, then any perceptual effects should

640

Table 2: Experiment 2 means (standard deviations) of percentages of “yes” responses to old and new items presented as
either animate or artifact through different cues. P = significant interaction between perceptual cues and trial type, C =
significant interaction between conceptual cues and trial type (F(1, 31) > 4.75, p < 0.05 for all).

Task
NamingP
OntologicalP
Inferential

Perceptual
Animate
Artifact
Old
New
Old
New
81.90
64.45
83.72
76.64
(18.67) (27.72) (14.71) (18.67)
80.73
62.76
83.46
73.18
(18.10) (28.85) (14.71) (20.36)
64.58
55.86
60.42
52.08
(27.15) (29.98) (30.55) (26.59)

disappear in Experiment 2. If, on the other hand, the
perceptual effects are a function of the animacy
characteristics of the perceptual cues, then there should be
similar perceptual interactions with trial type. That is,
participants should generalize items with eyes more
conservatively, and items with wheels less conservatively.

Conceptual
Animate
Artifact
Old
New
Old
New
83.20
73.18
82.42
67.71
(16.97) (21.50) (16.40) (26.02)
82.92
70.05
81.25
65.89
(18.10) (22.63) (18.10) (27.72)
60.42
52.08
64.58
59.77
(32.24) (29.42) (28.28) (28.85)

“yes” responses were submitted to a one-way repeated
measures ANOVA. Participants responded “yes” most to
old items (M = 77.60, SD = 27.65), next most to new items
(M = 65.41, SD = 32.23), and least to distractors (M = 42.21,
SD = 37.38), F(2, 62) = 82.69, p < 0.001. Distractors tended
to be accepted at lower than chance levels (two-tailed t(31)
= 1.59, p = 0.12), and so were excluded from further
analyses. As in Experiment 1, only old and new items were
included in order to focus more directly on generalization
patterns.
Next we analyzed the congruent blocks of Experiment 2.
We submitted percentages of “yes” responses at test to a 2
(animacy) × 2 (trial type: old or new) repeated measures
ANOVA. The results confirmed that participants responded
“yes” more to old than to new items in the congruent blocks,
F(1, 31) = 22.61, p < 0.001. There was also a trend toward
the predicted animacy patterns in generalization, as shown
through an interaction between animacy and trial type, F(1,
31) = 1.44, p = 0.23. On the congruent animate block,
participants responded “yes” more to old items (M = 77.26,
SD = 27.80) than to new items (M = 61.98, SD = 32.44).
However on the congruent artifact block, responses to old
items (M = 77.95, SD = 27.65) were not as much greater
compared to new items (M = 68.84, SD = 31.90). This trend
is similar to the patterns seen in the first experiment—more
conservative on the congruent animate block and less
conservative on the congruent artifact block.
Next, as in Experiment 1, we separated the data by task
and conducted three separate 2 (perceptual cue) × 2
(conceptual cue) × 2 (trial type) repeated measures
ANOVAs. A main effect of trial type reached significance
in all three tasks, showing greater “yes” responses to old
items than to new items (F(1, 31) > 6.42, p ≤ 0.01 for all).
Next we explored whether there were any interactions
between either the perceptual or conceptual cues and trial
type; these results are displayed in Table 2. Significant
effects in this table indicate generalization patterns similar
to those discussed above. That is, more conservative
generalization of animates, as shown by a greater difference
between old and new responses, compared to artifacts. Only
two interactions reached significance among the task
analyses: perceptual cue influenced generalization in both
the naming and ontological extension tasks. There was no
perceptual cue interaction in the inferential task, and no
conceptual cue interactions in any of the tasks.

Experiment 2
Method
Participants Thirty-two undergraduate students recruited
from the University of Colorado at Boulder psychology
department subject pool participated for course credit.
Materials Participants were trained on categories drawn
from the YUFO image set (Tarr, 2006; see Figure 3). For
each block of the experiment, six old and six new items
were drawn from one sub-category, and six distractors were
drawn from a different sub-category.
a
b

Figure 3: Images used in Experiment 2: YUFO stimuli
with added eyes and wheels.
Perceptual cues consisted of simple visual features, eyes
or wheels, added to the YUFO images. Conceptual cues,
novel names, and test questions were the same as in
Experiment 1, with the exception of the inferential question
for conceptual artifacts, which was changed to “Was this put
together?”1
Procedure Training and testing were conducted in the same
way as in Experiment 1.

Results
As in Experiment 1, we first checked whether participants
successfully learned the YUFO categories based on
responses to old, new, and distractor items. Percentages of
1

This question was changed to relate more directly to the
conceptual cue for artifacts.

641

Discussion

may be quite useful. The technique of comparing the effects
of perceptual and conceptual types of information both
within and across tasks can be extended to other domains.
For example, this method could be used to explore
developmental patterns of perceptual and conceptual
information use in children. It would be informative to test
whether children favor conceptual, top down information or
perceptual, bottom up information differently across tasks
and contexts. The results also have implications for research
on different categorization tasks. In particular, they are
consistent with work showing differences between
classification and inference learning, and raise the question
of how specific tasks trigger certain strategies of
information use. One possibility is that a task context itself
cues a certain categorization mechanism or strategy of
information use. Future work in categorization should
consider how both the characteristics of the stimuli and the
task context influence category learning and use.

The results of Experiment 2 showed that overall, perceptual
cues influenced generalization patterns. Across tasks
participants showed more conservative generalization to
items with added eyes and less conservative generalization
to those with added wheels. This shows that simple features
added to novel items had a similar effect to the rich
perceptual cues to animacy (e.g., multiple features and
distinct structures) used in Experiment 1. In the task
analyses, the influence of perceptual cues was seen in the
naming and ontological extension tasks, but not the
inferential task. Conceptual cue did not reliably influence
generalization patterns in any of the tasks.

General Discussion
In this set of experiments participants showed distinct
patterns of generalization for artifacts and animates. As
expected based on previous work in the literature,
participants demonstrated more conservative generalization
of animates and less conservative generalization of artifacts
in terms of how much they extended categories to old and
new items. Furthermore, these patterns were in line with
perceptual and conceptual cues differently depending on
categorization task. In Experiment 1, perceptual cues had a
dominant influence on participants’ responses in the two
classification tasks, naming and ontology extension, while
both perceptual and conceptual cues influenced performance
in the inferential task. In Experiment 2, perceptual cues
were again dominant in the classification tasks, while
neither type of cue had an effect on generalization in the
inferential task.
The patterns of individual task effects are intriguing. In
both experiments, the same type of information influenced
the naming and ontology extension tasks. Although these
tasks require classification at different levels, that is, the
basic level of novel names and the superordinate level of
ontological kinds, both tasks were selectively influenced by
the perceptual cues. In contrast, the inferential task was set
apart from the classification tasks in terms of cue influence
by showing an influence of both cues in the first experiment
and of neither cue in the second experiment. These task
patterns can be interpreted in terms of previous findings on
the differences between classification and inference
(Sakamoto & Love, 2010). In the classification tasks
participants focused on the perceptual cues likely because
they found them to be most diagnostic of their categories. In
the inferential task participants did not focus on one cue
over the other, perhaps because neither cue on it’s own was
sufficient to determine how prototypical an item was of its
category. It is still puzzling why neither cue influenced the
inferential task in Experiment 2, and this will be a question
for further research.
The current experiments show that people use perceptual
and conceptual information in categorization in different
ways depending on task. In the ongoing debate over the
mechanisms of categorization, particularly in the
developmental field, the methodology of these experiments

References
Booth, A.E., & Waxman, S.R. (2008). Taking stock as
theories of word learning take shape. Developmental
Science, 11, 185-194.
Colunga, E., & Smith, L.B. (2008). Knowledge embedded
in process: The self-organization of skilled noun learning.
Developmental Science, 11, 195-203.
Freeman, K.E., & Sera, M.D. (1996). Reliance on visual and
verbal information across ontological kinds: What do
children know about animals and machines? Cognitive
Development, 11, 315-341.
Gauthier, I., Tarr, M.J., Anderson, A.W., Skudlarski, P., &
Gore, J.C. (1999). Activation of the middle fusiform ‘face
area’ increases with expertise in recognizing novel
objects. Nature Neuroscience, 2, 568-573.
Jones, S.S., Smith, L.B., & Landau, B. (1991). Object
properties and knowledge in early lexical learning. Child
Development, 62, 499-516.
Malt, B.C., Sloman, S.A., Gennari, S., Shi, M., & Wang, Y.
(1999). Knowing versus naming: Similarity and the
linguistic categorization of artifacts. Journal of Memory
and Language, 40, 230-262.
Rosch, E., & Mervis, C.B. (1975). Family resemblance:
Studies in the internal structure of categories. Cognitive
Psychology, 7, 573-605.
Sakamoto, Y., & Love, B.C. (2010). Learning and retention
through predictive inference and classification. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Applied, 16, 361-377.
Shepard, R.N. (1987). Toward a universal law of
generalization for psychological science. Science, 237,
1217-1323.
Sloutsky, V.M., Kloos, H., & Fisher, A.V. (2007). When
looks are everything: Appearance similarity versus kind
information in early induction. Psychological Science, 18,
179-185.
Tarr, M.J. (2006). All Greeble, Fribble, and YUFO images
courtesy of Michael J. Tarr, http://www.tarrlab.org/.

642

