UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Perceptual Fluency Affects Categorization Decisions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8hd1h5fs

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Miles, Sarah J.
Minda, John Paul

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Perceptual Fluency Affects Categorization Decisions
Sarah J. Miles (smiles25@uwo.ca) and John Paul Minda (jpminda@uwo.ca)
Department of Psychology
The University of Western Ontario
London, ON N6A 5C2
Abstract
Learning in the prototype distortion task is thought to involve
perceptual learning in which category members experience an
enhanced visual response (Ashby & Maddox, 2005). This response likely leads to more efficient processing, which in turn
may result in a feeling of perceptual fluency for category members. We examined the perceptual fluency hypothesis by manipulating fluency independently from category typicality. We
predicted that when perceptual fluency was induced using subliminal priming, this fluency would be misattributed to category membership and would affect categorization decisions.
In a prototype distortion task, participants were more likely
to judge non-members as category members when they were
made perceptually fluent with a matching subliminal prime.
This result suggests that perceptual fluency can be reflective of
category membership and may be used as a cue during some
categorization decisions. In addition, the results provide converging evidence that some types of categorization are based
on perceptual learning.
Keywords: Category Learning; Prototype Learning; Perceptual Fluency; Subliminal Priming

The prototype distortion task was first introduced by Posner and Keele (1968) as a method of studying how category
representations are abstracted and stored. Although variations of the task have been used, in the general form of the
task participants are exposed to a series of dot patterns that
are distortions of a common prototype and form a category.
Next, participants judge whether a series of new dot patterns
are also category members. The pattern of responses given
by participants is thought to reflect the nature of the category representation used to make categorization judgments.
More recently, the task has been used to investigate the role of
perceptual learning in categorization (Casale & Ashby, 2008;
Coutinho, Couchman, Redford, & Smith, 2010).
FMRI studies involving the prototype distortion task have
shown that perceptual learning may be important for abstracting visual prototypes. In three studies (Aizenstein et al.,
2000; P. J. Reber, Stark, & Squire, 1998a, 1998b) visual areas in the occipital cortex showed decreased activity in response to category members relative to non-members. The
authors suggested that this decrease in activation might reflect easier or faster processing of category members, similar
to the type of processing fluency found in repetition priming studies. More specifically, a group of visual cortical cells
may learn to respond strongly to the prototype, less to nonprototypical category members and even less to items that
are not in the category. Across the learning period, perceptual learning causes the cells’ sensitivity and magnitude of
response to increase (Ashby & Maddox, 2005). Because the
increased response is only elicited for category members, its
presence can be used as a cue to category membership.

The perceptual representation system is thought to be an
implicit memory system that supports the improved processing of previously seen stimuli, as described above (Schacter,
1990; Tulving & Schacter, 1990). The perceptual representation system is also particularly sensitive to the similarity
among stimuli. It can generalize across similar stimuli but
not dissimilar stimuli, a process that is important for categorization (Cooper, Schacter, Ballesteros, & Moore, 1992).
Consequently, it has been proposed that the perceptual representation system could support the type of perceptual learning
that is thought to play a role in abstracting visual prototypes
(Casale & Ashby, 2008). In a study where participants were
trained on exemplars that were either high or low distortions
of the prototype, performance was best after training with the
low distortion items. These results illustrate that this type of
prototype abstraction is dependent on visual similarity and
may be mediated by the perceptual representation system.
Another study investigating the processes underlying prototype learning has come to a slightly different conclusion
(Coutinho et al., 2010). In this study, participants were
trained on the prototype distortion task either with stimuli that
were all the same size during training and test or with stimuli whose size varied during training and test. Performance
was comparable in both versions of the task. The authors
concluded that low-level perceptual learning is not the only
mechanism for prototype learning because low-level perceptual learning would have been disrupted by variations in size.
Therefore, while it seems that some sort of perceptual learning is important for prototype learning, it is not certain that
this learning is supported by the relatively low-level perceptual representation system.
Regardless of the level at which perceptual learning occurs, the enhanced visual responding that accompanies category members could be informative of category membership
(Ashby & Maddox, 2005). Perceptual fluency is the feeling
of ease or difficulty associated with a mental task (Alter &
Oppenheimer, 2009; Oppenheimer & Frank, 2008). Because
category members experience an enhanced visual response,
this could contribute to a feeling of perceptual fluency for
category members but not for non-members. This feeling of
fluency may be the cue that is used during judgments of category membership, especially in tasks such as the prototype
distortion task.
While perceptual fluency is generally a reliable cue about
the state of the environment, it can be independently manipulated (Oppenheimer, 2008). For example, subliminal priming, figure ground contrast, stimulus duration and stimulus
repetition all affect perceptual fluency. Since perceptual flu-

1655

ency is a feeling that accompanies a range of cognitive activities, manipulations of perceptual fluency have been shown
to affect a range of judgments, including liking (R. Reber,
Winkielman, & Schwarz, 1998), truth (R. Reber & Schwarz,
1999) and familiarity (Whittlesea, Jacoby, & Girard, 1990;
Whittlesea & Williams, 2000).
Perceptual fluency has not been directly manipulated in the
context of category learning tasks but there are some studies
that point to a role for perceptual fluency in categorization.
Oppenheimer and Frank (2008) investigated the effect of perceptual fluency on semantic categorization judgments. When
category exemplars (e.g., pigeon, hummingbird) were made
less fluent by being printed in a small, difficult to read font,
participants judged them as worse members of a given category (e.g., bird) than when they were presented in a larger,
easy to read font. A feature’s typicality (e.g., lays eggs)
for a given category was similarly affected by the font in
which it was printed. This experiment illustrates that perceptual fluency is important for categorization judgments of
well learned, semantic categories, but it is not clear whether
the same is true during the category learning process.
In another study, the relationship between prototypicality
and fluency was examined using the prototype distortion task
(Winkielman, Halberstadt, Fazendeiro, & Catty, 2006). Here,
fluency was a dependent variable, measured in terms of categorization speed. It was found that stimuli that were more
similar to the prototype were processed more fluently (i.e.,
more quickly) than stimuli that were less like the prototype.
The authors concluded that prototypicality is one of many
variables that can affect fluency. However, this study did not
manipulate fluency directly. It is possible that prototypical
items are categorized more quickly for reasons other than fluency. For example, for prototypical category members that
are far from the category boundary, perhaps a coarse-grained
computation is sufficient to determine category membership.
For less prototypical items that are close to the category
boundary, a more precise calculation may be necessary and
this precision may result in slower categorization decisions.
Therefore, it may not be the case that prototypical items are
perceived more fluently, but that the categorization decision
is easier for items that are farther from the category boundary. A direct manipulation of fluency would rule out this alternate explanation. In addition, the study did not investigate
whether the fluency that is associated with prototypicality is
used to make a judgment about category membership.
In the current study, fluency will be directly manipulated in
order to investigate whether it has an effect on categorization
decisions. Given that perceptual learning seems to be important for visual prototype abstraction and that perceptual fluency is a cue to perceptual learning, it is expected that manipulations of perceptual fluency will affect categorization. Following a training stage in which participants view category
members, participants will complete a test stage in which they
judge whether new items are members of the trained category.
In this stage, fluency will be manipulated using subliminal

priming. Past studies have demonstrated that subliminally
priming a stimulus with itself (i.e., a matching prime) elicits
a feeling of perceptual fluency relative to priming a stimulus
with an unrelated item (i.e., a mismatching prime) (Jacoby &
Whitehouse, 1989; R. Reber et al., 1998; Winkielman & Cacioppo, 2001). We expect that items primed with a matching
prime should be more likely to be endorsed as category members than items primed with a mismatching prime or no prime
because the fluency experienced as a result of the matching
prime will be misattributed to the fluency that coincides with
category membership.

Method
Participants
Participants included 26 students from the University of
Western Ontario who participated in the study either for
course credit or for $5. There were 7 males and 19 females
with a mean age of 20.20 years (SE = 0.71 years).

Materials
The categorization stimuli used in this experiment were similar to the dot patterns that have previously been used to study
prototype abstraction (P. J. Reber et al., 1998b; Smith &
Minda, 2001; Posner & Keele, 1968). The to-be-learned category was created by first generating a prototype and then
probabilistically distorting the prototype to create category
members that were similar to the prototype.
To create the prototype, nine points were randomly selected from a 30 x 30 grid and the points were joined to form
a polygon. Distortions of the prototype, which formed the tobe-learned category, were created by probabilistically moving
each of the nine points of the prototype. Specifically, a series
of rings was created around each point in the prototype. The
first ring was the single coordinate containing the point itself, the second ring was the eight coordinates surrounding
the point, the third ring was the coordinates immediately surrounding the second ring, and so on up to the fifth ring. To
distort the prototype, each of the nine points had a probability of .24 of moving to the second ring, .16 of moving to the
third ring, .30 of moving to the fourth ring and .30 of moving to the fifth ring. Once the ring that a point would move
to was determined, a coordinate within that ring was chosen
randomly for the point’s new location. This procedure was
carried out for each of the nine points in every distortion. A
total of 100 distortions of the prototype were created: 40 to be
used in the training stage and 20 to be used as targets in each
of three priming conditions in the test stage. Figure 1 shows
the prototype of the category, which was never presented to
participants, some distortions of the prototype that were category members and some randomly generated polygons that
were unrelated, non-categorical patterns.
The non-categorical polygons were created to be used in
the test phase of the experiment. Each non-categorical polygon was created using the same method as was used to create
the category prototype. No distortions were created for any of

1656

these polygons. A total of 100 non-categorical polygons were
created: 20 to be used as targets in each of the three priming
conditions in the test phase, 20 to be used as unrelated primes
for category members and 20 to be used as unrelated primes
for non-category members in the test phase.

Fixation cross
1000 ms
+
Forward mask
250 ms
Prime
33 ms
Backward mask
250 ms

A) Prototype

Target
300 ms
Blank screen
Response terminated

B) Distortions

C) Non-categorical

Figure 1: Shape stimuli used in the experiment. A) The prototype for the category. B) Examples of category members
that were created by distorting the prototype. C) Examples
of unrelated shapes that were not members of the category.
These shapes were all randomly generated.
Stimuli were presented using E-prime software (Psychology Software Tools, Pittsburgh, PA) on a PC with a monitor
refresh rate of 60 Hz. The prototype was 182 x 182 pixels.
Each of the distortions could be slightly larger or smaller than
the prototype, depending on the amount and direction that
each point was distorted. Because each polygon was created
by randomly selecting points on a grid, the shapes were not
necessarily centered on the grid. Each stimulus was manually centered so that all stimuli appeared at the centre of the
screen.

Procedure
The study consisted of a training stage, a test stage and a
prime visibility check. In the training stage, participants
viewed 40 high distortions of the prototype one at a time on
the screen for 5 seconds each. As in prior research, participants were instructed to imagine pointing at the centre of each
shape while it was on the screen to ensure that participants attended to the stimuli (Knowlton & Squire, 1993). Following
the training stage, participants were told that the shapes they
had just seen were members of a single category, in the same
way that a series of pictures of dogs would have all belonged
to the “dog” category.
Next, in the test stage, participants saw 60 new high distortions of the prototype and 60 unrelated shapes one at a time

Figure 2: An illustration of the sequence and timing of events
during the test stage and prime visibility stage. In the test
stage participants categorized the target stimulus. In the
prime visibility stage participants indicated whether the prime
was the same as the target, different than the target or whether
no prime was presented.

and judged whether each item belonged to the category. Figure 2 illustrates the sequence and timing of events in each of
the 120 trials of the test stage. Each trial began with a fixation cross followed by a forward mask made of randomly
oriented line segments. Next, a prime was presented for 33
ms followed by a backward mask of randomly oriented lines.
Finally, the target shape appeared on the screen for 300 ms,
at which point participants indicated whether the shape was a
member of the category by pushing the “y” key for “Yes” and
“n” key for “No”. The target shape was followed by a blank
screen which remained until the participant made a response.
On one third of the trials, the prime was the same as the target
shape, on one third of the trials it was a new unrelated shape
and on one third of the trials there was no prime (i.e., a blank
screen was shown for 33 ms between the masks). The order
of the target shapes was randomized for each participant.
The prime visibility stage was exactly the same as the
test stage except that participants made judgments about the
prime rather than the target shape. In this section, participants were explicitly told about the prime that appeared between the two masks. Their job was to indicate whether the
prime was the same as the target shape, different from the
target shape or whether no prime was presented by pushing
the “s”, “d” or “n” buttons, respectively. This stage was included to measure whether participants were able to perceive
the primes as they were presented in the test stage.

1657

Results
Prime Visibility
It was important that participants were not able to identify the
primes so that any effect of prime type could be attributed to
feelings of perceptual fluency rather than explicit identification strategies. We were most interested in whether participants were able to identify the content of the prime rather
than the presence of a prime, so we examined whether participants’ performance at discriminating between matching
and mismatching primes was above chance. Four participants
were able to discriminate between matching and mismatching
primes so their data was excluded from further analyses. The
remaining participants scored an average of 48.75% correct
(SE = 1.42%) (chance was 50%).

Categorization Performance
Categorization performance was calculated as proportion of
correct responses during the test stage of the experiment. Participants who failed to perform above 50% correct on this
stage did not demonstrate that they had abstracted any category knowledge. It was assumed that perceptual learning
had not occurred for these participants and perceptual fluency would not be a meaningful cue to category membership.
As a result the data from the three participants whose performance was less than 50% on the test phase was excluded
from the perceptual fluency analysis. The remaining participants scored an average of 61.93% correct (SE = 1.93%),
which is similar to performance in other studies (Knowlton
& Squire, 1993; P. J. Reber et al., 1998b, 1998a).
We predicted that regardless of actual category membership, stimuli primed with a matching prime would be more
likely to be endorsed as category members than stimuli
primed with mismatching prime or when there was no prime.
If matching primes cause an increase in category endorsement, this would result in an increase in the proportion of
correct responses to category members and a decrease in the
proportion of correct responses for non-members. A 2 (Category member vs. Non-member) x 3 (Prime: Match, Mismatch, None) within-subjects ANOVA found that categorization of non-members (M = .69, SE = .04) and members (M =
.55, SE = .05) did not differ, F(1, 18) = 3.41, p = .08. This
trend for non-members to be correctly categorized more often
than members is likely a reflection of participants’ conservative response strategy, where the overall proportion of ‘no’ responses was .57. There was no difference in performance for
stimuli primed by matching primes (M = .59, SE = .05), mismatching primes (M = .64, SE = .04) or no prime (M = .62,
SE = .05), F(2, 36) = 1.86, p = .17. Importantly, as illustrated
in Figure 3A, there was an interaction between prime type
and category membership, F(2, 36) = 5.32, p = .009. Tukey’s
HSD tests were used to investigate the effect of prime type
separately for category members and non-members. Contrary to what was predicted, there was no effect of prime
type for category members, as the proportion correct for all
prime types was the same, all q’s < 3, p’s > .10. However,

this was not the case for non-members– prime type did affect
proportion correct for non-category members. Specifically,
performance for matching primed non-category stimuli was
lower than performance for non-category stimuli that were
not primed, q(3, 36) = 4.65, p = .006. Performance on matching primed items was also worse than when a mismatching
prime was given q(3, 36) = 3.72, p = .03, but there was no
difference between mismatching primed items and items that
were not primed, q(3, 36) = 0.93, p = .79.
We also predicted that the fluency manipulation would be
reflected in the time taken to make a categorization judgment.
We considered only correct responses, as is typical of reaction
time analyses. We expected that category members that were
primed with a matching prime would be categorized more
quickly than those not primed, which would be categorized
more quickly than those primed with a mismatching prime.
As discussed above, for non-members the effect of the prime
was to decrease categorization accuracy. Since only correct
responses were considered in this analysis, we did not expect to see much, if any, influence of prime type on categorization speed for non-members. For each participant, all responses more than two standard deviations from their average
response time were removed and then the average response
time for correct responses in each condition was calculated.
A 2 (Category member vs. Non-member) x 3 (Prime: Match,
Mismatch, None) within-subjects ANOVA was used to investigate the average response time for each condition. Category
members (M = 712 ms, SE = 64 ms) and non-members (M
= 713 ms, SE = 74 ms) were categorized at the same speed,
F(1, 18) = 0.00, p = .99. There was no difference in reaction
time for stimuli primed by matching primes (M = 706 ms, SE
= 68 ms), mismatching primes (M = 729 ms, SE = 70 ms) or
no prime (M = 702 ms, SE = 65 ms), F(2, 36) = 0.61, p = .55.
Importantly, as illustrated in Figure 3B, there was an interaction between prime type and category membership, F(2, 36)
= 3.78, p = .03. Tukey’s HSD tests were used to investigate
the effect of prime type separately for category members and
non-members. Category members primed with a mismatching prime took longer to categorize than members that were
not primed (q(3, 36) = 3.57, p = .04) but did not take longer
than members primed with a matching prime (q(3, 36) = 2.54,
p = .19). Time to categorize category members primed by a
matching prime and not primed did not differ, q(3, 36) = 1.03,
p = .75. As expected, mismatching primes slowed the categorization of category members, but the expected speeding by
matching primes was not found. Prime type had no effect on
categorization time for non-category members, all q’s < 2.0,
p’s > .40.

Discussion
We found that categorization judgments were affected by perceptual fluency. When stimuli that were not members of the
category were preceded by a matching prime, tendency to
incorrectly endorse the stimulus as a category member increased, causing the proportion of correct categorization re-

1658

1000

Prime Type

p=.03

Match
None
Mismatch

900

p=.006

Match
None
Mismatch

p=.04

600

0.4

700

RT

0.6

800

1.0

B.

Prime Type

0.0

500

0.2

Proportion Correct

0.8

A.

Member

Non−member

Member

Category

Non−member
Category

Figure 3: A) Proportion of correct responses for category members and non-members with each type of prime. B) Response
time for correct categorization of category members and non-members with each type of prime. Error bars denote standard
error.
sponses to decrease. While the proportion of category members correctly endorsed as belonging to the category was unaffected by subliminal priming, the prime type did affect the
time taken to categorize category members. Categorization
of members was slowed when preceded by a mismatching
prime. The prime likely acted as a cue that the item was not
a category member, and it took time for participants to reconcile the conflict between the item’s true category membership
and the prime, slowing categorization.
We initially hypothesized that perceptual fluency would
have an opposite effect on categorization accuracy for category members and non-members, but only categorization accuracy of non-members was affected. It is likely that perceptual fluency is one of many cues to category membership,
and there is a limit to how much a feeling of fluency can influence a categorization decision. We have suggested that a
feeling of perceptual fluency is present for all category members based on perceptual learning during the training stage.
Perhaps the additional feeling of fluency from the matching
prime had little effect on the categorization of members because the fluency associated with perceptual learning already
had the maximal effect on the categorization decision. In
other words, a fluency threshold had already been reached for
category members so the fluency manipulation had no effect
on category assignment.1 Non-members, on the other hand,
did not produce an enhanced visual response and were not accompanied by a feeling of fluency. When perceptual fluency
was induced by priming, it was used as a signal to category
1 Note that this does not necessarily imply perfect categorization
of category members. While the perceptual fluency component of
the categorization decision may have been maximized, there are
other factors that may cause a category member to be incorrectly
categorized.

membership and the proportion of items endorsed as category
members was increased.
Although the perceptual fluency manipulation was not reflected in categorization performance for category members,
it was reflected in response time. Because response time is a
continuous measure, it may be more sensitive than the all-ornone categorization decision, allowing it to reflect changes
in fluency within category members that were not reflected
in categorization accuracy. Indeed, prime type did affect
response time for category members such that the categorization decision was slowed by mismatching primes. On
the other hand, we did not find that matching primes sped
the categorization of members. This supports our hypothesis that category members have reached a fluency threshold.
Increases in fluency did not confer any speed advantage but
decreases in fluency caused the fluency level to drop below
the threshold, resulting in slowed categorization. We also
found that primes did not affect the categorization speed of
non-members. Recall that matching primes resulted in more
incorrect responses for non-members. Because the response
time analysis only considered correct responses, the effect of
the prime was essentially eliminated for non-members so that
no differences in response times were observed.
It is important to note that the effect of the primes is not
because participants have adopted explicit response strategies based on the identity of the primes. In the prime visibility stage of the experiment, participants were explicitly instructed to look for the primes and all participants who were
able to discriminate between the primes were excluded from
all categorization analyses. Therefore, we can be confident
that the primes were subliminal and their effect was on feelings of fluency rather than on explicit response strategies.

1659

The implications of the current study are limited to situations in which participants are trained on a single category. In
many categorization studies, including a variant of the traditional prototype distortion task, participants are trained to categorize items as belonging to one of two categories (i.e., category A or category B). Perceptual learning may also occur in
this version of the prototype distortion task, but it should not
be informative about category membership, as it is in the traditional prototype distortion task (Ashby & Maddox, 2005).
In this task, all test items should elicit a feeling of fluency
because all items are members of a category. Because the
feeling of fluency is present for both categories, it cannot be
used in the categorization decision. Therefore, the perceptual fluency manipulation that affected categorization performance in the current study should not affect performance in a
task where two categories are learned. However, the fluency
manipulation may still affect judgments such as the typicality and attractiveness of the stimulus, which are influenced by
perceptual fluency. We are currently carrying out studies to
test these predictions.

Conclusion
This study has provided the first evidence that feelings of
perceptual fluency impact categorization decisions for some
newly learned categories. These results also provide further
evidence that category learning can involve perceptual learning. Future research is needed to investigate the extent to
which perceptual fluency is used for a wider range of categorization decisions.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a Canadian Graduate Scholarship from Natural Science and Engineering Research Council
of Canada to the first author. Correspondence should be addressed to Sarah Miles, smiles25@uwo.ca.

References
Aizenstein, H. J., MacDonald, A. W., Stenger, V. A., Nebes,
R. D., Larson, J. K., Ursu, S., et al. (2000). Complementary category learning systems identified using eventrelated functional mri. J Cogn Neurosci, 12, 977–987.
Alter, A. L., & Oppenheimer, D. M. (2009). Uniting the
tribes of fluency to form a metacognitive nation. Pers Soc
Psychol Rev, 13, 219–235.
Ashby, F. G., & Maddox, W. T. (2005). Human category
learning. Annu Rev Psychol, 56, 149–178.
Casale, M. B., & Ashby, F. G. (2008). A role for the perceptual representation memory system in category learning. Perception & Psychophysics, 70, 983–999.
Cooper, L., Schacter, D. L., Ballesteros, S., & Moore, C.
(1992). Priming and recognition of transformed threedimensional objects: Effects of size and reflection. J Exp
Psychol Learn Mem Cogn, 18, 43–57.
Coutinho, M. V. C., Couchman, J. J., Redford, J. S., & Smith,
J. D. (2010). Refining the visual-cortical hypothesis in
category learning. Brain Cogn, 74, 88–96.

Jacoby, L., & Whitehouse, K. (1989). An illusion of memory:
False recognition influenced by unconscious perception. J
Exp Psychol Gen, 118, 126–135.
Knowlton, B. J., & Squire, L. R. (1993). The learning of categories: Parallel brain systems for item memory and category knowledge. Science, 262, 1747–1749.
Oppenheimer, D. M. (2008). The secret life of fluency. Trends
Cogn Sci, 12, 237–241.
Oppenheimer, D. M., & Frank, M. C. (2008). A rose in any
other font would not smell as sweet: Effects of perceptual
fluency on categorization. Cognition, 106, 1178–1194.
Posner, M. I., & Keele, S. W. (1968). On the genesis of
abstract ideas. J Exp Psychol, 77, 353–363.
Reber, P. J., Stark, C. E., & Squire, L. R. (1998a). Contrasting cortical activity associated with category memory and
recognition memory. Learn Mem, 5, 420–428.
Reber, P. J., Stark, C. E., & Squire, L. R. (1998b). Cortical areas supporting category learning identified using functional
MRI. PNAS, 95, 747–750.
Reber, R., & Schwarz, N. (1999). Effects of perceptual fluency on judgments of truth. Conscious Cogn, 8, 338–342.
Reber, R., Winkielman, P., & Schwarz, N. (1998). Effects of
perceptual fluency on affective judgments. Psychol Sci, 9,
45–48.
Schacter, D. L. (1990). Perceptual representation systems
and implicit memory: Towards a resolution of the mulitiple
memory systems debate. Annals of the New York Academy
of Sciences, 608, 543–571.
Smith, J. D., & Minda, J. P. (2001, 984–1002). Journey
to the center of the category: The dissociation in amnesia between categorization and recognition. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory Cognition, 27.
Available from
Tulving, E., & Schacter, D. (1990). Priming and human memory systems. Science, 247, 301.
Whittlesea, B., Jacoby, L., & Girard, K. (1990). Illusions of
immediate memory: Evidence of an attributional basis for
feelings of familiarity and perceptual quality. Journal of
Memory and Language, 29, 716–732.
Whittlesea, B., & Williams, L. (2000). The source of feelings
of familiarity: The discrepancy-attribution hypothesis. J
Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cogn, 26, 547–565.
Winkielman, P., & Cacioppo, J. (2001). Mind at ease puts a
smile on the face: Psychophysiological evidence that processing facilitation elicits positive affect. Journal of Personality and social Psychology, 81, 989–1000.
Winkielman, P., Halberstadt, J., Fazendeiro, T., & Catty, S.
(2006). Prototypes are attractive because they are easy on
the mind. Psychol Sci, 17, 799.

1660

