UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Perceptual learning and face recognition : Disruption of second order relational information
reduces the face inversion effect.

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9446d980

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Civile, Circo
McLaren, R.P.
McLaren, IPL

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Perceptual learning and face recognition : Disruption of second order relational
information reduces the face inversion effect.
Ciro Civile (cc413@exeter.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, College of Life and Environmental Sciences,
University of Exeter, UK.

R.P. McLaren (R.P.McLaren@exeter.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, College of Life and Environmental Sciences,
University of Exeter, UK.

I.P.L. McLaren (I.P.L.McLaren@exeter.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, College of Life and Environmental Sciences,
University of Exeter, UK.

Abstract
The face inversion effect is a reduction in recognition performance
for inverted faces compared to upright faces that is greater than
that typically observed with other stimulus types (e.g. houses; Yin,
1969). This study investigated the link between second-order
relational structure and the face inversion effect suggested by
Diamond and Carey (1986). The idea is that expertise gained as a
consequence of a great deal of experience with exemplars derived
from a familiar category, that possess what Diamond and Carey
term second order relational structure, can produce an improved
ability to distinguish between and recognise members of this
category. Because facial features share the same basic spatial
configuration, i.e. eyes are always above the nose and so on, and
individual faces vary these spatial arrangements slightly, they have
second order relational structure. The argument is that our
experience with this structure underpins our ability to recognize
faces, and this expertise with faces is lost on inversion because
inversion disrupts the ability to exploit second order relational
information. In this paper we report two experiments that confirm
that we can obtain a strong face inversion effect, and that the
magnitude of this effect can be reduced by disrupting the second
order relational structure of the faces.
Keywords: Inversion effect; face recognition; Thatcher illusion;
scrambled faces; expertise; perceptual learning.

Introduction
Recognition of objects that are usually seen in one
orientation is sometimes strongly impaired when the same
objects are turned upside down, showing how intrinsically
difficult it is to identify them. This has been found to be
particularly the case for faces, a phenomenon known as the
face inversion effect. (Yin,1969). Thus, the fact that
recognition of human faces is more impaired by inversion
than is recognition for other stimuli has underlined how

faces are, in some sense, special. Over the past two decades,
however, more behavioural evidence has emerged that
challenges the assumption that facial stimuli are special, not
the least of which is the demonstration that the inversion
effect on recognition memory can be as strong with dogs as
with faces when the subjects are experts in the identification
and assessment of specific dog breeds. Given that the only
stimuli that result in a substantial inversion effect are the
ones for which the subjects have the necessary expertise
(Diamond & Carey, 1986), this suggests that the face
inversion effect may not be due to the fact that facial stimuli
are subject to special processing because they are facial in
nature, but instead that there are other factors, such as
expertise, which give rise to this effect. Diamond and Carey
(1986) proposed that it is a special type of information
“second order relational information” that we depend on
with increasing expertise. Human faces all have the same
group of features (eyebrows, eyes, nose, mouth, etc.). All
faces tend to have in common the same basic disposition of
components, such that the eyes are always above the nose
and so on. Thus, “first order relational information”
corresponds to the spatial relationship between these
features of a face, and “second order relational information”
corresponds to the small variations in these spatial
relationships that individuate the faces. In one of their
experiments on detecting grotesqueness, Searcy and Bartlett
(1996) made faces grotesque by either changing local
elements, such as blackening teeth, blurring the pupils, or by
changing the facial configuration. When shown in an
inverted orientation, faces that were distorted by means of
configural changes seemed to be more similar to the normal
version while the “locally distorted face” still looked
grotesque. Thus, configural changes did not survive the
inversion process as well as local ones. In another
experiment, Leder and Bruce (1998) distorted faces so as to
be more distinctive, either changing local features by giving
them darker lips, bushier eye brows, etc. or by changing
configural information to give a shorter mouth to nose

2083

spatial relation, etc. Distinctiveness impressions caused by
distorted configural information disappeared when faces
were presented in an inverted orientation compared to both
upright faces and faces distorted in their local aspects. This
sensitivity of configural distortions to inversion is also
believed to be the basis of the “Thatcher illusion”
(Thompson, 1980). Here, the illusion seems to depend on
the inversion of mouth and eyes within the face being hard
to detect (Thompson,1980) when the whole face is
inverted. The explanation typically offered is that inversion
reduces the use of configural information in the face, and
promotes a more componential analysis of the features
present. In isolation, the mouth and eyes do not look odd,
and so cause no great reaction in the viewer. When the face
is shown in its normal orientation, however, we revert to
configural processing, and this makes the distortions present
in the mouth and eyes stand out, resulting in a strong
reaction to the face on the part of most percipients. These
results all provide evidence for the powerful effect that
second order relational information has in the processing of
upright faces relative to inverted faces. One possible
criticism of this position would be that the nature of the
difficulty caused by disruption of configural information
consequent on inversion is still to be explained. The
suggestion from perceptual learning theories is that
expertise for faces based on familiarity with them as a class
might play a major role in this because this can act via
configural information, and if the configural processing is
disrupted by inversion, then this expertise is lost.
McLaren et al. (1989) proposed that having acquired
expertise with a category represented by a prototype (by
means of experience with it) will tend to lead to the unique
discriminating elements of exemplars constructed from that
category becoming more salient, more active, compared
with the prototypical ones that tend to be common across
exemplars. This is a consequence of latent inhibition
accruing more to the prototypical component of the stimulus
representation in the course of experience with the category.
This model of associative learning makes predictions about
the inversion effect which are consistent with McLaren’s
(1997) experiments. The first experiment demonstrated that
the inversion effect is dependent both on the subject’s
familiarity with a category and on the category being
defined by a prototype. Subjects were exposed to a set of
chequerboards and were then asked to categorize them into
two different categories. This was followed by a
discrimination task which included two pairs of
chequerboards (one pair in an upright and the other pair in
an inverted orientation) from a familiar category plus two
pairs of chequerboards from a novel category (again one
pair upright the other inverted). The results showed that
familiarity with a prototype-defined category possessing
second order relational structure gave subjects an enhanced
ability to discriminate between exemplars of that category in
an upright orientation. This benefit was lost when the
stimuli were inverted. Finally, in a second experiment this
time using a delayed matching task in the test phase, it was

shown that experience with a prototype-defined category
once again resulted in a significant inversion effect. The
importance of these results is that they imply that it should
be possible to ensure that latent inhibition, produced by
means of familiarity with a category possessing the
requisite structure, will lead to perceptual learning that
results in an inversion effect for exemplars of that category.
In the present study, we addressed the link between
expertise and the face inversion effect made by perceptual
learning theories. In Experiment 1, our goal was to obtain a
strong inversion effect for normal face stimuli and we
predicted a reduced inversion effect for Thatcherised face
stimuli. These latter stimuli are well matched to normal
faces in terms of complexity, but they suffer from disrupted
second order-relational information even when upright,
which should reduce some of the effect of expertise, and so
inversion should have less of an effect on them. This theme
is further developed in Experiment 2 where we investigated
the inversion effect using a new set of faces (scrambled
faces) that were characterized by complete disruption of
both first and second-order relational structure whilst still
maintaining all the local features typical of normal faces.

Experiment 1
Materials
The study used a set of 128 images in total. The faces
were standardized to grey scale images on a black
background using Adobe Photoshop. Only male faces were
used. This was to enable the hair to be cropped on each
image without cropping the ears (because males tend to
have shorter hair with ears visible whereas females often
have longer hair covering the ears). A programme called
Gimp 2.6 was used to manipulate the 128 stimuli. Any
given face stimulus was prepared in four different versions
i.e. normal upright, normal inverted, Thatcherised upright
and
Thatcherised
inverted which were used in a
counterbalanced fashion across participants so that each face
was equally often used in each condition of the experiment
Thatcherised faces were produced by rotating the mouth and
each of the eyes (individually) by 180 degrees. Examples of
the stimuli used are given in Figure 1. The experiment was
run using Superlab Version 4.0.7b. installed on an iMac
computer.

Figure 1; Examples of stimuli used in Experiment 1
showing the four different conditions. The dimensions of
the stimuli were 5.63cm x 7.84cm. The stimuli were
presented at a resolution of 1280 x 960 . Participants sat 1m
away from the screen on which the images were presented.

2084

Participants
The participants were 24 psychology undergraduates at the
University of Exeter.

Procedure
The study consisted of a ‘study phase’ and a ‘test phase’. In
the study phase each participant was shown 4 types of faces
with 16 photos for each face type (giving a total of 64
faces).
These faces will be termed the “familiar”
(designated as 1) faces for that participant. The face types
were: 1-Normal Inverted faces (1NI); 2-Normal Upright
faces (1NU); 3- Thatcherised Inverted faces (1TI) and 4Thatcherised Upright faces (1TU). In the test phase another
64 novel faces (designated as 2) split into the same four face
types were added to this set. Each facial stimulus had a
unique identifying number, to make sure that individual
faces never appeared in more than one face type at a time
during the experiment. To simplify their use in the
experiment, the facial stimuli available were divided into
sets of 16 giving 8 sets of stimuli, and each participant
group was shown a different combination of the 64 facial
stimuli split over the 8 sets. Each participant saw the facial
stimuli corresponding to their participant group in a
different order. The first event that participants saw after the
instructions consisted of a warning cue (a fixation cross in
the centre of the screen) presented for 1 second. This was
followed by a face that was presented for 3 seconds. Then
the fixation cross was repeated and another face presented
until all 64 facial stimuli had been seen. Once all 64 faces
were shown, the programme moved to the beginning of the
old/new recognition task. Participants were told that they
were about to see more faces presented one at a time in
random order. They were asked to press the ‘.’ key If they
recognised the face or to press ‘x’ if they did not. Each
participant within each participant group was then shown (in
random order) the 64 faces they had already seen intermixed
with a further 64 unseen faces. These unseen faces were
taken from the sets of facial stimuli not used during the
study phase. Table 1 shows the combinations of faces
presented to each participant group.

Table 1: Combinations of facial stimuli presented to each
participant group.

The procedure for the old/new recognition task was that
after the warning cue (1 second), a face was shown for 4
seconds and participants had to respond during this period.
If participants pressed the wrong key (i.e. a key other than
‘x’ or ‘.’) the feedback ‘Wrong key’ was shown for 2
seconds prior to the next face appearing on the screen. If
participants were too slow in responding (i.e. took longer
than 4 seconds), the message ‘Too slow’ appeared on the
screen. Since in the old/new recognition task there were 128
faces to consider, three participant breaks were incorporated
after every 32 faces. At the end of the experiment
participants were thanked for participating.
Results
The data from all 24 participants contributed to the signal
detection d' analysis. Figure 2 gives the results for the
mean d' obtained for each face type. A planned comparison
was used to examine whether or not there was a significant
inversion effect for normal facial stimuli. This gave a highly
significant advantage F(1,23) = 22.24, p<.001 one-tailed, for
normal upright faces vs. normal inverted faces, and another
planned comparison showed a similar (although not
significant) trend for Thatcherised upright vs. Thatcherised
inverted faces, F(1,23) = 1.88, p=.09 one-tailed. There was
also a significant interaction between face type and
orientation, F(1,23) = 5.04, p<.02. This reflected the fact
that the inversion effect in the normal faces was
significantly greater than that in the Thatcherised faces. To
further investigate this result, the effect of face type on the
recognition of upright faces was also analyzed. Normal
upright faces were recognized significantly better than
Thatcherised upright faces,F(1,23) = 8.99, p<.003, but there
was no significant difference in the recognition of normal
inverted faces and Thatcherised inverted faces. Thus, it
would seem that the reduction in the inversion effect for
Thatcherised faces is due to the impact that Thatcherisation
has on the upright faces rather than the inverted ones.

Figure 2: The X axis shows the four different stimulus
conditions, whereas the Y axis shows the d' means for each
of the four facial conditions in the test phase of Experiment
1.

2085

Discussion
In agreement with the literature on face recognition, the
results of this first experiment have shown a clear effect of
inversion for normal faces. By way of contrast, there was no
significant effect for Thatcherised faces (although there was
a trend in this direction), and the effect for normal faces was
significantly greater than for Thatcherised faces. This
confirms that we can obtain a strong inversion effect, and
the magnitude of this effect can be reduced by disrupting the
second order relational structure of the faces (Diamond &
Carey, 1986). Thatcherisation does not alter any of the local
features, nor does it greatly change first order structure, but
it does change the spatial relationship between features
where the eyes or mouth are involved. The fact that this
significantly reduced recognition performance to upright
Thatcherised faces compared to normal upright faces is
entirely consistent with our (and Diamond and Carey's,
1986) hypothesis, as is the fact that Thatcherisation had
little impact on recognition performance to inverted faces.
Nevertheless, Thatcherised faces clearly still have some
unaltered second order relational information, and according
to our hypothesis it is this that will enable them to benefit
from our life experience with faces and so produce a trend
towards an inversion effect. The logical next step is to
construct a set of stimuli with all the features of a normal
face, but with no second order relational information at all.
Thus, we devised Experiment 2, in which we used the same
experimental procedures as in Experiment 1 but this time
rather than Thatcherised faces we created a set of scrambled
faces. By simply re-arranging the local features of a face
we hoped to control for stimulus complexity compared to
normal faces, but completely eradicate the familiar first and
second order relational information.

counterbalanced, as in Experiment 1, by splitting the
participants into 8 groups.

Procedure
The procedure was exactly the same as that used in
Experiment 1. Firstly, in the study phase, participants were
asked to look at a set of faces shown on the computer screen
one at a time in random order. Following this first phase of
the experiment, the participants were presented with an
old/new recognition task. The participants were told to
press “.” on the computer keyboard if they had seen the
face before in the study phase, or “x” if they had not seen it
before.We predicted that we would obtain a strong inversion
effect for normal faces and no inversion effect for scrambled
faces.

Results
The data from all 24 participants were used in the signal
detection d' analysis. Figure 4 gives the results for the mean
d' for each face type. Once again planned comparisons
revealed a significant inversion effect for normal faces,
F(1,23) =20.00, p<.001, none for scrambled faces, F<1, and
a significant interaction between face type and orientation,
F(1,23)=7.78, p<.01. Performance in recognizing normal
upright faces was also significantly better than recognition
for scrambled upright faces, F(1,23) =26.62, p<.001, but this
time there was also a significant difference in the
recognition of normal inverted faces and scrambled inverted
faces, F(1,23) =3.37, p<.05. Finally normal inverted faces
were recognized numerically better than scrambled upright
faces but not significantly so F(1,23) =2.75, p=.06.

Experiment 2
Materials
Six facial features were used for scrambling i.e. the mouth,
nose, two ears and the two eyes (including eyebrows).
Scrambling was done by selecting at random one feature of
the face and moving it to the forehead (chosen because this
is the widest space inside the face and so can accommodate
any feature). Following this, a second feature was selected
and moved to the space left empty by the first feature, and
so on until all the 6 facial features had been moved.
Figure 4; The X axis shows the four different stimulus
conditions, whereas the Y axis shows the d' means for each
of the four facial conditions in the recognition phase of
Experiment 2.
Figure 3: Examples showing the four different conditions.

Discussion

Participants

In agreement with our predictions there is a strong inversion
effect for normal faces (upright better than inverted)
whereas there is no inversion effect at all for scrambled
faces. This is consistent with our hypothesis that

24 psychology undergraduates at the University of Exeter
took part in the experiment.
The study was

2086

participants when presented with scrambled faces in an
upright orientation, which are affected by the complete
disruption of the usual second-order relational information,
would not have any expertise for those upright faces. Thus,
when the same scrambled faces are presented in an inverted
orientation participants would not suffer any loss of
expertise, as there was none to start with. Hence, we do not
observe any inversion effect. The new finding here is the
significant difference between normal inverted faces and
scrambled faces, with participants actually performing better
in recognizing inverted normal faces than scrambled faces
in both orientations (though only significantly better than
scrambled faces that have been inverted). We return to this
finding in the general discussion.

General Discussion
The two experiments reported here provide clear evidence
that second order relational information is indeed critical in
driving the substantial inversion effect for faces. When we
disrupted the second order relational information of our set
of faces by inverting (rotating by 1800) the eyes and the
mouth, producing Thatcherised faces, the intention was to
disrupt exactly the information that Diamond and Carey
identified as the basis of our expertise with faces whilst
leaving other types of information (first order, local)
relatively intact. Our Thatcherised faces are themselves
defined in terms of a prototype (if you averaged the
Thatcherised faces you'd get a prototypical Thatcherised
face as a result), and so in some sense possess second order
relational structure. But it is not structure that our
participant’s would be familiar with when entering the
experiment, and so any effect of expertise would be
confined to those aspects of the second order structure that
had not changed (the spatial relationship between the nose
and the ears for example). We have hypothesized that it is
the combination of second order relational structure and
experience with it that leads to expertise – and this is the
basis of the interaction between Face Type and Orientation
that we have repeatedly demonstrated in this paper. Our
conclusion is that the inversion effect observed with normal
faces is driven by our ability to exploit second order
relational structure in categories of stimuli that both possess
the necessary structure and that are sufficiently familiar. If
this structure is disrupted, then so is the inversion effect. If
it is eliminated entirely then so is the inversion effect. So
far, so good; we will now subject this account to greater
scrutiny in the context of our results and the theory of
perceptual learning first put forward by McLaren, Kaye and
Mackintosh (1989) and subsequently developed in McLaren
and Mackintosh (2000, 2002).
The case for Thatcherised faces seems quite straightforward
and has already been given in the discussion of Experiment
1. By rotating the eyes and mouth we do not alter the first
order or local feature information to any great extent, but we
do change the second order structure involving those
features. If this is important for recognition, then we should
see an effect on upright Thatcherised faces, and we do, as

they are recognised significantly worse than normal upright
faces. If inversion removes our ability to make use of this
information, then the fact that it has been disrupted should
not matter, and indeed, inverted Thatcherised faces do not
seem to suffer in comparison with inverted normal faces.
The results of Experiment 1, then, are entirely consistent
with our version of Diamond and Carey's (1986) hypothesis
with respect to face recognition.
Experiment 2 is superficially somewhat similar in its results,
but actually reflects the consequences of a quite different
manipulation. True, the local features are unchanged for the
scrambled faces relative to the normal ones, but now both
first and second order information are no longer in their
familiar form, and the variation from scrambled face to
scrambled face means that, in some real sense, there is no
way to develop expertise with any second or first order
relational information as a result of experience with the
stimulus set. The effect of this is, in part, the expected one
in that any inversion effect for the scrambled faces
disappears. But the overall performance to scrambled faces,
whether in an upright or inverted orientation, is now below
not only that for upright normal faces (which would be
expected) but also below that obtained for inverted normal
faces, significantly so in the case of the inverted scrambled
faces. This is a challenging result which stands in stark
contrast to the finding that recognition performance for
inverted Thatcherised faces is no different to that for
inverted normal faces. If it was the case that we had simply
eradicated second order relational information in the
scrambled faces, and that this information was the source of
the inversion effect in normal faces, then we might have
expected scrambling to produce faces that (in any
orientation) supported the same level of recognition
performance as inverted normal faces. The finding that these
faces are now recognized significantly worse than inverted
normal faces indicates that something more is involved.
One possible explanation for this effect starts by suggesting
that inverted normal faces may still be benefiting from some
effects of expertise. After all, they contain standard facial
features that have not been themselves changed apart from
rotation as a configuration so they are recognizable as faces.
Clearly it would be unwise to assume that all effects of
expertise disappear under inversion, perhaps the use of
second order relational information is only attenuated in
these circumstances. If this is so, however, then some
explanation of why the inverted Thatcherised faces are not
worse recognized than inverted normal faces is needed. It
would be tempting at this point to note that, because of the
180º rotation of the eyes and mouth used to Thatcherise the
faces, when a Thatcherised face is inverted the eyes and
mouth are now in their normal orientation – could this offset
what otherwise would be a disadvantage for Thatcherised
faces compared to their normal inverted counterparts? One
problem with this explanation is that the upright scrambled
faces (for which no local features are inverted) are also
worse recognised (p=.06) than inverted normal faces, and
not distinguishably different from inverted scrambled faces,

2087

which suggests that having features in their correct
orientation is not, in itself, enough to confer much of an
advantage.
Another possible explanation appeals to the fact that by
using scrambled faces we have disrupted both first and
second order relational structure. To make the point with
somewhat greater force, with normal faces it is clear that
one is dealing with a face whether it is upright or inverted.
The same applies to Thatcherised faces, there is something
odd about them in an upright orientation but there is no
doubt that, upright or inverted, they are faces. This cannot
so easily be said of scrambled faces, even though they
possess all the local features of a face, the loss of first order
structure makes it relatively hard to describe these stimuli as
"face like" in either orientation. Perhaps this is the key then,
to the poor performance with these faces, poor performance
which is paradoxical in the sense that these faces, by virtue
of the variation in the spatial arrangement of their features
actually differ more from one another objectively than
normal or Thatcherised faces. This should make them easier
to discriminate and recognise, and the fact that it does not
we would argue is testament to the strong influence of
expertise on face recognition, though we note that it is also
consistent with the notion of a specialised processing
mechanism for faces. In the next section we consider one
theory that offers an explanation for the development of
expertise with faces that might be able to accommodate our
results.
The MKM theory of perceptual learning (McLaren, Kaye
and Mackintosh, 1989; see also McLaren and Mackintosh,
2000, 2002) suggests that features that are associatively
predicted by other features are less salient than relatively
unpredicted features. The associations that make the
predictions are built up in the course of experience with the
stimuli, but can only come about if there is a reliable
relationship between features for these associations to
exploit. Upright faces possess this quality, the first order
structure is highly predictable, the second order structure
less so. Thus the first order structure becomes relatively less
salient with experience, and the second order structure can
then be more easily used to individuate faces. On this
theory, then, the scrambled faces should be the baseline for
performance where all benefits of experience with the first
order structure of faces is lost making them much less
discriminable from one another. The theory would also have
it that it is this benefit that is responsible for inversion
effects, which fits well with the lack of a difference between
upright and inverted scrambled faces. But what of
Thatcherised faces? The theory predicts that, in the case of
upright Thatcherised faces, the rotated eyes and mouth will
have changed such that the predictions made for them (by
other features in the face) will no longer match with the
reality. This mismatch makes these features look salient and
enhances their "oddness". Unfortunately, many of these
salient features will tend to be those typical of
Thatcherisation, and so will be common across Thatcherised
faces, and will not help discrimination and recognition,

making upright Thatcherised faces worse than upright
normal faces in the experiments of the type reported here.
Now consider an inverted Thatcherised face. We know that
it does not look very different to its normal inverted
equivalent, and performance to both in our experiments is
roughly the same. The conclusion we draw is that features
are predicted to be in certain spatial locations (because we
know this is an inverted face), but that this happens without
making second order structure relatively salient. The
(somewhat speculative) claim being made here is that
inversion of a stimulus that is recogniseable as a face has the
effect of disrupting our expertise for second order structure,
whilst maintaining (at least in part) some reduction in the
salience of first order structure. Thus, inverted faces benefit
from this loss of salience of features that would otherwise
be common to all inverted faces (their basic spatial
arrangement) whilst losing the sensitivity to second order
structure that makes us so good at dealing with upright
faces, and which is the basis of the inversion effect.
Eliminating familiar first order structure by scrambling a
face reveals the advantage that this confers even for inverted
faces.
Further research will be needed to evaluate this account of
our results, but our data clearly suggest that there is a role
for both first and second order structure in face recognition,
that we argue can be understood in terms of experiencebased expertise.

References
Diamond, R. & Carey, S. (1986). Why faces are and are not
special: An effect of expertise. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 115, 107-117.
Leder, H. & Bruce, V. (1998) Local and relational aspects
of face distinctiveness'. The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology A, 51, 449 – 473.
McLaren, I.P.L. (1997). Categorization and perceptual
learning: An analogue of the face inversion effect. The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 50A (2),
257-273.
McLaren, I.P.L., Kaye, H. & Mackintosh, N.J. (1989). An
associative theory of the representation of stimuli:
Applications to perceptual learning and latent inhibition.
Oxford university press.
McLaren, I.P.L., & Mackintosh.(2000). An elemental model
of associative learning: latent inhibition and perceptual
learning. Animal Learning & Behavior, 28 (3), 211-246.
McLaren, I. P. L. & Mackintosh, N. J. (2002). Associative
learning and elemental representation: II. Generalization and
discrimination. Animal Learning & Behavior, 30,3,177-200.
Searcy, J. H., Bartlett, J. C. (1996) Inversion and processing
of component and spatial-relational information in faces.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and performance 22 904 – 915.
Valentine, T., & Bruce, V. (1988). Mental rotation of faces.
Memory & Cognition, 16, 556-566
Yin, R. K. (1969). Looking at upside-down faces. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 81, 141-145.

2088

