UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Phonological Encoding of Sentence Production

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/73m4990r

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Hilliard, Caitlin
Furth, Katrina
Jaeger, T. Florian

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Phonological Encoding in Sentence Production
Caitlin Hilliard (chillia2@u.rochester.edu), Katrina Furth (kfurth@bcs.rochester.edu),
T. Florian Jaeger (fjaeger@bcs.rochester.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Meliora Hall
Rochester, NY 14627 USA
Abstract
Previous tests of the phonological competition model (Dell,
1986) have mostly investigated the effects of phonological
overlap (e.g. pick-pin) in isolated word production (e.g.
primed picture naming). This is problematic since recent
findings suggest that the effect of phonological overlap
depends on the syntactic category of the phonologically
related words, and few previous studies investigate
phonological planning in the context of grammatical strings.
We introduce a novel paradigm to examine two predictions of
the so called parallel-then-sequential competition model
(O‟Seaghdha and Marin, 2000) against data from the
distribution of disfluencies in sentence production. We also
extend previous work by comparing different forms of
phonological overlap (identity vs. similarity) in both word
onsets and rhymes.
Keywords: phonological encoding; sentence production

Introduction
In order to speak, it is necessary to retrieve the segments
that comprise each word (i.e. the phonemes) and organize
them in the intended sequential order. This process, which is
commonly referred to as phonological encoding, has been
shown to be sensitive to interference from recently
processed phonological material. A long line of research has
employed these interference effects to infer the architecture
of the system underlying phonological encoding. One of the
most promising models that has emerged from this research
is the phonological competition model and its offspring,
which have been successfully applied to the distribution of
speech errors, lexical production latencies, speech rate
variations, and the tip-of-the-tongue phenomenon (Dell,
1986; Peterson, Dell & O‟Seaghdha, 1989; Sevald and Dell,
1994; O‟Seaghdha and Marin, 2000).
The original phonological competition model assumed
that all segments are activated in parallel (Peterson, Dell &
O‟Seaghdha, 1989). The model contains a network
comprised of nodes for both words and phonemes with topdown and bottom-up feedback connections between the
nodes. During planning of a spoken word, activation spreads
downward from the word node to the phonemes comprising
the word. Activation also travels upwards through feedback
connections from phonemes to the word nodes, leading to
activation of word nodes phonologically related to the
target. It is not until all the segments of a word have been
assigned to their appropriate position in the syllable frame
that the speaker starts articulating the word.
Evidence from later work suggests a sequential
component is required. This evidence comes from studies on
the effect of phonological overlap between adjacent words

(Sevald & Dell, 1994; O‟Seaghdha & Marin, 2000).
Participants were asked to produce sequences of monosyllabic consonant-vowel-consonant words as many times
as possible within an 8 second period, where the adjacent
words contained identical onsets (e.g. PICK-PIN) or
identical rhymes (e.g. PICK-TICK). While onset overlap
strongly inhibited (slowed down) production, rhyme overlap
led to less inhibition (O‟Seaghdha and Marin, 2000) or even
facilitation (Sevald & Dell, 1994). To account for these
findings, O‟Seaghdha and Marin (2000:59) propose the
parallel-then-sequential competition model, according to
which “all segments are first activated, providing feedback
to form-related words, and then selected in sequence.” This
would account for inhibition found in end-related
conditions: parallel activation of the phonemes of a word
retrieved for articulation spreads upwards through feedback
connections to words that share these phonemes in the same
position. If one of these words has recently been produced,
its relatively high lingering activation combined with the
feedback activation slows down selection of the target word.
This effect is larger for overlapping onsets than rhymes
because more time passes before the rhymes are required
(that is the sequential component of the model).
Another prediction of the phonological competition
model is that effects of phonological competition are
dependent on the frequency of the target. High-frequency
words are thought to encounter greater competition due to
the rapid activation of their segments, which in turn is
assumed to cause more competition between discrepant
syllables from adjacent words. This prediction has received
support from a variety of paradigms, including naming and
word pair production (O‟Seaghdha & Marin, 2000).
However, previous tests of the phonological competition
model have almost completely been limited to isolated word
production. The interaction between frequency and
phonological overlap, which is crucial for the parallel-thensequential model, has so far only been tested in isolated
word production. This is problematic since recent evidence
suggests that the effect of phonological overlap depends on
both the syntactic category of the phonologically related
words and the order, which was not controlled in the works
cited above. For example, Janssen and Caramazza (2009)
find inhibition due to onset overlap only for noun-noun
sequences, and facilitatory effects in adjective-noun, nounverb, and adjective-adjective-noun sequences. They
hypothesize that grammatically common sequences (nounverb, adjective-noun, etc.) show different effects than
sequences that are rare (e.g. noun-noun). This result would

3070

call into question the interpretation of previous evidence in
support of the parallel-then-sequential competition model.
We present two production experiments that seek to test
the predictions of the parallel-then-sequential competition
model against data from phonological encoding in complete
sentences. Experiment 1 investigates the effect of onset
overlap; Experiment 2 rhyme overlap. In both experiments
we test the prediction that more frequent target words
should be more severely inhibited than less frequent target
words. The paradigm we introduce was designed to allow us
to investigate phonological encoding in the context of
sentence production.

Experiment 1: Onset Overlap
Participants were asked to produce simple transitive
sentences. We manipulated the phonological overlap
between the verb (lost, below) and the object noun. The
object either (1a) had the same initial consonant and vowel
as the verb (lost-lock), (1b) had the same vowel, but the
initial consonant differed in exactly one phonological
feature (lost-rock), or (1c) had the same vowel and the
initial consonant did differ in at least two phonological
features (lost-sock).
(1)

(a) The maid lost the lock
(b) The maid lost the rock
(c) The maid lost the sock

[identical onset]
[similar onset]
[unrelated control]

Our design hence differs in several potentially relevant
aspects from previous work. First, previous work has
generally compared phonological overlap between words of
the same syntactic category (some recent exceptions are
Abrams & Rodriguez, 2005; Damian & Dumay, 2007;
Janssen & Caramazza, 2009). Second, previous work has
almost exclusively focused on the comparison between
onset identity and phonologically unrelated words. Little is
known about the role of high phonological similarity in the
absence of identity (but see Roelofs, 1999) –despite strong
typological evidence that there is a bias against adjacent
similar, but not necessarily against adjacent identical units
(for summary, see Graff, 2010). Here, we compare identical
to similar to unrelated words. Third, to address the
possibility that phonological context plays a role in how
phonological relatedness between proximate words affects
production, we keep the preceding word and the rhyme of
the target word identical across the conditions of an item
(_ock).

Method
Participants Thirty University of Rochester undergraduates
participated in the experiment for $10 compensation each.
All reported to be native speakers of English.
Materials The experiment consisted of 36 items and 54
fillers. Items were simple transitive sentences in the three
conditions illustrated in example (1) above. Participants saw
one of three Latin-square-designed lists, so that each

participant saw each item exactly once and equally many
instances of each condition.
Item triplets were created using the MRC
Psycholinguistic database (Coltheart, 1981). We first
extracted all mono-syllabic noun triplets that differed in
only in their phonological onset. For each triplet we
searched for a transitive verb, so that (a) the verb‟s first
syllable overlapped with one of the nouns in terms of its
initial consonant and nucleus, but not in terms of its final
consonant (identity condition) and (b) the verb‟s onset
differed from the onset of one of the other nouns in only one
phonological feature (similarity condition), and (c) the last
noun‟s onset differed from the verb‟s onset in at least two
phonological features. The resulting verb-noun-triplets were
filtered to remove combinations with very infrequent nouns
or verbs. Of the remaining materials, we chose those 36
combinations that we deemed best suited in terms of the
intuitive plausibility of the verb object combination (e.g. …
lost the lock/rock/sock. in (1) above).
We then constructed simple transitive sentences based on
these verb-noun-triplets. The constraints of the design
forced us to reuse five noun triplets with 11 different verbs
(e.g. “The traveler bashed her sack/pack/ back” and “The
guest padded his sack/back/pack”). However, stimuli were
distributed in such a way that participants never actually
saw the same noun twice in the experiment.
Log-transformed frequency information for each verb and
object was obtained from the 400 million word
Contemporary Corpus of American English (Davies, 2008).
Additionally, we gathered information about several
variables known to affect lexical production for all item
triplets to avoid potential confounds. The following control
properties of both the verb and object noun were considered:
the log-transformed frequency of the first syllable across all
words of English both in first position only and in any
position (obtained from the CELEX lexical database,
Baayen, Piepenbrock & Gulikers, 1995), the neighborhood
density1, and frequency-weighted neighborhood density
(Vaden, Hickok & Halpin, 2009). Controls were balanced
across conditions. We also conducted mixed effect
regression analyses (not reported here due to limited space)
that confirmed that none of the results reported below were
caused by main effects of the control variables.
Additionally, we gathered plausibility norms for each
sentence over Amazon‟s online service Mechanical Turk.
For the target stimuli, subjects were always third person
lexical nouns. Half of the verbs occurred in the present tense
and half in the past tense (e.g. lost in (1) above). Twentyseven (75%) of the verbs were monosyllabic, and the other 9
verbs were disyllabic. Object nouns were always
monosyllabic. The coda (e.g. /k/ in (1) above) was held
identical across the three conditions.
Since previous work suggests that phonological
relatedness affects production most strongly (or, possibly,
only) when accompanied by orthographical overlap
(Damian & Bowers, 2003), we tried to accompany
1

3071

See http://128.252.27.56/Neighborhood/NeighborHome.asp.

phonological overlap by orthographic overlap as much as
possible within the limits defined by the need to create a
sufficiently large set of plausible stimuli. The orthography
of verb-object onset consonant in the identity condition („l‟
in (1) above) was always matched. The orthography of the
vowel was matched between verb-object pairs in 28 of the
36 items (if it was matched for an item it was matched for
all conditions of that item). The orthography of the coda was
matched in all but two items, for which some conditions
contained a silent “b” (as in limb and lamb).
Procedure Participants were instructed that they would
have to solve math problems while remembering sentences.
There were two minimally different variants of the task.
Half of the participants saw variant A, the other half saw
variant B. Since the results did not differ between the two
versions of the task (there were no interactions between the
version of the experiment and the results reported below),
we pool the data from the two versions.
In variant A, trials consisted of three phases. In the
formation phase, participants saw the subject noun phrase
(e.g. the maid), the verb (e.g. lost), and the object noun
phrase (e.g.) the lock arrange in a triangle, randomly
positioned from trial to trial. Participants formed a sentence
from these parts and spoke it aloud. There was no time
pressure. In the distraction phase, participants read two math
problems aloud and typed the answer in a box on the screen.
In the recall phase, one word from the original sentence was
presented, prompting recall of the entire sentence as
accurately as could be remembered. For target trials the
prompt was always the subject of the sentence.
The procedure of variant B was identical to that described
above except for two aspects introduced to increase the
overall rate of disfluencies. First, we introduced time
pressure during both formation and recall, with a green
progress bar indicating remaining time. Based on piloting,
the deadlines were set at 5500 milliseconds and 1750
milliseconds, respectively. To further increase the task's
complexity, a temporal adverbial (e.g. yesterday) was added
to the formation phase (the four words were now positioned
in a diamond). In line with our expectations, version B
resulted in more overall disfluencies.
The experiment began with a short practice session (12
trials) after which participants were instructed to ask the
experimenter any questions they had about the procedure.
Practice trials only contained phonologically unrelated
stimuli. The practice session was followed by the
experimental session (90 trials).
Scoring Productions from both the formulation and the
recall phase of all item trials were transcribed and annotated
by an undergraduate RA. Annotation reliability was
ascertained by comparing annotation of 100 sentences
against those of the first author. Since the disfluency rate on
recall trials was very low (5%), we report only the analysis
of formation trials. The presence of disfluencies was
recorded for four separate regions: (1) before the subject, (2)
after the subject and before the verb, (3) after the verb and

before the head noun of the direct object, and (4) in the
remainder of the sentence. This is illustrated in example (2)
by squared brackets, where there is one disfluency in the
subject region (a restart), no disfluency in the verb region,
two disfluencies (one filled pause, one word lengthening) in
the object region, and no disfluency in the remainder of the
sentence.
(2)
Subject
Verb
Object
Remainder
Example [The, the maid] [lost] [the, uh, lo-ock] [yesterday]
Disfluency
yes
no
yes
no
The data from two participants had to be excluded
because they had to abort the experiment or did not follow
the instructions. Incomplete trials were excluded from the
analysis. All data from one item had to be excluded from the
analysis because of a copy and paste error in the
experimental lists. This left 994 formation trials with an
average disfluency rate across all regions of 16%.

Analysis
To analyze the distribution of disfluencies by conditions, we
conducted separate mixed logit regression analyses (Jaeger,
2008) for each sentence region for both the formation and
the recall trials. In all cases, a random intercept for
participants was the only justified random effect. We first fit
a model with the (a) the random effect, (b) a covariate for
plausibility, (c) the three-way design factor, (d) verb and
object frequency and (e) the interaction between (c) and (d).
The plausibility control was included to avoid potential
confounds since its effect reached significance in some
analyses. We then assessed the significance of variables by
comparing the full model against a model without that
variable. Directions of effects were assessed by means of
planned comparisons (e.g. we always used Helmert coding
for the design factor, comparing the Identical < Similar <
Unrelated condition).

Results
In the subject region, there were no significant effects. In
the verb region, two main effects and an interaction were
observed. Unsurprisingly, participants were less likely to
produce a disfluency the higher the logarithm transformed
verb frequency (β=-.14, z=-2.1, p<.04), and the higher the
sentence‟s plausibility rating (β=-.23, z=-2.2, p<.03). There
was no main effect of phonological overlap between the
verb and object. There was, however, an interaction between
phonological overlap and verb frequency (χ2(3)=11.1,
p<.02). Planned comparison revealed that, with increasing
verb frequency, both similar and identical verb-object onsets
led to increased probability of a disfluency compared to the
control condition (β=.36, z=2.5, p<.02). The effect of verb
frequency did not differ between the two overlap conditions
(p>.9).
In the object region, a main effect of phonological overlap
was observed (χ2(3)=6.4, p<.05). This effect was driven by
the identical verb-object onsets, which were associated with
a higher rate of disfluencies (β=.66, z=2.4, p<.02) compared

3072

to both similar verb-object onsets and the control condition
(the latter two conditions did not differ, p>.4). Additionally,
there was a significant interaction of phonological overlap
with object frequency (χ2(3)=10.8, p<.01). This interaction
went in the opposite direction of the effect observed over
the verb region: the effect of identical onsets decreased with
increasing object frequency (β=-.38, z=-2.6, p<.01). A
marginal interaction of verb frequency with similar onsets in
the same direction was also observed (β=-.29, z=-1.8,
p<.07).

effects similar to complete feature overlap (i.e. phoneme
identity).

Discussion

(3)

In comparing the effects of Experiment 1 to previous work,
it is important to keep in mind that the paradigm employed
here likely has considerably less power to detect effects than
studies that examine adjacent word produced in isolation
(rather than using a comprehended prime).
The inhibitory results found in the verb region between
related onsets are in line with previous work (O‟Seaghdha &
Marin, 2000; Sevald & Dell, 1994) and provide further
support for the phonological competition model. These
studies (Sevald & Dell, 1994; O‟Seaghdha & Marin 2000)
had participants repeat phonologically related words in fast
succession as many times as possible. Since our task did not
involve so much phonological repetition, it is unsurprising
that the hypothesized effect of phonological relatedness may
not reach significance in all cases.
However, the interaction between phonological
relatedness and object frequency for the object region
exhibited the opposite of the predicted pattern. We consider
two interpretations of this effect. First, it is possible that the
phonological inhibition model needs to be revised. Several
other studies have found that the effects of phonological
overlap depend on whether the two phonologically related
words are of the same syntactic category (Abrams &
Rodriguez, 2005; Damian & Dumay, 2007; Janssen &
Caramazza, 2009). Most of this work has employed
paradigms in which one of the two related words (the so
called prime) is only comprehended. This differs from the
procedure employed here, where both words (the verb and
the object) are produced.
It is also possible that the different interactions of
frequency and phonological relatedness are due to properties
of the procedure used here. We return to this point below.
With regard to the relation between similarity and
identity, the results are relatively weak but consistent. With
regard to the interaction with verb frequency (in the verb
region), similar and identical onsets group together
compared to the control condition. With regard to the
interaction with object frequency (in the object region), a
similar pattern was observed, although the effect here was
stronger for identical than for similar onsets. The same
ordering is found for the main effect of phonological
overlap at the object. Taken together, these results suggests
that at least at some stage, subphonemic overlap affects
lexical production and that partial feature overlap can create

Experiment 2: Rhyme Overlap
Experiment 2 follows the design of Experiment 1, but
investigates the effects of phonological overlap between
rhymes. An example item is shown as (3) below. As spelled
out in the introduction, the parallel-then-sequential
competition model predicts less inhibition for related
rhymes than for related onsets.
(a) The owners scrub the pub [identical rhyme]
(b) The owners scrub the pup [similar rhyme]
(c) The owners scrub the pus [unrelated control]

Method
Participants Thirty undergraduate students from the same
population as in Experiment 1 participated for $10
compensation each. All reported to be native speakers of
English.
Materials Following Experiment 1, there were 36 items and
54 fillers. Item triplets were created to mirror those from
Experiment 1, differing only in the location of overlap (the
rhyme instead of the onset). The frequency of the verb and
object, as well as all the controls variables mentioned in the
description of Experiment 1 were elicited for Experiment 2.
For target stimuli, subjects were again always third person
lexical nouns. Thirty-one of 36 verbs occurred in the
present tense, due to less likelihood of participants altering
the coda of either the verb or object for sentences with
present tense verbs. Half of verbs were monosyllabic and
half disyllabic. Object nouns were always monosyllabic.
The onsets of the nouns within each triplet were held
consistent. The orthography of verb-object coda consonant
was always matched. The orthography of the vowel was
matched between verb-object pairs in 26 of the 36 items.
The orthography of the onset within triplets was matched in
all items.
Procedure The procedure was identical to that of
Experiment 1, having two minimally different variants A
and B, with the same differences as in Experiment 1. Again
the data from each variant were pooled, as the results of
interest do not differ between the two versions.
Scoring Scoring was identical to Experiment 1, with one
difference: trials in which participants introduced additional
material in the coda of the verb or object (e.g. scrubbed for
scrub, pubs for pub) were excluded from the analysis. Data
from four items had to be excluded from the analysis since
less than 40% of the participants managed to construct the
intended sentence. This left 656 formation with an average
disfluency rate across all regions of 21%.

3073

Results
In the subject region, two main effects and an interaction
were observed. Parallel to Experiment 1, participants were
less likely to produce a disfluency the higher the sentence‟s
plausibility rating (β=-.25, z=-1.9, p<.06). There also was a
marginal main effect of phonological overlap (χ2(3)=4.6,
p=.09), so that both identical and similar rhymes were more
likely to lead to a disfluency compared to the control
condition (β=.57, z=2.2, p<.03). The two phonological
overlap conditions did not differ from each other (p>.9).
Additionally, there was a marginal interaction between
phonological overlap and verb frequency (χ2(3)=4.9, p=.09)
for identical compared to similar rhymes and the control
condition, participants were more likely to produce a
disfluency the higher the verb frequency (β=.36, z=2.2,
p<.03). The effect of verb frequency did not interact with
the difference between similar rhymes and the control
condition (p>.9).
In the verb region, there were no effects. In the object
region, there was no main effect of phonological overlap or
object frequency, but the two-way interaction between
phonological overlap and object frequency approached
significance (χ2(3)=5.1, p<.08): for identical compared to
unrelated rhymes, participants were again more likely to
produce a disfluency the higher the object frequency (β=.40,
z=2.2, p<.03). The effect of object frequency did not differ
between identical and similar onsets (p>.8).

with regard to the interaction with frequency. This suggests
competition may also take place at the subphonemic level.
Two findings were not predicted by the parallel-thensequential competition model. First, we do not find that
onsets lead to more inhibition than rhymes: The coefficients
of the phonological overlap effects are comparable across
the two experiments. Additionally, disfluency rates were
higher overall in Experiment 2. Second, Experiment 1
returned one significant interaction of phonological
relatedness and frequency in the unexpected direction: for
the object region, the inhibitory effect of onset overlap
decreased with increasing frequency of the object
These unexpected effects could be due to a drawback of
our paradigm to be addressed in future work: the lack of
control over the time course of comprehension and
subsequent production of the sentence. Figure 1 illustrates
the two endpoints of the spectrum that describes the
potential overlap of cascading comprehension and
production processes in our paradigm. The hypothetical
speaker in the left panel, initiates talking as soon as a likely
candidate for the subject phrase (maid) has been
comprehended. As a consequence, parts of the to-beproduced sentence are still being comprehended while
articulation is already initiated. The hypothetical speaker in
the right panel, initiates production planning only after all
parts of the stimulus have been comprehended, thereby
avoiding overlap between comprehension and production.

Discussion
The results in the subject region of Experiment 2 are similar
to the findings in the verb region in Experiment 1;
conditions with both identical and similar rhymes increase
the likelihood of producing a disfluency. Also in line with
Experiment 1, the probability of producing a disfluency
between identical rhymes increased with verb frequency.
We can only speculate that the reason that these effects
showed up in the subject region in Experiment 2, but verb
region in Experiment 1, is due to the relatively low power
our paradigm has compared to previous work (see above).
In the object region, disfluencies were more likely in the
identical rhyme condition with increasing object frequency,
which contrasts the result from Experiment 1.

General Discussion
The results obtained in Experiments 1 and 2 are mixed,
although overall they tend to support the phonological
competition theory. First, only inhibitory main effects of
phonological overlap were observed. Second, the interaction
of phonological overlap with frequency went in the
direction predicted by the parallel-then-sequential
competition model (O‟Seaghdha and Marin, 2000) for three
out of the four significant interactions.
With regard to the comparison of similar vs. identical
onsets and rhymes, we found that identity is generally worse
than similarity. Identical onset and rhymes lead to inhibition
compared to similar ones. Words with similar onsets or
rhymes mostly grouped with the control condition, except

Figure 1: Illustration of different hypothetical time courses
of stimulus comprehension and production in our paradigm
These different time courses are likely to lead to different
results: phonological overlap has been shown to differ
depending on whether verbal apprehension (in particular, of
written input) co-occurs with production of the target word
(O‟Seaghdha & Marin, 2000 vs. Taylor & Burke, 2002),
sometimes turning inhibitory into facilitatory effects. Since
we did not control the strategies employed by participants, it
is possible that the resulting mix of strategies weakened
effects or even caused the unexpected interaction between
phonological overlap and frequency in Experiment 1.
We must also factor in that the different syntactic
categories of the two words could have produced some of
the facilitatory effects. When the phonologically related
prime and target are of different syntactic categories this
facilitates TOT state resolution compared to the presentation
of same-category primes, which has no effect (Abrams &
Rodriguez, 2005; Burke, MacKay, Worthley & Wade,
1991). In another study examining these effects,
phonological onset overlap yielded different effects based

3074

on word order; inhibitory effects are found in noun-noun
utterances, while facilitatory effects are found in adjectivenoun utterances (Janssen & Caramazza, 2009). Janssen and
Caramazza link this difference to differences in the relative
time course of grammatical and phonological encoding for
grammatically
typical
(e.g.
adjective-noun)
and
grammatically atypical (e.g. noun-noun) utterances. In our
experiments, all utterances only contained grammatically
typical orders. Yet, it is possible that the overlapping
phonological encoding of the verb and object took place
during different time points of their respective grammatical
encoding, explain the results of Experiment 1. Without
further stipulations, it would, however, not account for the
observed inhibition for both the verb and the object when
their rhymes overlapped (Experiment 2). In short, our data
suggest a three-way interaction of phonological encoding,
grammatical encoding, and they type of phonological
overlap (onset vs. rhyme). We conclude that the account
introduced by Janssen and Caramazza (2009) requires
further modification.
Despite the drawbacks discussed above, we consider the
paradigm introduced here a promising first step toward
examining phonological competition effects during sentence
production. While the lexical content to be produced by
participants in our experiments was still largely scripted,
participants had to create the syntactic structure themselves
from the parts presented to them. Recall also that the
adverbial in our stimuli (e.g. yesterday) could be produced
in several positions of the sentence, highlighting the fact
that grammatical encoding of the sentences was not fully
scripted, unlike the majority of over 200 previous
experiments we recently surveyed (but see Bock, 1987;
Jaeger, Furth, & Hilliard, 2011).
In ongoing work, we are exploring ways to increase the
statistical power of the approach by analyzing word duration
and speech rate data from the different sentence regions.
Word durations of the determiner before the object noun, for
example, should be lengthened when lexical production of
the noun is inhibited.

Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful to Andrew Watts for programming
the experiments, to S. Brown, J. Ferris and R. Glass for
running participants, and to S. Kumar, and R. Murphy for
transcription and annotation. Experiment 1 was conducted
by KF as part of her B.A. thesis, Experiment 2 was
conducted by CH. This work was partially funded by a
Bishop Award to KF and by a Alfred P. Sloan Research
Fellowship and the Wilmot Award to TFJ.

References
Abrams, L., & Rodriguez, E. L. (2005). Syntactic class
influences phonological priming of tip-of-the-tongue
resolution. Psych Bulletin & Review, 12(6), 1018-1023.
Abrams, L., White, K. K., & Eitel, S. L. (2003). Isolating
phonological components that increase tip-of-the-tongue
resolution. Memory & Cognition, 31, 1153-1162.

Baayen, R. H., Piepenbrock, R., & Gulikers, L. (1995). The
CELEX Lexical Database (Version Release 2) [CDROM]. Philadelphia: LDC, University of Pennsylvania.
Burke, D. M., MacKay, D. G., Worthley, J. S., & Wade, E.
(1991). On the tip of the tongue: What causes word
finding failures in young and older adults? JML, 30(5),
542-579.
Coltheart M (1981) The MRC psycholinguistic database.
JEP, 33A: 497-505.
Damian, M. F., & Bowers, J. S. (2003). Effects of
orthography on speech production in a form-preparation
paradigm. JML, 49(1), 119-132.
Damian, M.F., & Dumay, N. (2007). Time pressure and
phonological advance planning in spoken production.
JML, 57(2), 195-209.
Davies, M. (2008) The Corpus of Contemporary American
English (COCA): 385 million words, 1990-present.
Dell, G. (1986). A spreading activation theory of re- trieval
in language production. PsychReview, 93, 282321.
Graff, P. (2010). Towards a Feature-Based Model of
Phonological Similarity. Cambridge, MA: MIT.
Jaeger, T. F. (2008). Categorical data analysis: Away from
ANOVAs (transformation or not) and towards logit mixed
models. JML, 59(4), 434-446.
Jaeger, T. F., Furth, K., & Hilliard, C. (2011). Phonological
encoding during unscripted sentence production.
Unpublished manuscript, University of Rochester.
James, L. E., & Burke, D. M. (2000). Phonological priming
effects on word retrieval and tip-of-the-tongue
experiences in young and older adults. JEP:LMC, 26,
1378-1391.
Janssen, N., & Caramazza, A. (2009). Grammatical and
Phonological Influences on Word Order. Psych Science,
20, 1262-1268.
O‟Seaghdha, P. G., & Marin, J. W. (2000). Phonological
competition and cooperation in from-related priming:
sequential and nonsequential processes in word
production. JEP: HPP, 26, 57–73.
Peterson, R.R. Dell, G.S., & O‟Seaghdha, P.G. (1989). A
connectionist model of form-related priming effects. 11th
CogSci.
Roelofs, A. (1999). Phonological segments and features as
planning units in speech production. LCP, 14, 173-200
Sevald, C.A., & Dell, G.S. (1994). The sequential cuing
effect in speech production. Cognition, 53, 91–127.
Starreveld, P. A. (2000). On the interpretation of onsets of
auditory context effects in word production. JML, 42,
497–525.
Taylor, J.K., & Burke, D.M. (2002). Asymmetric aging
effects on semantic and phonological processes: Naming
in the picture-word interference task. Psych and Aging,
17, 662-676.
Vaden, K.I., Hickok, G.S., & Halpin, H.R. (2009). Irvine
Phonotactic Online Dictionary, Version 1.4 3.
White, K. K., & Abrams, L. (2002). Does priming specific
syllables during tip-of-the-tongue states facilitate word
retrieval in older adults? Psych & Aging, 17, 226-235.

3075

