UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Phrase Structure Priming Across Sentences: Facilitation or Reconfiguration?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5r6538w8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Frazer, Alexandra K.
O'Seaghdha, Padraig G.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Phrase Structure Priming Across Sentences: Facilitation or Reconfiguration?
Alexandra K. Frazer (akf207@lehigh.edu)
Department of Psychology, Lehigh University USA

Padraig G. O’Seaghdha (pat.oseaghdha@lehigh.edu)
Department of Psychology and Cognitive Science Program, Lehigh University, USA

Abstract
Structural priming, the tendency for speakers to reuse the
structures of recent utterances (Bock, 1986) or to produce
repeated structures more fluently, is well documented for
structural selection, but less so for phrase structure
generation. Priming of structural choices is long-lived,
persisting across intervening utterances (Bock & Griffin,
2000), but priming of phrase structure does not survive even
one intervening sentence (Wheeldon & Smith, 2003),
suggesting that the processes may be different. Moreover,
although Smith & Wheeldon (2001) found an initiation
latency benefit of initial noun phrase priming, the main verb
(move/s) was also constant. Here, we report a noun phrase
structure repetition effect only when the entire verb phrase
was also repeated. Because this effect is better accounted for
as plan reconfiguration than as structural priming, previous
reports of phrase level structural priming need to be
reassessed.
Keywords: Language production; grammatical encoding;
structural priming; lexical boost; planning scope

Structural Priming in Sentence Production
For a quarter of a century, structural priming has been one
of the most researched topics in the field of language
production. Structural priming is the tendency to echo the
syntactic structures of recently produced utterances
(Pickering & Ferreira, 2008) with potential gains in fluency.
For example, after producing sentence (a), people would be
more likely to generate (b) than (c) in a picture description
task (example from Bock & Griffin, 2000, p. 178).
(a)
(b)
(c)

The car‟s windshield was struck by a brick.
The boy is being awakened by a noisy alarm.
A noisy alarm awakened the boy.

In addition, production of (b) may be more fluent
following (a) than following a non-passive precursor. Such
effects are ubiquitous in production, occurring across
languages (Loebell & Bock, 2003), in written and spoken
production (Pickering & Branigan, 1998), between speakers
(Bock, Dell, Chang & Onishi, 2007), in aphasic speakers
(Hartsuiker & Kolk, 1998), and in children (Huttenlocher,
Vasilyeva, & Shimpi, 2004) (for a recent comprehensive
review see Pickering & Ferreira, 2008). Furthermore,
structural priming is not easily explained by repetition of
themes, lexical items, or metrical relationships between the
prime and target utterances, and has been interpreted as
evidence for an abstract or isolable representation of syntax
(see Pickering & Ferreira, 2008).

Most models of sentence production make a distinction
between functional and positional levels of grammatical
encoding (Bock & Levelt, 1994; Garrett, 1976). During
functional grammatical encoding, lexical items are selected
with respect to grammatical roles, whereas during positional
encoding words are linearized and linked to phonological
information. One might expect structural priming to operate
at both levels (Pickering & Ferreira, 2008). However, the
available evidence suggests that the processes at the two
levels may differ (Bock & Griffin, 2000; Smith &
Wheeldon, 2001).
The bulk of structural priming research has considered
functional level priming, using syntactic choice data to
determine whether priming has occurred (Bock, 1986;
Pickering & Ferreira, 2008). Functional level priming is
long-lived, persisting over multiple intervening sentence
productions, and so may reflect adjustments to the mappings
between meanings and syntactic expressions rather than
short term activation of lexical or syntactic options (Bock &
Griffin, 2000; Chang, Dell & Bock, 2006). Such high level
mappings, however, are not transparently relevant to
positional level processes.
Positional level structural priming involves the
linearization of words and may involve a phrasal planning
scope. Thus, because they involve linearization of nouns
(Bock & Warren, 1985), coordinate noun phrases are a good
candidate for phrase structure priming. Smith and Wheeldon
(2001) tested structural priming between both simple and
compound noun phrases, reporting a benefit in initiation
latency for primed compound phrases but no benefit for
simple noun phrases. Importantly, the priming effect did not
persist over even one intervening trial (Wheeldon & Smith,
2003). Wheeldon and Smith interpret this as evidence that
positional level assembly processes facilitate the
construction of a particular noun phrase structure, rather
than reflecting the mappings from conceptual to
grammatical representations that operate at the functional
level. Thus, although functional and positional level priming
may both be considered to be “structural”, they also involve
distinct processes.

Verb Phrase Repetition and Priming
An important theoretical debate in the functional level
literature concerns the potential role of lexical, and
especially verb repetition in promoting structural
persistence. Using measures of syntactic choice, Pickering
and Branigan (1998) showed that when the verb was

1140

repeated from prime to target, the amount of priming
increased, and therefore proposed that verbs play a pivotal
role in structural priming. Using the same materials as
Pickering and Branigan (1998), and again varying whether
or not the verb was repeated, Corley and Scheepers (2002)
used both measures of syntactic choice and response
latencies to measure priming. Only the same verb conditions
resulted in significant structural priming measured by
syntactic choice, and these conditions also showed a large
initiation time advantage. However, Hartsuiker et al. (2008)
showed that structural priming effects are distinct from the
„lexical boost‟ of verb repetition. They also showed that the
lexical boost was a short-lived effect, occurring only from
one sentence to the next, whereas structural priming effects
were long-lived, persisting over multiple intervening
sentences (see also Bock & Griffin, 2000).
Although it has not been explicitly addressed in the
published literature, verb repetition may also be implicated
in positional level processing. The Smith and Wheeldon
(2001) studies employed a picture description task in which
participants produced coordinate noun phrases prescribed by
the movements of pictures on a screen. In these
experiments, the specific movement of the pictures always
varied between productions but the main verb always
repeated from prime to target (e.g., MOVE/S up, down,
together, apart). There was a small, but robust initiation time
benefit of approximately 50ms across experiments, but only
for complex initial noun phrases. Like the lexical boost of
Hartsuiker et al. (2008), phrase structure priming was shortlived, occurring only between consecutive sentences
(Wheeldon & Smith, 2003). This raises the question of
whether phrase structure priming is a diminished structural
priming effect (see Pickering & Ferreira, 2008), or whether
it may be a different phenomenon.
Similar to Smith and Wheeldon, we have observed robust
phrase structure priming among consecutively generated
sentences when the prime and target sentences shared both
structure and the verb phrase (Schuster & O‟Seaghdha,
2005). This leaves open the possibility that the observed
positional structural priming effects are contingent on or
significantly enhanced by repetition of the verb. In a pilot
study with no verb phrase repetition from primes to targets,
we found no evidence of structural priming in measures of
initiation time (Frazer, 2009). Thus, to our knowledge only
studies of initiation time that have repeated some or all of
the verb phrase show structural priming. If the repetition of
the verb phrase is required for priming effects to be
observed, this suggests the following interim conclusion:
pure structural priming of the kind observed at the
functional syntactic level may not occur at the level of
phrase structure generation.

phrase was either the same in prime and target, different but
in the same spatial dimension (horizontal or vertical), or
different and in a different spatial dimension (see Figure 1).
All the productions were functionally equivalent
declaratives; only the positions of simple and complex noun
phrases, and the spatial locations described in the verb
phrases, varied.
We made two main predictions:
 Based on Smith & Wheeldon (2001), structural priming
will only be observed for compound initial noun phrases.
 Structural priming effects will be robust when the verb
phrase is repeated but reduced when it is not.

Method
Spatial Descriptions of Word Locations (SDWL) In this
procedure, participants receive sets of four nouns followed
by colored blocks that identify which words go together
(same color) and where they feature in the sentence (green
in NP1; red in NP2; see Figure 1). Thus participants are
induced to prepare Compound NP1 - VP - Short NP2 or
Short NP1 - VP - Compound NP2 sentences. Consecutive
sentences share structure, spatial predicates, both, or neither.
The spatial predicates are of the form is/are left of/right
of/above/below. This procedure addresses our goal of
examining positional level priming. Although the nouns in
this task are fully prescribed, participants must engage the
production processes of conceptualizing the spatial
arrangement to be described, formulating the corresponding
sentence, and linearizing the words for articulation.
Note that in this design, in the different structure
condition, the final noun phrase in the prime matches the
structure of the initial noun phrase of the target, raising the
possibility of unwanted priming among these adjacent
phrases. However, it is plausible that structural priming is
regulated by the sentence hierarchy. On this basis,
confirmed by the results of Smith and Wheeldon‟s (2001)
Experiment 6, we assume that priming occurs between
corresponding phrases in the same sentence positions.
Table 1: Experimental Design: Structural and Spatial
Location Components Shared Between Prime and Target
Sentences in Each Condition (all conditions include
Compound and Short NP1 targets).

Current Study
We systematically manipulated structural repetition in
conjunction with verb phrase repetition in order to examine
whether structural priming effects at the positional level are
in fact contingent on repetition of the verb phrase. The verb

1141

Structure Repetition
Spatial
Location

Different

Same

Location Only (A)

Opposite

VP Dimension (B)

Other

Unprimed (C)

Same
Structure and
Location (D)
Structure and VP
Dimension (E)
Structure Only (F)

Figure 1: Spatial Descriptions of Word Locations Procedure: Target Conditions in Relation to a Preceding Prime Production
1. Participant receives and memorizes set of four words
2. Words are replaced by blocks which convey encoding requirements
Words in GREEN locations are in the first NP; Words in RED locations are in the second NP. BLACK words are
discarded.
3. Participant produces appropriate sentence of the form “X/ X and Y - is/are left of/right of/ above/ below - Y and Z/ Z]

Participants Thirty-six native English speaking Lehigh
University undergraduates participated to fulfill a course
requirement. The experiment took approximately one hour
to complete.
Materials Words were selected based on a direct measure
of lexical accessibility, the naming latencies of singular
monosyllabic nouns in the English Lexicon Project database
(Balota, et al., 2007). Selected items were within one half
standard deviation of the mean naming latency [Range: 591
ms to 653 ms]. Item selection also took into account
concreteness and unambiguous pronunciation.
Items were first assigned to prime or target groupings of
four such that all words were used only once. The words
were then rotated across Conditions and Target Structures in
16 versions of the experiment so that there were no
systematic bindings of words to conditions. This elaborate
counterbalancing meant that there were no stable sentencelevel items and so no analysis by items is warranted.

Each version of the experiment contained 64 prime-target
combinations for a total of 128 productions. For each
Target Structure in both the Primed and Unprimed
conditions there were 4 targets where the spatial description
was the same as in the prime, 4 where the location was in
the same dimension but opposite, and 8 where the location
was in one or the other pole of a different dimension.
Design We manipulated Target Structure (Compound NP1
or Short NP1), Structure Repetition from the preceding
sentence (Same of Different), and the Spatial Location
described in the verb phrase (Same, Opposite, Other). See
Table 1.
Procedure Sentences were produced according to the
Spatial Descriptions of Word Locations procedure (Figure
1). First, four words appeared on screen. Participants read
each word aloud, paying attention to its location. When they
were ready, they pressed a key to continue, or the

1142

experiment continued automatically after 10 seconds. Next,
the colored blocks replaced the words. These blocks
indicated how the words should be spatially described (see
Figure 1). Participants were asked to produce the ingredients
of the compound noun phrases in a natural order, top-tobottom or left-to-right.
Participants were asked to produce the sentences as
quickly and accurately as possible. They were shown four
examples before proceeding to a practice section of 12
productions. During the practice trials the experimenter
corrected any errors and clarified the procedure as
necessary.
The sentences were organized in prime-target pairs but
presented in a continuous stream. The sequence of sentence
pairs was fully randomized. The experiment was broken into
two sections, with the opportunity for a break between
sections. The session was recorded for later coding.

Results
Data Scoring and Errors Any trial where speech did not
begin within 5 seconds of the appearance of the colored
blocks was discarded. Errors were defined as productions in
which the wrong words were produced, the words were
produced in the wrong order within a Compound NP or in
the wrong NP, the spatial description was incorrect, or the
production was incomplete. An error in the prime meant that
the prime-target pair was removed even if there was no error
on the target.
Six participants were excluded from the analysis for
having error rates over 50%. This left 30 participants who
had an average error rate of 29%. This rate is consistent
with previous work using this paradigm (Frazer, 2009;
Schuster & O‟Seaghdha, 2005) and reflects both the
intrinsic difficulty of the task and the need to exclude targets
if there was an error on the preceding prime.
Analysis The results of an initial overall analysis of
variance are summarized in Figure 2. There are two notable
findings. First, sentences beginning with a short noun
phrase (Short NP1) were actually produced more slowly
(1635ms) than those beginning with a compound noun
phrase (1381ms). This suggests that the short NPs, which
were produced as bare nouns, were planned in conjunction
with the following verb phrases, whereas compound noun
phrases were not (see Wagner, Jescheniak, & Schriefers,
2010, for a recent discussion of flexibility in the scope of
planning). This effect of Target Structure was significant, F
(1, 29) = 39.78, p < .001.
Overall, targets preceded by a same structure prime were
initiated more quickly (1472ms) than those preceded by a
different structure prime (1544ms), F (1, 29) = 5.85, p =
.022. This does not indicate across the board structure
priming however, because it is qualified by a complex
pattern of interaction. As predicted, priming is largely
confined to the conditions with compound initial noun
phrases (see Figure 2). Among Compound NP1s, the effect
of structure repetition is further limited to sentences with the

Figure 2: Mean Initiation Times with Standard Errors as a
Function of Structure Repetition (Same or Different) and
Target NP1 Structure
Same Spatial Location in prime and target (see Figure 3).
The three-way interaction, reflecting an effect of Structure
Repetition concentrated in the Same Spatial Location and
only in the Compound NP1 Target Structure was
significant, F (2, 58) = 5.18, p = .009.
A separate analysis of the Short NP1 sentences confirmed
that there was no effect of Structure Repetition, F (1, 29) <
1, or of Spatial Location, F (2, 58) = 1.01, and no
relationship of the two, F (2, 58) < 1. This is consistent with
previous results with initial noun phrases containing single
monosyllabic nouns (Smith & Wheeldon, 2001). Smith and
Wheeldon suggested one explanation of this outcome, that
short initial NPs are primed in all conditions. This is
complicated in our case by the evidence that short noun
phrases may be planned with the following verb phrase. But
in any case, the short noun phrase data by themselves do not
show any priming and will not be considered further.
Turning to the Compound NP1 productions, we found a
benefit of Structure Repetition, F (1, 29) = 12.07, p = .002,
as we did in the overall analysis. There was no main effect
of Spatial Location, F (2, 58) = 1.78, p = .181, but the effect
of Structure Repetition is clearly concentrated in the Same
Spatial Location condition [Interaction: F (2, 58) = 7.36, p =
.001; see Figure 3]. One could interpret this as a benefit of
verb phrase repetition or as a structural benefit contingent
on verb phrase repetition, except that the effect appears to
reflect a cost in the Location Only condition rather than a
clear benefit in the Structure and Location

1143

Discussion and Conclusions

(A) (D)

(B) (E)

(C) (F)

Figure 3: Mean Initiation Times for Compound NP1s with
Standard Error Bars as a Function of Structure Repetition
(Same or Different) and Spatial Location (Letters refer to
conditions in Figure 1).
condition. The mean initiation time for the Location Only
condition is substantially slower than for any other
condition in Figure 3. The priming effect in the Opposite
Spatial Location conditions is much smaller and
nonsignificant, and in the Other Spatial Location conditions
there is no priming.
Why is there a cost to compound initial noun phrase
production following a simple initial noun phrase that used
the same conceptual configuration and predicate? One
explanation may lie in the planning scope of the Short NP1
prime sentence which, as discussed earlier, may be included
with the verb phrase in a larger unit. Because the Compound
NP1 is not typically included in a larger planning unit, there
may be difficulty in moving from a short to a long noun
phrase when the verb phrase is repeated. This could happen
in two related ways. There may be a tendency to bind the
compound noun phrase to the repeated predicate, that is, to
repeat the NP-VP planning scope, or there may be difficulty
in adopting the simpler NP planning scope in this condition.
The larger planning scope, or reconfiguration to the default
shorter planning scope for a compound noun phrase, can
account for the reaction time pattern. In either case, the
apparently large priming effect in the Structure and
Location repetition condition is not convincing evidence for
phrase structure priming, but may instead involve
reconfiguration in the different structure condition.

Our study brings into question previous findings of
structural priming at the level of phrase structure. Previous
research has suggested that priming occurs but only for
relatively complex phrases. In this experiment, we saw only
a non-significant trend toward structural priming in
conditions where the entire verb phrase following a complex
initial noun phrase was not repeated. However, it remains
possible that structural priming occurs when there is a
“foothold” available in planning beyond the primed
component. This was available in the Smith and Wheeldon
(2001) experiments in the form of the main verb “move”.
This constant and dependable planning component
contiguous to the noun phrase may allow for expression of a
fragile priming effect. It may also be that the more direct
picture movement description task of Smith and Wheeldon
is more sensitive than our rather demanding spatial
description task. Thus the jury is out on the question of
whether structural priming extends to the level of phrase
structure.
A second challenge to existing findings is presented by
our Same Location observation of a cost to structure shifting
rather than a benefit to structure repetition. Specifically,
initiation of sentences beginning with a compound noun
phrase was slower following a similar spatial configuration
but different structure prime. Previous studies such as Smith
and Wheeldon (2001), which did not vary verb phrase
congruity, do not distinguish between costs and benefits and
so their small priming effects may reflect either or both.
Related to the cost-benefit determination, we also found a
counterintuitive difference in planning scope between
sentences beginning with short and long noun phrases such
that short noun phrases were slower to initiate. We suggest
that this is because they are planned with the following verb
phrase. This outcome may be specific to bare monosyllabic
noun production, which is natural in our Spatial
Descriptions of Word Locations procedure though not in
picture naming. Smith and Wheeldon (2001) elicited
sentences with pictures, for which speakers produced a
definite article before the nouns (e.g. “the eye”), and
latencies were shorter for short NPs in their study.
Consistent with our findings here, previous research using
the SDWL procedure with monosyllable nouns has shown
longer latencies for short NPs (Frazer, 2009). However,
short noun phrases were faster when the nouns were
disyllables (Schuster & O‟Seaghdha, 2005), suggesting that
speakers prefer an NP planning scope provided that the
phrase contains more than one stress unit. Caution in
drawing strong conclusions about the status of phrase
structure priming is appropriate in light of these planning
scope considerations. Nonetheless, our findings suggest that
phrase structure priming may be even more evanescent than
previous work has suggested (Wheeldon & Smith, 2003), or
may not explain significant variance at all. Because phrase
structure generation occurs at a different level than the
structure selection that is the focus of most structural
priming research, the fate of phrase structure priming does

1144

not diminish the theoretical interest of the larger field of
structural priming. However, it is important to determine the
true status of phrase structure priming in future research
because it speaks to the pervasiveness of structural
persistence in the syntactic system.

Acknowledgments
Supported by NIDCD grant R01DC006948. We thank Lisa
Connor, Anna Gonsiorowski, Alexandra Huttle, and
Marilyn Andersen for assistance with the collection and
scoring of data.

References
Balota, D.A., Yap, M.J., Cortese, M.J., Hutchison, K.A.,
Kessler, B., Loftis, B., Neely, J.H., Nelson, D.L.,
Simpson,G.B., & Treiman, R. (2007). The English
Lexicon Project. Behavior Research Methods, 39, 445459.
Bock, J.K. (1986). Syntactic persistence in language
production. Cognitive Psychology, 18, 355-387.
Bock, K., & Griffin, Z.M. (2000). The persistence of
structural priming: Transient activation or implicit
learning? Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
129, 177-192.
Bock, K. & Levelt, W. (1994). Language production:
Grammatical encoding. In M.A. Gernsbacher (Ed.)
Handbook of Psycholinguistics. San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Bock, J.K. & Warren, R.K. (1985). Conceptual accessibility
and syntactic structure in sentence formulation.
Cognition, 21, 47-67.
Bock, K., Dell, G., Chang, F., & Onishi, K.H. (2007).
Persistent
structural
priming
from
language
comprehension to language production. Cognition, 104,
437-458.
Chang, F., Dell, G.S., & Bock, K. (2006). Becoming
syntactic. Psychological Review, 113, 234-272.
Corley, M. & Scheepers, C. (2002). Syntactic priming in
English sentence production: Categorical and latency
evidence from an Internet-based study. Psychonomic
Bulletin and Review, 9, 126–131.
Dell, G.S. (1986). A spreading activation theory of retrieval
in sentence production. Psychological Review, 93, 283–
321.

Ferreira, V.S., & Bock, K. (2006). The functions of
structural priming. Language and Cognitive Processes,
21, 1011-1029.
Frazer, A.K. (2009). Hindrance and helping: Lexical and
phrasal structure repetition in sentence production.
Unpublished Manuscript.
Garrett, M.F. (1976). Syntactic processes in sentence
production. In R.J. Wales & E. Walker (Eds.), New
approaches to language mechanisms. Amsterdam: North
Holland.
Hartsuiker, R. J., & Kolk, H. H. J. (1998a). Syntactic
facilitation in agrammatic sentence production. Brain and
Language, 62, 221 - 254.
Hartsuiker, R.J., Bernolet, S., Schoonbaert, S., Speybroeck,
S., & Vanderelst, D. (2008). Syntactic priming persists
while the lexical boost decays: Evidence from written and
spoken dialogue. Journal of Memory and Language, 58,
214-238.
Huttenlocher, J., Vasilyeva, M. & Shimpi, P. (2004).
Syntactic priming in young children. Journal of Memory
and Language, 50, 182-195.
Loebell, H., Bock, K. (2003). Structural priming across
languages. Linguistics, 41, 791–824.
Pickering, M.J. & Branigan, H.P. (1998). The representation
of verbs: Evidence from syntactic priming in language
production. Journal of Memory and Language, 39, 633651.
Pickering, M.J. & Ferreira, V.S. (2008). Structural priming:
A critical review. Psychological Bulletin, 134, 427-459.
Roelofs, A. (1992). A spreading-activation theory of lemma
retrieval in speaking. Cognition, 42, 107-142.
Schuster, K. & O'Seaghdha, P. (April, 2005). Ending the
isolation of syntactic priming: Orthogonal structure and
content repetition in sentence production. Poster
presented at 18th Annual CUNY Sentence Processing
Conference, Tucson, AZ.
Smith, M., & Wheeldon, L. (2001). Syntactic priming in
spoken sentence production – an online study. Cognition,
78, 123-164.
Wheeldon, L. & Smith, M. (2003). Phrase structure
priming: A short-lived effect. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 18, 431-442.

1145

