UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Prepositions in and on retain aspects of spatial meaning in abstract contexts

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0kd5r1db

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Jamrozik, Anja
Gentner, Dedre

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Prepositions retain aspects of spatial meaning in abstract contexts
Anja Jamrozik (a.jamrozik@u.northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Dedre Gentner (gentner@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208 USA
Abstract
Prepositions such as in and on convey not only spatial
relationships between objects, but also abstract relationships,
such as ‘Mary is in love’ and ‘Tim’s on a roll’. Although
such uses are often thought to be purely idiomatic, we
hypothesized that these abstract, non-spatial relationships
might preserve one specific aspect of prepositions’ spatial
meaning: the degree to which the figure or the ground
controls the figure-ground relationship (Coventry, 1992;
Coventry, Carmichael & Garrod, 1994; Feist & Gentner,
1997, 1998, 2003).
We found that locus of control
distinguishes in and on in common abstract metaphorical
contexts (e.g., in love/on a roll), matched abstract contexts
(e.g., in/on time), and novel abstract contexts. These findings
suggest that prepositions retain aspects of their spatial
meaning when used abstractly.
Keywords:
metaphor

prepositions;

spatial

language;

semantics;

Introduction
Spatial prepositions such as in and on are often used
abstractly to describe non-spatial relationships. For
example, we use the same preposition in to describe the
spatial relationship between two objects, such as ‘an orange
in a bowl’, and to describe the abstract relationship between
a person and an emotional state, such as ‘Mary is in love’.
Such uses are highly frequent: approximately 40% of
preposition use is metaphorical (Steen, Dorst, Herrmann,
Kaal, Krennmayr, & Pasma, 2010). The high frequency of
these abstract metaphorical uses makes it important to know
whether there is some underlying regularity in this usage.
Are there patterns of in and on use that remain stable across
spatial and non-spatial contexts?
It is generally assumed that the answer is no: that is, that
abstract uses of in and on are idiomatic and follow no
patterns. Intuitively, the abstract uses of on, such as 'on a
roll', 'on the way', or 'on time' do not seem to have much in
common with each other, nor do they form an obvious
contrast with abstract uses of in such as 'in a fury', 'in the
presentation, or 'in earnest'. Indeed, the idea that the
abstract uses of prepositions are idiosyncratic and lack any
regularity is stated quite explicitly in educational materials
designed to teach English as a second language. Books
designed to teach prepositions to non-native speakers advise
students to learn preposition uses on a case-by-case basis.
For example, a popular guide to prepositions suggests that
abstract uses such as ‘in time’ and ‘on time’ are entirely

different from spatial uses of these prepositions and must be
learned individually (Yates, 1999). Thus, according to the
commonly held view, there is no systematic mapping from
spatial meanings to abstract meanings for in and on; abstract
uses of these prepositions simply convey frozen, idiomatic
meanings.
But perhaps this pessimistic view is premature. After all,
there is considerable evidence that spatial language can be
used to structure how we talk about more abstract concepts
(e.g. Lakoff & Johnson, 1980). For example, spatial terms
can be used systematically to describe affective states
(Nagy, 1974), such as when we say that someone is feeling
low or that someone’s spirits rose. Spatial terms can also be
used to describe communication (e.g., an idea getting across
to someone) (Reddy, 1979) and to talk about time (e.g.,
autumn is ahead of us or summer is behind us) (e.g.,
Boroditsky, 2000; Clark, 1973; Gentner, Imai, &
Boroditsky, 2002; Heine, 1997; Traugott, 1978). Given that
spatial terms can often be mapped systematically to abstract
domains while retaining many aspects of their spatial
meaning, we asked whether the same is true of the
prepositions in and on.

Factors that distinguish between in and on
Two factors that have been found to distinguish spatial uses
of in and on in English are geometry and function.
Generally, in is more likely to be used if the geometry of the
figure-ground relationship is one of inclusion of the figure
in the ground (Miller & Johnson-Laird, 1976; Herskovits,
1986; Cienki, 1989; Bowerman & Pederson, 1992;
Coventry, Carmichael, & Garrod, 1994). Additionally, the
more concave the ground is (and thus able to contain the
figure) the more likely we are to use in rather on to describe
the spatial relationship (Herskovits, 1986; Feist & Gentner,
2003). A second factor that determines whether in or on
will be used is the function of the figure and the ground
(e.g., Bowerman & Pederson, 1992; Coventry, 1992;
Coventry, Carmichael, & Garrod, 1994; Coventry & Garrod,
2004; Coventry & Prat-Sala, 2001; Feist, 2008; Feist &
Gentner, 2003; Garrod & Sanford, 1989). For example, in
is more likely to be used if the ground typically functions as
a container for the figure (Coventry, Carmichael, & Garrod,
1994; Coventry & Garrod, 2004; Feist & Gentner, 2003).
While these two factors are very important in
distinguishing spatial preposition meaning, it is unclear how

1589

they could transfer to abstract preposition use. Consider the
following examples of abstract uses of in and on:

convey greater figure control than in even when used in
these ‘stock’ metaphor settings.

(1) Sarah is in the job market.

Experiment 1

(2) Kate is on the job market.

To test the whether locus of control distinguishes in and on
in conventionalized metaphorical settings, we asked
participants to rate how much control figures had over
situations described by sentences that either contained a
conventional use of a figure in ground, a conventional use of
a figure on ground, or another preposition. We predicted
that figures on ground would be rated as having greater
control than figures in ground.

Neither of these factors seems to be able to adequately
account for the subtle difference in meaning between (1)
and (2). The geometry of the figure (a human) and of the
ground (an abstract entity) is the same in both examples. It
is unclear how the geometry of the relationship between a
human figure and an abstract ground could change between
(1) and (2). In terms of function, the ground is the same in
(1) and (2) and so should be able to function as a container
as well in either example. Thus, the factors of geometry and
function seem unlikely to distinguish abstract uses of in and
on.
There remains a third factor that distinguishes spatial uses
of in and on–namely, locus of control of the spatial
relationship between figure and ground. People are more
likely to use in when the ground object can control the
location of the figure, and thus has high control of the
figure-ground relationship (e.g., a coin in the dish)
(Coventry, 1992; Coventry, Carmichael, & Garrod, 1994).
Also, because locus of control of the figure-ground
relationship tends to reside with the animate member of the
relationship, people are more likely to use in when the
ground is animate—e.g., ‘a coin in her hand’—than when it
is not—e.g., ‘a coin in the dish’. In the other direction,
people are more likely to use on when the figure is animate
(because an animate figure will generally have more
control: e.g., ‘a butterfly on a dish’ vs. ‘a coin on a dish’
(Feist & Gentner, 1997, 1998, 2003).
We hypothesized that, unlike the factors of geometry and
function, locus of control might systematically distinguish
abstract uses of in and on. Returning to the contrast
between examples (1) and (2), perhaps the difference
between someone 'in the job market' and 'on the job market'
is a difference in the perceived control of the figure over the
situation. If on tends to convey greater figure control than
in, then Kate, who is on the job market, may be perceived as
having greater control over the situation than Sarah, who is
in the job market. The current experiments used this
contrast, among others, to test the importance of locus of
control for abstract uses of in and on.
If locus of control distinguishes abstract uses of in and on,
then we should find that even in abstract contexts, figures
on ground would be perceived as having more control than
figures in ground. In the first experiment, this prediction
was tested by comparing figure control of conventional
metaphorical uses of in (e.g., in the job market), and on
(e.g., on top of it). According to the view that abstract uses
of prepositions have frozen, idiomatic meanings, these
common conventional uses of prepositions would be the
most likely to have meanings far removed from their spatial
meanings. If, however, prepositions retain aspects of their
spatial meaning when used abstractly, then on should

Method
Participants Fourteen undergraduate students from
Northwestern University received partial course credit for
their participation. All participants were native speakers of
English.
Materials, procedure, design Participants were presented
with 30 sentences, each of which contained a preposition
used abstractly. Common abstract uses of prepositions were
selected from idiom dictionaries and included
conventionalized uses of in and on (e.g. in the way, on
track) as well as other prepositions. Eleven of the sentences
included a figure in ground and eleven included a figure on
ground. Eight sentences included other conventionalized
uses of prepositions (e.g. over the moon). A corpus search
(Corpus of Contemporary American English – COCA)
revealed that the figure in ground phrases were more than
twice as frequent as the figure on ground phrases,
approximating the natural distribution of these prepositions.
The figure of each sentence was underlined (e.g. Karen is
on top of it this afternoon). Participants were asked to read
each of the sentences and to rate figure control with a scale
ranging from 1 (underlined word is totally controlled by the
situation) to 9 (underlined word controls the situation
totally), as seen in figure 1, below. The 30 sentences were
presented in either a forward or reverse order.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Underlined word is
totally controlled by
the situation
Karen is on top of it this afternoon. 1

2

3

Underlined word
controls the situation
totally
4

5

6

7

8

9

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Figure 1: Example of a question asking about figure control
of a figure on ground.

Results
In Experiment 1, we tested whether figures on ground
would be rated as higher in control than figures in ground.
As predicted, participants rated figures on ground as higher

1590

in control (M = 6.8) than figures in ground (M = 5.5), t(13)
= 4.26, p < .001.

Discussion
Experiment 1 tested whether on conveys greater figure
control than in when these prepositions are found in
conventional metaphorical contexts. As predicted, figures
on ground were rated higher as having greater control than
figures in ground. These findings suggest that locus of
control remains important for distinguishing in and on even
in conventional abstract, non-spatial settings.
However, one concern is that the figure in ground and
figure on ground phrases used in Experiment 1 did not use
matched grounds. For example, the figure in ground
phrases included figures in love, in stitches, and in time and
figure on ground phrases included figures on top of it, on
the way, and on a roll. Since phrases were not matched for
the ground used, the findings could not rule out the
possibility that people associate certain grounds (e.g., on top
of it) with greater figure control than other grounds (e.g., in
love). To rule out this possibility, Experiment 2 tested
figure control of matched figure-ground pairs. It the locus
of control hypothesis is correct, then even with identical
grounds, we should find that figures on ground (e.g., Mary
was there on time to the meeting) would be perceived as
having greater control than figures in ground (e.g., Nancy
was there in time for the meeting).

Each sentence pair was followed by a forced-choice
question phrased to correspond to the situation described by
the sentences. For each of the eight preposition pairs, the
forced-choice question was designed to reveal which figure
was perceived to have more control. For the four filler pairs,
the question concerned which inference about the sentence
pair would be more or less likely (e.g. ‘Ben and Ted are two
miners working in a northern Canadian diamond mine.
Workers get a bonus if they are able to find valuable
diamonds. Ben found a brilliant diamond. Ted found an
opaque diamond. Who is more likely to get the bonus?).
Participants rated their confidence for each forced-choice
answer on a 1-5 scale. An example of a preposition
sentence pair and forced-choice question is in Figure 2,
below:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Two spies, Agent Taylor and Agent Harris, are both working to
complete a secret service operation. The spy who does a better job
will be assigned to a more difficult and important project.
Agent Taylor is in the first
stage of the operation.

Who is more likely to be able to finish the operation well?
Agent Taylor

1

Method
Participants Twenty-two undergraduate students from
Northwestern University received partial course credit for
their participation. All were native speakers of English.

Agent Harris

How confident are you in the answer you gave?

Experiment 2
To test the whether locus of control distinguishes in and on
when placed in matched figure-ground settings, we asked
participants to decide which of two figures (the figure in
ground or the figure on ground) had more (or less) control
of different situations. In order to equate the figures, we
used same-gender proper names for the figures
(counterbalancing the particular names across conditions).
We predicted that figures on ground would be chosen as
having more control of the situations, and conversely, that
figures in ground would be chosen as having less control of
the situations.

Agent Harris is on the first
stage of the operation.

not at all
confident

2

3

4

5
very
confident

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Figure 2: Example of a preposition sentence pair and forcedchoice figure control question.
Participants read each of the twelve sentence pairs and
answered the related forced-choice question after each
sentence pair. Presentation was counterbalanced so that half
of the questions were phrased with less and half with more
(i.e. Who is less/more likely to…) and so that predicted
answers were associated equally often with the figure in and
on ground and were located equally often on the left and
right side of the page.

Results

Materials and procedure Participants were presented
with twelve sentence pairs--eight sentence pairs that
contrasted the prepositions in and on and four filler sentence
pairs that contrasted other words. Figure in ground and
figure on ground phrases were chosen as in Experiment 1,
except that only phrases with matched grounds were
included. As before, a corpus search (COCA) revealed that
the frequencies of the figure in ground and figure on ground
phrases approximated the natural distributions of these
prepositions.

In Experiment 2, we tested whether figures on ground
would be perceived as having more control than figures in
ground when the prepositions were placed in matched
abstract contexts. As predicted, participants made more
choices in the expected direction (i.e., choosing the figure
on ground response when asked about which figure had less
control and the figure in ground when asked about which
figure had less control) than in the other direction, p <.005,
Fisher’s exact test. Participants were also more confident in
choices made in the expected direction (M = 3.81) than the
choices they made in the unexpected direction (M = 2.99),
t(21) = 4.83, p < .001.

1591

Discussion
Experiment 2 tested whether on conveys greater figure
control than in when these prepositions are placed in
matched abstract contexts. As predicted, figures on ground
were perceived as having greater control than figures in
ground when contexts were matched. These findings
suggest that locus of control can distinguish the prepositions
in and on in matched abstract contexts.
Findings from Experiment 1 suggested that on conveys
greater figure control than in when used in common abstract
settings. Because figure in ground and figure on ground
phrases were not matched to include the same grounds, it
could not be ruled out that people had memorized which
grounds were associated with low versus high figure
control. Experiment 2 ruled out this possibility by directly
comparing matched figure-ground pairs. Extending the
findings of Experiment 1, findings of Experiment 2 further
suggest that when used abstractly, on conveys greater figure
control than in.
Both Experiments 1 and 2 used familiar abstract
expressions, leaving open the question of whether the
extension patterns found here are truly generative. To
address this question, Experiment 3 tested matched novel
abstract uses of in and on (e.g., a figure in or on a cipe). We
predicted that locus of control would distinguish in and on
when used in novel abstract contexts: specifically, that
figures on ground would be perceived as having more
control than figures in ground.

Experiment 3
In order to test whether locus of control differentiates novel
figures in ground and figures on ground, in Experiment 3
we asked participants to interpret novel abstract uses of in
and on. Participants were presented with contexts in which
novel words could conceivably be used (e.g., in the context
of a perfume workshop, a specialty farm, or a community of
instrument makers), and were then given a description of a
figure from this context either in or on a novel ground.
Participants were then asked to interpret this novel use of
the preposition. We predicted that figures on ground would
be described as having more control of the situation than
figures in ground.

Method
Participants Sixteen participants received either partial
course credit or payment for participation in this
experiment. All were native speakers of English.
Materials and procedure Participants were presented with
16 situations that involved activities that could be described
with a “niche” vocabulary (e.g., perfume making, a
specialty farm, historical reenactments). Each situation was
described with a paragraph and was followed by a sentence
describing a figure from the situation that included a
plausible non-word (ARC Nonword Database; Rastle,
Harrington, & Coltheart, 2002). Eight of the situations were

described with sentences that included in or on and eight
were described with filler sentences that did not include
these prepositions. The orders of the prepositions and nonwords were counterbalanced.
An example stimulus, in which a figure is described with
a novel abstract use of in is presented in Figure 3, below.
The participants’ task was to interpret the final sentence
describing the figure.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Context: Kate is a perfume maker who is very skilled at
discovering new scent combinations. She works for a
perfume company that creates unusual fragrances made
from rare plant oils. Kate creates new scents for the
company. The process of mixing the plant oils is very
complicated. Kate has good days, when the scents she
creates are subtle and intricate, and bad days, when her
nose seems insensitive and the scents she creates are
boring.
Transcript from Tracy (a worker in the perfume
company): “It’s the third day of the mixing process and
Kate is in a cipe.”
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Figure 3: An example of a novel abstract description of a
figure in ground.
Two trained undergraduate research assistants read each
of the novel situation paragraphs (but not the figuredescription sentences) and then read each of the
participants’ interpretations of the figure-description
sentences. The coders then rated each interpretation for
figure control on a scale from 1 (extremely low control of
the situation by the person) to 5 (extremely high control of
the situation by the person).

Results
The results of Experiment 3 bear out the hypothesis that
novel uses of figures on ground would be described as
having more control than figures in ground. For the
example given above, participants who had read that Kate
was in a cipe gave interpretations such as: “Kate is having
problems with her new perfume she’s making” and “Kate
isn’t doing so well finding the perfect scent”. Conversely,
participants who read that Kate was on a cipe gave
interpretations such as: “She is creating a good scent today,”
and “Kate is doing well. Tracy [another worker at the
factory] wishes she were like Kate”.
Across raters, interpretations of figures on ground were
rated as having more control (M = 3.42) than figures in
ground (M = 2.82), t(121) = 3.17, p < .01, with inter-rater
reliability of r = .677, p < .001. Mean ratings for figures in
ground and figures on ground are shown in Figure 4, below.

1592

Figure 4: Mean figure control ratings for novel figures in
ground and figures on ground.

Discussion
Experiment 3 tested whether on conveys greater figure
control than in when placed in novel abstract contexts. As
predicted, novel figures on ground were described as having
more control than novel figures in ground. These findings
suggest that the locus of control aspect of preposition
meaning extends to novel abstract contexts.

General Discussion
The results of these studies bear out the claim that the
prepositions in and on retain a key aspect of their spatial
meaning—namely, locus of control—when used to describe
abstract relationships. Experiment 1 tested a variety of
highly conventional figure in ground and figure on ground
phrases. We found that figures within conventional figure
on ground phrases were perceived to have greater control
than those within figure in ground phrases. We found the
same pattern in Experiment 2 with matched figure-ground
pairs, ruling out the possibility that people were using
learned associations of certain grounds with high figure
control and other grounds with low figure control. The
findings from Experiment 3 suggest that the locus of control
aspect of preposition meaning can also be extended to novel
abstract contexts. Together, the findings suggest that one
aspect of spatial preposition meaning, locus of control, is
retained when these prepositions are used abstractly, both in
conventional and novel contexts.
Our results are consistent with prior findings that spatial
language can be used to structure non-spatial domains, such
as time (e.g. Bennett, 1975; Clark, 1973; Gentner, Imai, &
Boroditsky, 2002; Heine, 1997; Lakoff & Johnson, 1980;
Traugott, 1978). Recent findings suggest that temporal uses
of prepositions (e.g. at noon, on Wednesday, in June) can
retain semantic content and influence how speakers think
about time (Kranjec, Cardillo, Schmidt, & Chatterjee,
2010).
The career of metaphor hypothesis (Bowdle & Gentner,
1999, 2005) suggests a possible mechanism through which
prepositions meanings’ could have become abstracted while

retaining aspects of spatial meaning. According to this
hypothesis, frequent alignment of a given base term with
metaphoric targets can lead to the abstraction of the base’s
meaning. Thus, for example, if the spatial meaning of in is
pressed into metaphorical uses such as ‘in my mind’ or ‘in a
quandary’, the resulting common structure will lack a
concrete containment relation, but can retain the locus-ofcontrol relation. Over time, this abstraction can come to
serve as a secondary meaning of in. This more abstract
meaning could then be applied across a variety of contexts
while still retaining aspects of the spatial meanings. Such an
abstraction process is consistent with accounts of the
process of grammaticalization by typologists (e.g., Claudi &
Heine, 1986).
Although abstract uses of prepositions such as in love and
on a roll are often thought to be idiomatic, the present
findings suggest that aspects of these prepositions’ spatial
meanings are retained in abstract contexts. These findings
invite the question of whether other subtle aspects of spatial
meaning remain pervasive in seemingly idiomatic usages of
spatial language.

Acknowledgements
The research described here was conducted in the Spatial
Intelligence and Learning Center (SILC) at Northwestern
University, a Center funded by NSF grant SBE-0541957.
We thank Brian Han and Joseph Wilson for their help in
coding the data and the Cognition and Language Lab.

References
Boroditsky,
L.
(2000).
Metaphoric
structuring:
Understanding time through spatial metaphors.
Cognition, 75 (1), 1-27.
Bowdle, B., & Gentner, D. (1999). Metaphor
comprehension : From comparison to categorization.
Proceedings of the Twenty-first Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum, 9095.
Bowdle, B., & Gentner, D. (2005). The career of metaphor.
Psychological Review, 112 (1), 193-216.
Bowerman, M., & Pederson, E. (1992, December).
Crosslinguistic perspectives on topological spatial
relationships. Paper presented at
the 91st Annual
Meeting of the American Anthropological Association,
San Francisco.
Cienki, A. J. (1989). Spatial cognition and the semantics of
prepositions in English, Polish, and Russian. Munich:
Verlag Otto Sagner.
Clark, H. H . (1973). Space, time, semantics, and the child.
In T. E. Moore (Ed.), Cognitive development and the
acquisition of language (pp. 27-63). New York:
Academic Press.
Claudi, U. & Heine, B. (1986). On the metaphorical base of
grammar. Studies in language, 10 (2), 297-335.
Coventry, K. R. (1992). Spatial prepositions and functional
relations: The case for minimally specified lexical entries.
(Ph.D. thesis). University of Edinburgh.

1593

Coventry, K.R., Carmichael, R. & Garrod, S.C. (1994).
Spatial prepositions, object-specific function and task
requirements. Journal of Semantics, 11, 289–309.
Coventry, K. R., & Garrod, S. C. (2004). Saying, seeing,
and acting: The psychological semantics of spatial
prepositions. New York: Psychology Press.
Coventry, K. R., & Prat-Sala, M. (2001). Object-specific
function, geometry, and the comprehension of in and on.
European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 13(4), 509528.
Feist, M. I. (2008). The changing shape of prepositional
meanings. In H. Chan, H. Jacob, & E. Kapia (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Boston University
Conference on Language Development. Somerville, MA:
Cascadilla Press, 108-119.
Feist, M. I., & Gentner, D. (1997). Animacy, control, and
the IN/ON distinction. Paper presented at the Fourteenth
National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Workshop
on Language and Space, Providence, RI.
Feist, M. I., & Gentner, D. (1998). On plates, bowls, and
dishes: Factors in the use of English IN and ON.
Proceedings of the Twentieth Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society, 345-349.
Feist, M. I., & Gentner, D. (2003). Factors involved in the
use of in and on. Proceedings of the Twenty-fifth Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 390-395.
Garrod, S. C. & Sanford, A.J. (1989). Discourse models as
interfaces between language and the spatial world.
Journal of Semantics, 6, 147-160.
Gentner, D., Imai, M., & Boroditsky, L. (2002). As time
goes by: Evidence for two systems in processing space >
time metaphors. Language and Cognitive Processes, 17,
537-565.
Heine, B. (1997). Cognitive foundations of grammar. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Herskovits, A. (1986). Language and spatial cognition: An
interdisciplinary study of the prepositions in English.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Kranjec, A., Cardillo, E., Schmidt, G., & Chatterjee, A.
(2010). Prescribed spatial prepositions influence how we
think about time. Cognition, 114, 111–116.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Miller, G. A., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1976). Language and
perception. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard
University Press.
Nagy, W. (1974). Figurative patterns and redundancy in the
lexicon. (Ph.D. thesis). University of California at San
Diego.
Rastle, K., Harrington, J., & Coltheart, M. (2002). 358,534
nonwords: The ARC Nonword Database. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 55A, 1339-1362.
Reddy, M. J. (1979). The conduit metaphor: A case of frame
conflict in our language about language. In A. Ortony
(Ed.), Metaphor and thought (1st ed., pp. 284-324).
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.

Steen, G.J., Dorst, A.G., Herrmann, J.B., Kaal, A.A.,
Krennmayr, T., & Pasma, T. (2010). A method for
linguistic metaphor identification: From MIP to MIPVU.
Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Traugott, E. C. (1978). On the expression of spatio-temporal
relations in language. In J. H. Greenberg (Ed.), Universals
of human language, vol. 3: Word structure (pp. 369-400).
Stanford : Stanford University Press.
Yates, J. (1999). The ins and outs of prepostions: A
guidebook for ESL students. New York: Barron's
Educational Series.

1594

