UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Priming Spatial Perspective

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5fn0f0gx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Andonova, Elena
Coventry, Kenny R.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Priming Spatial Perspective
Elena Andonova (eandonova@nbu.bg)
Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology, New Bulgarian University, 21 Montevideo Street
Sofia, 1618 Bulgaria

Kenny R. Coventry (kenny.coventry@northumbria.ac.uk)
Cognition and Communication Research Centre, Northumbria University,
Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 8ST UK

environment, based on the way-finder, as embedded in the
path, or from an external (or allocentric) perspective, that is,
a viewpoint external to the environment, commonly
associated with maps and cardinal directions, the way
people would look at a map or a drawing of a route. For the
sake of brevity, we will refer to these as the ‘route
perspective’ and the ‘survey perspective,’ following Taylor
and Tversky (1996). Previous studies have demonstrated
that a number of factors, including individual differences,
environmental structure, and learning mode, influence
preferences for spatial perspective in verbal descriptions.
Mode of acquisition has been shown to affect perspective
choices in spatial memory; for example, participants who
studied maps gave more accurate responses later in survey
perspective tasks whereas participants who were doing
navigation gave more accurate responses to route
perspective tasks (Taylor, Naylor, & Chechile, 1999).
Taylor & Tversky (1996) found that preference for the use
of route perspective was enhanced in environments that
contained a single path vs. multiple paths and environments
that contained landmarks of a single size scale vs.
landmarks of varying size. Bugmann, Coventry, and
Newstead (2007) found that context of retrieval (frequency
of visitation vs. importance of activities) can affect spatial
perspective choices, too.
Intra-individual variability in spatial perspective choices
involves speakers switching perspective – participants tend
to mix perspectives quite regularly (Taylor & Tversky,
1996). On the other hand, consistency in the use of a
reference frame has also been established in a number of
studies. For example, Vorwerg (2009) found that speakers
tended to repeat spatial reference frame, lexical and
syntactic choices across successive spatial utterances in a
localization task. There are multiple reasons why a speaker
may or may not switch from one perspective to another, for
instance, because of some features of the environment or the
task. However, although most studies have researched
spatial perspective choices in a monologue setting, one
important reason for initial perspective choice and
subsequent switches may be the behavior of the interlocutor
(conversation partner). In recent years, there has been some
evidence that speakers are sensitive to interlocutors’
presence, ability, and interactive behavior (Schober, 2009;
Striegnitz, Tepper, Lovett, & Cassel, 2009; Andonova,
2010). Watson, Pickering, & Branigan (2004) found
priming effects of reference frame in a confederate task

Abstract
Spatial perspective choices have been shown to be sensitive to
individual differences, mode of learning, and contextual
factors. In two studies using a confederate priming paradigm,
we investigated whether higher level conceptual priming at
the level of spatial schemas can be found in speakers’
preference for route vs. survey perspective descriptions of
how to get from one place to another. Perspective priming
was found both when speakers started with or without an
individual preference. Priming occurred even after their
partners switched from route to survey perspective
descriptions, though not vice versa. The implications of these
findings for accounts of priming conceptual structure are
discussed.
Keywords: priming, spatial perspective, route, survey,
confederate paradigm.

Introduction
Research over the last few decades has produced a rich set
of findings on the existence of priming effects at different
levels of language representation, for example, syntactic and
lexical structure. Further, conceptual/semantic priming has
been studied in experimental tasks such as fragment
completion, category-exemplar generation and others.
However, less is known about priming at a higher level of
representation. Here we ask whether priming also occurs for
such higher level representations that are even further
abstracted from the lexical and semantic features of
individual words and concepts. For example, while tigers
are associated with animals and boxes with artifacts, no
clear and unambiguous association exists between left and a
specific direction (is it my left, your left, or left on the
map?) 1.Thus, spatial reference and spatial perspective offer
a suitable testing ground for priming higher level conceptual
schemas. This research asks whether priming occurs for the
choice of global spatial description adopted to explain how
one gets from one place to another.
In the literature a distinction has been made between route
and survey types of spatial description. A route or
environment can be described from an embedded (or
egocentric) perspective, that is, from within the
1
Ambiguity is not an inherent feature of all spatial reference,
however, e.g., cardinal directions such as North and South.

423

where speakers described the location of an abstract shape
with respect to different objects.
All in all, a number of factors contribute to speakers’
choices of spatial perspective, including differences across
individuals, environments, and learning patterns. It remains
unclear, however, to what extent such choices may be
influenced by the preceding context of speaking. Do they
depend on what perspective speakers have heard being used
by a previous speaker in a given situation? Are people more
likely to adopt a given perspective if they heard it used
initially (earlier) or most recently (later)?

perspective as well rather than the perspective they were
initially exposed to in their partner’s descriptions.
A third possibility also exists—the fact that their partners
have used both route and survey perspectives and that they
switched between them may reduce speakers’ preferences
for either perspective and lead them to choose between
perspectives more or less randomly.

Method
The design of the experiment included early confederate
prime on the first block (route vs. survey perspective) for
the second block participants’ responses and experimental
condition (consistent route, route-then-survey, survey-thenroute and consistent survey perspective) for responses on
the fourth block.

Experiment 1
This first experiment was designed to examine whether
speakers are primed by the previous use of spatial
perspective by another person (a peer). To test for a priming
effect, we designed a pre-scripted series of descriptions used
by a confederate in association with the individual maps and
routes that they applied to. These descriptions varied
systematically in terms of the underlying spatial perspective
such that half of the participants heard the confederate use
an embedded (route/egocentric) perspective and the other
half heard the confederate use an external (gaze/survey)
perspective on the first block. We examined the mean
percent use of embedded (route) perspective in participants’
descriptions on the second block of cards which followed
after the confederates’ initial block. Two more blocks with
four cards each followed after the first (confederate) block
and the second (participant) block, again in the same order –
the third block of cards was described by the confederate
and the fourth/last one was described by the participant. The
confederate’s descriptions on the third block either
continued in the same spatial perspective (either route
perspective on both confederate blocks or survey
perspective on both confederate blocks) or switched to the
alternative perspective (for example, if the confederate used
the route perspective on the first block, then they used the
survey perspective on the third block). This manipulation
allowed us to address a second research question in this
experiment, i.e., whether priming from the first
(confederate/prime) block continues to affect participants’
responses on the fourth (participant) block of descriptions
when the confederate switches spatial perspective half-way
through the experimental session or not. In other words, do
speakers become primed by their partner’s spatial
perspective choice on the later block independent of
whether this perspective was also used consistently on the
earlier block as well? How flexible and dynamic is spatial
perspective use? If this kind of conceptual priming of
perspective is guided by primacy, i.e., a focus on initial
choice of perspective by the partner, then speakers may not
re-align perspectives after their partner made the switch. On
the other hand, if the use of spatial perspective is flexibly
adaptive to the dynamics of use by one’s partner, then
participants’ responses should involve using the new

Participants 96 participants (69 female) took part in the
experiment. They were university students with a mean age
of 22.19 years (range 19 – 44) who received course credit or
were paid for their participation. All were native German
speakers. The data of six of them were not included in the
analyses because of confederate error or of because of their
responses on the post-test questionnaire.
Stimuli and Procedure The experimental stimuli consisted
of sixteen different cards each containing a simple map
drawing (see Figure 1 for an example) with a different twoleg route on it indicated by a green and red dot for the start
and end of the route, respectively.

Figure 1: An example of a map and a route (the green and
red dots mark the start and end points of the route).
Cards were organized into four blocks of four cards each.
The first and third blocks consisted of perspective prime
trials and were described by an experimental confederate.
The second and fourth block of cards were the target trials
and were described by the experimental participants. The
spatial perspective of the confederate primes was consistent
within each block and was in either route or survey
perspective. In addition, confederates’ scripted descriptions
across the two blocks were either perspective consistent
(invariable) or inconsistent, i.e., the confederate switched
perspectives between the early and the later block of maps
they described.
A confederate priming paradigm was used. Each
participant was seated across a desk from the confederate

424

with a visual barrier placed between them. A stack of cards
with identical maps and routes were placed in front of each
of them on a vertical stand. In addition, the confederate used
a list of pre-scripted descriptions matching their cards in
either route or survey perspective. The scripted responses of
the confederate were not visible. Confederates were student
assistants of the same age and population who were trained
to act as participants. Participants and confederates took
turns in blocks of four trials describing the routes on the
cards. Confederates also spoke first, ensuring that their
utterances (primes) preceded those of the participants on
target trials. Participants were instructed to describe the
routes on their cards and to pay attention to both their maps
and their partner’s maps as they would do a test on map
memory at the end of the experiment. This instruction
ensured that participants were not ignoring their partners’
maps and descriptions. At the end of the experimental
session, participants filled out a questionnaire which
included questions asking what they thought the experiment
was about and what they thought about their partner’s
behavior. Testing was conducted in the German language.

Figure 2: Mean percentage use of the route perspective on
the later participant block in the four priming conditions.
Note: RR – consistent route priming; RS – route-thensurvey priming; SR – survey-then-route priming; SS –
consistent survey priming condition.
We also compared the mean percent use of route
perspective on the first and second participant blocks by
related samples (matched pairs) t-tests for each of the four
conditions separately. The only reliable difference was in
the route-then-survey condition, t(25) = 3.652, p = 0.001,
where participants’ use of the route perspective dropped
from 72% on their first block to 42% on their second block.
Experiment 1 set out to investigate whether speakers’
choices of spatial perspective in describing routes depend on
the perspective used by their partner. The results show that
this was indeed the case: speakers’ choices were influenced
by the way their partner used spatial perspective both on the
initial block and on the later block of route description tasks.
The analysis of the degree to which speakers’ choice shifted
on the later block, however, has revealed some additional
aspects that deserve discussion here. First, the consistent
route priming condition produced responses that were
significantly different from the other three conditions, yet
the consistent survey priming condition did not differ
reliably from the two inconsistent conditions where
confederates switched perspective half-way through the
session. This means that consistency may be necessary but
insufficient as an explanation for these results. Second, the
two inconsistent priming conditions led participants to
produce almost identical patterns of responses on the later
post-switch block, despite the different directions of
switching – from route to survey vs. from survey to route
perspective. In this case, neither which perspective was used
most recently nor which perspective was the first to be used
by the confederate made an impact. It may appear that the
inconsistency of perspective use by one’s partner as such is
the leading factor. However, participants’ responses in the
two inconsistent conditions also did not differ significantly
from choices in the consistent survey priming condition.
Thus, a more plausible explanation is that the mere use of
the alternative, non-default survey perspective by one’s
partner on any of the priming blocks leads to a uniformly

Results and Discussion
The percentage use of route perspective only (vs. survey and
mixed perspective) was calculated for each block for each
participant and the statistical analyses were run on these
participant means. An independent samples t-test showed an
effect of perspective prime on participants’ choice of
perspective on their early experimental block, i.e., after
hearing the first block of four descriptions by the
confederate involving the manipulation of spatial
perspective (route vs. survey), t(88)=6.593, p<.001.
Participants
used
descriptions
in
the
route
(embedded/egocentric) perspective significantly more after
hearing route perspective primes (M=75.53 %) than after
hearing survey perspective primes (M=29.26%). This result
reveals a strong priming effect of spatial perspective.
We analyzed participants’ responses on the later
experimental block by means of a one-way ANOVA with
experimental condition as an independent variable
(consistent use of route perspective, consistent use of survey
perspective, inconsistent prime use of route perspective and
inconsistent prime use of survey perspective). This analysis
revealed a priming effect on the later block as well, F(3,
86)=9.823, p<.001 (see Figure 2). An LSD post-hoc test
showed reliable differences between the consistent route and
each of the other three conditions (the consistent survey
condition, the inconsistent survey condition, and the
inconsistent route condition), all p’s <.001. The difference
between the consistent survey and inconsistent survey
conditions and the difference between the consistent survey
and the inconsistent route conditions were not reliable but in
the expected direction. There was no difference between the
responses of participants in the two inconsistent perspective
prime conditions.

425

low rate of use of the route perspective. This conclusion is
further supported by the finding that it was only in the
route-then-survey priming condition that speakers’ choices
shifted significantly between the early and the later block of
descriptions. Basically, speakers mostly abandoned the use
of the route perspective as soon as their partner did.

preference for the route perspective in descriptions,
t(66)=2.14, p<.05. This is in line with interpretations offered
in the discussion of the first experiment.
On the middle participant block, we found an effect of
confederate priming condition, t(65)=4.90, p<.001 on the
mean percent use of the route perspective after subtracting
the initial baseline use of route perspective. If the
confederate had used route perspective primes, participants’
use of the same perspective increased by 11.03%. When the
confederate had described in the survey perspective,
participants’ use of the route perspective decreased by
30.06% in comparison with their own baseline descriptions
on the initial block. This constitutes evidence of a clear
priming effect.
We also compared the mean percentage use of route
perspective on the initial and middle (participant) blocks by
related samples (matched pairs) t-tests for each of the two
priming conditions separately. The only reliable difference
was in the survey prime condition, t(32) = 5.11, p<.001,
where on the middle block participants reduced their mean
% use of route perspective in comparison with their initial
block preferences from 58.33% to 28.27%. In the route
prime condition, participants increased their use of route
perspective from 61.53% to 72.56% although this difference
was not reliable, t(33) = 1.88, p = .07.
We then ran a one-way ANOVA with condition
(consistent
route,
inconsistent
route-then-survey,
inconsistent survey-then-route, and consistent survey
priming by confederate) as an independent variable and
mean % use of route perspective on the last block as the
dependent variable, again subtracting the baseline (see
Figure 3). There was again an effect of condition on the
average % change in route perspective use, F(3, 63) = 3.70,
p<.05. LSD tests revealed reliable differences between the
consistent route and the consistent survey conditions
(p<.05). None of the other differences were reliable. In the
consistent route priming condition, participants used the
route perspective on average 10% more on the last block
than on the initial baseline block, and in the consistent
survey condition, they used the route perspective on average
34.38% less on the last than on the initial block.

Experiment 2
The first experiment established the effect of partners’
choices of spatial perspective on speakers’ use of
perspective. However, the confederate was always the first
to describe maps, so it is not clear whether participants
followed suit independent of what their own default or
preferred spatial perspective was or not. It is also unclear
whether the route perspective was the default choice for this
task and the survey or mixed perspective was the alternative
as we expected. A second study was run to find out if
speakers’ initial or default choices of spatial perspective
could be reversed or at least modified to some degree by
what they heard as perspective use in their partner’s
descriptions.

Method
The design of the second experiment was exactly the same
as the first experiment with one important modification. An
additional block was introduced in the beginning of the
session which was to be described by the participants, thus
allowing us to establish the general baseline preference for
spatial perspective for each of them.
Participants Sixty-nine participants took part in this study
for course credit or payment. Data for three participants
were not included in the analyses for the same reasons as in
experiment 1.
Stimuli and Procedure The same stimuli and procedure
were used as in experiment 1 with one important difference.
There were five blocks of cards/maps altogether. The
participant described the initial, middle, and last block
(blocks 1, 3, 5) and the confederate described the second
and fourth block.

Results and Discussion
In this study, participants described the first set of cards and
the priming by confederate description only occurred
afterwards. Thus, the mean % use of route perspective on
this initial block was treated as an individual baseline for
each participant and the degree to which subsequent priming
affected their responses was calculated on the basis of
subtracting these individual baseline averages from the
mean % route perspective used on the third (middle) and
fifth (last) block of cards (after the confederate primes on
the second and fourth blocks).
On the initial participant block, we ran a one-sample t-test
to establish whether participants had a preferred or default
spatial perspective or alternatively whether their choices did
not differ from chance. Their initial choices did show a

Figure 3: Mean percentage change in route perspective on
the last participant block in the four priming conditions.

426

after survey priming, it did not receive a boost from route
priming. We interpret this as potentially a ceiling effect
associated with the unmarked member of this route-survey
perspective dichotomy.
Further insights into the workings of priming were
gleaned from the analyses of speakers’ responses on the last
block after their partner had already produced two blocks of
descriptions. Once again, we found striking behavioral
similarities on the last block in the two experiments (block 4
of experiment 1 and block 5 of experiment 2). Here, in
experiment 2, as in experiment 1, speakers’ preferences
changed significantly only in the route-then-survey priming
condition. Thus, additional priming coming from the second
confederate block did not boost the use of a given spatial
perspective in the two consistent conditions (route-route and
survey-survey), and partners switching from survey to route
perspective did not impact upon speakers’ later choices. It
was only the switch from the default route to the alternative
(non-dominant) survey perspective that helped change their
minds. This pattern resonates closely with the results of the
first experiment and supports the interpretation offered
there.

Note: RR – consistent route priming; RS – route-thensurvey priming; SR – survey-then-route priming; SS –
consistent survey priming condition.
We then compared the mean percentage use of route
perspective on the initial and last (participant) blocks by
related samples (matched pairs) t-tests for each of the four
conditions separately. There were reliable differences in the
route-then-survey condition, t(18) = 2.11, p<.05, in the
survey-then-route condition, t(16) = 2.55, p<.05, in the
consistent survey condition, t(15) = 3.91, p<.01, but not in
the consistent route prime condition, t(14) = 1.00, p<.4.
Participants reduced their use of the route perspective
significantly on the last block in comparison with their
initial choices after they heard the confederate primes
switch from route to survey or vice versa, or after the
confederate consistently used the survey perspective.
Finally, we compared the mean percentage use of route
perspective on the middle and last (participant) blocks by
related samples (matched pairs) t-tests for each of the four
conditions separately. There was a reliable difference in the
route-then-survey condition only, t(18)=3.65, p<.01.
Participants significantly reduced their use of the route
perspective on the last block in comparison with the middle
block only when the confederate primes switched from
route to survey perspective half-way through the
experimental session.
The results of experiment 2 mirror those of experiment 1.
Even though participants were the first to start describing
maps and thus free to set their own preference for a spatial
perspective independent of any influence from their partner,
the choice of perspective embedded in the confederate
descriptions on the second block influenced speakers’
subsequent response significantly, leading them to reduce
their use of the route perspective if their partner used survey
perspective. In this sense, we find again, as in Experiment 1,
that speakers are ready to abandon the use of the route
perspective in favor of survey or mixed descriptions as soon
as their partner indicates a dis-preference for the route
perspective. Note that the priming effect in these cases was
of a strikingly similar magnitude in the two studies (30%).
Speakers’ perspective choices were remarkably similar
across the two studies as a function of confederate priming
on the early immediately preceding block, i.e., on the early
block (2) after the first confederate priming block (1) of
experiment 1 as well as on the middle block (3) after the
first confederate priming block (2) of experiment 2.
In addition, due to the introduction of an initial participant
block in experiment 2, we could test whether the priming
effect found on the early blocks constituted a change away
from a baseline in both directions, i.e., whether speakers
increased their use of the route perspective after route
priming as well as reduced their use of route perspective
after survey priming by comparing speakers’ preferences on
the initial and middle blocks. This turned out not to be the
case. While route perspective use decreased significantly

Conclusion
The studies reported here addressed whether spatial
perspective choices are subject to priming by partners’
speaking patterns. The results of both studies point to a
positive answer to this question. In experiment 1,
participants described how to get from one point to another
on simple maps after hearing an experimental confederate
produce such descriptions in either route or survey
perspective. In experiment 2, participants described maps
before and after a confederate offered their descriptions. In
both cases, priming was found to occur on the immediately
subsequent block. This indicates that speakers were
sensitive to perspective choices made by their partners even
after they had made their own initial commitment to one of
them. Participants did show considerable variability in
initial preferences but they also demonstrated flexibility by
aligning their choices with those of their partners. Thus,
even if individual cognitive styles existed (Levelt, 1982),
they could be modified accordingly.
The patterns of spatial perspective priming were
strikingly similar in profile and even in magnitude across
the two studies, i.e., independent of whether participants or
confederates set the precedent in spatial perspective choice.
Furthermore, in both studies, speakers’ choices were
modified again after their partner switched away from their
initial preference for a spatial perspective half-way through
the experiments and continued to produce descriptions in
the alternative spatial perspective. Notably, however, this
priming effect occurred only if the switch was made in the
direction of the weaker, generally dis-preferred spatial
schema, namely, the survey perspective.
These findings have implications for priming mechanisms
generally, both in terms of the effects of consistency vs.
inconsistency of priming, and in terms of the different

427

impact of priming with the preferred vs. the dis-preferred
member of a conceptual opposition.

Acknowledgments
Thanks go to the research assistants, confederates, and the
research team of I5-DiaSpace. The financial assistance of
the German Science Fund (DFG) is acknowledged for
funding provided to SFB/TR8 Spatial Cognition at the
University of Bremen where this research was conducted.
This research was partially supported by a HWK fellowship
(Hanse Institute for Advanced Studies, Germany) awarded
to Kenny Coventry.

References
Andonova, E. (2010). Alignment of Spatial perspective. In
S. Ohlsson & R. Catrambone (Eds.), Proceedings of the
32nd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 2506-2511). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Bugmann, D., Coventry, K.R., & Newstead, S.E. (2007).
Contextual Cues and the Retrieval of Information from
Cognitive Maps. Memory & Cognition, 35(3), 381-392.
Levelt, W.J.M. (1982). Cognitive styles in the use of spatial
direction terms. In Jarvella, R.J., Klein, W. (eds.): Speech,
Place, and Action. Chichester: Wiley, pp. 251-268.
Schober, M. (2009). Spatial Dialogue between Partners with
Mismatched Abilities. In: Coventry, K.R, Tenbrink, T.,
Bateman,
J.
(eds.):
Spatial
Language
and
Dialogue.Oxford: Oxford University press.
Striegnitz, K., Tepper, P., Lovett, A., Cassel, J. (2009).
Knowledge Representation for Generating Locating
Gestures in Route Directions. In: Coventry, K.R,
Tenbrink, T., Bateman, J. (eds.): Spatial Language and
Dialogue. Oxford: Oxford University press.
Taylor, H.A., Naylor, S.J., & Chechile, N.A. (1999). Goalspecific Influences on the Representation of Spatial
Perspective. Memory & Cognition, 27(2), 309-319.
Taylor, H.A., & Tversky, B. (1996). Perspective in Spatial
Descriptions. Journal of Memory and Language, 35, 371391.
Tversky, B., Lee, P.U., & Mainwaring, S. (1999). Why
Speakers Mix Perspectives. Spatial Cognition and
Computation, 1, 399-412.
Vorwerg, C. (2009). Consistency in Successive Spatial
Utterances. In: Coventry, K.R, Tenbrink, T., Bateman, J.
(eds.): Spatial Language and Dialogue. Oxford: Oxford
University press.
Watson, M.E., Pickering, M.J., Branigan, H.P. (2004).
Alignment of Reference Frames in Dialogue. In K.D.
Forbus, D. Gentner, & T. Regier (Eds.), Proceedings of the
26th annual conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
1434-1440). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

428

