UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Probabilistic inferences under emotional stress

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6d00d0vp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Wichary, Szymon
Rieskamp, Jorg

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Probabilistic inferences under emotional stress
Szymon Wichary (swichary@swps.edu.pl)
Interdisciplinary Center for Applied Cognitive Studies
Warsaw School of Social Sciences and Humanities
Ul. Chodakowska 19/31, 03-815 Warsaw, Poland
University of Basel, Department of Psychology
Missionsstrasse 62a, 4055, Basel, Switzerland

Jörg Rieskamp (joerg.rieskamp@unibas.ch)
University of Basel, Department of Psychology
Missionsstrasse 62a, 4055, Basel, Switzerland

Abstract
Many models of cognition neglect emotional states that could
affect individuals‘ cognitive processes. The present study
explores the effect of emotional stress on people‘s cognitive
processes when making probabilistic inferences. It was
hypothesized that emotional stress reduces cognitive capacity,
leading to the selection of simple inference strategies.
Emotional stress was induced with highly arousing negative
pictures briefly presented to participants before they made an
inference. Emotional stress influenced the selectivity of
participants‘ information search. Emotionally stressed
individuals relied on the importance of the cues to a greater
extent than the nonstressed participants. They also spent less
time on the least important information. Moreover, the
proportion of participants‘ choices consistent with a simple
lexicographic heuristic was higher for the emotionally
stressed participants than for the nonstressed participants. The
results suggest that people respond adaptively to emotional
stress by selecting heuristics that require less information and
fewer cognitive operations.
Keywords: emotional stress; information search; inference
strategies.

Affect and strategy use
Many theories of cognition treat the human mind as a cold
information processor that always performs under the same
conditions. In contrast, humans make decisions in varying
emotional states (e.g., Schwarz, 2000). Do the cognitive
processes underlying people‘s inferences change when they
are emotionally aroused? This is the central question of the
present article.
Decision making is influenced by affective states. Isen
and Means (1983) showed that people in a mildly positive
mood made decisions more quickly, analyzed less
information, and therefore seemed to select simpler
strategies for making decisions than people in neutral
affective states. Luce, Bettman, and Payne (1997) showed
that task-related negative emotions, induced by conflict
among attributes, led to more extensive information search,
but the search was at the same time more selective and more
attribute based.
The above studies employed rather mild manipulation of
affect. A few other studies looked at more extreme affective

states. Mano (1992) showed that participants under social
stress (anticipated in-class presentation) employed simpler
decision strategies and were more polarized in their
decisions. Lewinsohn and Mano (1993) showed that more
highly aroused participants, when performing multi-attribute
choice tasks, acquired less information and acquired it in a
more selective manner, ignoring more attributes than less
aroused participants and focusing on the subjectively
important attributes. They concluded that ―under conditions
of extremely high arousal, the decision maker may shift to a
very ‗thin‘ processing strategy and could be forced to
oversimplify the decision process‖ (Lewinsohn & Mano,
1993).
The above studies provide evidence that affect influences
the selection of decision strategies. However, these studies
did not examine directly which strategy was best in
predicting participants‘ choices; instead, strategy selection
was inferred from participants‘ information search behavior.
The analysis of information search often does not allow an
unequivocal identification of decision strategies, a problem
that has been pointed out repeatedly (Luce et al., 1997;
Rieskamp & Hoffrage, 2008). Therefore, we think it is
important to extend the research on affect and strategy
selection by studying participants‘ information search and
their actual choices.

Probabilistic inference
In a probabilistic inference task, individuals make an
inference about a criterion on the basis of several cues (e.g.,
Gigerenzer & Goldstein, 1996). For instance, one could
infer which of two patients requires more urgent treatment
on the basis of several cues such as respiration or heart rate.
The cues are only probabilistically related to the criterion,
so that a positive cue value makes a positive criterion (e.g.,
a more precarious physical status) only more likely.
Probabilistic inferences require a relatively long sequence of
cognitive operations that usually result from the application
of cognitive strategies.

Cognitive strategies
The inference task described above can be solved with
various inference strategies, like the lexicographic strategy,

1872

elimination by aspects or an additive model (for an
overview, see Rieskamp & Hoffrage, 2008). The strategies
differ in the amount of information they require to make an
inference and the way information is processed. One very
simple lexicographic strategy called take-the-best
(Gigerenzer & Goldstein, 1996) infers that the alternative
with the highest cue value on the cue with the highest
validity also has the highest criterion value. If the cue with
the highest validity does not discriminate between
alternatives, then take-the-best considers the cue with the
second highest validity, and so on. An alternative strategy
called weighted additive (WADD) integrates the available
information; it computes the sum of all cue values
multiplied by their cue validity for each alternative. WADD
finally selects the alternative with the largest sum. The first
strategy, take-the-best, is a strategy that does not integrate
any information. It is noncompensatory since the
information of cues with high validity cannot be
compensated for by cues with lower validity. In contrast,
WADD is a compensatory strategy that integrates all
information.
Although there are many other strategies that people
could apply to make inferences, taken together, take-thebest and WADD often appropriately describe people‘s
inferences (Bröder, 2000; Rieskamp & Otto, 2006). People
seem to select WADD more often when they make
inferences in a new environment with which they have no
experience and where the costs of applying the strategy are
low. In contrast, in cases with increased application costs,
for instance, due to high monetary costs associated with
information search or due to time pressure, take-the-best
more suitably predicts people‘s inferences (Rieskamp &
Hoffrage, 2008; Rieskamp & Otto, 2006). Following the
approach taken by Rieskamp and Otto (2006), we will
concentrate on take-the-best and WADD as two prototypical
inference strategies, while being aware that people might
use variants of these strategies or even other strategies. It is
important to stress that when considering the operations that
are necessary to process the strategies and the required
amount of information, take-the-best is much simpler than
WADD to apply (see also Payne, Bettman, & Johnson,
1993).

Current study
Predictions
The application of inference strategies implies performing
elementary cognitive operations (Huber, 1980; Payne et al.,
1993). In general, strategy application requires the search
for information and the short-term storage and retrieval of
information. The application of WADD additionally
requires information integration. In contrast, the application
of take-the-best does not require the integration of
information but rather, only comparison processes.
According to the reduction of the range of cue utilization
hypothesis proposed by Easterbrook (1959), emotional
arousal elicited by stressors limits the number of cues used

to solve a particular task. Under high emotional stress only
the central, or highly relevant cues are retained for use,
whereas peripheral, or irrelevant cues are ignored. If high
emotional arousal restricts cue utilization, it can be
predicted that under emotional stress people will prefer
simpler strategies that require less information and do not
have to integrate information. Thus, under emotional stress,
when compared with no emotional stress, a larger
proportion of people‘s choices should be predictable with
the simple lexicographic strategy take-the-best. If people
select take-the-best more frequently under emotional stress
to make inferences, this will also affect their information
search. The application of take-the-best when compared to
WADD implies that people will search in general for fewer
cues, search for cues in the order of their validity, spend
more time on the cues with very high validity, and ignore
the less relevant information. Thus, it can be predicted that
people under emotional stress, when compared to
nonstressed people, should exhibit a more selective
information search that focuses on the important cues and
ignores the less important cues.

Method
Participants Forty-one participants (33 women) took part
in the experiment; they were recruited from first-year
students of psychology at Jagiellonian University in
Krakow, Poland and took part in the experiment for partial
course credit.
Inference task The task was implemented as a
computerized information board (Payne, Bettman &
Johnson, 1988). The participants‘ task was to choose the
most productive worker from among four job candidates.
The participants could acquire information about the
candidates by uncovering the cells of a table with six rows
and four columns that was presented on a computer screen.
This computerized information board was used to allow us
to assess information-processing characteristics. The
experiment commenced with a training phase of 10 tables
and continued with a test phase of 56 tables; each table in
the test phase was preceded by a 2-s presentation of a
photograph (see Manipulation of emotional arousal). The
candidates were described with the following cues:
conscientiousness, intelligence, initiative, creativity,
communication skills, and agreeableness. Cue values were
presented as numbers ranging from 1 to 5, 1 indicating a
low evaluation of the cue and 5 indicating a high evaluation
of the cue. The corresponding cue validities were: 0.82,
0.80, 0.76, 0.69, 0.57, and 0.44. Cue validities are defined as
the conditional probabilities of making a correct decision
based on the cue, under the condition that the cue
discriminates, that is, only one alternative has the highest
cue value. The item set (the cue values and validities used as
input in the task) used in the test phase was created to allow
discrimination between take-the-best and WADD; that is, it
included 33 items where take-the-best and WADD made
different predictions. The item set additionally allowed

1873

discrimination among other strategies not examined here
(see Rieskamp & Hoffrage, 1999).
Manipulation of emotional stress Emotional stress was
manipulated between subjects with slides from the
International Affective Picture System (IAPS; Lang,
Bradley, & Cuthbert, 1990, 1998) — a slide was presented
before each of the 56 tables in the test phase. The content of
the pictures was chosen to match the two conditions:
‗neutral‘ (or low arousal) and ‗emotional stress‘ (or high
negative arousal). In the neutral condition, the photographs
showed different nonarousing objects and scenes. In the
emotional stress condition the pictures showed drastic
scenes, such as car accidents, victims of these accidents,
mutilated bodies and body parts. The content of the pictures
in the experimental condition was extreme in order to elicit
high arousal as well as to make sure that the effect of the
manipulation was present from the beginning of the task.
The State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (Spielberger, Gorsuch, &
Lushenne, 1970; Polish adaptation: Sosnowski &
Wrześniewski, 1983) was used as a manipulation check to
assess anxiety (associated with emotional stress) before and
after the experiment.
Procedure The study took place in a cognitive psychology
laboratory at Jagiellonian University. Participants were told
that the study concerned the effects of affect on decision
making and were assigned to the experimental and control
conditions by a quasirandom procedure. Participants
assigned to the experimental condition were told that they
would see unpleasant pictures and that they could quit the
experiment at any time. After entering the laboratory,
participants completed the state and trait anxiety inventory.
Following that, they read the instructions for the inference
task and completed the task. Afterward, participants filled
out the state and trait anxiety inventory for a second time.
At the end, a debriefing session followed, aimed at
explaining the purpose of the study and the experimental
manipulations. In addition, some weeks after the completion
of the study, the participants were again invited to attend an
additional information session, in which the purpose of the
study was described again and the results of the study were
explained.

Results
Manipulation check Overall, the manipulation of
emotional stress with IAPS slides was effective, as indicated
by the scores on the state anxiety scale administered before
and after the inference task. Participants who saw the
negative emotionally arousing pictures had an average
anxiety scores of 34.1 (SD = 5.89) before the experiment,
which increased to an average score of 48.1 (SD = 9.87)
after the experiment. Participants in the neutral condition
experienced on average a similar state anxiety before (with a
score of 35, SD = 10.02) and after (with a score of 36.4, SD
= 6.91) the experiment. A repeated-measures analysis of

variance (ANOVA) revealed a significant interaction effect
of the between-subjects stress manipulation and the time of
measurement of state anxiety (pretest vs. posttest), F(1,39)
= 15.1, p < .001. Although the manipulation was on average
successful, there was a large variance, so that some
participants did not have higher or had only slightly
increased anxiety scores after the experiment. For this
reason, we decided to exclude the five participants in the
emotional stress condition for whom the posttest–pretest
difference in anxiety score was smaller than 8 points. This
guaranteed that for all participants left in the emotional
stress condition, the emotion manipulation had a large
effect, according to Cohen‘s classification (Cohen, 1988).
We also checked that the experimental and control groups
were not significantly different in terms of gender
composition, to rule out the possibility that the difference in
anxiety scores between the two groups was due to different
emotional reactivity of males and females.
Information search analysis The predecisional information
search was characterized by (1) variables describing the
general amount of search: the average time a participant
spent on a decision, the average number of information
boxes opened, the average time these boxes remained open,
and (2) variables describing the selectivity of search, that is,
the focus on particular pieces of information: the proportion
of time spent on the most important cue and on the least
important cue out of the total time spent on all cues, and the
correlation between the time spent on cues and their
validities. The results for the search variables were
aggregated across four blocks of 14 items each, to enable
the analysis of change in strategy selection across trials. A
series of repeated-measures ANOVAs was conducted with
trial block as a within-subject factor, emotional stress as a
between-subjects factor, and the search characteristics as
dependent variables.
Emotional stress influenced the behavior on the inference
task. The differences between the emotional and neutral
condition were in how the information search was
organized. In the emotional stress condition, the information
search was strongly influenced by the information about the
cue validities. In this condition, the correlation of time spent
on cues and their validities was relatively high for the whole
task, right from the beginning (r ranging from .57 in the first
block to .6 in the last block). This contrasted with the
behavior of the participants in the neutral condition, for
whom this correlation was much lower in the beginning of
the task (r = .35 in the first block) but steadily rose toward
the end of the task (r = .56 in the last block). Figure 1
illustrates the Block × Emotional Stress interaction,
F(3,102) = 4.51, p = .005. For the analyses, the original
Pearson correlation was transformed with Fisher‘s Ztransformation; for presentation in the paper the original
correlations are used.

1874

In contrast to variables describing the selectivity of
search, the variables characterizing the general amount of
search were not affected by emotional stress. The only result
concerning these variables was the effect of block. The total
decision time and the average time of looking at the cues
decreased across the four trial blocks, F(3,102) = 10.85, p <
.001 and F(3,102) = 43.68, p < .001, respectively. The
number of acquisitions differed across the four blocks,
F(3,102) = 7.32, p < .001, with the highest value in the
second block of trials.

Figure 1: The correlation between time spent on cues and
cue validities across the four blocks and the two
experimental conditions.
The above effect can be further understood by analyzing
the time devoted to the analysis of particular cues. In the
emotional stress condition, the time devoted to the least
important cue was consistently low from the beginning to
the end of the task (from 5.2% in the first block to 5.8% in
the last block). This contrasted with participants‘ behavior
in the neutral condition, where they initially devoted
relatively much time to the analysis of the least important
cue (11.6% in the first block) and steadily decreased this
time across the task (7.4% in the last block). Figure 2
illustrates the Block × Emotional Stress interaction,
F(3,102) = 3.45, p = .017.

Outcome analysis In addition to the information search
analysis, we analyzed participants‘ actual choices. First, we
determined the percentages of predicted inferences using the
two strategies WADD and take-the-best across all
participants and across all four trial blocks. Across all trials,
WADD predicted 57% of all choices compared to take-thebest, which predicted 49% of all choices. Thus, both
strategies did better than chance (i.e., 25%) in predicting
participants‘ choices, and on average WADD was better
than take-the-best at predicting the inferences. However, the
success of the strategies in predicting participants‘ choices
depended on the experimental condition.
To analyze this, we first conducted two repeatedmeasures ANOVAs, with the proportion of choices
predicted by WADD and take-the-best as the dependent
variables, and the trial block as a within-subject factor and
emotional stress as a between-subjects factor. Emotional
stress influenced the proportion of choices consistent with
the take-the-best strategy. In the first half of the experiment,
participants‘ choices under emotional stress were more
consistent with take-the-best as compared to the choices of
nonstressed participants. In the second half, take-the-best
predicted a similar proportion of both stressed and
nonstressed participants‘ choices. Figure 3 illustrates the
Block × Emotional Stress interaction, F(3,102) = 2.89, p =
.039.

Figure 2: Proportion of time spent on the least valid cue
across the four blocks and the two experimental conditions.
The proportion of time devoted to the most valid cue was
high across the whole task, in both conditions. In the neutral
condition, this proportion was slightly lower in the
beginning and rose from about 22.5% in the first block to
25.5% in the last block, but this effect was not statistically
significant. In the emotional stress condition, the proportion
of time spent on the best cue remained consistently high
across the task (about 30%).

Figure 3: Proportion of choices consistent with take-thebest (TTB) across the four blocks and the two experimental
conditions.

1875

In contrast, emotional stress did not influence the
proportion of choices predicted by WADD—for this
strategy, the only effect was an increase in the proportion of
predicted choices across the four blocks (from 49.5% in the
first block to 66% in the last block); the main effect of
block, F(3,102) = 10.36, p < .001.
The above effect of emotional stress on the proportion of
choices consistent with take-the-best is in line with the
results of the information search analysis. Although the
process and outcome variables are conceptually different,
we observed high consistency of process and outcome
measures; that is, we observed correlations between the
variables describing the selectivity of search and the
proportion of choices predicted by take-the-best (Table 1).
Moreover, the pattern of correlations across the two
experimental conditions was informative. In the emotional
stress condition, the correlation between the proportion of
time spent on the worst cue and the proportion of choices
consistent with take-the-best was high and negative (r =
−.63). In the neutral condition, no such correlation was
observed. This shows that under emotional stress, the
choices consistent with take-the-best are associated with
ignoring the least valid cue during information search.
Table 1: Correlations of outcome and process measures.
Condition

Process measure
T/V cor. Best cue Worst cue
TTB
Neutral
0.57*
0.85**
-0.26
Emotional
0.69**
0.85**
-0.63*
TTB = proportion of choices consistent with take-the-best;
T/V cor. = correlation between time spent on cues and cue
validities; Best cue = proportion of time spent on the most
valid cue; Worst cue = proportion of time spent on the
least valid cue
*p<.05, **p<.01

Furthermore, we determined the strategy that was best in
predicting each participant‘s choices across the whole task.
For example, if WADD predicted 70% of a participant‘s
choices and take-the-best predicted 30% of this participant‘s
choices, then this participant was classified as a WADD
user. In case of a tie between WADD and take-the-best, the
participant was ―partitioned‖ between WADD and TTB
(each strategy received 0.5 points). In the neutral condition,
the proportion of participants classified as WADD users was
higher than the proportion of take-the-best users (72% vs.
28%, respectively), whereas in the emotional stress
condition, the proportions of participants using WADD and
take-the-best were equal (Figure 4). This shows that under
emotional stress a substantial proportion of participants used
the simple lexicographic strategy, so that take-the-best was
as good as WADD in predicting participants‘ choices.

Figure 4: Proportion of participants classified as WADD
and take-the-best (TTB) users across the two experimental
conditions.

Discussion
The central question of this article was whether the
cognitive processes underlying people‘s inferences are
affected by emotional stress. The present study shows that
emotional stress does affect information processing and
strategy selection in a probabilistic inference task. Under
emotional stress, information search is largely organized by
cue validities, consistently across the whole task. In
contrast, under no stress, information search is initially
influenced by cue validities only to a small degree, which
increases across the task, presumably due to learning.
Furthermore, under emotional stress, the least important
information is largely ignored, consistently across the whole
task. Under no stress, however, the least important
information is initially analyzed to a considerable extent,
which decreases across the task. The results of the process
analysis were consistent with the results of the outcome
analysis. The outcome analysis showed that the simple,
noncompensatory strategy take-the-best was selected more
frequently under emotional stress than under no stress, at
least in the first half of the experiment.
The present results support the hypothesis of the reduction
in the range of cue utilization under emotional arousal
(Easterbrook, 1959). They are also in line with a similar
idea proposed by Ben Zur and Breznitz (1981), namely, the
filtration mechanism, according to which decision makers
only process a subset of the available information to cope
with a stressful, time-pressed situation. One puzzling result
is that the difference between stressed and non-stressed
individuals diminished across the task due to the change of
behavior by the non-stressed individuals. We think that this
reflects the interplay between exploration and exploitation
of the environment during information search. Participants
under emotional stress exploited the environment to make
efficient use of the available information, by focusing
attention on the important cues and ignoring the
unimportant ones. On the other hand, the non-stressed
participants initially explored the environment, in order to

1876

learn the contingencies of the task, and then, based on
learning, gradually focused attention on the more important
cues and ignored the less important ones.
Our results are consistent with other findings on affect
and decision making (e.g., Lewinsohn & Mano, 1993;
Mano, 1992). Especially, Lewinsohn and Mano (1993)
showed that relatively high arousal leads to a selective
processing of information by focusing on the more
important attributes and ignoring others. Also, Luce et al.
(1997) showed that increased negative emotions lead to
more focused information processing, particularly at the
beginning of the decision process.
We go beyond the previous studies by not only examining
participants‘ information search or their final choices, but
by performing a process and an outcome analysis together.
Previous studies only indirectly inferred that people select
simpler decision strategies under emotional stress (e.g.,
Mano, 1992). The conclusions we draw from our two
analyses are consistent with each other. The results suggest
that people under emotional stress select the strategy that is
easier to execute, namely, the lexicographic strategy takethe-best, more often than nonstressed people, and the use of
this strategy is associated with ignoring less important
information. In line with previous research (e.g., Bröder,
2003; Payne et al., 1993; Rieskamp & Hoffrage, 1999,
2008; Rieskamp & Otto, 2006), these results show that
people select strategies adaptively depending on the
characteristics of the inference situation.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by research grant no. N N106
219338 from the Polish Ministry of Science and Higher
Education to Szymon Wichary and by Swiss Sciex-NMS
grant no. 09-083-1 to Szymon Wichary and Jörg Rieskamp.

References
Ben Zur, H., & Breznitz, S. (1981). The effect of time
pressure on risky choice behavior. Acta Psychologica, 47,
89-104.
Bröder, A. (2000). Assessing the empirical validity of the
―take-the-best‖ heuristic as a model of human
probabilistic inference. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory & Cognition, 26, 13321364.
Bröder, A. (2003). Decision making with the ―adaptive
toolbox‖: Influence of environmental structure,
personality, intelligence, and working memory load.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
& Cognition, 29, 611-625.
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the
behavioral sciences. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Easterbrook, J. A. (1959). The effect of emotion on the
range of cue utilization and the organization of behavior.
Psychological Review, 66, 183-201.
Gigerenzer, G., & Goldstein, D. (1996). Reasoning the fast
and frugal way: Models of bounded rationality.
Psychological Review, 103, 650-669.

Huber, O. (1980). The influence of some task variables on
cognitive operations in an information-processing
decision model. Acta Psychologica, 45, 187-196.
Isen, A. M., & Means, B. (1983). The influence of positive
affect on decision-making strategies. Social Cognition, 2,
18-31.
Lang, P. J., Bradley, M. M., & Cuthbert, B. N. (1990).
Emotion, attention and the startle reflex. Psychological
Review, 97, 377-398.
Lang, P., Bradley, M. M., & Cuthbert, B. N. (1998).
International affective picture system (IAPS): Technical
manual and affective ratings. Center for Research in
Psychophysiology, University of Florida, Gainesville.
Lewinsohn, S., & Mano, H. (1993). Multi-attribute choice
and affect: The influence of naturally occurring and
manipulated moods on choice processes. Journal of
Behavioral Decision Making, 6, 33-51.
Luce, M. F., Bettman, J. R., & Payne, J. W. (1997). Choice
processing in emotionally difficult decisions. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, &
Cognition, 23, 384-405.
Mano, H. (1992). Judgements under distress: Assessing the
role of unpleasantness and arousal in judgment formation.
Organizational Behavior & Human Decision Processes,
52, 216-245.
Payne, J. W., Bettman, J., & Johnson, E. J., R. (1988).
Adaptive strategy selection in decision making. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 14, 534-552.
Payne, J. W., Bettman, J. R., & Johnson, E. J. (1993). The
adaptive decision maker. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Rieskamp, J., & Hoffrage, U. (1999). When do people use
simple heuristics, and how can we tell? In G. Gigerenzer,
P. M. Todd, and the ABC Research Group, Simple
heuristics that make us smart (pp. 141-167). New York,
NY: Oxford University Press.
Rieskamp, J., & Hoffrage, U. (2008). Inferences under time
pressure: How opportunity costs affect strategy selection.
Acta Psychologica, 127, 258-276.
Rieskamp, J., & Otto, P. (2006). SSL: A theory of how
people learn to select strategies. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 135, 207-236.
Schwarz, N. (2000). Emotion, cognition, and decision
making. Cognition & Emotion, 14, 433-440.
Sosnowski, T., & Wrześniewski, K. (1983). Polska
adaptacja inwentarza STAI do badania stanu i cechy lęku.
(Polish adaptation of the State Trait Anxiety Inventory).
Przegląd Psychologiczny, 26, 393-412.
Spielberger, C. D. Gorsuch, R. L., & Lushenne, R. E.
(1970). Manual for the State Trait Anxiety Inventory. Palo
Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.

1877

