UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Processing Emergent Features in Metaphor Comprehension

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3pd4h0k4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Terai, Asuka
Goldstone, Robert

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Processing Emergent Features in Metaphor Comprehension
Asuka Terai (asuka@nm.hum.titech.ac.jp)
Global Edge Institute, Tokyo Institute of Technology,
2-12-1, Ookayama, Meguro-ku, Tokyo, 1528550 JAPAN

Robert L. Goldstone (rgoldsto@indiana.edu)
Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University,
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
Abstract
This study examines the processing of emergent features in
metaphors. Emergent features are metaphoric interpretations
that are characteristic neither of the target nor the vehicle. In
the first experiment, participants were asked to respond as to
whether a verbal feature is an appropriate interpretation of the
metaphor, which was presented as a prime. They are asked
to respond immediately after a tone is presented which has
a variable temporal lag after the feature. The timing of each
tone controlled the participants’ response times. The results
show that the response deadline given to the participants only
slightly affected their judgments. In a second experiment, the
time to interpret a metaphor was controlled by varying the presentation time of the metaphor. The results showed that emergent features require more time for recognition as a metaphoric
interpretation than do non-emergent features. The results support the hypothesis that interaction among features causes feature emergence. Keywords: Metaphor comprehension; Feature Emergence; Interaction.

Introduction
In this research, we examined the process of feature emergence, which is realized in comprehension of metaphors taking the form of TARGET is VEHICLE. Previous papers indicate that interpretations of these metaphors consist
of four types of features. These features include common
features, target features, vehicle features and emergent features (Becker 1997, Gineste et al. 2000, Nueckles and Janetzko 1997). When an interpretation is thought of in relation
to both the target and the vehicle, it is regarded as a common
feature. When an interpretation is thought of as a characteristic of the target (or of the vehicle), it is referred to as a target
feature (or a vehicle feature). Finally, emergent features are
not typically thought of in relation to either the target or the
vehicle alone but do come to mind when the target and vehicle enter into a metaphoric comparison. For example, for the
metaphor Stars are Diamonds, the feature white is a
target feature, rare is a vehicle feature, beautiful is
a common feature because it is listed as a feature when given
either stars or diamonds by themselves, and amazing is an emergent feature because it is not listed for either
word by itself, but is listed when the words are paired.
Previous research (Gineste et al., 2000) has reported that
over 60% of metaphoric interpretations were emergent features. Emergent features are thus prevalent and play an important role in metaphor comprehension. Emergent features
required a longer response time to be regarded as a feature of
the prime than target or vehicle features, when the features
were tested with target-term or vehicle-term primes. When

the features were tested with the metaphor as the prime, both
the emergent features and non-emergent features required a
longer response time than did the target-term or the vehicleterm primes. The emergent features did not change their duration from one prime condition to another. As a result of these
experiments, it was concluded that the results are consistent
with the interaction theory of metaphor (Black 1962). However, previous results have not examined a difference between
processes of emergent features and non-emergent features in
metaphor understanding.
The interaction theory (Black 1962) suggests that metaphor
comprehension is a product of an interaction between the target and the vehicle concepts. The created new meanings by
the metaphoric comparison are thought to be the emergent
features. In addition, Nueckles and Janetzko (1997) introduce
the idea that metaphor comprehension proceeds in analysisbased and synthesis-based stages. According to their idea
there must first be an analysis of the lexical meanings of
the target and vehicle in analysis-based stage. If the target
and vehicle have enough similarity, the metaphor comprehension does not proceed to synthesis-based stage.8 For cases in
which the target-vehicle similarity is not sufficient, a shift to
synthesis-based processing occurs. Then the metaphor comprehension is achieved through a construction of new components of meaning by synthesis of the target and the vehicle. It
is during this second phase that emergent features would be
generated.
Furthermore, previous computational models of metaphor
understanding have proposed that emergent features are emphasized more than non-emergent features through interactions among features in metaphor understanding (Utsumi
2000, Terai and Nakagawa 2007, 2008). These models are
able to simulate activation of emergent features under this assumption. However, these researches did not examine the experimental validity of this assumption that interaction among
features causes emergent features. If the assumption is correct, then there should be differences between processes that
generate emergent features and non-emergent features during the interpretation of metaphors. Therfore, one difference would be related to processing times. Emergent features
are expected to require more time to be recognized during a
metaphoric interpretation than non-emergent features.
This study employed two experiments to test the processing time of emergent features within metaphor interpretation.
The first experiment was conducted using a cue-to-respond

2043

method to elucidate how much time emergent and nonemergent features require to be generated during metaphoric
interpretation. In the first experiment, participants were presented a metaphor. Participants were then presented with an
emergent feature or a non-emergent feature for either a short
or long period of time. Participants were then cued by a tone
to respond as to whether the feature was appropriate to the
metaphor which had been presented before. In the second experiment, participants were primed with a metaphor for either
a short or long period of time. After the metaphor was presented, an emergent or non-emergent feature was presented
and participants were asked to respond as to whether the feature is appropriate to the metaphor. The aim of these experiments was to determine whether emergent and non-emergent
features have different time courses of processing.

Experiment 1
In this experiment, we examined the processing of emergent
and non-emergent features in metaphor comprehension using
a cue-to-respond method.

Method
34 undergraduates participated in this experiment. All
participants were native English speakers. We selected
50 metaphors of the form ”TARGET is VEHICLE”: 38
metaphors were used in Becker (1997) and 12 metaphors
were used in Gentner and Clement (1988). For each of these
50 metaphors, 1 to 5 features were selected. From Becker’s
and Gentner and Clement’s results, 63 emergent features and
92 non-emergent features (20 features are common features,
22 features are target features and 50 features are vehicle features) were identified. Becker (1997) listed features and categorized them into 4 types of features (emergent, common,
target, and vehicle features). Based on her categorization,
56 emergent features and 76 non-emergent features were selected. Gentner and Clement’s results describe the properties
of the metaphor, either the target or the vehicle. We extracted
features from the descriptions and selected 7 emergent features and 16 non-emergent features. The features were categorized according to the rule used in Becker (1997). That
is, if a feature which is included in the description of the
metaphor is not included in either a description of the target or vehicle, then the feature is regarded as an emergent
feature. On the other hand, if the feature, which is included
in the description of the metaphor, is included in a description of the target or the vehicle, the feature is regarded as a
non-emergent feature1 . There is no significant difference between the numbers of participants who responded positively
(”the feature is the property that the metaphor represents”)
for emergent compared to non-emergent features. In order
1 It might be some concern that there is difference between the
sets of features from Becker’s and Gentner and Clement’s results.
Thus, we analyzed the results separately for Becker’s results because
they represented a larger data set. The results show the same tendency that are indicated when all data are analyzed. Therefore, in
this paper, we combine the two data sets.

to preclude the participants from responding ”Yes” to all features, we also included 25 metaphors and 2 features for each
metaphor that are irrelevant to either the target or to the vehicle. These items were selected from McGlone and Manfredi
(2001) as a distractor pair of a metaphor and a feature.
The procedures were as follows. First, the fixation point
”+” was presented for 3 seconds on the computer screen.
Then, participants were presented with a metaphor for 1 second. They were asked to interpret the metaphor. After presentation of the metaphor, a feature was presented. While the
feature was displayed, at 0.5 seconds in the short-time condition or at 5 seconds in the long-time condition, after the starting point of the feature’s presentation, a brief tone (2000Hz,
for 0.05 seconds) sounded. Participants were cued by the
brief tone to respond ”yes” or ”no” depending on whether
the feature was related to the metaphor or not. Participants
were instructed to respond by pressing the ”p” key (”Yes”)
or ”q” key (”No”) within 1 second. They were asked to respond as quickly as they could after the tone. If response time
took longer than 1 second after the tone, the feature disappeared and the sign ”Your response is too slow” appeared on
the screen. The combination of times and features was randomized. Each combination was proportionally equal. After every 30 trials, the participants were given a break. In
the short-time condition, 0.5 seconds after the presentation
of the feature, the participants had to respond, presumably
near the beginning of their interpretation process. In the longtime condition, they were assumed to complete more of the
metaphor interpretation process.

Results
The average rate at which the participants responded within
the limited time is 91.9% in the short-time condition and
97.9% in the long-time condition.
Response times The averages of response times after the
tone under the condition that participants responded ”Yes”
are shown in Figure 1. There is a main effect of time condition (F(1, 33) = 76.2, p < .001) and a main effect of feature
types (F(1, 33) = 6.07, p < .05). In the short-time condition, the average response time for emergent features is 519.9
milliseconds and that of non-emergent features is 529.0 milliseconds. In the long-time condition, the average response
time for emergent features is 415.5 milliseconds and that of
non-emergent features is 434.6 milliseconds. The response
time after the tone in the short-time condition is longer than in
the long-time condition. And, the response time of emergent
features is significantly shorter than that of non-emergent features at 5% level. The response times under the condition that
participants responded ”Yes” are analyzed concerning 4 types
of features: emergent, common, target, and vehicle. These
are shown in Table 1. There is main effect of time condition
(F(1, 33) = 34.9, p < .001), but there is neither a main effect of feature types nor interaction between time and feature
type.

2044

Figure 1: The response time when they responded ”Yes” in
Experiment 1 (millisecond).

Figure 2: Average proportions of ”Yes” responses (%) in Experiment 1.

Table 1: Averages of the response times when participants responded ”Yes” (millisecond) in Experiment 1. Standard deviations are shown in parentheses.

Table 2: Average proportions of ”Yes” responses (%) in Experiment 1. Standard deviations are shown in parentheses.

Feature Type
Emergent Features
Common Features
Target Features
Vehicle Features

Time Condition
Short-time
519.9 (180.3)
521.1 (179.0)
527.8 (172.8)
533.0 (188.0)

Feature Type
Long-time
415.5 (113.4)
432.0 (126.4)
441.2 (136.2)
432.7 (134.3)

Emergent Features
Common Features
Target Features
Vehicle Features

Proportions of Appropriate Features as Interpretation of
the Metaphor A ”Yes” response indicates that the participant recognized the feature as a valid metaphoric interpretation. The proportion of ”Yes” responses for emergent features and non-emergent features are shown in Figure 2. In
the short-time condition, the average proportion of ”Yes”
responses of emergent features is 46.9% and that of nonemergent features is 50.7%. In the long-time condition, the
average proportion of emergent features is 46.1% and that
of non-emergent features is 54.9%. An arcsine transformation was applied to the proportion data because of the restriction of these data to a 0-1 range. After transformation, the
proportions were analyzed using a two-way ANOVA. There
was a main effect of feature type (F(1, 33) = 34.0, p < .001)
and an interaction between feature types and time condition (F(1, 33) = 4.51, p < .05). The proportions of ”Yes”
judgments for the 4 types of features are shown in Table 2.
There is a main effect of the 4 feature types (F(3, 99) = 6.73,
p < .001). The proportions of the 3 non-emergent features are
significantly higher than that of emergent features (p < .01).
However, there is no main effect of time condition and no
interaction.

Discussion
In Experiment 1, the response time was controlled using
the cue-to-respond method. Participants had enough time to
judge if the feature was an interpretation of a metaphor in the
long-time condition. They ware able to respond significantly
earlier than in the long-time, compared to short-time, condition. This difference is predicted if participants were not finished with their interpretation process by the time the early,

Time Condition
Short-time
46.9 (15.4)
50.9 (22.5)
54.3 (21.3)
49.0(18.5)

Long-time
46.1(15.8)
55.3 (18.6)
53.0 (19.0)
55.7 (17.1)

short-time tone was sounded. Response time of emergent features is significantly shorter than non-emergent features. No
significant differences in response times were found among 4
feature types. However, the 3 types of non-emergent features
(common, target and vehicle features) required slightly longer
response time after the tone than the emergent features.
The proportions of ”Yes” responses for emergent features
were significantly lower than that of the non-emergent features. Even when participants had 5 seconds to respond in
the long-time condition, they responded ”Yes” to less than
50% of the emergent features. Apparently, it is more difficult to recognize emergent features as metaphoric interpretations. Furthermore, it is shown that there is a weak interaction between feature types and time condition. Participants
regarded more non-emergent feature as a metaphoric interpretation in the long-time condition. These results suggest
that it takes more time to recognize non-emergent features as
a metaphoric interpretation than emergent features. However,
the results are open to alternative accounts. In particular, if
the emergent features are indeed fairly subtle, then even the
longer response deadline may not have been sufficient to appreciate their aptness. In this case, participants may subscribe
to more non-emergent features during the longer response
deadline because even these more straightforward interpretations require a substantial processing period. In addition,
when the proportions concerning 4 types of features were analyzed, there was no interaction. With respect to comparisons
within the 3 types of non-emergent features, there were no
differences in how often participants subscribed to their aptness.
In this experiment, the participants were shown a metaphor

2045

for the same duration (one second) regardless of response
deadline. Instead, the response deadline time during the
presentation feature was controlled. During the presentation of the metaphor, participants presumably interpreted the
metaphor. However, while the feature was present on the
screen, they had to think about whether the feature was related to the metaphor or not. It is possible that the process
during presentation of the feature is different from the process of metaphor comprehension. Therefore, a second experiment was conducted to examine the influence of the time for
metaphor comprehension on the processing of the emergent
features.

Experiment 2
In this experiment, the metaphor presentation time was controlled instead of the response deadline. We examined the influence of metaphor presentation time on the process of emergent and non-emergent features in metaphor comprehension.

Figure 3: The response time when they responded ”Yes” in
Experiment 2 (millisecond).
Table 3: Averages of the response times when participants responded ”Yes” (millisecond) in Experiment 2. Standard deviations are shown in parentheses.
Feature Type

Method
56 undergraduates participated in this experiment. All participants were native English speakers. The sets of metaphors
and features were the same as those used in Experiment 1.
The procedures are as follows. First, participants were presented with a metaphor on a computer screen. The metaphor
presentation time was 3 seconds in the short-time condition
and 12 seconds in the long-time condition. They were asked
to interpret the metaphor. After presentation of the metaphor,
a feature was presented. The participants were asked to respond ”yes” or ”no” depending on whether the feature was related to the metaphor or not. Participants responded by pressing ”p” key (”Yes”) or ”q” key (”No”) within 6 seconds. They
were asked to respond as fast as possible without sacrificing
accuracy. If they could not respond within 6 seconds, the
feature disappeared and the text ”Your response is too slow”
appeared on the screen. The combination of times and features was randomized. Each combination was proportionally
equal.

Results
Response times The averages of response times under the
condition that participants responded ”Yes” are shown in Figure 3. There is main effect of time condition on response time
(F(1, 55) = 34.2, p < .001). In the short-time condition, the
average response time for emergent features is 2052.7 milliseconds and that of non-emergent features is 2033.5 milliseconds. In the long-time condition, the average time for
emergent features is 2249.0 milliseconds and that of nonemergent features is 2283.7 milliseconds. Irrespective of type
of features, the response times in the long-time condition
were longer than that in the short-time condition. There is
neither a main effect of type of feature nor an interaction between type of feature and time. Furthermore, the response
times were analyzed for all 4 types of features: emergent,
common, target, and vehicle. These are shown in Table 3.
There is main effect of time condition (F(1, 104) = 5.14,

Emergent Features
Common Features
Target Features
Vehicle Features

Time Condition
Short-time
2100.9 (994.6)
2050.0 (948.0)
2116.3 (963.1)
2120.7 (959.7)

Long-time
2281.7 (1030.3)
2289.0 (1023.8)
2276.3 (1020.8)
2306.8 (1029.6)

p < .05) but there is neither a main effect of feature type nor
an interaction between type of feature and time.
Proportions of Appropriate Features as Interpretation of
the Metaphor Measuring proportions of ”Yes” responses
for emergent and non-emergent features, there is a main effect
of feature types (F(1, 55) = 47.0, p < .001) and an interaction
between feature types and time condition (F(1, 55) = 13.2,
p < .001), as shown in Figure 4. In the short-time condition,
the average proportion of ”Yes” responses for emergent features is 46.7% and that of non-emergent features is 50.4%.
In the long-time condition, the average proportion of emergent features receiving a ”Yes” response is 54.7% and that of
non-emergent features is 50.3%. The results show that nonemergent features are more often regarded as metaphoric interpretations than emergent features, and that emergent features require more time to be regarded as an interpretation of
the metaphor than non-emergent features.
The proportions of approved metaphor interpretations for
the 4 types of features are shown in Table 4. There is a
main effect of time condition (F(1, 55) = 7.50, p < .01) and
a main effect of feature type (F(3, 165) = 10.1, p < .001).
The results show that the proportions of the 3 types of nonemergent features (common, target and vehicle features) are
significantly higher than that of emergent features (p < .001).
Furthermore, with respect to the 3 types of non-emergent features, the proportions of approved interpretations in the shorttime condition are higher than those in the long-time condition. Conversely, the proportions of approved interpretations
for emergent features in the short-time condition are lower
than for the long-time condition.

2046

Discussion

Figure 4: Average proportions of ”Yes” responses (%) in Experiment 2.

Table 4: Average proportions of ”Yes” responses (%) in Experiment 2. Standard deviations are shown in parentheses.
Feature Type
Emergent Features
Common Features
Target Features
Vehicle Features

Time Condition
Short-time
46.7 (15.8)
58.0 (19.9)
55.5 (19.2)
57.6 (19.2)

Long-time
49.5 (15.6)
51.8 (20.8)
51.9 (18.5)
53.3 (16.9)

The trials were divided into 3 groups based on when they
occurred during the experiment (beginning, middle, ending) and the proportions were analyzed concerning these 3
groups (Figure 5). There is a main effect of type of features (F(1, 55) = 41.0, p < .001) and an interaction between
feature type and time condition (F(1, 55) = 14.8, p < .001).
In the short-time condition, the average proportion of ”Yes”
responses of emergent features is 44.7% at the beginning,
47.4% at the middle and 48.0% at the ending. The results
show that participants learned that the emergent features are
the metaphoric interpretations in the short-time condition,
however, the proportion of the emergent features in the longtime condition decreases.

The response time results show that participants responded
significantly faster in the short-time condition than in the
long-time condition. In Gineste et al. (2000), each metaphor
was shown for around 1 second (they used a presentation time
of 40 milliseconds per character). After each metaphor was
presented, there was 2 second delay and then a feature was
presented. Their results showed that the average response
time for non-emergent features (the target or the vehicle features) was 1201 milliseconds. For the emergent features, the
response time was 1173 milliseconds. These response times
are shorter than our results in either the short or long-time
condition. In our experiment, the metaphor was presented for
3 seconds in the short-time condition. Therefore, it could be
argued that the shorter presentation time of a metaphor made
participants’ respond more quickly. Perhaps the short display
duration implicitly served as a prompt for participants to decide quickly. The long presentation of the metaphor triggers
association more widely. The wide association would cause
the long response times in the long-time condition. Furthermore, non-emergent features are either properties of the target
or the vehicle or both. The proportion of ”Yes” responses for
non-emergent features in the short-time condition is higher
than in the long-time condition. The results show that the
shorter presentation of a metaphor made participants interpret the metaphor based on more the properties of the target
and that of the vehicle.
The proportions of ”Yes” responses for emergent features
were significantly lower than that of non-emergent features.
This shows that it is more difficult to recognize emergent features as metaphoric interpretations. At the beginning, the proportion of ”Yes” responses for emergent features in the shorttime condition is only 44.7%. However, this proportion gradually increased during the experiment. The results imply the
possibility that the participants learned how to recognize an
emergent feature as an interpretation in the short-time condition.

General Discussion

Figure 5: Change of the average proportions of ”Yes” responses (%) in Experiment 2.

In Experiment 1, the proportions of ”Yes” (approved
metaphor interpretation) responses doesn t show that the
emergent features require more time to be recognized as a
metaphoric interpretation than non-emergent features. Experiment 2 shows that the emergent features require more
time for metaphor presentation be recognized. The difference between these experiments is likely caused by the difference between processes during the controlled time in Experiment 1 and 2. The time to find relationship between a feature and a metaphor was manipulated in Experiment 1, and
the time to interpret metaphors was manipulated in Experiment 2. The former process can be regarded as the process
of metaphor comprehension. This occurs when a particular
interpretation of a metaphor is tested. For example, the interpretation white is tested to see whether it is a valid
interpretation of the metaphor Stars are diamonds. On the

2047

other hand, the latter process occurs when only the metaphor
itself is presented, and participants need to build an understanding of the metaphor from internal evidence within the
metaphor itself. Furthermore, all of the total interpretation/
decision/response times in Experiment 1 were less than those
in Experiment 2. That is, even the long response deadline of
Experiment 1 is less than that used in Experiment 2. So, I
suspect that participants have not had time to find emergent
interpretations in Experiment 1. In short, subjects CAN develop emergent interpretations, but it takes more than the five
seconds allowed in Experiment 1. By the end of those five
seconds, participants have only succeeded in reliably finding
the more straight-forward (non-emergent), less emergent interpretations. And the cue-to-respond task is too stressful for
participants to find emergent interpretations. Thus, the results
in Experiment 2 reflect how to process emergent features in
metaphor comprehension without a context.
The proportions of ”Yes” responses in Experiment 2 imply that at first, the meanings of the target and the vehicle
are emphasized as non-emergent features, but then, emergent
features are discovered as valid interpretations. These results
support the assumption that interactions among the features
of the terms used in a metaphor can cause emergent features
to be formed (Terai and Nakagawa 2007, 2008). Furthermore,
the proportion of ”Yes” responses for non-emergent features
in the long-time condition is lower than in the short-time condition. This result suggests that features that are true of one
metaphor term but not the other are inhibited in the long-time
condition. This inhibition of the non-emergent features supports the premise that the interactions among features include
activation and inhibition processes. In the long-time condition, the proportions of Yes responses for emergent features change non-monotonously. At the ending, the proportion reduced. It can be considered that the participants learned
that the emergent features are the metaphoric interpretations
in the long-time condition from the beginning to the middle.
However, their learning proceeded and the emergent features
might be targeted in the inhibition process at the ending.
The results in Experiment 1 show that the response times
for the emergent features are faster than those of the nonemergent features. On the surface, this result appears to contradict the results from the proportion of ”Yes” responses,
but if we accept that response times indicate activation level,
then it may be that after an interactive comparison process
has been accomplished, emergent features are more activated
than non-emergent features. The interpretation approval rates
show that recognizing an emergent interpretation is harder
than a non-emergent interpretation. Therefore, the emergent
features require more time to be regarded as a metaphoric interaction, however, when they are recognized, they were more
salient than the non-emergent features.

tures. However, we have not yet elucidated a detailed mechanism of the interaction. A next step will be to apply existing
interactive process models of metaphor comprehension (Terai
and Nakagawa 2007, 2008) to the observed time course results.

Acknowledgments
We are deeply grateful to Dr. Angela H. Becker and Dr. Dedre Gentner for allowing us to use their valuable data. This
research is supported by MEXT’s program ”Promotion of Environmental Improvement for Independence of Young Researchers” and National Science Foundation REESE grant
0910218. We want to thank Akshat Gupta and Rachel
Selonick for assistance with the experiments.

References
Becker, A. H. (1997). Emergent and common features influence metaphor interpretation. Metaphor and Symbol, 12.
Black, M. (1979). More about metaphor (A. Ortony, Ed.).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Getner, D., & Clement, C. (1988). Evidence for relational
selectivity in the interpretation of analogy and metaphor
(G. H. Bower, Ed.). New York: Academic Press.
Gineste, M., Indurkhya, B., & Scart, V. (2000). Emergence of
features in metaphor comprehension. Metaphor and Symbol, 15, 117–135.
McGlone, M. S., & Manfredi, D. A. (2001). Topic-vehicle
interaction in metaphor comprehension. Memory and Cognition, 29.
Nueckles, M., & Janetzko, D. (1997). The role of semantic
similarity in the comprehension of metaphor. In Proc. of
the 19th annual meeting of the cognitive science society
(pp. 578–583).
Terai, A., & Nakagawa, M. (2007). A neural network model
of metaphor understanding with dynamic interaction based
on a statistical language analysis; targeting a human-like
model. Int. J. of neural systems, 17, 265–274.
Terai, A., & Nakagawa, M. (2008). A corpus-based computational model of metaphor understanding incorporating dynamic interaction. In V.kurkova et al. (eds): Proc. of icann
2008, part2, lncs 5164 (pp. 443–452). Berlin Heidelberg
Springer-Verlag.
Utsumi, A. (2000). Hiyu no ninchi / keisan moderu (cognition
of metaphors / computational model). Computer Today, 96,
34–39.

To elucidate the mechanism of feature emergence during
metaphor interpretation, we manipulated the time allowed for
comprehending a metaphor and/or its interpretation. The results support a protracted process of interaction among fea-

2048

