UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Promoting Development of Geometry Concepts: Interfacing Multiple Embodied
Representations with a Computer Game

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/428582wd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Vitale, Jonathan
Black, John
Swart, Michael

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Promoting Development of Geometry Concepts: Interfacing Multiple Embodied
Representations with a Computer Game
Jonathan Michael Vitale (JMV2125@Columbia.Edu)
Department of Human Development, Teachers College, 525 W. 120th Street
New York, NY 10027 USA

John B. Black (Black@Exchange.TC.Columbia.Edu)
Department of Human Development, Teachers College, 525 W. 120th Street
New York, NY 10027 USA

Michael Swart (MIS2125@Columbia.Edu)
Department of Human Development, Teachers College, 525 W. 120th Street
New York, NY 10027 USA

Abstract
In this study we examined the effectiveness of a computerbased geometry learning tool with 4th grade students. In both
an experimental and control condition children constructed a
series of common four-sided figures to fit a set of visual
constraints.
Additionally, children in the experimental
condition were required to validate the presence of parallel
segments, congruent segments, or right angles embedded in
their figures with the assistance of a visual depiction of the
property’s spatial significance. Following training we
conducted six identification tasks in which participants
attempted to discriminate two valid members of a given
polygon class from four displayed polygons. In all six
instances, varying polygon, instruction, and feedback type,
children in the experimental condition were more likely to
correctly identify both class members than children in the
control condition.
Keywords: embodied cognition, mathematical development,
education, cognitive development

Introduction
Core mathematical abilities may emerge from either innate
processes or general human experiences (Lakoff & Nuñez,
2000). Yet, the development of mature concepts and skills
depends on one’s cultural experiences – such as schooling.
For example, while number sense may emerge from general
spatial processes (Dehaene, 1997), the development of
mature numerical representation is moderated by exposure
to formal and informal activities (Siegler & Ramani, 2008).
Furthermore, Siegler and Ramani (2008) successfully
demonstrated that persistent SES-based disadvantages could
be overcome by effective use of appropriate tools (i.e.,
linear board games).
Cognitive research in geometry may follow a similar
trajectory. The core systems approach – which has been
applied successfully in numeracy – has recently been
invoked to explain the cognitive basis of Euclidean
geometry. Specifically, Spelke, Lee, and Izard, (2010) claim
that geometric concepts are grounded in two core cognitive
systems, typically associated with spatial navigation and
object perception. The latter system is hypothesized to

support the concepts of lengths and angles, which are
critical to school-based geometric activities.
Yet, while lengths and angles are certainly perceivable
attributes of objects, other qualities, such as bilateral
symmetry (Quinlan & Humphreys, 1993), may be more
salient. In some cases these perceptually salient features
may interfere with formal classifications of geometric
objects. For example, Mach (1886/1959) demonstrated that
a square may be perceived as a diamond when its diagonal
is oriented vertically.
Similarly, in a study that applied nonmetric
multidimensional scaling to a set of four-sided figures – a
technique in which perceived dissimilarities between objects
are spatially represented for analysis – perceived attributes
confounding lengths and angles emerged, including
“dispersion” (irregularity), “elongation”, and “jaggedness”
(Behrman & Brown, 1968).
Likewise, Shepard and
Chipman (1970) found similar dimensions in participants’
categorizations of U.S. state shapes.
While a variety of factors affect natural object perception,
perhaps the more narrow set of educationally-relevant
geometric figures (e.g. square, equilateral triangle) better
afford conceptualization by normative (Euclidean) classbased properties (e.g. parallel lines). However, interview
data demonstrates that young children categorize polygons
based on informal perceptual attributes, such as “slanty”,
“pointy”, or “skinny” (Clements, Swaminathan, Hannibal,
& Sarama, 1999). As the Mach (1886/1959) squarediamond demonstration suggests, informal concepts play a
role in geometric representation into adulthood.
Yet, over two thousand years of geometry as a formal
discipline suggests that humans are not bound by superficial
percepts. Abstractly, geometric concepts may be conceived
in terms of strict hierarchy, facilitating deductive reasoning.
Such organization suggests an internal representation
similar to the discrete, hierarchical, propositional network of
Quillian (1966).
Yet, rather than viewing the development of geometry
concepts as a shift from perception to abstraction, one may
conceive of development in terms of perceptual

1

2383

reorganization and learning (Goldstone & Barsalou, 1998;
Goldstone, Landy, & Son, 2010). From this perspective,
experts do not rely upon perception any less than novices,
but are trained to perceive structurally-relevant attributes,
while overlooking irrelevant features. We suspect this is the
case in geometry as children shift from informal perceptual
features (e.g. “pointy” shapes) to more normative ones (e.g.
right angles).

shifting children’s perception/conception of polygons. As
such, children in the experimental condition should be more
likely than children in the control condition to correctly
identify non-prototypical members of a polygon class.

Method
Participants

Geometry learning
While the shift from informal (or core) concepts to
formal, Euclidean concepts is the goal of geometry
education, many current practices are ineffective or
misleading (Clements, 2004). Reliance on a limited range
of exemplar shapes and activities often leaves children
without the concepts or skills to perform more complex
tasks, such as geometric proof.
Digital technology, on the other hand, facilitates the
display of a wide range of figures in a variety of contexts,
thereby promoting development of more general concepts.
Further, technology may elicit specific behaviors through
systems of constraints, feedback, and goal structures,
thereby promoting development of precise concepts. Yet,
what specific mechanisms will direct learners’ behaviors
towards meaningful features of the shape concept?
Lakoff and Nuñez (2000), hypothesize that basic
mathematical concepts are supported by “grounding
metaphors” embodied in physical experience with the
natural world. We suggest that one such geometric
metaphor is “polygons as a surface face of physical
objects.” Lakoff and Nuñez further suppose that advanced
mathematical knowledge depends upon linking multiple
metaphors in a spatially-grounded context. A digital
learning system may play a role in either assisting in the
development of a primary conceptual representation or the
interfacing (i.e., “linking”) of multiple representations.
In the study that follows we examine the process of
interfacing multiple embodied representations in a polygon
construction task. Specifically, children in both a control
and experimental condition were tasked with construction of
specific polygons within some physical bounds. However,
in the experimental condition, children validated the
inclusion of target properties in their constructed figure (e.g.
parallel lines for a parallelogram) by manipulating a
software tool depicting the property as a hand gesture.
Additionally, the experimenters showed children how to use
their own hands to mimic the on-screen gesture, in line with
research demonstrating gesture’s (potential) causal role in
mathematical learning (Broaders, Wagner, Zachary, &
Goldin-Meadow, 2007). The visual depiction and physical
gesture each provide a means of embodying the
mathematical concept in the perceptual and/or motor
systems, respectively – in contrast to approaches that situate
mathematical concepts in symbolic or verbal systems.
In this initial study we compare our embodied, property
validation approach to a non-validation procedure to provide
causal evidence for our system’s role in successfully
2

Twenty-one fourth grade children were recruited from an
after-school program located in a low-SES, predominantly
Hispanic neighborhood of New York City. The children
were randomly assigned to either an experimental or control
condition. The experimental condition consisted of ten
children (M = 9.4 years, SD = .16, 40% female, 90%
Hispanic, 10% African American). The control condition
also consisted of ten children (M = 9.6 years, SD = .28, 50%
female, 100% Hispanic). Two children (one from each
condition) were native Spanish speakers, but could
communicate sufficiently in English and showed little
difficulty understanding the tasks. Additionally, one child,
assigned to the experimental condition, was not included in
the study due to prolonged absence.

Materials and Procedure
Study-related tasks were conducted in the context of a
weekly after-school robotics program directed by the
experimenters. Robotics activities were not essential to the
tasks of this study, although they did inform the visual
design of the game. Generally, robotics activities were
conducted after children completed study-related activities.
An approximately 1.5 hour block was divided into two 45
minute sessions. In each session all children from either the
control or experimental condition were “pulled-out” to a
separate classroom to perform either the learning or
assessment tasks. Because of the prolonged nature of the
after-school program we took the opportunity to test these
tools across three curricular units, focusing on three polygon
properties: parallel segments, congruent (adjacent)
segments, and right angles.
In each unit the children engaged in a series of self-paced
polygon construction activities (10 for parallel segments, 6
each for congruent adjacent segments and right angles).
Children performed the construction task on individual
computers, in parallel with all other (present) participants in
his or her condition. Immediately following completion of
all construction activities within a unit, the assessment task
(polygon identification) was administered, individually,
apart from the other children.
Polygon construction game
The central learning tool was intended to provide children
with multiple instances of polygons in a game-like context.
The general goal of the game was to navigate a virtual agent
(robot) through an obstacle course, collecting “goal”
objects, avoiding “danger” objects, and returning to the

2384

starting position (i.e., closing the polygon) via a series of
lines and angles. The placement of goals and dangers was
directed to promote the construction of specific polygons,
including trapezoids, parallelograms, kites, rhombi,
rectangles, and squares. In each case a dense set of
circumnavigable objects were placed in the screen’s center,
in the general shape of the intended polygon. Additional
goals and dangers were positioned away from this central
set to restrict paths from large deviations. The particular
game objects and cover story were varied throughout the
sessions to maintain high motivation.

Preview

Child ready

Plot
Figure
closed

Segment deleted

Adjust

Property
Validation

Properties are
within threshold

Unsuccessful

Control

Experimental

Test
Figure 1. Polygon construction game flow, with
cropped screenshots from a parallelogram task.
Yellow arrows demonstrate progress in the intended
direction. Red arrows demonstrate mistake-based
The game design is summarized in figure 1, above. In
either condition the children first previewed the obstacle
course on a grid. Children were verbally instructed to try

and “memorize” the shape that would “fit” the course. In a
left side panel, not shown in figure 1, the name of the
intended polygon and a list of properties were displayed
(e.g. 4 right angles).
At the child’s discretion, he or she clicked a continue
button, clearing the screen of all game objects. The child
then engaged in an iterative process of plotting line
segments and angles over a grid by manipulating the mouse
in corresponding straight lines and arcs, respectively.
Pressing the delete key removed the previously constructed
shape component. To assist in the construction of an
appropriate figure the initial placement and orientation of
the first segment were fixed and could not be deleted.
A closed polygon could then be adjusted by dragging and
dropping vertex points – displayed as small circles – within
the game screen. During this phase, pressing the delete key
removed the polygon’s final segment and resumed plotting.
The two phases of shape construction (plotting, adjusting)
were intended to afford multiple intuitive strategies.
Although a single mechanism may have sufficed (for
example, by providing an initial, random polygon to be
adjusted), our priority was to elicit the child’s intuitive
representation of shape, which could be embodied by either
the path-plotting or shape-transforming activity. As such,
there was some variability in strategy, as some children
engaged in precise plotting, while others relied more heavily
upon adjusting.
Once a figure was closed, the child could proceed to
either the testing phase (in the control condition) or the
property validation phase (in the experimental condition), in
which participants confirmed the presence of parallel
segments, congruent segments, and/or right angles
embedded in the polygon, according to the polygon’s class.
Specifically, the child either clicked pairs of sides to
validate parallelism or congruency, or clicked vertex points
to validate right internal angles. If the figure successfully
met all property criteria (within a small threshold: 3% grade
for parallel lines, 20 pixels for congruency, and 4◦ for right
angles, inclusive), the participant continued to the testing
phase. Else, the child returned to the adjusting phase.
Further, to facilitate comprehension, the spatial
significance of the property was visually depicted (see
figure 2). For parallelism two hands moved in parallel at
the same slope as one side and were matched for slope
against a second side. For congruency two hands marked
the distance of one side and were matched against the length
of a second side. For right angles two perpendicular hands
were matched against the angle at a vertex.
The display of hands, for each of these checks, was
included to provide the children with a justification that
could be applied outside of the game context.
Finally, in either condition the children tested their figure
design on the obstacle course. In this phase the virtual agent
was placed on the starting point, the participant adjusted its
initial heading, and clicked to set the agent in motion upon
the constructed path. A trace of the agent’s path, i.e., the
constructed figure, followed its motion. If the agent

3

2385

successfully returned to the starting position, while
collecting all goals and avoiding all dangers, the level was
completed and the child received a reward stamp on a
personalized document tracking his or her progress. If the
agent was unable to navigate the course successfully the
participants would return to the adjusting phase for revision.

Navigate hand to Automatically
first side
aligns

Navigate hand to
opposite side

Navigate hands Automatically
to first side
aligns

Rotate hands to
adjacent side

designed such that properties of a parent or grandparent
class were retained. Specifically parallelograms were
distorted into trapezoids, rhombi into kites and
parallelograms, and rectangles into trapezoids and
parallelograms (see figure 4 for the rhombus example).
Individual trials consisted of two sets of valid-invalid
pairs of polygons that applied the same invalidating
alteration. For example, in figure 3, the upper polygons are
valid trapezoids while the lower polygons have been altered
by changing the slope of the shortest side.

Navigate hands Automatically
to first side
aligns

Figure 3. Trapezoid trial in the polygon identification
task.

Figure 2. Visual depictions in property validation phase.
Displays validation of parallel sides, congruent sides,
and right angles (from top to bottom).
Polygon identification task
As stated above, the intended purpose of the polygon
construction game was to shift children’s perception away
from informal attributes of shapes to formal properties. To
assess this shift children performed the task of identifying
(i.e., clicking) two examples of a given polygon from four
displayed polygons (see figure 3). Following each learning
unit (parallel segments, congruent adjacent segments, right
angles) the child performed 60 trials in two blocks. The
blocks assessed the child’s ability to identify trapezoids,
parallelograms, rhombi, (mixed) isosceles triangles and
isosceles trapezoids, rectangles, and (mixed) right triangles
and right trapezoids.
To generate the stimuli for each task we began with the
image of three valid members of the shape’s class, in a
prototypical orientation. We then distorted these images in
one of two dimensions such that they remained visually
similar to the class members, yet class invalid. In the case
of isosceles and right trapezoids exemplars were distorted
along one dimension, creating half as many figures (but the
same total when combined). Finally, the pool of figures was
doubled by rotating each image a quarter-turn. In the case
of parallelograms, rhombi, and rectangles distortions were

The rational for this trial structure – as opposed to a
simpler choice between two figures – was to make the
dimensions of alteration between the figures explicit. For
example, in figure 3 the top-left trapezoid may be
considered prototypical. The top-right trapezoid is nonisosceles and rotated – and therefore non-prototypical. On
the other hand, the bottom-left figure is an irregular
distortion of the prototypical trapezoid, but visually similar.
Clearly, the difficult choice lies in these two options. But
making the more prototypical (and the non-prototypical,
invalid) figure available we encourage the participants to
think about the rules governing class inclusion.
A block of trials paired all possible combinations of two
valid polygons with their invalid partners. With six valid
polygons in each set (including the rotated figures), the
number of combinations is 15. Paired with two invalid
partners the number of trials is 30. In the case of the mixed
triangle/trapezoid trials, with a single invalid partner, two
sets of 15 trials were combined to produce a block of 30.
To explore this task’s robustness across different
conditions planned variations of feedback and instruction
were embedded across the six blocks. For the trapezoid,
parallelogram, rhombus, and rectangle blocks (i.e., those
figures that had been trained) instructions included a text
display of the relevant rule of inclusion (e.g., “A trapezoid
has one pair of parallel lines”). Additionally, in these cases,
two figures were displayed – one valid example and one

4

2386

invalid example – upon which the participants were asked to
click the target components of the valid figure (e.g., the
parallel sides of the trapezoid). In the case of the mixed
triangle/trapezoid blocks, only the text rule of inclusion was
provided (e.g., a triangle or trapezoid is “right” if it contains
at least one right angle). The lack of a visual example in
this case was intended to demonstrate how well the child
could transfer the visual interpretation of the previous block
to the current block.
Following each trial participants were provided feedback,
stating the number of correctly identified figures. This
feedback was intended to reinforce the rule of inclusion
rather than memory for specific figures. As an additional
indicator of effect robustness the assessment blocks
following
the
third
unit
(rectangles,
right
triangles/trapezoids) did not include feedback.

Rhombi

Rhombus-like kites

calculated to produce a single statistic (e.g., out of 60
correct polygons displayed the participant selected 40).
However, we suspect that this metric does not fully capture
performance. For example, a child might attend to the
correct dimension, but in the wrong direction, resulting in a
0-correct trial. Following this error, given feedback, he or
she may have corrected this directional error and followed
with a 2-correct trial. On the other hand, a child with two 1correct trials in a row is likely attending to the wrong feature
of the polygon. Although both children correctly selected
two figures in total, the nature of their performance is quite
different.
To avoid the assumption of normality in the trial
classification data (e.g., rhombus results are skewed to the
left due to a ceiling effect) a nonparametric, one-tailed
Mann-Whitney U test was applied to compare counts of 2correct and 1-correct trials between conditions.
As table 1 displays, each comparison between
experimental and control is significant at the α < .05 level.
This is true in both easier blocks in which the majority of
participants, in both conditions, correctly identified both
polygons in more than half of the trials (i.e., rhombus), and
difficult blocks in which the majority of participants, in both
conditions, misidentified at least one polygon in more than
half of the trials (i.e., right triangle/trapezoid).
Median trial counts (out of 30)
Exam

Block

Rhombus-like parallelograms

2-Correct

U

E: 18
Trapezoid

E: 6
82**

C: 14.5

Figure 4. Examples of rhombus stimuli in polygon
identification task. Top row shows valid rhombi.
Second row shows rhombi manipulated to form kites.
Third row shows rhombi manipulated to form
parallelograms. Another nine images (not shown) are
◦
50 rotations of these figures.

E: 6
C: 12

E: 22

E: 8
83.5**

C: 4

All children completed all 22 construction tasks. The
number of sessions significantly differed between
conditions (experimental: Mean 8.8; control: Mean 6.7,
t(18)=3.9, p < .001).
For the polygon identification task we classified each trial
according to the number of correctly selected polygons (0,
1, or 2). For each participant, within a single block, total 2correct, 1-correct, and 0-correct trials were then computed
(e.g., in a block of 30 trials a subject has 15 2-correct, 10 1correct, and 5 0-correct trials). Alternatively, the number of
correctly selected polygons across an entire block may be
5

2387

Rectangle

E: 6.5
89**

C: 14.5
3rd

* p < .05

88.5**
C: 15

E: 7
Right
Trap., Tri.

81**
C: 23.5

E: 22.5

Results

80.5**

80.5**
C: 17.5

Isosceles
Trap., Tri.

79.5*
C: 13

E: 24
Rhombus
2nd

79*
C: 17

E: 23.5
Parallelogram

E: 18
72.5*

C: 2.5

U

E: 12
74*

C: 12.5
1st

1-Correct

72.5*
C: 23

** p < .01

Table 1. Median distribution of trials with one and two
correctly chosen polygons and associated Mann-Whitney
U tests.

Discussion
Dehaene and Izard (2006) found that indigenous
Amazonians, without formal geometric knowledge,
successfully discriminate parallel and perpendicular
segments from sets of arbitrarily oriented segments.
Undoubtedly, U.S. children are capable of classifying based
on these attributes of shapes. In this study, only the children
in the experimental condition reliably did so.
Yet, these preliminary results are merely suggestive in
nature. By testing our embodied validation condition
against a non-validation condition we conclude that our
software was effective – but we cannot be sure why. One
explanation is that children in the experimental condition
developed a higher perceptual sensitivity to small deviations
from parallelism, perpendicularity, and congruity.
Additionally, the children in the experimental condition may
have developed a greater sense of how to apply these
property concepts to polygons. On the other hand children
in the control condition likely applied a weak representation
of the property or misunderstood how to apply the property
as a basis of polygon classification.
However, the use of a non-validation control raises
several
alternative,
information
processing-based,
explanations. Specifically, because the control group’s
shapes were unconstrained by polygon class-based
properties, constructed figures may have deviated markedly
from the intended polygon. In this case the children would
have been exposed to a sparser set of valid polygons than
the experimental condition, making the implicit encoding of
the relevant property more difficult. Anecdotally, while it
was rarely the case that children greatly deviated from the
intended polygon – which was generally prevented by the
placement of mandatory path goals and peripheral obstacles
– children often engaged in a form of “guess-and-check” in
which tests were followed by minor adjustments, retesting,
and so on. This strategy, at least in its most rapid form, was
prevented by the property validation procedure in the
experimental condition. Learning artifacts and strategies
will be analyzed in future work.
Secondly, because of the additional difficulty inherent in
the experimental condition, those children engaged in
approximately a third more game sessions. While we
expected some difference in training duration, given a fixed
number of activities, additional measures may be taken to
equate these groups more closely in both number of
activities and time-on-task.
Specifically, in ongoing work we address both of these
concerns by introducing a property validation phase in the
control group.
Rather than promoting the spatial
characteristics of the property, children in this control are
attended towards a numerical representations of the property
(e.g., ensuring that a right angle measures 90◦). This
additional step lengthens the duration of training and
ensures the construction of accurate polygons – likely more
accurate than those created in the experimental condition.
This refinement of the learning task will determine whether
the experimental group’s success was founded on greater
6

exposure to accurate polygons or due to the interactive,
embodied nature of the property validation task.

Reference
Behrman, B. W., & Brown, D. R. (1968). Multidimensional
scaling of forms: A psychological analysis. Perception
& Psychophysics , 4 (1), 19-25.
Broaders, S. C., Wagner, S. C., Zachary, M., & GoldinMeadow, S. (2007). Making children gesure brings out
implicit knowledge and leads to learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General , 136 (4), 539-550.
Clements, D. (2004). Geometric and spatial thinking in early
childhood education. In D. H. Clements, J. Sarama, & A.
DiBiase, Engaging young children in mathematics:
standards for early childhood education (pp. 267-297).
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaume Associates, Inc.
Clements, D. H., Swaminathan, S., Hannibal, M. A., &
Sarama, J. (1999). Young children's concept of shape.
Journal for Research in Mathematics Education , 30 (2),
192-212.
Dehaene, S. (1997). The number sense: How the mind
creates mathematics. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Dehaene, S., & Izard, V. (2006). Core knowledge of
geometry in an Amazonian indigene group. Science ,
311 (5759), 381-384.
Goldstone, R. L., & Barsalou, L. W. (1998). Reuniting
perception and conception. Cognition , 65, 231-262.
Goldstone, R. L., Landy, D. H., & Son, J. Y. (2010). The
education of perception. Topics in Cognitive Science , 2
(2), 1-20.
Lakoff, G., & Nuñez, R. E. (2000). Where mathematics
comes from: How the embodied mind brings
mathematics into being. New York: Basic Books.
Mach, E. (1886/1959). The analysis of sensations and the
relation of the physical to the psychical. New York:
Dover.
Quillian, M. R. (1966). Semantic memory. Cambridge, MA:
Bolt, Beranak and Newman.
Quinlan, P. T., & Humphreys, G. W. (1993). Perceptual
frames of reference and two-dimensional shape
recognition: Further examination of two-dimensional
shape recognition. Perception , 22, 1343-1364.
Shepard, R. N., & Chipman, S. (1970). Second-order
isomorphism of internal representation: Shapes of states.
Cognitive Psychology , 1, 1-17.
Siegler, R. S., & Ramani, G. B. (2008). Playing linear
numerical board games promotes low-income children's
numerical development. Developmental Science , 11 (5),
655-661.
Spelke, E., Lee, S. A., & Izard, V. (2010). Beyond core
knowledge: Natural geometry. Cognitive Science , 34
(5), 863-884.

2388

