UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Psychopaths’ Morality. Ethicocentrism, Free Will, and the Fear of Decriminalization

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0n1288zk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Magnani, Lorenzo
Bardone, Emanuele
Bertolotti, Tommaso

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Psychopaths’ Morality
Ethicocentrism, Free Will, and the Fear of Decriminalization
Lorenzo Magnani (lmagnani@unipv.it)
Department of Philosophy, University of Pavia
P.zza Botta, 6 - 27100 Pavia, Italy

Emanuele Bardone (bardone@unipv.it)
Department of Philosophy, University of Pavia
P.zza Botta, 6 - 27100 Pavia, Italy

Tommaso Bertolotti (tommaso.bertolotti@unipv.it)
Department of Philosophy, University of Pavia
P.zza Botta, 6 - 27100 Pavia, Italy
Abstract

disguised, fragmented, and depraved – concerns and convictions, which are envisaged as “moral” in the subjective estimation of criminal psychopaths, are capable of triggering
atrocious violence.
Kent Kiehl, a psychologist who focuses his research on
the clinical neuroscience of major mental illnesses (with special attention to criminal psychopathy, substance abuse, and
psychotic disorders such as schizophrenia), usefully observes
that psychopathy immediately affects morality:

Present-day legal judgments of psychopathological criminals
strongly avoid the exploitation of “moral” considerations. Currently, the attribution of responsibility to criminals often takes
advantage of the cognitive concept of mental incapacity so
that, in these cases, the moral judgment about moral conducts
of “psycho-pathological” criminals is potentially extinguished.
We contend that the theories and methods that are currently
used in western societies to discharge moral and legal responsibility are not clear in their epistemic structure and so partially unreliable. To support this conclusion we take advantage
of our recent cognitive studies concerning the multiplicity of
moral frameworks, the gene/cognitive niche co-evolution, and
the concept of free will.
Keywords: Psychopaths; morality, decriminalization; ethicocentrism; violence.

Psychopathy is a personality disorder characterized by
a profound lack of empathy and guilt or remorse, shallow affect, irresponsibility, and poor behavioral controls.
The psychopaths’ behavioral repertoire has long led
clinicians to suggest that they are “without conscience”
(Hare, 1993).[. . . ] Thus, the psychopath presents clinically as a “walking oxymoron”. On the one hand, the
psychopath is capable of articulating socially constructive, even morally appropriate, responses to real-life situations. It is as if the moment they leave the clinician’s
office, their moral compass goes awry and they fail seriously in most life situations (Kiehl, 2008, p. 119).

Criminal Psychopaths’ Morality and
Ethicocentrism
Human beings live with various kinds of moralities, and possess and adopt different moral frameworks (e.g. religious,
civil, personal, emotional, etc., not to mention their intersections and intertwining) which they engage and disengage both
intentionally and unintentionally, in a strict interplay between
morality and violence. There are also private moralities and
habits – perceived as fully moral by the agents themselves,
which we can call pseudo-moralities if we compare them to
the translucency of the modern moral frameworks (that is,
the way they are described in books about moral philosophy: Kantian, utilitarian, religious, ethics of virtues, feminist
ethics, and so on). These personal moralities can be very easily observed not only as the fruit of the emergence of archaic
moral templates of behavior in mentally healthy human beings – that is, templates of possible moral behavior trapped in
a kind of hidden moral unconscious – but also in the case of
violent psychopaths, who suffer from a personality disorder
involving a profound lack of empathy and remorse, shallow
affect and poor behavioral controls:1 psychiatrists and criminologists usually describe how extremely personal – often
1 The publication of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders third edition, DSM-III, changed the name of this
mental disorder to Antisocial Personality Disorder

We must immediately stress that when Kiehl says that
criminal psychopaths present a “lack of morality”. We prefer
to suggest that they display a lack of our morality: the ethicocentric morality2 of a civil, cultivated observer. It seems that
the criminal psychopaths’ acts result inconsistent with their
verbal reports, like in the following case, still illustrated by
Kiehl:
I was working with a psychopath who had been convicted of killing his long-term girlfriend. During his narrative of the crime he indicated that the trigger that set
him off was that she called him “fat, bald, and broke”.
After her insult registered, he went into the bathroom
where she was drawing a bath and pushed her hard into
the tile wall. She fell dazed into the half-full bathtub. He
2 Analogously to ethnocentrism, ethicocentrism is the tendency
to believe that one’s ethical framework is centrally important, and
the correct meter to measure all other moralities.

1043

then held her under the water until she stopped moving.
He wrapped her up in a blanket, put her in the car, drove
to a deserted bridge, and threw her off. Her body was
recovered under the bridge several days later by some
railroad workers. When asked if what he had done was
wrong, he said that he knew it was a bad idea to throw
her off the bridge. When I probed further, he said that
he realized that it was bad to actually kill her. This inmate was subsequently released from prison and then
convicted of killing his next girlfriend. When I met up
with him in the prison some years later, he indicated that
his second girlfriend had “found new buttons to push”.
He was able to admit that he knew it was wrong to kill
them.
In the case we just reported, it seems that a “morality”
of killing is activated: the victim is sacrificed because she
deserved that punishment in the light of the psychopath’s
rigid morality. Being questioned, a morality of decency is
advanced and verbally reported before the moral imperative
not to take another person’s life (the wrong deed consists in
throwing the body in the river) and finally, the morality of
not-killing is verbally proposed (the wrong deed consists in
the killing itself). In the perspective of disengagement and
reengagement of morality, the first moral fragment (killing to
punish) does not only trigger but also justifies violence, and
plays a dominant role. However, it coexists with other moral
fragments, that are reengaged and that sometimes disengage
the dominant one. Many criminal psychopaths share multiple moralities with mentally “sane” human beings, moralities which play the role of more or less freely chosen “reasons”, and they are involved in processes of disengagement
and reengagement; these various shifts seem anomalous insofar as they display a strange sudden intermittence of changes
or long delays, a lack of stability within the various stages
or an excess of stability, and in some cases the – so to say –
special “individuality” of the adopted structured morality is
majorly at play.
Kiehl contends that many other psychiatric conditions
(also some underlaying criminal behaviors) are related to the
aforementioned impairments in understanding moral behavior: still, some are “unencumbered by moral imperatives”,
as in the case of a schizophrenic who had killed someone
he thought had implanted a monitoring device in his head.
The usual interpretation of this supposed lack of morality is
the following: in the case above, through our twenty-firstcentury academic or forensic ethicocentric screen, the criminal schizophrenic could not be convinced that sacrificing his
victim was a bad thing to do because he was unable to articulate that it was wrong to kill this person. We rather think
that cases like this are better illustrated as characterized by
the stability of a central and unique totally “subjective” moral
framework, not sharable in a collective dimension, but still
lived as “moral” by the human agent (i.e., if the schizophrenic
could not be persuaded into acknowledging that his deeds
were wrong, he probably kept thinking they were right, which

is a moral stance). We are dealing with a kind of personal
morality, as we have noted above, envisaged as a fully acceptable dominant morality in a subjective estimation, concurring with an anomalous absence of those multiple moralities which in my opinion characterize mentally healthy human beings.3
Relatively well-known research4 about criminal psychopaths stresses the fact that they do not discriminate between moral and conventional rules (for example, mere etiquette and various social rules, such as which side of the road
to drive on, or how to move the pieces in a game of chess),
contrarily to non-psychopathic criminal and “normal” individuals. So to say, the criminal psychopaths rate the wrongness and seriousness of the respective violations in a similar way and as authority-independent. Moreover, in a second
experimental result criminal psychopaths tended to treat all
rules as “inviolable” in an effort to convince the experimenter
that they were mentally healthy. The interpretation resorts to
state a deficit of moral motivation together with a deficit of
moral competence, as a direct result of the emotional deficit.
We consider this interpretation of results to be puzzling.I
consider this interpretation of results to be puzzling.5 We do
not agree with it: first of all, almost always conventional rules
as well carry the moral values of a group (for example, etiquette is not simply a morally-neutral rule), and so the experiment is biased by this aprioristic assumption of the experimental psychologist; second, the antisocial violent outcome
is not necessarily due to impaired violence inhibition and to a
general lack of emotional concern for others. In the perspective we have outlined above, the data obtained can also be interpreted in terms of a rigidity in the adoption of a given moral
perspective and in the perseverance in applying the related
violent (criminal) punishment, in lieu of a more open mechanism of moral disengagement and reengagement in other
moralities, possibly less inclined to perform violent punishment. On the contrary, the supposed lack of moral emotion
(Prinz, 2007, p. 45) seems to us intertwined – at first sight
paradoxically – with the production of a lack of moral flexibility: in this sense criminal psychopaths do not have problems with morality because they are practically “amoral” and
3 A rich

research is available on the psychometric aspects of various psychopathological behaviors, intertwined with glibness, superficial charm, low empathy, lack of guilt or remorse, and shallow
emotions. Other studies concern the neural counterparts of psychopathological symptomatology, which are for example localized
in malfunctions of orbital frontal cortex, the anterior insula, the anterior cingulate of the frontal lobe and the amygdala, and adjacent
regions of the anterior temporal lobe. Other neural counterparts are
being studied, especially regarding reduced activity in psychopaths
during language processing in the right anterior temporal gyrus, the
amygdala, and the anterior and posterior cingulate, in the case of
attention, orienting, and affective processes, and the relevant role in
psychopathy of paralimbic system. Details are furnished in (Kiehl,
2008).
4 (Blair, Jones, Clark, & Smith, 1997).
5 (Kelly, Stich, Haley, Eng, & Fessler, 2007) illustrate a growing body of evidence which justifies substantial skepticism about all
the major conclusions that have been drawn from studies using the
moral/conventional distinction.

1044

they lack moral (emotional) commitment, but instead because
they are engaged in a kind of rigid hyper-morality, which is
not open to quick and appropriate revisions. One should wonder whether the emotion, in front of inflicted harm, is lacking
because subjects are engaged in a rigid morality whose punishments are seen as just and deserved, or it is the lack of
emotion that promotes rigidity in the adopted moral perspective. It is not that criminal psychopaths do not master moral
emotions and show reduced activation of areas involved in attention and emotional processing, but it seems instead they
just master their moral emotions that way: in sum, they are
emotionally retarded just in the light of our moral judgment
of “normal” individuals or non-psychopathic criminals!
It is a real pity that psychiatric and psychoanalytic traditions, still obsessed by an excess of positivistic commitment,
mostly refuse any interest to the moral aspects of mental illnesses. In this perspective psychiatrists often correctly complain about the tenacious persistence of a “moralistic” perspective in cases of childhood sexual victimization: there has
been a tendency in psychiatric professionals to vilify6 those
very patients who display abnormal sexual behaviors as a result of various kinds of sexual trauma (Van Slyke, 2006). we
say, to respect the purported objectivity and freedom from
moral bias in scientific evaluation, diagnosis, and therapy on
the part of the psychiatrist is one thing, but the lacking of
consideration of the moral life of criminal psychopaths and
their victims is a totally different thing. After all, morality
is no longer the “other” of scientific rationality, like it has
almost always been considered in the last two centuries (science deals with what is the case, whereas ethics deals with
what ought to be), but a legitimate object of rational analysis.7 Prinz too seems perplexed: “These deviations suggest
that they do not possess moral concepts; or at least that their
moral concepts are fundamentally different from ours” (Prinz,
2007, p. 43).8
Here we may draw an interesting parallel with confabulating. Confabulation results from the inability to discard beliefs
or ideas that are patently false. This is due to the fact that confabulators may lack the mechanisms enabling them to inhibit
information that is irrelevant or out of date. The main effect
is that the process of belief monitoring and revision cannot
take place, and the confabulator is simply trapped within his
bubble. We argue that something similar may happen to criminal psychopaths. That is, they would be trapped in a sort of
moral confabulation resulting from the inability to discard a
6 It could be speculatively suggested that such a perspective is the
remnant of a vestigial “honor” culture, which despises, insulates and
punishes those guiltless troubled individuals just as a family would
punish a girl who lost her virginity because of rape.
7 Searle contends that to say something is true is already to say
you ought to believe it, that is other things being equal, you ought
not to deny it (Searle, 2001). This means that normativity is more
widespread than expected
8 On the moral content of what it is called “personal construct
theory taxonomy” of the acts of killers cf. (Winter, 2006). Winter
quotes the serial killer Alan Brady (Brady, 2001): “Serial killers,
like it or not, can possess just as many admirable facets of character
as anyone else, and sometimes more than average”.

certain morality as unacceptable. In turn, such an inability
would block the normal moral flexibility and so the process
of moral reengagement.
In sum, usually perpetrators of evil do not regard themselves, like Kant had already stressed – cf. (Kant, 1998,
p. 59). as wrongdoers, neither in case of sound people nor
of course, all the more so, in the case of mentally ill ones.
Paradoxically, they often see themselves as victims, for example treated unjustly or aggressively, so that they think –
perversely – they should deserve sympathy, support, and tolerance (if not praise).

Mental Incapacity, Gene/Cognitive Niche
Co-evolution, and the Fear of Decriminalization
Present-day legal judgments of psychopathological criminals
strongly avoid the exploitation of “moral” considerations and
also tend to disregard the possible “moral” aspects of criminal conduct. Currently, the attribution of responsibility to
criminals often takes advantage of the concept of mental incapacity, so that, in these cases, the moral judgment about
moral conducts of “psycho-pathological” criminals is potentially eliminated insofar as they are merely seen as affected by
an overall mental incapacity exclusive object of psychiatric
and legal technicalities. One must note that the attribution
of responsibility changes over time, as (Lacey, 2010, p. 116)
observes. Nowadays, the state’s function in proving not only
conduct but also individual responsibility (i.e., psychological
and internal, capacity-based, requirements of “mens rea”, the
guilty mind presupposed by criminal liability) is crucial for
the legitimation of criminal law, not as a system of brutal,
retaliating force but as a system of actual justice.
In brief, it is evident that, in this perspective, the jury’s
commonsense moral assumptions about madness, which
characterized the evaluative/character based practice of the
past, decline: currently, incapacity defenses which lead to
judgments of non-responsibility focus onto cognitive incapacities (for example “lesions of the will”, found in the factual conditions of mental, inner or neural states of individuals, where knowledge and consciousness are central), as opposed to volitional incapacities, that were considered as forms
of moral insanity. Furthermore, one could notice how both
the hypertrophic diffusion of psycho-pathological insights in
the appraisal of criminal responsibility and the revival of
character-based criminalization are easy ways of escaping a
more burdensome, yet richer, practice of criminal justice: as
we contend, stressing the criminals’ moral character leads to
the unescapable excess of overcriminalization , but similarly,
a psychopathology of criminals yields the perverted fruit of
utter decriminalization (at least from the point of view of social ideologies and everyday people’s mentality), resulting in
the impossibility of any guilt ever being attested.
It could be argued that many dangerous outcomes of the
anomalous engagement and disengagement of moralities are
caused by the “anomalous” engagement of more or less rigid
personal, individual moralities – that only the agent himself

1045

recognizes as such – and by their abnormal consecutive replacement: the reader could ask, how can a morality that is
private still be a morality? She should note that Morality can
be fragmented and private – in the sense that it is not shared
with some specific groups – because it is a vestigial remaining of more ancient moral concerns and axiological frameworks, that can be illustrated in terms of the speculative psychoanalytic concept of collective unconscious. For example,
mobbing and bullying behaviors are surely not explicitly labeled as “moral” in our civil western countries, but still mentally “work” in people and are perceived as good motivations
for supposed-to-be “moral” behaviors, exactly as they worked
fairly well in ancient times, for example when the scapegoat
mechanism was a perfectly approved, efficient, and justified
conduct. Of course these behaviors were not necessarily labeled “moral” in the respective human groups, by the same
meaning we now sophisticatedly and intellectually attribute
to it, but they played a decisive role in that cooperative sense
which works in the case of coalition enforcement.
In order to shed light on this issue involving an evolutionary dimension of human nature, we take advantage of a different perspective on the hotly debated relationship between
culture and nature. That is, we claim that the various archaic
moral and non moral aspects of the collective unconscious are
more likely to emerge in connection with the impoverishment
of the cognitive niches (Tooby & DeVore, 1987) one lives in.
That is, some moral templates relying on archaic modes of
moral behavior are somehow re-activated or re-enacted as the
result of a “moral sensory deprivation” caused by the pauperization of the cognitive niche. The evolutionary importance
of the cognitive niche is given by the fact that it is responsible
for providing and delivering additional resources for behavior
control. Such additional resources are part of an ecological
inheritance system, which co-evolves along with the genetic
inheritance one (Odling-Smee, Laland, & Feldman, 2003) so
that some plastic behaviors emerge augmenting the cognitive
and moral repertoire furnished by evolution.
In order to clarify this point from an evolutionary perspective, and thus dealing briefly with the hotly debated issue
related to the relationship between culture and nature, we
have to indicate here the main points related to gene/cognitive
niche co-evolution: general inheritance (natural selection
among organisms influences which individuals will survive
to pass their genes onto the next generation) is accompanied
by another inheritance system which plays a fundamental role
in biological evolution, where niche construction counts. It is
the general inheritance system (also called ecological inheritance by Odling-Smee, Laland and Feldman) (Odling-Smee
et al., 2003). In this co-evolutionary process selection selects – so to say – for purposive organisms, that is, nicheconstructing organisms.
Given the fact there is
1. a co-evolution between genes and cognitive niches during
human evolution and, especially,

2. because of their specific coupling which occurs during the
life of any individual, like for example it is illustrated by
the so-called neural Darwinism (Edelman, 1987)
the methods that are currently used in western societies to
discharge moral and legal responsibility seem to us unclear in
their epistemic structure and so partially unreliable.
Indeed, it is a fact that the brain is configured in a certain way, and there is evidence according to which genetic
or anatomic disfunction (such as epilepsy, delirium, dementia, thyroid dysfunction, cerebrovascular disease, encephalitis, diabetes, etc.) is present and promotes aggressiveness:
the problem is that all this is often vaguely linked to a related lack or impairment of free will capacities, and nothing
more, as we will better explain in the last section of this paper.
Indeed, philosophers of free will frequently refer to mental
and brain disorders as conditions that compromise free will
and reduce moral responsibility, and so does forensic psychiatry. For example, what if some neural clusters were shaped
during the personal history of an individual immersed in the
aggressive morality of a honor culture, so that he presents
anomalous distribution of excitations in areas related to aggressiveness (even detectable thanks to fMRI methods) with
respect to “normal” agents? Does this authorize us to state
that the person who embodies those neural networks is not
responsible for his violent illegal outbursts? Is the presence
of certain genes, susceptible to the exposure to unlucky cognitive niches (for instance an abusive family), a reason which
authorizes the philosopher or the forensic psychiatrist to subsequently hypothesize a lack or an impairment of free will in
a criminal offender? Furthermore, on another account, does
the fact that his brain did not have the chance to be exposed to
the cognitive niche of civil morality embedded in modern law
and civil morality itself make the criminal offender morally
and/or legally condoned?

Can We Freely Decide to Kill our Free Will?
It is important to note that various characteristics (not free
from ambiguities) of free will can be proposed: 1) one must
be able to act otherwise, i.e. one must have alternative possibilities; 2) one must be able to act or choose for a reason;
3) one has to be the originator (the causal source) of the action. Obviously, free will is always related to moral responsibility. Various constraints, standard and psychiatric, are believed to create problems to free will: for example, diminished capacity, intoxication, unconscious drives, infancy, entrapment, duress or coercion, kleptomaniac impulses, obsessional neuroses, desires that are experienced as alien, posthypnotic commands, threats, instances of force majeure, various psychopathological states, physical and genetic impairments. The “excuses” typically find application in cases involving the ignorant, the misled, the coerced, the mentally
insane, the intoxicated, the biologically abnormal. In these
cases the actus reus tends to be conceded but mens rea is denied.
(Meynen, 2010) concludes that philosophers of free will

1046

have paid scarce attention “to identifying the precise reasons
why (certain) mental disorders would diminish free will; a
detailed analysis of what it is that mental disorders do that
has such an effect on free will is lacking”: this happens in the
case of defining criminal responsibility in real subjects (for
example related to psychosis), which leads to the choice of
non-moral medical treatment instead of the fully moral/legal
punishment which would normally follow a misbehavior. For
example it is not clear when free will is partially compromised, and then when and to what extent responsibility can
be actually discarded. The empirical fact that legal or psychiatric forensic technicalities can de facto solve ambiguities
does not mean they are always based on serious scientific reasons. The typical “psycho” who killed his girlfriend acted for
reasons as strong as moral imperatives, so with this respect
his free will is preserved: his mental disorder does not affect
this sense of free will. Similarly, can the capacity to choose
alternative possibilities be jeopardized by mental disorder? It
is not clear. Finally, what about the source/cause of criminal
violent action, which depicts the third sense of free will we
have indicated above? Is it the guilt, the “proper person”, his
mental disorder, or his “biology”?
Professional psychologists and the so-called behavioral
scientists argue for a broader and richer range of ways in
which psychology might be applied to criminal justice and,
thereby, to law (Carson, Milne, Pakes, Shalev, & Shawyer,
2007). They always contend that further “scientific” light can
be shed not only on the problem of criminal responsibility, but
also on eyewitness identification, investigative interviewing,
credibility assessments and lie detection, fact finding, evidence, decision making and its discontents. They for instance
stress that legal judgements, in particular, are influenced by
short-cut, heuristical reasoning processes which have to be
studied and clarified. We would like to note that psychology
and other behavioral sciences do not have a privileged disciplinary status, for instance over philosophy or logic, that
criminal justice “must” take advantage of. It is well known
that too many psychologists just aim at promoting and diffusing their discipline as necessary everywhere, all the more
in legal settings, even if the contribution often result scarce or
counterproductive. Just to make an example, it is very sad that
the study of abduction, so important in criminal investigation
and in legal trials, is paradoxically disregarded by the psychologists themselves, even if studied in depth for example by
philosophers, logicians, and AI scientists (Magnani, 2009).
Even some psychologists acknowledge that “[u]nfortunately
whilst work on abduction and defeasible arguments is exciting the interest of computational scientists interested in artificial intelligence it has provoked less interest amongst psychologists” (Carson, 2007).
A further interesting speculation may be advanced: what
about a person who, in the presence of dysfunctional cognitive niches (poverty, abuse, and other various kinds of direct
or structural violence), has in the beginning freely chosen and
later on freely educated himself (and his brain’s neural net-

works) to perform violent physical aggressiveness, fearlessly
and repeatedly. Indeed, after years, he might have developed
a criminal psychopathic personality and he can be described
as such by a psychiatrist. In such cases the everyday language
clearly expresses the same conclusion of the psychiatrist: “he
is dominated by his impulses”, so it is not him that performed
the crime but his mental illness. Then, just go to the medical
treatment, son!
A question arises: who (or what) transformed him into a
person who lacks free will or has it impaired? “He himself”,
as the cognitive agent, his environment, his brain, his genes?
We think we need more knowledge about puzzling situations
like this.
From this perspective we can see that people can be considered as responsible for dismissing the ownership of their own
destiny. But, what about the responsibility for violent actions
committed after that initial moral “choice”, in the presence
of the consequent impaired intentionality and free will? A
similar problem is illustrated by Meynen himself:
For instance, with respect to the person being the “genuine source of the action”, I mentioned that the mental
disorder-rather than the “person proper” – could be considered the cause of a crime. Yet, this raises the question,
what is the person proper and how can one distinguish
the person proper from a mental disorder? This line of
questioning will, sooner or later, bring up the question,
what exactly is a mental disorder? – a central topic in
the philosophy of psychiatry. And if we focus on the
“cause” of an event, then we must decide how to assess,
among the manifold phenomena that contribute to the
occurrence of a particular event (e.g., actions), which
of these contributory phenomena count as an authentic
“cause”. For instance, did an addict’s original decision
to use heroin cause the heroin addiction and thus also
cause the actions that subsequently resulted from the
heroin addiction? In brief, a central issue will be, how
do the person proper and the disorder relate and how can
they be distinguished when it comes to the initiation of
actions? (Meynen, 2010)
Could it help our analysis to consider a person – for instance responsible for violent actions – who is supposed to be
affected by a psychopathological lack or impairment of free
will, yet who may have also freely brought himself to that
condition? Maybe he chose a specific reaction in his coupling with cognitive niches, a reaction that later on conducted
“him” to weaken or annihilate his own free will. From this
perspective we can see that people can be considered as responsible for dismissing the ownership of their own destiny.
But, what about the responsibility for violent actions committed after that initial moral “choice”, in the presence of the
consequent impaired intentionality and free will?
Is this attitude still reminiscent of the old-fashioned judgment based on moral character, that (it seems) we had abandoned in the nineteenth century, or is it an actual problem

1047

we need to address when evaluating crimes? In which cases
should we condone a criminal and the violence he perpetrated? In case we condone his crime, but the criminal had
performed the violent action in a state of free will, are we not
in the presence of a kind of perverse disguised forgiveness, a
dressed up excuse, which does further wrong to all the others criminals who could not make use of the same awkward
forgiveness?
Even if we do not have to fear the psychiatric legal decriminalization, which is anyway justified by the need for
“civilizing” the criminal law, it is worth stressing that psychiatric, psychological, and neurological knowledge is often
rudimentary, obviously continually changing during the standard research process of the involved academics, and often
applied in settings where incompetence, excessive economic
drives, avidity, and other variables endowed with possible violent outcomes are at play. What is really unfortunate, in our
opinion, is that media and therefore public opinion became
absolutely comfortable with insanity pleas, in spite of being
conspicuously ignorant as far as the knowledge of forensic
psychiatry is concerned. Still, this taught them the capacity
to roughly classify almost any violent or bloody actions as the
fruit of criminal psychopathologic individuals: this way, they
are inclined to decriminalize such actions far too easily.
In sum, for common people the violent subject is no longer
responsible because he was the real victim of a kind of mental infection due to a “parasitic” moral niche (i.e. poverty,
a revengeful honor culture. . . ), or because the real killer was
“his biology” (an anomalous brain, for example). On one side
the responsible is the objective moral niche, on the other an
unlucky biology: responsibility for violent behavior is externalized and everyone is happy to think that atrocious violence
does not normally come from the core of an individual’s free
will. As further illustrated in a recent book by (Magnani,
2011), such “deliverance” from violence reflects a tendency
to sterilize and disregard it, considering violence as something exogenous to our decisions, instead of embedded in the
fabric of our very nature.

Conclusion
We have contended that the approach currently used in western societies to discharge moral and legal responsibility is
not clear in its cognitive and epistemic structure, and should
therefore be questioned. To support this conclusion we have
taken advantage of our recent cognitive studies concerning
the multiplicity and variability of moral frameworks and the
gene/cognitive niche co-evolution, which can help shedding
new light on the concept of free will. Free will has in fact
often been exploited to discharge legal responsibility in a debatable way. This lead us to propose a new analysis of the
interplay between overcriminalization and decriminalization.

References
Blair, R. J. R., Jones, L., Clark, F., & Smith, M. (1997). A
lack of responsiveness to distress cues. The psychopathic
individual. Psychophysiology, 34, 192–198.

Brady, I. (2001). The Gates of Janus: Serial Killing and its
Analysis. Los Angeles, CA: Feral House.
Carson, D. (2007). A psychology and law of fact finding?
In D. Carson, R. Milne, F. Pakes, K. Shalev, & A. Shawyer
(Eds.), Applying Psychology to Criminal Justice (pp. 115–
130). Chichester: Wiley & Sons.
Carson, D., Milne, R., Pakes, F., Shalev, K., & Shawyer, A.
(Eds.). (2007). Applying Psychology to Criminal Justice.
Chichester: Wiley & Sons.
Edelman, G. M. (1987). Neural Darwinism. New York: Basic
Books (HarperCollins).
Hare, R. D. (1993). Without Conscience: the Disturbing
World of the Psychopaths among Us. New York: Pocket
Books.
Kant, I. (1998). Religion within the Boundaries of Mere
Reason [1793]. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
(Translated and edited by A. Wood and G. di Giovanni. Introduction by R. M. Adams.)
Kelly, D., Stich, S., Haley, K. J., Eng, S. J., & Fessler,
D. M. T. (2007). Harm, affect, and the moral/conventional
distinction. Mind & Language, 22(2), 17–131.
Kiehl, K. A. (2008). Without morals: the cognitive neuroscience of criminal psychopaths. In W. Sinnott-Armstrong
(Ed.), Moral psychology (pp. 119–149). Cambridge, MA:
The MIT Press. (Vol. 3.)
Lacey, N. (2010). Psychologising Jekyll, demonising Hyde:
the strange case of criminal responsibility. Criminal Law
and Philosophy, 4, 109–133.
Magnani, L. (2009). Abductive Cognition. The Eco-Cognitive
Dimensions of Hypothetical Reasoning. Heidelberg/Berlin:
Springer.
Magnani, L. (2011). Understanding Violence. Morality, Religion, and Violence Intertwined: A Philosophical Stance.
Heidelberg/Berlin: Springer. (Forthcoming.)
Meynen, G. (2010). Free will and mental disorder: Exploring
the relationship. Theoretical Medicine and Bioethics. (DOI
10.1007/s11017-010-9158-5)
Odling-Smee, F. J., Laland, K. N., & Feldman, M. W. (2003).
Niche Construction. The Neglected Process in Evolution.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Prinz, J. J. (2007). The Emotional Construction of Morals.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Searle, J. (2001). Rationality in Action. Cambridge, MA:
The MIT Press.
Tooby, J., & DeVore, I. (1987). The reconstruction of hominid behavioral evolution through strategic modeling. In
W. G. Kinzey (Ed.), Primate Models of Hominid Behavior
(pp. 183–237). Albany: Suny Press.
Van Slyke, V. (2006). The vilification of victimized children in historical perspective. In T. Mason (Ed.), Forensic
Psychiatry: Influences of Evil (pp. 231–248). Totowa, NJ:
Humana Press.
Winter, D. A. (2006). Destruction as a constructive choice.
In T. Mason (Ed.), Forensic Psychiatry: Influences of Evil
(pp. 153–157). Totowa, NJ: Humana Press.

1048

