UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Role of Attention in the Formation of Illusory Correlations Among Preschoolers

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7f57j1gt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Bower, Corinne
Lawson, Chris

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Role of Attention in the Formation of Illusory Correlations Among
Preschoolers
Corinne A. Bower (corinne.bower@sju.edu)
Chris A. Lawson (clawson@sju.edu)
Saint Joseph's University
Department of Psychology, 5600 City Avenue
Philadelphia, PA 19131 USA
Abstract
A large body of research shows that adults will form
illusory correlations in the course of category learning.
Surprisingly little research has examined illusory
correlations among children. Two experiments examined
the formation of the illusory correlation in 3- and 5-yearolds. Experiment 1 provides evidence that these young
children will not form illusory correlations in a novel
categorization task. Results from experiment 2 indicate
that eliciting an attentional shift caused younger children
to form an illusory correlation. These results are the first
to show that the tendency to form illusory correlations
occurs early in development. Furthermore, these results
have important implications regarding the mechanisms
responsible for illusory correlations.
Keywords: cognitive development; illusory correlation;
statistical learning

Introduction
People tend to form categories that adhere to
regularities in the environment (Anderson, 1991; Pothos
& Bailey, 2009). However, there are occasions in which
people form categories that violate regularities in the
environment. For instance, the so-called illusory
correlation (IC) occurs when infrequent properties are
associated with uncommon categories, despite the
absence of such a relationship (Chapman, 1967). The
present study explores the developmental origins of this
apparent categorization bias.
Hamilton and Gifford (1976) provided a classic
demonstration of the illusory correlation. Participants
read descriptions about individuals from either a
common (e.g., a novel category with 26 members) or
rare category (e.g., a novel category with 13 members).
One of two properties was attributed to each individual,
such that one property was more frequent than the
other, yet both property types were distributed among
individuals in both categories at the same proportion
(e.g., 18:8 and 9:4). After learning about all 39
individuals participants were asked to attribute either
the infrequent or frequent property to each individual.
Participants attributed the infrequent behaviors to the
rare group at higher rates (48%) than the common
group (22%). Thus, participants formed an illusory
correlation – they falsely perceived a relationship

between the rare property and the rare category even
though no such relationship was presented in the
evidence.
Illusory correlations are interesting because they
violate normative models of categorization (Fiedler,
2000). That is, rather than utilizing the correlational
structure of the data, people appear to rely on other, less
optimal strategies in the course of categorization.
Indeed, the phenomenon is related to other forms of
base-rate neglect that have been demonstrated in the
categorization literature (Kruschke, 1996; Medin &
Edelson, 1988).
Several mechanisms have been proposed to describe
why people form illusory correlations. One view is that
illusory correlations are the product of memory
processes such as having a stronger memory trace for
the common elements in the task (Rothbart, 1981; see
also Hintzman, 1986), or heightened memory for the
distinct features of the evidence such as rare properties
and categories (Hamilton & Gifford, 1976; Mullen &
Johnson, 1990). It has also been argued that an illusory
correlation is the result of attentional learning
mechanisms (Sherman, Kruschke, Sherman, Percy,
Petrocelli, & Conrey, 2009). For example, Kruschke
(1996; 2003) argued that people fail to attend to base
rates in the course of multiple-item categorization due
to an attentional shift in the learning phase. From this
perspective, a learner first focuses on learning about the
common group and common property. After building a
representation of the common category, a shift in
attention to the rare category elicits the expectation that
a different property will be associated with this
different category.
One way to better understand the mechanisms
underlying this phenomenon is to explore the origins of
illusory correlations. Surprisingly few studies have
examined illusory correlations in children and all of
these studies have involved children older than 5 years
of age. Primi and Agnoli (2002) tested 6- to 22-yearolds using social and nonsocial stimuli. In their study,
participants learned about individuals from a common
category (N = 14) and individuals from a rare category
(N = 7) each of which was paired with infrequent and
frequent properties at the same ratio (e.g., 5:2). After
the learning phase 6-year-olds’ attributions of the

3028

infrequent properties were higher to the rare category
(51%) than were attribution of infrequent properties to
the common category (36%). Similarly, Johnston and
Jacobs (2003) provided evidence that by 7 years of age
children will form illusory correlations. No studies have
examined the formation in children younger than 6
years of age.
The prevailing view is that children younger than 6
years of age will not form illusory correlations because
they lack the capacity necessary to organize the
available evidence (Johnston & Jacobs, 2003; Primi &
Agnoli, 2002). That is, younger children may not be
able to encode the exemplars in the evidence as
representing different categories, or they may not be
able to recognize that the properties are more or less
frequent. From this perspective, the complex set of data
represented in most illusory correlation tasks should
lead to random responding in young children. The
attention-shift account has not been explored in
developmental studies, which is surprising given the
abundance of literature showing that young children
rely on attentional learning mechanisms to learn about
novel stimuli in their environment (Hanania & Smith,
2009). If attentional learning mechanisms are
responsible for the formation of illusory correlations,
young children should form illusory correlations,
provided cues in the available evidence draw their
attention to the different categories and properties. The
present experiments tested this hypothesis.
This paper describes two experiments with 3- and 5year-olds in which we explored the possibility that
certain cues in the evidence will elicit the formation of
illusory correlations in young children. We examined
these age groups based on documented age differences
in executive function between 3 and 5 years (Hanania &
Smith, 2009; Zelazo, 2006). For instance, when
subjected to a rule switch in a sorting game (e.g.,
sorting based on shape rather than color), 5-year-olds,
but not 3-year-olds, are able to change their sorting
behavior based on the new rule (Zelazo, 2006). Thus, 5year-olds are able to flexibly switch their attention from
one task to another while younger children do not
exhibit the same flexibility. We expect that this inability
of younger children to perseverate attention will dispose
them to be unable to form illusory correlations.
The present experiments involved a modified version
of the standard illusory correlation paradigm in which
children learned about the properties of categories and
then were asked to make property attributions based on
the distributions of properties in the evidence. However,
each of the experiments involved additional cues that
were included to support the formation of illusory
correlations. In Experiment 1 we included a
differentiation phase prior to training in which children
were provided cues to highlight that the task involved
learning about two different kinds of animals. We

expected that this subtle cue would support category
differentiation and thus might be sufficient to cause
children to form illusory correlations. However, the
results from Experiment 1 indicated this was not the
case. Thus, Experiment 2 introduced more overt cues
intended to elicit the formation of illusory correlations.
In this case we presented the categories in such a way to
support an attention-shift from one category to the other
during training: In the training all of the individuals
from the common category were presented first,
followed by the presentation of the individuals from the
rare category. We expected that this method of
presentation would cause an attention-shift and
therefore lead to the formation of illusory correlations.
For both of the experiments we anticipated that we
might observe age differences such that older children,
but not younger children, would be more likely to form
illusory correlations.

Experiment 1
Participants learned about the properties of two
different categories (e.g., dogs and bugs). The items
were designed such that one category and one property
were common and that the other category and property
were rare. Moreover, both properties were distributed
the same across both categories. The experiment
included a differentiation phase that highlighted the two
categories prior to training. We anticipated that this
differentiation phase might help children recognize that
the evidence included two categories and that doing so
might support the formation of an illusory correlation.
An alternative hypothesis is that highlighting the
different categories may make it easier for children to
identify the specific features associated with each of the
categories. That is, telling children about the categories
might cause them to pay less attention to category
information in the training phase and instead focus on
learning about the information for which they have no
prior information (e.g., properties). It is possible that
greater attention to the properties will support learning
about the distributional features of the properties. Thus,
in the attribution phase children may attribute the
frequent and infrequent properties at the same rate
across the two category types. Of course, it is also
possible that children will be unable to encode all of
this information and will simply respond at chance
levels.

Method
Participants. Seventeen 3-year-olds (10 males and 7
females) and eighteen 5-year-olds (9 males and 9
females) participated in this study and were recruited
from local preschools. Participants were from diverse
economic and racial backgrounds and were

3029

representative of the city, and surrounding areas, of
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Design and Materials. The stimuli included two
categories (dogs and bugs) represented by toy figurines
(each approximately 1 inch in height or length).
Participants were shown 8 figurines of one animal
(common category) and 4 figurines of a different
animal (rare category). The two properties were two
different food (fruit) items that were represented by
small toys located to the left or right of the child.
Properties were manipulated within each category so
that one property was more frequent than the other. A
property ratio of 3:1 was equally distributed across both
the common and rare categories. For example, for the
common animal, 6 out of the 8 figurines had one
property (e.g., ate the fruit on the left side of the child)
and 2 out of the 8 figures had the other property (e.g.,
ate the fruit on the right side of the child), while 3 out
of 4 figurines from the rare group also had the frequent
property, and 1 out of 4 rare figurines had the
infrequent property. The animals and properties were
counterbalanced so that an approximately equal number
of participants learned about each animal as rare or
common and each property type as infrequent or
frequent. Counterbalancing the location of the
properties allowed us to track the possibility that
children had a prior expectation about the fruit
preference of dogs or bugs. The patterns of responses
indicated children had no such preference.
There were three parts to the study: a differentiation
phase, training phase, and attribution phase. The
differentiation phase took place before the training
phase and was designed to support differentiation
between the two categories. The figurines of one
category were spread out in front of the participant
while the experimenter repeatedly (3 times) labeled the
items (e.g., “Look, these are all dogs. Each of these
animals is a dog. See all of these dogs?”). All of the
items of the category were then removed and then the
process was repeated for all of the items from the other
category, after the experimenter described they were
going to show a “different set of animals”.
In the training phase each of the 12 items was
presented individually. The experimenter randomly
presented one of the figurines to the participant and
said, “This is a <label>. Watch this <label> eat. Yum.
Yum. Yum.” While saying “yum yum yum,” the
experimenter showed the figurine eating the fruit. This
figurine was then placed in a pile and the experimenter
presented the next figurine. The experimenter repeated
this process for the remaining 11 figures. The
experimenter then collected all the figurines.
The property attribution task was conducted
immediately after the training session and involved the
12 figurines from the training set. The experimenter

randomly selected a figurine and showed it to the
participant. The experimenter asked the participant to
predict whether the animal eats the fruit from the left or
right by saying “Here is a <label>. Show me where this
<label> goes yum yum yum.” The experimenter
repeated this process for all 12 figurines.
Procedure. Children were individually interviewed in a
quiet location at their school. The experiment was
presented as a “game” to elicit more enthusiasm over
the course of the experiment. Also, children received a
sticker after the completion of the experiment. The
procedure lasted approximately 10 minutes.

Results
Responses were averaged to yield mean attributions of
frequent and infrequent properties for common and rare
categories. Because the main analysis revealed no age
differences, Figure 1 shows attributions collapsed
across both age groups. The main analyses involved an
Age (5-year-olds, 3-year-olds) x Category (common,
rare) x Property (frequent, infrequent) ANOVA with
the last two factors within-subjects. Note that the
presence of an illusory correlation should lead to an
interaction between property and category. However,
the analysis yielded only a significant Property effect,
F(1, 33) = 14.71, p = .001; η2 = .31, due to a higher rate
of attributions for the common category and the rare
category for frequent properties (M = 0.61, SD = 0.25;
M = 0.65, SD = 0.29, respectively) than infrequent
properties (M = 0.39, SD = 0.25, M = 0.35, SD = 0.29,
respectively). No significant Age differences were
found, and the Property x Category interaction failed to
reach significance, F(1, 33) = 0.33, p = .571.

Figure 1: Mean property attributions of frequent and
infrequent properties for common and rare categories.
Error bars indicate one standard error from the mean.

Discussion
Results from Experiment 1 indicate that 3- and 5-yearolds did not form an illusory correlation under these
conditions. Instead, both groups of children generalized
the frequent property more consistently than the

3030

infrequent properties to both categories. One important
conclusion from these results is that the absence of an
illusory correlation in preschoolers is not due to an
inability to encode the relevant information in the task.
In fact, young children preformed quite well in the task,
in the sense that their responses indicate that they
accurately learned the correlational structure of the
data. Thus, what remains unclear is why they did not
form an illusory correlation from this evidence. One
possibility is that the available cues in the evidence
were not sufficient to draw children’s attention to the
different categories in the evidence. This possibility
suggests that stronger cues designed to elicit attention
to the two-category structure of the evidence should
cause children to form illusory correlations. Experiment
2 was designed to test this prediction.

Experiment 2
A second experiment was conducted in which we
provided overt cues to elicit an attention-shift during
the training phase. All facets of the experiment were the
same as in Experiment 1, with one exception. In this
case participants first learned about the properties of all
of the individuals from the common category and then
learned about the properties of all of the individuals
from rare category. We expected that presenting
information in this way would cause an attention-shift
from the common category to the rare category and that
this shift in attention would lead to the formation of an
illusory correlation. Critically, we expect that children
will associate the frequent property to the common
property, and as a consequence of the attention shift,
they will expect the other (infrequent) property is
associated with the rare category. If, on the other hand,
these young children are simply unable to form illusory
correlations – perhaps because they are disposed to
attend to the correlational structure of the evidence –
then the results should replicate those found in
Experiment 1.

the rare group were presented. In all other ways the
design of Experiment 2 was identical to the design in
Experiment 1.

Results
Responses were calculated using the same method as
Experiment 1. An Age (5-year-olds, 3-year-olds) x
Category (common, rare) x Property (frequent,
infrequent) mixed ANOVA revealed an effect of
Property, F(1, 20) = 4.18, p = .05, η2 = .17, due to
higher attributions of the frequent properties (M = .57,
SD = .12) than infrequent properties (M = .43, SD =
.12). Critically, there was a Category x Property
interaction, F(1, 20) = 12.25, p = .002, η2 = .38, but no
three-way interaction. Simple effects analyses revealed
there was a higher rate of attributions of infrequent
properties to the rare category (M = .55, SD = .25) than
to the common category (M = .31, SD = .18), and a
higher rate of attributions of frequent properties to the
common category (M = .69, SD = .18), than the rare
category (M = .45, SD = .25. Because there were no
interactions with age, Figure 2 presents mean property
attributions for all children combined.

Figure 2: Mean property attribution of frequent and
infrequent properties for common and rare categories.
Error bars indicate one standard error from the mean.

Method
Participants. Thirteen 3-year-olds (8 males and 5
females) and nine 5-year-olds (4 males and 5 females)
that did not participate in Experiment 1 participated in
Experiment 2 and were recruited from local preschools.
Recruitment procedures were the same as in
Experiment 1.
Design, materials, and procedure. The design was
similar to the design used in Experiment 1; there was a
differentiation phase, a training phase, and a projection
phase. However, there was a blocked training such that
all of the figurines of the common category were
presented together first and then all the figurines from

Discussion
These results indicate that presenting training items in a
way that elicits an attention-shift between the two
categories presented in the evidence caused young
children to form an illusory correlation. The training
effect had consistent effects for both age groups: 3- and
5-year-olds formed illusory correlations under these
conditions. Thus, these are the first data to demonstrate
the formation of illusory correlations in children 5 years
of age and younger. These results indicate that children
are not bound to categorize novel stimuli on the basis of
the available correlational data – as in Experiment 1 –

3031

but rather may be compelled to categorize based on
perceived relationships between properties and
categories.

General Discussion
Two experiments examined the formation of illusory
correlations in 3- and 5-year-olds. Experiment 1
provided evidence that these young children did not
form illusory correlations, but rather generalized
properties on the basis of the correlational data
available in the evidence. However, the provision of
overt cues that elicited an attention-shift from one
category to the other category did lead to the formation
of illusory correlations for both groups of preschoolers
(Experiment 2). Overall, these are the first data to, 1)
provide evidence that children younger than 6 years of
age form illusory correlations, and 2) explore the
conditions that are responsible for the formation of
illusory correlations early in development.
Our interpretation of the findings is that they
underscore the role of attentional learning in the process
of categorization. Attentional learning has been
explored in other research on cognitive development.
For example, attention to cues in the environment is
integral to early word learning (e.g., Smith, 1995) and
rule-learning (e.g., Zelazo, 2006). Some research has
examined the role of attention in categorization (Fisher,
2007 reviews this work), yet such research has focused
on the role of attention in deriving accurate, or
normative categorization decisions. One novel
contribution of the present work is the demonstration
that attentional learning mechanisms can lead to
systematic and patterned biases in categorization in
young children.
It is also possible that memory processes played a
role in children’s responses. The blocked presentation
of the categories in Experiment 2 may have supported a
stronger memory trace for the common elements of the
evidence, or made the distinctive (i.e., rare) properties
more salient. In general, we concede that other
processes likely contribute to the formation and
maintenance of illusory correlations. However, the
results from Experiment 2 suggest cues that elicit a shift
in attention from one category to another are necessary
to elicit illusory correlations. It remains an important
question for future research just which cognitive
processes contribute to the formation of illusory
correlations in children.
In regards to future questions, memory processes may
be implicated in the formation of illusory correlations
only under certain conditions. For example, people may
be inclined to form illusory correlations when the
sample of evidence is so large they are unable to recall
the specific category-property associations. Thus, it is
possible the absence of illusory correlations in

Experiment 1 was due, in part, to the small sample of
evidence: Children may have been able to recall which
properties were more frequent/infrequent and which
categories were more common/rare. Given a larger
training set (e.g., 24 exemplars), participants may be
more susceptible to form illusory correlations because
they are unable to recall specific features of the
evidence. We are currently conducting a set of studies
to test this possibility.
Another important question concerns the ecological
validity of the illusory correlation. For example, in the
normal course of the day an individual does not have
access to all category members and the properties
associated with these members. How strong (or real) is
the disposition to form illusory correlations: Is evidence
about only one member from a rare group performing
an infrequent property sufficient to form an illusory
correlation? Risen, Gilovich, and Dunning (2007)
investigated this effect, the one-shot illusory
correlation, in adults and found evidence to support this
type of illusory correlation. We are currently examining
the extent to which young children are inclined to form
one-shot illusory correlations: Are children disposed to
associate rare events when given minimal evidence?
A second question concerns racial categories in
relation to stereotyping. Previous studies have
investigated this effect with social stimuli (e.g., people
performing good or bad behaviors). Findings suggest
that illusory correlations do form with this type of
stimuli (e.g., Hamilton & Gifford, 1976). While our
study is the first to show that children as young as 5
years of age will form illusory correlations, we found
this pattern for animal categories. Though we would
expect to find the same pattern for social categories –
such as race and gender – it is possible the present
results are limited to the particular domain used in the
present study. This possibility has broad implications
concerning whether domain-general or domain-specific
mechanisms are responsible for the formation of
illusory correlations.
Given the erroneous and invasive nature of the
illusory correlation, it is important to understand ways
of eliminating such a potentially harmful type of
reasoning. For example, a study conducted by Case,
Fantino, and Goodie (1999) looked at the effects of
base rate training or probability learning in the absence
of cues in adults. Results indicate that the training
significantly reduced base rate neglect. If this type of
training can reduce base rate neglect in a particular task,
it would be interesting to see what other types of
training can reduce base rate neglect and in what other
domains this training would be successful. More
importantly, would this type of training be successful in
children?
Even though questions remain concerning the
mechanisms responsible for the illusory correlation

3032

formation, the results from these two experiments
support the conclusion that this phenomenon takes
place earlier in development than has been previously
indicated. Thus, one important conclusion from this
study is that the type of irrational decision-making
found in young children serves as a starting point for
the irrational decision-making found in adults.

Acknowledgements
These studies would not be possible without the
cooperation of the teachers, parents, and children of the
Kinder academy preschools of Philadelphia. Thanks
also to Samantha Evans for assistance in data
collection.

References
Anderson, J. R. (1991). The adaptive nature of human
categorization. Psychological Review, 98, 409-429.
doi: 10.037/0033-295X.98.3.409
Case, D. A., Fantino, E., & Goodie, A. S. (1999). Baserate training without case cues reduces base-rate
neglect. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 6, 319-327.
Chapman, L. J. (1967). Illusory correlation in
observational report. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 6, 151-155. doi: 10.1016/S00225371(67)80066-5
Fiedler, K. (2000). Illusory correlations: A simple
associative algorithm provides a convergent account
of seemingly divergent paradigms. Review of General
Psychology, 4, 25-58. doi:10.1037/1089-2680.4.1.25
Fisher, A. V. (2007). Are developmental theories of
learning paying attention to attention? Cognition,
Brain, and Behavior, 11, 635-646.
Hamilton, D. L. & Gifford, R. K. (1976). Illusory
correlation in interpersonal perception: A cognitive
basis of stereotypic judgments. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 12, 392-407. doi:
10.1016/S0022-1031(76)80006-6
Hanania, R., & Smith, L.B. (2009). Selective attention
and attention switching: towards a unified
developmental approach. Developmental Science, 13,
1-14. doi:10.111/j.1467-7687.2009.00921.x
Hintzman, D. L. (1986). ‘Schema abstraction’ in a
multiple-trace memory model. Psychological Review,
10, 252-264. doi: 10.1037/0033-295X.93.4.411
Johnston, K. E. & Jacobs, J. E. (2003). Children’s
illusory correlations: The role of attentional bias in
group impression formation. Journal of Cognition
and
Development,
4,
129-160.
doi:
10.1207/S15327647JCD0402_01
Kruschke, J. K. (1996). Base rates in category learning.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 22, 3-26. doi: 10.1037/02787393.22.1.3

Kruschke, J. K. (2003). Attention in learning. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 12, 171-175.
doi: 10.1111/1467-8721.01254
Medin, D. L. & Edelson, S. M. (1988). Problem
structure and the use of base-rate information from
experience. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General,
117,
68-85.
doi:
10.1037/00963445.117.1.68
Mullen, B., & Johnson, C. (1990). Distinctivenessbased illusory correlations and stereotyping: A metaanalytic integration. British Journal of Social
Psychology, 29, 11-28.
Pothos, E. M. & Bailey, T. M. (2009). Predicting
category intuitiveness with the rational model, the
simplicity model, and the generalized context model.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 35, 1062-1080. doi:
10.1037/a0015903
Primi, C. & Agnoli, F. (2002). Children correlate
infrequent behaviors with minority groups: A case of
illusory correlation. Cognitive Development, 17,
1105-1131. doi: 10.1016/S0885-2014(02)00076-X
Risen, J. L., Gilovich, T., & Dunning, D. (2007). Oneshot illusory correlations and stereotype formation.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 33,
1492-1502. doi: 10.1177/0146167207305862
Rothbart, M. (1981). Memory processes and social
beliefs. In D. L. Hamilton (Ed.), Cognitive processes
in stereotyping and intergroup relations (pp. 145181). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Sherman, J. W., Kruschke, J. K., Sherman, S. J., Percy,
E. J., Petrocelli, J. V., & Conrey, F. R. (2009).
Attentional processes in stereotype formation: A
common model for category accentuation and
illusory correlation. Journal of Personality and
Social
Psychology,
96,
305-323.
doi:
10.1037/a0013778
Smith, L. B. (1995). Self-organizing processes in
learning to learn words: Development is not
induction. In C. E. Nelson (Ed.), Basic and applied
perspectives
on
learning,
cognition,
and
development. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Inc.
Zelazo, P. D. (2006). The dimensional change card sort
(DCCS): A method of assessing executive function in
children. Nature Protocols, 1, 297-301. doi:
10.1038/nprot.2006.46

3033

