UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Searching for cultural influences on the body-specific association of preferred hand and
emotional valence

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6qc0z1zp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
De la Fuente, Juanma
Casasanto, Daniel
Roman, Antonio
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Searching for cultural influences on the body-specific association of preferred hand
and emotional valence
Juanma de la Fuente (jdelafuente@ugr.es)
Dept. de Psicología Experimental y Fisiología del Comportamiento,
University of Granada, Granada, Spain

Daniel Casasanto (casasand@newschool.edu)
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Donders Center for Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour, Radboud University, Nijmegen, NL
Department of Psychology, The New School for Social Research, New York, USA

Antonio Román (reche@ugr.es)
Dept. de Psicología Experimental y Fisiología del Comportamiento,
University of Granada, Granada, Spain

Julio Santiago (santiago@ugr.es)
Dept. de Psicología Experimental y Fisiología del Comportamiento,
University of Granada, Granada, Spain
Abstract

the difference between right- and left-handers’ judgments.
Rather, bodily differences determine the direction of
space-valence associations.
Interestingly, Casasanto (2009) found no evidence of a
cultural influence towards good-is-right superimposed on
the body-specific pattern. In fact, overall, the strength of
the association between preferred side and positive
evaluation was significantly stronger in left-handers than
in right-handers – a trend observed consistently over five
experiments. Similar results have been found in children.
In right- and left-handers as young as five years old, the
good-is-left mapping in lefties is already significantly
stronger than the good-is-right mapping in righties
(Casasanto & Henetz, 2011). The same trend was observed
in spontaneous gestures (Casasanto & Jasmin, 2010).
Based on these results in English and Dutch speakers, it
appears that cultural conventions associating good with
right play no role in establishing the conceptual mapping
between left-right space and ideas of good and bad.
Yet, the left-right conventions in English and Dutch
culture may not be as strong as in some other cultures. In
English and Dutch, ‘left’ is associated with clumsy, but not
necessarily with filthy or evil. Arab culture, however, has
stronger conventions in favor of the right and against the
left. In Arab culture there are taboos against the left that
apply to all kinds of everyday activities. For example,
Muslims should never use their left hand for eating or
drinking because it represents the bad, twisted, dark and
dirty. The left hand can only be used for personal hygiene
or other dirty activities (Mateo, 2010; Westermack, 1926).
If culture does play a role in establishing the conceptual
association between left-right space and emotional
evaluation, its effect should be more detectable in Arab
culture than in the cultures Casasanto and colleagues have
tested previously, which lack stringent taboos against the

Prior research has shown that right-handers tend to associate
the right side of space with positive ideas and the left side of
space with negative ideas, but left-handers associate right
with negative and left with positive. No effect of the
standard cultural association of right with good was found
superimposed on this pattern. Can cultural conventions
modulate this body-specific association? Here we compared
Spanish and Arab cultures, which differ in the pressure
against the left and in favour of the right. In spite of clear
indications that cultural pressure against the left is stronger
in Arab than Spanish culture, we observed no traces of an
increased tendency to associate right with good in Arab
righties. So far, there is no evidence for an effect of cultural
conventions on the strength of body-specific conceptual
associations.
Keywords: conceptual metaphor; body specificity; cultural
conventions; Arabic; handedness; emotional valence.

Introduction
Many languages and cultures associate the right side with
good things and the left side with bad things. This is
revealed in linguistic expressions like “my right-hand
man” and “he has two left feet,” or cultural conventions
like patterns of sitting at tables, house and church design,
burial practices and so on (McManus, 2002).
In spite of exposure to such wide and consistent cultural
and linguistic patterns, Casasanto (2009) demonstrated that
left-handers tend to associate left with positive ideas and
right with negative ideas, whereas right-handers show the
culturally-licensed mapping. Thus, each group associates
good more strongly with their dominant side, a bodyspecific effect on conceptual structure. Because there are
no cultural or linguistic conventions that link the left with
good things, neither cultural nor linguistic experience can
predict or explain the body-specificity in left-handers or

2616

left. Here we compared the mapping between left-right
space and emotional valence in Arabs, Spaniards, and
bicultural Arabs living in Spain.

1). They were told that the character (named Bob or
Mohamed, according to the participant's culture) was
planning a trip to the zoo and that he loves zebras and
thinks they are good but hates pandas and thinks they are
bad (or vice versa, as animal-to-valence assignment was
counterbalanced). Participants were instructed to place the
good animal in the box corresponding to good things, and
the bad animal in the box corresponding to bad things.
Responses were given orally and without visual support
from the diagram sheet, to prevent manual responses (e.g.,
pointing). After completing this task, the participants
answered five debriefing questions: the first two questions
were fillers (“Are you studying Spanish or French?” and
“If you had to choose, would you say that today it will be
rainy or sunny?”), followed by one relevant debriefing
question (“Why do you think you placed the good animal
in the box that you did?”). After one more filler question
(“If you had to choose between keeping animals in the zoo
or letting them stay free, what would you choose?”), there
was a final debriefing question (“Do you think that the side
of your dominant hand might have influenced your
decision to place the good animal in the box that you
chose?”). After the questions, the participants were asked
to report their handedness.

Experiment 1: Space-Valence Associations in
Spaniards and Bicultural Arabs
Our first step was to replicate Casasanto's (2009) findings
in Spanish right- and left-handers. This would extend prior
observations to a new culture and language which had not
been tested so far. Spain shares the main characteristics of
Western culture with previously tested American and
Dutch groups (Casasanto, 2009), but it also differs in
important ways because of its Catholic roots, versus
Protestant (religion has been shown to be instrumental in
affecting attentional styles, see Colzato, van den
Wildenberg & Hommel, 2008). In addition, the Spanish
language belongs to a different linguistic family, the
Romance languages (versus Germanic).
We also set out to extend prior results to bicultural
participants, by including a group of Arabs living in Spain.
Participants in this group were highly fluent bilinguals who
had lived in Spain for many years. They came mostly from
neighboring Morocco, but also from other Arab countries
such as Tunisia or Mauritania. This group carried out the
task in Spanish.

Method
Participants. There were a total of 53 participants, mean
age 25.6 years, age range: 20-53 years. The Spanish group
consisted of 29 students of the University of Granada: 9
left-handers (7 female) and 20 right-handers (6 female).
All of them were native Spaniards, had never lived in an
Arabic country for longer than an occasional stay and did
not know any Arabic language. The Arabic group
consisted of 1 left-hander (female) and 23 right-handers
(10 female). They were recruited by means of
advertisements placed both within and outside the
university. Linguistic and family information of three
participants was lost due to a computer problem. For the
remaining participants, their average number of years in
Spain was 5.7 (range 1-15). Sixteen of them were
originally from Morocco, one from Senegal, one from
Tunisia, one from Mauritania, and two were born in
Europe to Arab families. All of them but one were native
or highly fluent speakers of at least one Arabic language
(mostly Standard Arabic and Moroccan Darija). All of
them were also native or highly fluent in at least one
European language (mostly Spanish or French) and all of
them were fluent in Spanish. None of them had any
problem in understanding the instructions or
communicating with the experimenter in Spanish.

Figure 1: The diagram sheet presented to participants.
The diagram was removed from view before participants
responded, necessitating an oral rather than a manual
response.

Results and Discussion
The final debriefing question was used to filter out those
participants that suspected a relation between handedness
and their choice of location for the good and bad animals
(2 Spaniards and 3 Arabs, all of them right-handed). All
analyses were run on the remaining participants.
In the Spanish group, a majority of left-handers placed
the good animal in the box on the left of the character (7
out of 9, 77.7%), whereas a majority of right-handers
placed the good animal in the box on the right (12 out of
18, 66.6%; p = 0.04 by Fisher’s Exact Test1; see Figure 2).

Procedure. We used a Spanish version of Experiment 3
from Casasanto (2009). The participants were presented
with a sheet depicting a cartoon character seen from above
with a box on the left and another on the right (see Figure

1

2617

All reported Fisher's Exact Tests were two-tailed.

Thus, there were significant differences between right- and
left-handers in their space-valence associations: the
majority of participants placed the good animal in the box
on their dominant side.
As we found only one Arabic lefty, we only compared
the Spanish and Arabic right-handed groups. We did not
find differences between them (12 out of 18, 66.6% vs. 17
out of 20, 85%, p = 0.26 by Fisher’s Exact Test),
indicating that the right-is-good association was not
significantly stronger in Arabs than in Spaniards.
We note that in this sample, the majority of left-handers
were women whereas the majority of right-handers were
men. It is unlikely, however, that this chance association of
handedness with gender accounts for the body-specific
association of space with valence, given that this effect has
been shown in previous studies in which gender was
controlled (Casasanto & Henetz, 2011), and even in a
study involving only men (Casasanto & Jasmin, 2010).
Summing up, data from the present study replicate
Casasanto’s (2009) body specificity findings, and suggest
that cultural experience does not modulate the bodyspecific association between lateral space and emotional
evaluation. However, the strength of conceptual mappings
in the Spanish-acculturated Arab participants may have
changed as a result of their long immersion in Spanish
culture and language. Would Arabs who have never lived
in a Western culture show an effect of their cultural
taboos?

Experiment 2: Space-Valence Associations in
Moroccan Arabs
We went to Morocco to test an additional group of Arab
participants in the same task. All participants were
immersed in an Arab culture (in Morocco) and language
(Darija, the local dialect of Arabic). We also improved the
laterality measure, changing to a completely implicit 4point scale (see details below).

Method
Participants. Forty students (15 female; age range 19-30
years) from the University Abdelmalek Esaadi of Tetouan
(Morocco) were paid for their participation. All of them
were born in Morocco and had never resided in a Western
country (with two exceptions: one participant was born and
lived in Spain up to age 3, and another lived in Gibraltar
up to age 9). All of them were either native speakers of
Darija or highly fluent in this language. We failed to find
any left-handers.
Procedure. The procedure was the same as for the prior
groups, with the exception that materials were translated
into Darija. The self-report of handedness was removed.
Instead, we devised an implicit handedness test with four
items. A ball was placed on a table in front of the
participant, and s/he was asked to grab it and throw it to
the experimenter. Then, a blackboard with a chalk and an
eraser was placed on the table, and the participant was
asked to write his name down. S/he was then asked to
erase it. Finally, a cardboard tube was placed on the table
and s/he was asked to grab it and look through it. The hand
used to grab the ball, chalk, eraser and tube was recorded.
Using the right hand was coded as +1 and using the left
hand was coded as -1. Additionally, a subsample of 24
participants also responded to an oral version (in Darija) of
the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory (EHI, Oldfield,
1971) after completing the implicit laterality test.

90
80
70
60
50

Results and Discussion

% 40

Two participants were filtered out because they reported at
debriefing that handedness was related to their response.
The implicit laterality measure again revealed a total lack
of left-handers. Only 7 participants out of 38 used the left
hand in one item of the implicit measure. No participant
used the left hand for more than one item. The EHI
provided converging results in the subsample that
responded to both laterality measures.
Because of the lack of lefties, we again restricted
comparisons to the right-handed groups. Moroccan righties
did not show significant differences from either of the
prior two groups: 26 out of 38 (68.4%) of them preferred
to place the good animal on the right (p = 1.0, when
compared to Spaniards; p = 0.21, when compared to
Spanish-acculturated Arabs; both by Fisher’s Exact tests;
see Figure 3). Thus, even when Arabic participants were
tested immersed in their culture and language, and the

30
20
10
0
left-handed

right-handed

Figure 2: Percentage of good-on-the-right responses in
the Spanish group as a function of handedness. Whereas
the majority of right-handers implicitly associated good
with right and bad with left, the majority of left-handers
implicitly associated good with left and bad with right.

2618

good” responses (difference = 29%, Wald χ2 = 5.46, df = 1,
p = 0.02; Figure 4).
The strength of explicit associations between right and
good varies across cultures. As expected, this association
was strongest in our sample of Arabs who were tested in
Morocco (in Darija), and weakest in our sample of
Spaniards tested in Spain (in Spanish).

whole procedure was run in the local Arabic language, we
failed to find any influence of culture on the association
between right and good.
90
80
70

90

60
50

80

% 40

70

30

60

20

50

10

% 40

0
Spanish

30

Arabs in Spain Moroccan

20

Fgure 3: Percentage of good-on-the-right responses in
the three right-handed groups. The strength of the implicit
association between space and valence did not differ
between groups.

10
0
Spanish

Analysis of debriefing data
One possibility is that, even though conventions in Arabic
culture and language favor the right and disfavor the left,
such conventions are “dead” metaphors and are no longer
processed implicitly as active metaphorical mappings by
people living in those cultures. So, we carried out a followup analysis of the debriefing data aimed to reveal whether
an explicit association between right and good is stronger
in our Arab participants than in the Spanish group. We
analyzed the debriefing question: “Why do you think you
placed the good animal in the box that you did?” The
participants were the right-handers from the three cultural
groups in Experiments 1 and 2 (N = 93). We coded the
answer as 1 if the participant made an explicit reference to
the culture-based association between right and good (e.g.,
“because good things must go on the right”, or “because
the right is good”); otherwise we coded the answer as 0.
We then compared the proportions between the three
groups.
Across all three groups, culture predicted the rate of
“right is good” responses, according to a binary logistic
regression (Wald χ2 = 5.77, df = 2, p= 0.056). The rate of
“right is good” responses increased monotonically from
the Spanish participants (9 out of 29, 31%), to the
bicultural Arab participants in Spain (10 out of 24, 41.6%),
to the Moroccan Arab participants (24 out of 40, 60%).
Compared to the mono-cultural Spaniards, the monocultural Arabs showed nearly twice the rate of “right is

Arabs in
Spain

Moroccan

Figure 4: Percentage of answers to the debriefing question
making explicit reference to the right-good association in
the three groups of righties. The strength of the explicit
association between space and valence differed
significantly across cultures.

General Discussion
Present results replicate the body-specific association
between good things and the dominant side of space found
by Casasanto (2009) in members of two new cultures
(Spanish and Arab), tested in two new languages (Spanish
and Darija). Consistent with earlier studies in Dutch and
American participants (Casasanto, 2009; Casasanto &
Jasmin, 2010; Casasanto & Henetz, 2011), we found no
effect of cultural pressures to favor the right superimposed
on the body-specific pattern of implicit associations.
Similar implicit associations between left-right space and
emotional valence were found across Spaniards tested in
Spain, bicultural Arabs tested in Spain, and Arabs tested in
Morocco.
Although we found hardly any left-handed Arabs,
comparisons between right-handers from the thee groups
showed no significant differences in the implicit
preference to associate good with the right side of space.
An analysis of the debriefing data indicated that the
Moroccan Arab group held stronger explicit beliefs about
the relation between right and good than the Spanish

2619

group. Immersion in Spanish culture appears to have
reduced conscious availability of this space-valence
mapping in the Spanish-acculturated Arab group to a level
non-significantly different from the Spanish group.
In summary, the present data confirm that explicit
associations of the right side with good things and the left
side with bad things are stronger in Arab culture than in
Spanish culture. However, this stronger cultural pressure
did not increase Arab participants’ implicit associations of
right with good and left with bad. Body-specific
perceptuo-motor fluency remains, so far, the sole
explanation for the conceptual association of horizontal
space and emotional evaluation: People associate positive
things with the side of space they can act upon more
fluently with their dominant hand.
Whereas the strength of explicit space-valence
associations varied across cultures, the strength of implicit
space-valence associations did not. Conventions in
language and culture that link right with good and left with
bad do not seem to have any effect on people’s implicit
space-valence mappings. A definitive test of this
conclusion, however, will need to wait for data being
collected from Arab left-handers. The difficulty of finding
this kind of participant provides another hint to the
strength of the taboos against the left hand in Arab culture.
An alternative strategy will be to temporarily change
perceptuo-motor fluency in Arab righties by means like
those used by Casasanto & Chrisykou (2011), who showed
that a few minutes of acting less fluently with the right
hand in the lab is enough to reverse right-handed Dutch
participants’ implicit associations of good with right and
bad with left. If culture does have an influence, Arab
righties may be more resistant than Spanish righties to the
effects of motor training.

Casasanto, D., & Jasmin, K. (2010). Good and bad in the
hands of politicians: Spontaneous gestures during
positive and negative speech. PLoS ONE 5(7): e11805.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0011805
Colzato, L. S., van den Wildenberg, W. P. M., & Hommel,
B. (2008). Losing the big picture: How religion may
control visual attention. PLoS ONE 3(11): e3679.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0003679
Mateo, J. (2010). Salud y ritual en Marruecos.
Concepciones del cuerpo y prácticas de curación.
Barcelona: Bellaterra. [Health and ritual in Morocco.
Conceptions of the body and healing practices.]
McManus, I. C. (2002). Right hand, left hand: The origins
of asymmetry in brains, bodies, atoms and cultures.
London, UK / Cambridge, MA: Weidenfeld and
Nicolson / Harvard University Press.
Oldfield, R. C. (1971). The assessment and analysis of
handedness:
The
Edinburgh
Inventory.
Neuropsychologia, 9, 97–113.
Westermack, E. (1926). Ritual and belief in Morocco.
London: MacMillan.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by Grant P09-SEJ-4772,
Consejería de Innovacion, Ciencia y Empresa, Junta de
Andalucía, and European Regional Development Fund
(ERDF), to Julio Santiago and Daniel Casasanto. We are
grateful to Abderrahman El Fathi for making possible to
carry out this study at Abdelmalek Esaadi University, and
to Omar Badessi, Tarik Boubker, Bouthaina Ben El Amin
and Mouad El Mejdki for assisting with running the
Moroccan group.

References
Casasanto, D. (2009). Embodiment of abstract concepts:
Good and bad in right- and left-handers. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 138, 351-356.
Casasanto, D., & Chrysikou, E. (2011) When Left is
“Right”: Motor fluency shapes abstract concepts.
Psychological Science, 22(4), 419-422.
Casasanto, D. & Henetz, T. (2011). Handedness shapes
children's abstract concepts. Cognitive Science. In press.

2620

