UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Searching Our Cognitive Social Networks: How We Remember Who We Know

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1r4158nt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Hills, Thomas
Pachur, Thorsten

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Searching Our Cognitive Social Networks: How We Remember Who We Know
Thomas T. Hills (thomas.hills@unibas.ch) & Thorsten Pachur (thorsten.pachur@unibas.ch)
Department of Psychology, University of Basel, Missionsstrasse 64A, 4055, Basel, Switzerland
Abstract
Recalling people we know is a key cognitive function,
influencing studies of contagious disease, how we see our
relative position in the world, and who we invite to our
weddings. Whereas social memory has often been studied
independently from other memory research (e.g., Bond et
al., 1985; Brewer et al., 1995), we focus here on possible
parallels with search in other domains—in particular the
thesis that search of social memory is governed by similar
rules and processes as those that guide search in semantic
memory and may involve executive processes. Such a
connection would involve two claims: First, search in social
memory dynamically transitions between local and global
search strategies (similar to search of associative memory;
SAM, Raaijmakers & Shiffrin, 1981). Second, as proposed
for a domain general executive search process (Hills et al.,
2010; Hills et al., 2008), dynamic transitions from local to
global search criteria should recruit the general control of
attention.
We investigated these possibilities by modeling how
people recall social contacts and also by investigating to
what extent this search process correlates with working
memory capacity. We examined the role of social
categories, social proximity, and frequency factors as well
as the dynamic character of search in social memory by
developing a new task, the social fluency task, which asks
participants to recall the first 35 ‘people that they know’.
Participants then reconstructed the social network based on
all pair-wise interactions between those 35 individuals (see
Figure 1), and provided, for each recalled individual, their
frequency of encounter with them as well as their social
category (partner, family member, friend, or acquaintance).
Participants also took a working memory span task, the
automated operation span task (Unsworth et al., 2005).
To disentangle the possible role of different retrieval
structures, we compared several computational models that
differed in the assumed cues governing the underlying
sequential search process. We used a model framework
similar to SAM (Raaijmakers & Shiffrin, 1981), which
probes memory with a specific set of cues. Local cues were
taken to represent social category or social proximity, based
on the last item recalled. Frequency, being independent of
recent recall, was taken as the global cue.
We found that while—consistent with prior research
(Bond et al., 1985; Brewer et al., 1995)—recall was
structured in terms of social categories, models using social
proximity and frequency information predicted participants’
recall patterns best. Furthermore, dynamic models that made
local-to-global transitions where they were predicted by
social proximity outperformed dynamic models making
transitions predicted by social category.
Finally, as

proposed by a domain general executive search process, the
observed dynamic transition rate between different retrieval
structures was inversely correlated with working memory.
Importantly, clustering coefficient for individual social
networks did not differ in relation to operation span. Our
results highlight a neglected parallel between semantic and
social memory, and support the thesis of a domain-general
executive search process that directs search by maintaining
perseveration on local subgoals while inhibiting competition
from other potential goals (i.e., targets of attention).
References and Relevant Publications
Bond, C. E, Jr., Jones, R. L., & Weintraub, D. L. (1985). On
the unconstrained recall of acquaintances: A samplingtraversal model. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 49, 327-337.
Brewer, D. D., Rinaldi, G., Mogoutov, A., & Valente, T. W.
(1995). A quantitative review of associative patterns in
the recall of persons. Journal of Social Structure, 6(1).
Hills, T. (2006). Animal foraging and the evolution of goaldirected cognition. Cognitive Science, 30, 3-41.
Hills, T. (In press). The evolutionary origins of
cognitive control. Topics in Cognitive Science.
Hills, T., Goldstone, R.L., & Todd, P.M. (2008).
Evidence for generalized cognitive search
processes at multiple levels in a hierarchical
problem solving task. In V. Sloutsky, B. Love, and
K. McRae (Eds.) Proceedings of the 30th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 843).
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Hills, T., Todd, P. M., & Goldstone, R. L. (2008). Search
in internal and external spaces: Evidence for generalized
cognitive search processes. Psychological Science, 19,
676-682.
Hills, T., Todd, P. M., & Goldstone, R. L. (2010). The
central executive as a search process: exploration and
exploitation in generalized cognitive search processes.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 139, 590609. doi: 10.1037/a0020666.
Hills, T., Todd, P.M., & Jones, M. (2009). Optimal foraging
in semantic memory. In N.A. Taatgen & H. van Rijn
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Cognitive Science Society.
Raaijmakers, J. G. W., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1981). Search of
associative memory. Psychological Review, 88, 93-134.
Unsworth, N., Heitz, R.C., Schrock, J.C., & Engle, R.W.
(2005). An automated version of the operation span task.
Behavior Research Methods, 37, 498–505.

1310

Figure 1. Typical retrieval patterns for two participants and their corresponding social networks. Dots represent individual
recoveries. Size indicates the social proximity with the individual retrieved previously, with the smallest, closed dots having
no social proximity with the prior individual, and larger dots having the highest social proximity with the prior individual.
Social networks to the right correspond with the retrieval patterns on the left. Numbers inside vertices indicate the order of
retrieval. The participant in the upper frame has an operation span of 44. The participant in the lower frame has an operation
span of 27.

1311

