UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Selection Strategy of Effort Control: Allocation of Function to Manual Operator or
Automation System

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/61z7h0dz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Maehigashi, Akihiro
Miwa, Kazuhisa
Terai, Hitoshi
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Selection Strategy of Effort Control: Allocation of Function to Manual Operator
or Automation System
Akihiro Maehigashi (mhigashi@cog.human.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Kazuhisa Miwa (miwa@is.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Hitoshi Terai (terai@is.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Information Science, Nagoya University, Japan

Kazuaki Kojima (koj@aoni.waseda.jp )
Faculty of Human Sciences, Waseda University, Japan

Junya Morita (j-morita@jaist.ac.jp)
School of Knowledge Science, Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Japan
Abstract
In this study, we experimentally investigated the human selection strategy of effort control, the control of function allocation to either the manual operator or the automation system.
We conducted two experiments using two types of tracking
tasks. As a result, we found that people tended to perform effort control based on manual-based selection, depending more
on manual performance than system performance. Also, we
confirmed that the tendency to use an automation system was
related to the selection strategy.
Keywords: Human-automation system interaction; Misuse;
Disuse; Effort control.

Introduction
The development of technologies has rapidly increased in recent years. People have more opportunities to work with automation systems as important resources for performing tasks
(Hutchins, 1995). Lee and Moray (1994) stated that in the
situation where people work with automation systems, they
do not play only the role of a manual operator, but also play
the role of a supervisory controller who monitors the whole
system consisting of human and automation system from the
meta viewpoint.
A primary role of such a supervisory controller is effort
control, the control of function allocation to either the manual
operator or the automation system. In previous studies about
human use of external resources, it was confirmed that people
adaptively control such a function allocation to either internal
processing or external processing (processing using external
resources), appropriately estimating the costs of a task and
using external resources (e.g., Cary & Carlson, 2001; Gray
& Fu, 2004; Walsh & Anderson, 2009). On the other hand,
in previous studies about human use of automation systems,
it has been pointed out that many failures emerged in the effort control, and these failures often caused fatal accidents
(Norman, 1990). Parasuraman and Riley (1997) defined these
maladaptive effort controls as misuse and disuse. Misuse is
overreliance on automation systems, and disuse is underutilization of the systems. Many researchers are rigorously investigating human misuse and disuse of automation systems
(e.g., Bahner, Hüper, & Manzey, 2008; Dzindolet, Peterson,
Pomranky, Pierce, & Beck, 2003).

Lee and Moray (1994) stated that effort control is not performed depending only on the performance of an automation
system, but also on the performance of human manual operation. In a normative manner, it is ideal to allocate functions
based on evaluations of both kinds of performances evenly.
However, the balance of the consideration might be disproportionate. Our first interest in the current study is to investigate the selection strategy of effort control. In this study,
we define system-based selection as effort control depending
more on system performance than on manual performance.
In contrast, we define manual-based selection as effort control depending more on manual performance than on system
performance. We investigate whether people perform effort
control based on system- or manual-based selection.
Human ability to evaluate manual performance has been
investigated in the study area of metacognition. The term
metacognition here means people’s ability to monitor their
own actions (Metcalfe & Greene, 2007). Metcalfe and
Greene (2007) found that people could appropriately judge
their manual operation performance (Judgment of performance: JOP). On the other hand, human evaluation of system performance has been investigated in the study area of
human-computer interaction. Madhavan and Phillips (2010)
found that people tend to evaluate system performance as
lower than its actual performance. Moreover, many researchers are investigating situation awareness. These studies
showed that there are two types of monitoring: active monitoring (monitoring situations while manually conducting a
task) and passive monitoring (monitoring situations while observing an automation system’s operation) (e.g., Metzger &
Parasuraman, 2001). Endsley and Kiris (1995) and Metzger
and Parasuraman (2001) found that people show higher situation awareness during active monitoring than during passive
monitoring.
These previous studies lead to an expectation that in cooperative work with an automation system, people are expected to perform effort control depending more on manual
performance than on system performance. In other words, we
expect that people perform effort control based on manualbased selection. The first research question of the current

1977

study is as follows.
Research Question 1: Do people perform effort control
based on manual-based selection rather than on system-based
selection?
Moreover, Lee and Moray (1994) and Madhavan and
Phillips (2010) showed that the human tendency to use automation systems is influenced by individual differences.
There are many studies investigating the human tendency to
use automation systems from the viewpoints of misuse and
disuse. However, only a few studies have been conducted,
focusing on the relationship between the tendency to use automation systems and the selection strategy of the effort control. Therefore, our second interest in this study is to investigate the relationship between the tendency to use automation
systems and the selection strategy of the effort control. In
particular, our second research question is as follows.
Research Question 2: Do people whose styles of using
an automation system differ, i.e., misuse-biased users and
disuse-biased users, adopt different selection strategies of effort control?
Figure 1: Line (top) and road (bottom) tasks.

Experimental Task
We used two tracking tasks (line and road tasks) as experimental tasks (Figure 1). In the line task, the participants track
a line that scrolls downward past a circle vehicle. When the
circle vehicle veers off the line, the performance score is reduced as operational error. On the other hand, in the road
task, the participants track a road that scrolls downward past
a dot vehicle. When the dot vehicle hits the edge of the road,
the performance score is reduced as operational error. The
participants were allowed to switch to either auto mode (operation completely performed by the program) or manual mode
(operation performed by participants using left and right arrow keys) by pressing a selector on the keyboard. In these
tasks, we manipulated the automation capability (Ca) and the
manual capability (Cm) with five levels: 30, 40, 50, 60, and
70. Technically, each value indicates the success rate of the
operation command. Therefore, the higher the values of Ca
or Cm are, the more controllable the circle or the dot vehicle
is. In contrast, the lower the values of Ca or Cm are, the less
controllable the circle or the dot vehicle is.

Analysis
In this section, we introduce the analysis method used in this
study. We propose and conduct an innovative performancebased analysis. First, the average percentage of using the auto
mode is recorded at each combination of Ca (5 levels) × Cm
(5 levels). Second, we fit the logistic curve to the percentages
at the 25 data points. The predicted percentage of using the
auto mode is described as follows.
Percentage o f using auto mode
= 100 ∗ 1/(1 + e−(β0 +β1Ca+β2Cm) )

(e(β2 ∗10) ), calculated from the coefficients of Ca (β1 ) and Cm
(β2 ), and investigate the selection strategy of the effort control based on the odds ratios. The odds ratio of Ca indicates
the increase of the percentage of using the auto mode with the
increase of the value of Ca. On the other hand, the odds ratio
of Cm indicates the decrease of the percentage of using the
auto mode with the increase of the value of Cm. We investigate whether the percentage of using the auto mode increases
or decreases when the values of both Ca and Cm equivalently
increase. In particular, we analyze whether the product of the
odds ratios of Ca and Cm exceeds 1 or falls below 1.
Figure 2 shows the relation of the graphical images of the
logistic curves and the products of the odds ratios of Ca and
Cm. If the product exceeds 1, this means that the increase
of the percentage of using the auto mode with the increase of
Ca is greater than the decrease of the percentage of using the
auto mode with the increase of Cm. This indicates that effort
control is performed depending more on system performance
than on manual performance, and system-based selection was
adopted. On the other hand, if the product falls below 1, this
means that the decrease of the percentage of using the auto
mode with the increase of Cm is greater than the increase of
the percentage of using the auto mode with the increase of
Ca. This indicates that effort control is performed depending
more on manual performance than on system performance,
and manual-based selection was adopted.

Experiment 1
Method

Finally, we use the odds ratios of Ca (e(β1 ∗10) ) and Cm

Participants Twenty-four university students participated
in the experiment. The participants conducted both line and
road tasks, and the order of the tasks was counterbalanced

1978

Product of ORs
of Ca and Cm!

2

1.5

1

0.75

0.5

OR of Ca!

2

2

2

1.5

1

OR of Cm!

1

0.75

0.5

0.5

0.5

Figure 2: Relation of graphical images of logistic curves and products of odds ratios (ORs) of Ca and Cm. The x-axis represents
the value of Cm, the y-axis represents the value of Ca, and the z-axis represents the percentage of using the auto mode.

among the participants.
Procedure The participants were required to achieve as
high a score as possible in each task, adaptively selecting either the auto or manual mode. In each task, we conducted 25
trials consisting of 5 (Ca: 30, 40, 50, 60, 70) × 5 (Cm: 30,
40, 50, 60, 70). Each trial lasted 40 seconds. When one trial
ended and another began, the display showed “the capabilities
changed” on the center of the screen. At the same time, the
number of completed trials among the 25 trials was shown.
Before conducting each task, the participants performed two
training trials for 40 seconds each as practice for switching
the auto and manual modes. In the first training trial, the
value of Ca was set to 70 and that of Cm was set to 30. Also,
in the second training trial, the value of Ca was set to 30 and
that of Cm was set to 70. Throughout the experiment, the values of Ca and Cm were not displayed on the screen; therefore,
the participants were not informed of the values.

Result and Discussion
First, in each line and road task, the average percentage of
using the auto mode was recorded at each combination of Ca
(5 levels) × Cm (5 levels). Second, we fitted the logistic curve
to the 25 data points. The predicted percentages of using the
auto mode are as follows.
Line task
Percentage o f using auto mode
= 100 ∗ 1/(1 + e−(0.505+0.042Ca−0.046Cm) )

product of the odds ratios of Ca and Cm in each task.
First, we investigated the selection strategy of the effort
control in Research Question 1. Table 1 shows that the
product of the odds ratios of Ca and Cm fell below 1 in
both tasks. Thus, the results confirmed that the effort control was performed based on manual-based selection in both
tasks. The participants depended 1.043 (= 1/0.958) and
1.254 (= 1/0.797) times more on manual performance than
on system performance in the line and road tasks respectively.
Misuse- and Disuse-Biased Groups Next, in order to investigate the relationship between the tendency to use automation systems and the selection strategy of effort control
in Research Question 2, we divided the participants into two
groups: misuse-biased and disuse-biased. In each task, the
participants whose average percentage of using the auto mode
was higher than the median average were put in the misusebiased group; and the other half of the participants became
the disuse-biased group.
In each of the misuse- and disuse-biased groups engaging
in each line and road task, the average percentage of using the
auto mode was recorded at each combination of Ca (5 levels)
× Cm (5 levels). Second, we fitted the logistic curve to the
25 data points. The predicted percentages of using the auto
mode are as follows.

Table 1: Odds ratios of Ca and Cm, and product of odds ratios
of Ca and Cm in Experiment 1.

Road task
Percentage o f using auto mode
= 100 ∗ 1/(1 + e−(1.317+0.022Ca−0.044Cm) )
The Hosmer-Lemeshow test was applied to assess goodness of fit of the predicted curves. The test was neither significant in the line (p = .89) nor road (p = .97) tasks, indicating
that the logistic curves described the data well. The top two
rows in Table 1 show the odds ratios of Ca and Cm, and the

1979

Line
Road
Misuse
Line
Disuse
Misuse
Road
Disuse

OR of Ca

OR of Cm

1.522
1.248
1.600
1.578
1.372
1.189

0.629
0.638
0.711
0.535
0.623
0.616

Product of ORs
of Ca and Cm
0.958
0.797
1.138
0.845
0.856
0.732

Line task
Misuse-biased group
Percentage o f using auto mode
= 100 ∗ 1/(1 + e−(0.249+0.047Ca−0.034Cm) )
Disuse-biased group
Percentage o f using auto mode
= 100 ∗ 1/(1 + e−(0.522+0.045Ca−0.062Cm) )
Road task
Misuse-biased group
Percentage o f using auto mode
= 100 ∗ 1/(1 + e−(1.696+0.031Ca−0.047Cm) )
Disuse-biased group
Percentage o f using auto mode
= 100 ∗ 1/(1 + e−(1.080+0.017Ca−0.048Cm) )
The Hosmer-Lemeshow test was neither significant in the
misuse- (p = .94) nor disuse- (p = .78) biased groups in the
line task. Also, the test was neither significant in the misuse(p = .95) nor disuse- (p = .93) biased groups in the road task.
These results indicated that the logistic curves described the
data well. The bottom four rows in Table 1 show the odds
ratios of Ca and Cm, and the product of the odds ratios of Ca
and Cm in the four groups.
In each task, we compared the products of the odds ratios of Ca and Cm in the misuse- and disuse-biased groups.
The product was lower in the disuse-biased group than in
the misuse-biased group. This result showed that the participants in the disuse-biased group performed the effort control depending more on manual performance than those in
the misuse-biased group did. Thus, the results confirmed that
there is a relationship between the tendency to use automation
systems and the selection strategy of the effort control.
In summary, the participants in Experiment 1 tended to perform effort control based on manual-based selection rather
than on system-based selection. Also, we confirmed that
there is a relationship between the tendency to use automation systems and the selection strategy of the effort control. In
the following Experiment 2, we aimed at corroborating these
findings in different situations.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, using the same tasks as in Experiment 1, we
set up two different situations. In the first situation, during the
task, the value of Ca was displayed on the screen, but that of
Cm was not displayed (Ca-displayed situation). In this situation, the participants could know the performance potential in
the auto mode by the displayed value of Ca during the task.
However, they needed to evaluate the manual performance
through observing their manual operations. In the second situation, during the task, the value of Cm was displayed on
the screen, but that of Ca was not displayed (Cm-displayed

situation). In this situation, the participants could know the
performance potential in the manual mode by the displayed
value of Cm during the task. However, they needed to evaluate the system performance through observing the system
operation.
It is assumed that in the Ca-displayed situation, the participants could know the system performance more easily and
would be guided to depend more on the system performance
in their effort control. In other words, in such a situation, we
expect that the system-based selection would be facilitated in
the effort control. On the other hand, it is assumed that in the
Cm-displayed situation, the manual-based selection would be
facilitated in the effort control.
If the findings of Experiment 1 are robust human behavior,
the following is predicted.
About Research Question 1, the Ca-displayed situation
would facilitate the system-based selection, and the Cmdisplayed situation would facilitate the manual-based selection. Additionally, the latter promotion of the manual-based
selection in the Cm-displayed situation would be larger than
the former promotion of the system-based selection in the Cadisplayed situation.
About Research Question 2, the participants in the disusebiased group would depend more on the manual performance
than those in the misuse-biased group would in both Ca- and
Cm-displayed situations.

Method
Participants Eighty-three university students participated
in the experiment. The participants were divided into four
groups: 21 for the line task and 22 for the road task in the
Ca-displayed situation; and 20 for the line task and 20 for the
road task in the Cm-displayed situation.
Procedure Basically the same procedure was followed as
in Experiment 1. However, in Experiment 2, throughout the
experiment, the value of Ca was displayed and that of Cm
was not displayed in the Ca-displayed situation, and the participants were not informed of the value of Cm. On the other
hand, the value of Cm was displayed and that of Ca was not
displayed in the Cm-displayed situation, and the participants
were not informed of the value of Ca.

Result and Discussion
First, in each group, the average percentage of using the auto
mode was recorded at each combination of Ca (5 levels) ×
Cm (5 levels). Second, we fitted the logistic curve to the
25 data points. The Hosmer-Lemeshow test was neither significant in the line (p = .83) nor road (p = .99) tasks in the
Ca-displayed situation. Also, the test was neither significant
in the line (p = .97) nor road (p = .98) tasks in the Cmdisplayed situation. These results indicated that the logistic
curves described the data well. The top two rows in Table
2 show the odds ratios of Ca and Cm, and the product of the
odds ratios of Ca and Cm in each of the Ca- and Cm-displayed
situations.

1980

Table 2: Odds ratios of Ca and Cm, and product of odds ratios of Ca and Cm in Experiment 2.
Ca-displayed

Line
Road
Misuse
Line
Disuse
Misuse
Road
Disuse

OR of Ca

OR of Cm

2.106
2.229
2.443
1.996
2.362
2.230

0.557
0.548
0.568
0.521
0.556
0.513

Cm-displayed

Product of ORs
of Ca and Cm
1.175
1.222
1.388
1.040
1.314
1.146

First, we investigated the selection strategy of the effort
control in each situation. Table 2 shows that in the Cadisplayed situation, the product of the odds ratios of Ca and
Cm exceeds 1 in both tasks. This result shows that the effort
control was performed based on the system-based selection in
both tasks in the Ca-displayed situation. On the other hand,
in the Cm-displayed situation, the product of the odds ratios
of Ca and Cm falls below 1 in both tasks. This result showed
that the effort control was performed based on manual-based
selection in both tasks in the Cm-displayed situation. Thus,
the results confirmed that the Ca-displayed situation facilitated system-based selection, and the Cm-displayed situation
facilitated manual-based selection.
Next, we compared the promotions of the system-based selection in the Ca-displayed situation and the manual-based
selection in the Cm-displayed situation in each task. In particular, we compared the product of the odds ratios of Ca and
Cm in the Ca-displayed situation with the reciprocal number
of the product of the odds ratios of Ca and Cm in the Cmdisplayed situation.
In the line task, the participants in the Ca-displayed situation depended 1.175 times more on system performance
than on manual performance. In contrast, the participants
in the Cm-displayed situation depended 1.400 (= 1/0.714)
times more on manual performance than on system performance. Moreover, in the road task, the participants in the
Ca-displayed situation depended 1.222 times more on system performance than on manual performance. In contrast,
the participants in the Cm-displayed situation depended 1.553
(= 1/0.643) times more on manual performance than on system performance. This result showed that the participants’
dependency on manual performance in the Cm-displayed situation was larger than that on system performance in the Cadisplayed situation. Thus, the results confirmed that the promotion of the manual-based selection in the Cm-displayed
situation was larger than that of the system-based selection in
the Ca-displayed situation, and the manual-based selection in
the effort control is robust human behavior.
Misuse- and Disuse-Biased Groups Next, in order to investigate the relationship between the tendency to use automation systems and the selection strategy of the effort con-

OR of Ca

OR of Cm

2.143
1.418
2.506
1.908
1.441
1.466

0.333
0.453
0.314
0.334
0.525
0.342

Product of ORs
of Ca and Cm
0.714
0.643
0.787
0.638
0.757
0.502

trol, we grouped the participants into two groups as in Experiment 1. In each misuse- and disuse-biased group engaging
in each task in each situation, the average percentage of using the auto mode was recorded at each combination of Ca (5
levels) × Cm (5 levels). Second, we fitted the logistic curve
to the 25 data points.
In the Ca-displayed situation, the Hosmer-Lemeshow test
was neither significant in the misuse- (p = .80) nor disuse(p = .94) biased groups in the line task. Also, the test
was neither significant in the misuse- (p = .97) nor disuse(p = .99) biased groups in the road task. Moreover, in the
Cm-displayed situation, the test was neither significant in the
misuse- (p = .94) nor disuse- (p = .98) biased groups in the
line task. Also, the test was neither significant in the misuse(p = .99) nor disuse- (p = .86) biased groups in the road task.
These results indicated that the logistic curves described the
data well. The bottom four rows in Table 2 show the odds
ratios of Ca and Cm, and the product of the odds ratios of Ca
and Cm in the eight groups.
In each task in each situation, we compared the products
of the odds ratios of Ca and Cm in the misuse- and disusebiased groups. The product was lower in the disuse-biased
group than in the misuse-biased group in both tasks in both
situations. This result showed that the participants in the
disuse-biased group depended more on manual performance
for their effort control than those in the misuse-biased group
did. Thus, the results confirmed that there is a robust relationship between the tendency to use automation systems and the
selection strategy of effort control.

General Discussion
Selection Strategy of Effort Control
As a result of our experiments, we found that people perform
effort control based on manual-based selection rather than on
system-based selection. This result is consistent with the findings of the preceding studies about performance evaluation of
a system and manual operations and situation awareness. In
our experiments, the participants needed to evaluate the performance of the system and manual operations in order to
allocate the function to either the manual operator or the automation system. However, they might not be able to consider

1981

such evaluations from both viewpoints evenly because of the
limitation of human cognitive capacities. This limitation led
the participants to perform effort control based on a single
viewpoint. As a result, manual-based selection was adopted
because active monitoring was more preferred than passive
monitoring.
Moreover, in this study, we investigated the relationship
between the tendency to use an automation system and the
selection strategy of effort control. We also found that the
disuse-biased users depended more on manual performance
than the misuse-biased users did. This result might be caused
by the differences in the abilities of the misuse- and disusebiased participants for evaluating the system performance.
Madhavan and Phillips (2010) experimentally investigated
the relationship between the computer self-efficacy (CSE)
and the tendency to use automation systems. CSE reflects
persons’ self-judgment of their abilities to use a computer.
In their experiment, the high-CSE participants calibrated the
system performance more appropriately and utilized an automation system more adaptively than the low-CSE participants did. On the other hand, the low-CSE participants could
not appropriately estimate the high performance of the system
and tended to underutilize it. In our experiments, there is a
possibility that the disuse-biased participants had lower CSE
than the misuse-biased participants, and were inferior in abilities to evaluate the system performance. From their limitations of the abilities in evaluating the system performance, the
disuse-biased participants tended to perform the effort control
depending on the manual performance more saliently.

Influence of Tasks
We used two types of tracking tasks. It was more difficult to
evaluate both auto and manual performances in the road task
than in the line task. In the line task, the circle vehicle could
keep moving away from the line. Therefore, both system and
manual performances were visibly externalized. On the other
hand, in the road task, the dot did not go over the edge of the
road and was knocked back into the road. Therefore, both
system and manual performances were not externally represented.
In Experiment 1, the participants performed the effort control based on the manual-based selection more saliently in the
road task than in the line task. In order to compensate for the
difficulty in evaluating the performances in the road task, the
participants might evaluate the controllability of the dot and
use it as a cue in the effort control. Metcalfe and Greene
(2007) experimentally investigated the nature of human judgment of agency (JOA), i.e., self-judgment of controlling their
own actions. In their experiment, they manipulated the degree
of the participants’ operability of mouse movements that controlled the movement of an object on a computer screen. The
participants appropriately judged the degree of controllability
of the object as their JOA. In our experiment, it was more difficult to evaluate both system and manual performances in the
road task than in the line task. In such a situation, the participants could estimate their controllability of manual operation

and compensate for the difficulty.
On the other hand, in Experiment 2, there was no clear difference in the selection strategy of the effort control between
the line and road tasks. There is a possibility that explicit
information of Ca and Cm had a strong impact on the selection strategy and attenuated the difference between the tasks.
A detailed investigation of this result should be conducted as
future work.

References
Bahner, J. E., Hüper, A.-D., & Manzey, D. (2008). Misuse
of automated decision aids: complacency, automation bias
and the impact of training experience. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 66, 688–699.
Cary, M., & Carlson, R. A. (2001). Distributing working memory resources during problem solving. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 27, 836–848.
Dzindolet, M. T., Peterson, S. A., Pomranky, R. A., Pierce,
L. G., & Beck, H. P. (2003). The role of trust in automation reliance. International Journal of Human-Computer
Studies, 58, 697–718.
Endsley, M. R., & Kiris, E. O. (1995). The out-of-the-loop
performance problem and level of control in automation.
Human Factors, 37, 381–394.
Gray, W. D., & Fu, W.-T. (2004). Soft constraints in interactive behavior: the case of ignoring perfect knowledge
in-the-world for imperfect knowledge in-the-head. Cognitive Science, 28, 359–382.
Hutchins, E. (1995). How a cockpit remembers its speeds.
Cognitive Science, 19, 265–288.
Lee, J. D., & Moray, N. (1994). Trust, self-confidence, and
operators’ adaptation to automation. International Journal
of Human-Computer Studies, 40, 153–184.
Madhavan, P., & Phillips, R. R. (2010). Effects of computer
self-efficacy and system reliability on user interaction with
decision support systems. Computer in Human Behavior,
26, 199–204.
Metcalfe, J., & Greene, M. J. (2007). Metacognition of
agency. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
136, 184–199.
Metzger, U., & Parasuraman, R. (2001). The role of the
air traffic controller in future air traffic management: an
empirical study of active control versus passive monitoring.
Human Factors, 43, 519–528.
Norman, D. A. (1990). The ‘problem’ with automation: inappropriate feedback and interaction, not ‘over-automation’.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London
Series B-Biological Sciences, 327, 585–593.
Parasuraman, R., & Riley, V. (1997). Humans and automation: use, misuse, disuse, abuse. Human Factors, 39, 230–
253.
Walsh, M. M., & Anderson, J. R. (2009). The strategic nature
of changing your mind. Cognitive Psychology, 58, 416–
440.

1982

