UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Sex Differences in Brain Activation During Virtual Navigation: A Functional MRI Study

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/19054699

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Nowak, Nicole
Resnick, Susan
Elkins, Wendy
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

over half of the studies; a female advantage was found in
approximately 18 percent of the studies which involved
map learning and memory, but women as a group never
outperformed men in real or simulated environments. The
effect size (Cohen’s d) of the sex difference varies from
small to large. For example, a moderate effect size
favoring males was reported for a map-based route
learning task (Galea & Kimura, 1993), while a large
effect size was found for an orienteering drill
(Malinowski & Gillespie, 2001). Effect sizes favoring
men during performance of computerized maze
navigation are moderate to large (e.g., Grön, Wunderlich,
Spitzer, Tomczak, & Riepe, 2000; Moffat, Hampson, &
Hatzipantelis, 1998). A sex difference favoring men in
virtual Morris Water Task (vMWT) performance has also
been reported (Astur, Ortiz, & Sutherland, 1998; Driscoll,
Hamilton, Yeo, Brooks, & Sutherland, 2005; Nowak &
Moffat, 2010; Sandstrom, Kaufman, & Huettel, 1998)
with several effect sizes as large as or larger than one
standard deviation (e.g., Astur et al., 1998; Nowak &
Moffat, 2010).
Sex differences at the behavioral level imply that sex
differences at the neural level may be one source of
explanation for this group difference; therefore, it is
logical to hypothesize that men and women may be
recruiting different brain regions to solve navigation
tasks. To our knowledge, only two papers have addressed
sex differences in blood oxygen level dependent response
(BOLD; i.e., brain activation) during the performance of
VE tasks in samples of healthy young participants.
In the first fMRI study of this nature, men and women
were tested while they navigated as quickly as possible
through a number of unfamiliar computerized mazes
(Grön et al. 2000). Behaviorally, men found their way to
the goal location of the mazes significantly faster than
women, and the effect size of this sex difference was
large. During maze navigation, activation in the right
prefrontal cortex and right inferior and superior parietal
lobes was greater for women than men. Activation during
navigation was greater for men than women in the regions
of the left hippocampus, right parahippocampal gyrus,
and left posterior cingulate/retrosplenial cortex. The
authors interpreted the sex difference in brain activation
as a product of the differential use of egocentric and
allocentric strategies. However, due to the large,
statistically uncontrolled sex difference in navigation
performance, this study cannot rule out the possibility that
men and women matched in navigation accuracy and
speed may show a more similar pattern of brain activation
during maze performance.
Ohnishi et al. (2006) categorized participants by sex and
navigation ability, which provided the opportunity to test
the main effects and interactions of each of these
variables on brain activation during passive maze
navigation.

Sex Differences in Brain
Activation During Virtual Navigation:
A Functional MRI Study
Nicole T. Nowak (at3125@wayne.edu)
Department of Psychology
5057 Woodward Ave. 7th Floor
Detroit, MI 48202

Susan M. Resnick
(resnicks@grc.nia.nih.gov)
Laboratory of Behavioral Neuroscience
Biomedical Research Center, room 04B317
251 Bayview Boulevard, Suite 100
Baltimore, MD 21224-6825

Wendy Elkins (wendy.elkins@nih.gov)
Laboratory of Behavioral Neuroscience
Biomedical Research Center, room 04C106
251 Bayview Boulevard
Baltimore, MD 21224-6825

Scott D. Moffat (moffat@wayne.edu)
Institute of Gerontology and
Department of Psychology
87 E. Ferry St.
Detroit, MI 48202

Abstract
A male advantage is often reported for measures of
visuospatial performance, including measures of spatial
navigation; however, few papers have addressed sex
differences in brain activity during performance of these
navigation tasks. We used functional MRI to compare the
brain activation between young adult men and women
during performance in a virtual environment (VE). Men
and women did not differ in performance, but sex
differences
were
apparent
in
the
functional
neuroanatomical correlates of navigation. In particular
there was increased activation of the posterior cingulate
retrosplenial cortex in men, and, in women with perfect
recall performance, increased activation of the
parahippocampal gyrus. These two areas are keys to
successful navigation. Our results demonstrate that even
when men and woman are well-matched on navigation
performance, they appear to use different brain
mechanisms to achieve the same behavioral end point.
Keywords: virtual navigation; sex differences; functional
MRI

Spatial navigation is one domain of human cognition
where a male advantage has been reported. In a review of
sex differences in navigational performance Coluccia and
Louse (2004) reported that a male advantage was found in

2776

Participants passively viewed movement through nine
mazes from a first-person perspective, and then were
presented with two mazes from a bird’s-eye perspective
and were directed to determine which maze represented
the environment they had passively viewed. Navigation
ability (good or poor) was based on participants’ Sense of
Direction Questionnaire scores (SDQ-S; Takeuchi, 1992),
an inventory composed of two scales relating to
awareness of orientation and memory for spatial behavior.
There was no main effect of sex, or interaction between
sex and ability, on brain activation during maze
navigation; however, the main effect of ability was
significant. Participants with good navigation ability as
determined by SDQ-S scores had greater activation in the
parahippocampal gyri and precuneus, whereas poor
navigators had greater activation in the right inferior
parietal lobe. There was a positive correlation between
accuracy in choosing the correct bird’s-eye view maze
during the passive navigation task and activation in the
left hippocampus and parahippocampal gyrus; whereas a
negative correlation was found between accuracy and
right superior parietal lobe activation. Interpretation of
this group difference was similar to that made by Grön in
that better navigation ability was attributed to the use of
an allocentric strategy whereas poor ability was related to
an egocentric strategy.
Although the methods used to study the neural
substrates of navigation differed between Grön et al.
(2000) and Ohnishi et al. (2006), it is worth comparing
the two. The brain areas involved in the maze
performance of men (Grön et al.) coincide well with areas
of activation found in the good navigators (Ohnishi et al.);
likewise, results from the women correspond well with
those of the bad navigators. The left hippocampus and
parahippocampal gyri were associated with the best
navigation performance, whereas activity in the right
inferior and superior parietal lobes was correlated with
relatively poor performance.
Clearly there is a gap in our knowledge between sex
differences at the behavioral level and those at the
functional neuroanatomical level. Conclusions from the
behavioral literature are consistent; there is often a
moderate to large male advantage on real world and
virtual navigation tasks. The primary aim of this
neuroimaging study was to investigate sex differences in
brain activation during a virtual navigation task, and to
correlate brain activity with performance. Collectively,
the results from Grön et al. (2000) and Ohnishi et al.
(2006) led us to hypothesize that the hippocampus and
parahippocampal gyri would be associated with relatively
good navigation performance, whereas the right parietal
cortex would underlie poorer performance. Given the
volume of research demonstrating sex differences in
navigation-related behavior, we also hypothesized that
men would complete our maze task with greater accuracy

than women, and that group differences in brain
activation would be apparent.

Method
Participants
Thirty healthy men and women (n = 15 men), age 21-39
years, who fit the MRI safety criteria, were recruited from
newspaper advertisements. Men and women did not differ
in age, t(28) = .87. It is unknown whether the groups
differed in level of education or occupation.
Procedures
Prior to completing the VE tasks in the scanner,
participants received extensive training outside of the
scanner to familiarize them with the specific procedures
and goals of the VE.
Navigation Tasks We used functional MRI to compare
the brain activation between young men and women
during performance in a VE. The virtual maze used in this
task was a combination of interconnected hallways and
small rooms, where there were six common objects
placed throughout. This assessment had two parts:
encoding and recall. The encoding phase of the navigation
task required participants to actively explore the virtual
maze and learn the location of six objects, as well as the
spatial layout of the environment. Participants were
instructed to learn the location of all of the objects, the
interconnections of the hallways, and the general layout
of the maze such that they could create an accurate
overhead map of the environment. The recall phase
required participants to remember the locations of the six
objects encountered during the encoding phase and to
move from object to object quickly and accurately using
the shortest possible route. Presumably, the task as a
whole required both object and object location memory
along with a broader viewer-independent cognitive map
of the environment which enabled participants to make
decisions about the shortest routes possible between six
objects. For each of the encoding and recall condition a
control task was used that required participants to follow
a winding hallway without having to learn the location of
objects, locate objects, or make any navigation decisions;
however, the control task required focused attention, the
same joystick movements, visual stimulation, optic flow
and other motion sensations as the navigation task.
A block design was employed and consisted of two
phases: encode versus control, and recall versus control.
The first phase involved a total of 10 blocks, which
alternated between encode and control every 60 sec. The
second phase was also composed of 10 blocks, alternating
between the recall and control tasks every 60 sec.;
therefore, the total duration of the functional task was 20
minutes.

2777

fMRI Data Acquisition & Analysis Images were
acquired on a 1.5 Tesla Phillips Gyroscan NT Intera
parallel to the plane containing the anterior and posterior
commissures. Following high resolution anatomical
images, functional images were obtained using echoplanar imaging (TR = 3000 ms; TE = 30 ms; field of
view= 64×64; voxel size= 3.75mm×3.75mm×5.5 mm).
The first eight preliminary volumes of a session were
discarded to achieve equilibrium. Statistical analysis was
performed using SPM2 (Wellcome Department of
Cognitive Neurology, London, UK) implemented in
Matlab 5. All images were motion corrected by realigning
to the first image of each subject. All images were
spatially normalized to the standard template provided in
SPM2 which is based on the reference brain provided by
the Montreal Neurological Institute. Volumes were
smoothed using an 8mm full width half maximum height
Gaussian filter.
For primary analysis, each imaging run was analyzed
using a box car function convolved with the
hemodynamic response function. Contrast images
producing t-statistics for each voxel were calculated for
each subject based on the primary analysis. Voxels were
thresholded at p < 0.01. These contrast images were then
incorporated into second level group comparisons using a
random effects model. Men and women were examined
separately using one-sample t-tests comparing the
navigation and control conditions. For comparisons
between men and women during maze encoding, twosample t-tests were used; and for group comparisons
during maze recall, analysis of covariance was performed
with sex as a grouping variable and speed during maze
recall used as a covariate in the model. For all random
effects analyses, height threshold was set at p < 0.01.
Figures 1-3 represent group composite images created for
the groups of men and women separately.

BOLD Response in Men and Women During
Navigation Encoding
One sample t –tests were used to determine areas of brain
activation specific to maze learning by subtracting
activation during the control trials from activation during
the exploration trials. For the sample as a whole,
activation was found in the following regions during maze
exploration: bilateral precuneus, middle frontal gyri, and
claustrum; left medial frontal gyrus, and left superior
frontal gyrus.
Two sample t –tests were used to analyze sex
differences in brain activation during maze learning.
Activation during the encoding trials was greater in men
than women in the following regions: bilateral middle
frontal and cingulate gyri; right cuneus, putamen, superior
parietal lobe, angular and medial frontal gyri; left
posterior cingulate, insula, and lingual gyrus. Women,
compared to men, had greater activation in the right
amygdala and inferior parietal lobe, and left paracentral
lobule. The top panel in Figure 1 highlights some of the
regions that were more active in the group of men than
group of women during encoding (i.e., Men > Women),
and the bottom panel of Figure 1 displays some of the
regions that were more active in women than men (i.e.,
Women > Men).
Results: Men > Women: left posterior cingulate,
right cuneus, left middle frontal gyrus

Results: Women > Men: right inferior parietal
lobe and amygdala

Results
Navigation Performance
To investigate sex differences on behavioral outcome
variables, we performed independent sample t-tests. Men
traveled at a faster speed than women during the recall
trials, t(28) = 1.99, p = .057, and this group difference
was due to men moving at a faster speed during the first,
t(28) = 2.70, p = .01, and final, t(28) = 2.25, p = .03, recall
trials. Due to men travelling at a significantly faster speed
on two of the five recall trials, speed was used as a
covariate in the analyses of the recall task fMRI data.
Also, the uncontrolled sex difference in speed was one of
the drawbacks in the study by Grön et al. (2000), and we
aimed to avoid this problem. Men and women did not
differ in percent accuracy during recall, t(28) = .36, p =
.73, and were well-matched on the other navigational
variables.

Figure 1: Sex Differences During Encoding
BOLD Response in Men and Women During
Navigation Recall
A one sample t –test was used to determine areas of brain
activation specific to maze recall by subtracting activation
during the control trials from activation during the recall
trials. For the sample as a whole, activation was found in
the following regions during the maze recall task: bilateral
precuneus and thalamus; right posterior cingulate,
claustrum, cerebellum, and superior frontal gyrus; left
insula, and precentral, inferior occipital, medial, and
middle frontal gyri.

2778

Analysis of covariance controlling for speed of
movement during the recall task was used to analyze sex
differences in brain activation during maze recall. By
using speed as a covariate, we were able to control for any
group differences in brain activation that may have been
attributable to men moving faster than women, especially
on the first and final trials of the recall task. Activation
during the recall trials was greater in men than women in
the following regions: bilateral parahippocampal gyri;
right cingulate, cuneus, thalamus, and lingual, middle
frontal, and superior temporal gyri; and left precuneus
.Women, compared to men, had greater activation in the
left superior and medial frontal gyri. Figure 2 highlights
some of the sex differences in brain activation during the
recall task.

Results: Men > Women: Bilateral cuneus; Left
posterior cingulate

Results: Women > Men: Left parahippocampal
gyrus

Results: Men > Women: Bilateral
parahippocampal gyrus; Right posterior cingulate
Figure 3: Sex Differences During Recall in Men and
Women Matched on Recall Accuracy
Relationships Between Navigation Performance and
BOLD Response During Encoding
Regression analysis was used to assess the relationship
between brain activation during the exploration phase and
accuracy scores during the recall phase for men, women,
and the sample as a whole. The region most strongly
correlated with good recall performance in the whole
sample was the right middle frontal gyrus. For men, a
positive association was found between performance and
activation in the left posterior cingulate, precuneus, and
superior frontal gyrus. The right middle frontal gyrus,
cingulate and insula cortex, and left superior frontal gyrus
were positively correlated with recall performance in
women.

Results: Women > Men: Left frontal cortex

Figure 2: Sex Differences During Recall
BOLD Response in Men and Women with Perfect
Accuracy Scores During Maze Recall
Because of controversy associated with interpreting group
differences in brain activation data when groups may
differ in behavioral performance, we employed strict
matching criteria to investigate sex differences in brain
activation completely independent of performance
differences. We selected only those men and women who
performed perfectly on the recall portion of the study (i.e.
they made no mistakes when directed to move to any
specific object). There were 18 subjects (9 women) who
met this criterion.
Activation was greater in men than women in the
following regions: bilateral precuneus, cuneus, and
precentral gyrus; right thalamus, red nucleus, lingual and
superior temporal gyri; left posterior cingulate and middle
frontal gyrus (Figure 3, top panel). Women, compared to
men, had greater activation in the right anterior cingulate,
precuneus, and inferior frontal gyrus; left inferior parietal
lobe, middle frontal and parahippocampal gyri (Figure 3,
bottom panel).

Relationships between Navigation Performance and
BOLD Response During Recall
Regression analysis was used to assess the relationship
between brain activation during the recall phase and
accuracy on the recall task. Greater accuracy in the whole
sample was most strongly correlated with left paracentral
lobule activation. For men, the most robust positive
association was found between performance and
activation of the left posterior cingulate cortex. The right
middle frontal and cingulate gyri were positively
correlated with recall performance in women.

Conclusion
The primary contributions of this paper are the
demonstration of sex differences in brain activation
during navigation encoding and recall. Most importantly,
we demonstrated that men and women showed different
patterns of brain activation even when the groups each
performed at 100 percent accuracy.

2779

The fact that women and men both performed well on this
task is an exception to the male advantage reported in
many studies of navigation-related tasks, and this is likely
due to the difficulty level of the task. Participants
performed the recall task with an average of 80%
accuracy.
Several group differences in brain activation emerged
from our analyses, but it is beyond to scope of this paper
to discuss the possible functional significance of each
area. Two regions of interest which have been discussed
consistently in the literature regarding navigation are the
posterior cingulate/retrosplenial cortex and the
parahippocampal
gyrus.
The
posterior
cingulate/retrosplenial cortex has been recognized for its
role in visuospatial orientation (e.g., Vogt, Finch, &
Olson, 1992), and neuropsychological studies suggest it is
a necessary component of successful navigation because
it allows us to orient ourselves in space and integrate
egocentric and allocentric frames of reference (for review,
see Epstein, 2008; Maguire, 2001). The posterior
cingulate/retrosplenial cortex has been associated with
mental navigation from one landmark to another (Ghaem
et al., 1997), expertise in the encoding of a virtual town
(Wolbers & Büchel, 2005), reporting the location of a
familiar place (Epstein, Parker,&Feiler, 2007), and in
several other neuroimaging studies of navigation-related
tasks (e.g., for review, see Maguire, 2001; for metaanalysis, see Spreng, Mar, & Kim, 2008) including one
very similar in design to the current study (Aguirre et al.,
1996).
The parahippocampal area is another key component of
successful navigation as it allows us to identify and
remember landmarks, scenes (e.g., Epstein, 2008), and
spatial
layouts,
even
those
scenes
without
objects/landmarks (Epstein, 2008; Epstein &Kanwisher,
1998). Involvement of the parahippocampal gyrus has
been associated with viewing of landmarks within a
virtual town (Ekstrom et al., 2003);and learning and
recall phases of a VE task similar to ours (Aguirre et al.,
1996).
Of particular interest is the pattern of posterior
cingulate/retrosplenial cortex and parahippocampal
activation. In a recent review, Epstein (2008) discussed
these two regions as having “distinct but complementary
roles” in spatial navigation. The parahippocampal region
subserves our ability to identify and remember landmarks
and scenes, whereas the posterior cingulate/retrosplenial
cortex subserves spatial orientation. In men, increased
BOLD response was seen in the posterior
cingulate/retrosplenial cortex for all statistical analyses
conducted, and parahippocampal gyrus activation was
found during recall. Although we did not measure or
manipulate strategy in this study, the ubiquitous activation
of the posterior cingulate region supports previous
observations and interpretations that men conceptualize
the environment through an allocentric, or viewer-

independent framework. Additionally, bilateral activation
of the parahippocampal gyrus suggests that men were
utilizing combined “scene” and “spatial” representations
of the environment to solve the recall task. The pattern of
results was less consistent for women. The frontal lobe
activation in women during recall performance suggests
that the task may have been approached in terms of object
location and working memory. Greater BOLD response in
the left parahippocampal gyrus than men during recall in
the subsample of participants with perfect accuracy scores
is consistent with data and interpretations that suggest
women rely more heavily on memory for landmarks and
scenes when navigating through the environment. We
can infer from our data that more than one effective
means of conceptualizing the spatial environment exists,
and that these different strategies may lead to similar
behavioral performance.
Behavioral studies suggest that men prefer allocentric
strategies and are more adept at using them than women,
and that women prefer egocentric strategies (e.g.,
Coluccia & Louse, 2004; Galea & Kimura, 1993;
Malinowski & Gillespie, 2001), but to our knowledge an
fMRI study in which men and women were matched on
strategy and accuracy has not been done; therefore, we
can speculate that strategy partially accounts for the
difference in brain activation. Future neuroimaging
studies that experimentally manipulate strategy and match
men and women on behavioral outcomes within each
strategy will provide a more definitive discussion about
the effects of sex and strategy on the functional
neuroanatomical correlates of navigation. While studies
of this nature will be valuable, it is also important to think
of these frameworks of spatial orientation as
complementary (Eptstein, 2008) in that it behooves us in
our large-scale environments to fluidly translate between
first-person/egocentric and world-centered/allocentric
perspectives.

Acknowledgments
Funded in part by NIH Intramural Research Program and
by grant R01 AG028466 awarded to Scott Moffat.

2780

Nowak, N. T., & Moffat, S. D. (2010). The relationship
between second to fourth digit ratio, spatial cognition,
and virtual navigation. Archives of Sexual Behavior,
DOI 10.1007/s10508-010-9668-2.
Ohnishi, T., Matsuda, H., Hirakata, M., & Rahman, Q., &
Koerting, J. (2008). Sexual orientation-related
differences in allocentric spatial memory tasks.
Hippocampus, 18, 55-63.
Sandstrom, N.J., Kaufman, J., & Huettel, S. (1998). Males
and females use different distal cues in a virtual
environment navigation task. Cognitive Brain Research,
6, 351-360.
Spreng, R. N., Mar, R. A., & Kim, A. S. N. (2008). The
common neural basis of autobiographical memory,
prospection, navigation, theory of mind, and the default
mode: A quantitative meta-analysis. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 21(3), 489-510.
Takeuchi, Y. (1992). Sense of direction and its
relationship with geographical orientation, personality
traits and mental ability. Japanese Journal of
Educational Psychology, 40, 47-53.
Wolbers, T., &Büchel, C. (2005). Dissociable
retrosplenial and hippocampal contributions
to successful formation of survey representations. The
Journal of Neuroscience, 25(13), 3333-3340.

References
Aguirre, G. K., Detre, J. A., Alsop, D. C., D’Esposito, M.
(1996). The parahippocampus subserves topographical
learning in man. Cerebral Cortex,6, 823-829.
Astur, R.S., Ortiz, M.L., & Sutherland, R.J. (1998). A
characterization of performance by men and women in
a virtual Morris Water task: A large and reliable sex
difference. Behavioral Brain Research, 93, 185-190.
Coluccia, E. & Louse, G. (2004). Gender
differences in spatial orientation: A review.
Journal of environmental psychology, 24, 329-340.
Driscoll, I., Hamilton, D.A., Yeo, R.A., Brooks, W.M., &
Sutherland, R.J. (2005). Virtual navigation in humans:
the impact of age, sex, and hormones on place learning.
Hormones and Behavior, 47, 326-335.
Ekstrom, A.D., Kahana, M.J., Caplan, J.B., Fields, T.A.,
Isham, E.A., Newman, E.L., & Fried, I. (2003).Cellular
networks underlying human spatial navigation. Nature,
425, 184-187.
Epstein, R. A. (2008). Parahippocampal and retrosplenial
contributions to human spatial navigation. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 12(10), 388-396.
Epstein, R. & Kanwisher, N. (1998). A cortical
representation of the local visual environment. Nature,
392(6676), 598-601.
Epstein, R. A., Parker, W. E., &Feiler, A. M. (2007).
Where am I now? Distinct roles for
parahippocampal and retrosplenial cortices in place
recognition. The Journal of Neuroscience, 27(23), 61416149.
Galea, L.A.M. & Kimura, D. (1993). Sex differences in
route learning. Personality and Individual Differences,
14(1), 53-65.
Ghaem, O., Mellet, E., Crivello, F., Tzourio, N., Mazoyer,
B., Berthoz, A., & Denis, M. (1997). Mental navigation
along memorized routes activates the hippocampus,
precuneus, and insula. Cognitive Neuroscience and
Neuropsychology, 8, 739-744.
Grön, G., Wunderlich, A.P., Spitzer, M., Tomczak, R., &
Riepe, M.W. (2000). Brain activation during human
navigation: gender-different neural networks as
substrate of performance. Nature Neuroscience, 3(4),
404-408.
Maguire, E. A. (2001). The retrosplenial contribution to
human navigation: A review of lesion and neuroimaging
findings. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 42, 225238.
Malinowski, J.C. & Gillespie. W.T. (2001). Individual
differences in performance on a large-scale, real-world
wayfinding task. Journal of Environmental Psychology,
21, 73-82.
Moffat, S.D., Hampson, E., & Hatzipantelis, M. (1998).
Navigation in a “virtual” maze: Sex differences and
correlation with psychometric measures of spatial
ability in humans. Evolution and Human Behavior, 19,
73-87.

2781

