UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Spatial Reasoning within Visible Functional Constraints

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0n39c7bt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Jahn, Georg
Muller-Bardorff, Miriam
Coventry, Kenny

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Spatial Reasoning within Visible Functional Constraints
Georg Jahn (georg.jahn@uni-greifswald.de)
University of Greifswald, Department of Psychology,
Franz-Mehring-Str. 47, 17489 Greifswald, Germany

Miriam Müller-Bardorff (mm061876@uni-greifswald.de)
University of Greifswald, Department of Psychology,
Franz-Mehring-Str. 47, 17489 Greifswald, Germany

Kenny R. Coventry (kenny.coventry@northumbria.ac.uk)
Cognition and Communication Research Centre, School of Life Sciences, Northumbria University
Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 8ST, UK
Abstract

Spatial relational reasoning problems vary in difficulty
depending on the number of possible interpretations of a set
of premises. Visible context and functional constraints
should take effect in the interpretation of extended spatial
descriptions in reasoning problems as in the comprehension
of single utterances. In this paper we demonstrate that
visible and functional constraints mesh together on-line with
verbal information to limit the number of interpretations
considered by participants to solve spatial reasoning
problems.

In an eye tracking experiment, the interplay of visual and
verbal information was studied in the domain of spatial
relational reasoning. Standard verbal two-dimensional
reasoning problems were presented auditorily along with
visible context. In one condition, the visual-verbal interplay
was designed to limit the number of interpretations that
participants should consider for a set of premises. Past
research has shown that visual context does not appear to
limit the number of interpretations participants produce in this
domain. In the present study, however, participants’
responses, premise processing times, and gaze behavior
confirmed that the interplay of visual and verbal information
successfully directed participants towards a single
interpretation when functional constraints disambiguated
spatial relations. The results corroborate theories of situated
language processing and demonstrate perceptual grounding
and functional modulation in spatial reasoning.
Keywords: Spatial relational
integration; mental models.

reasoning;

Spatial Relational Reasoning

visual-verbal

Situated Language Comprehension
Comprehending language that refers to visible context
involves rapid and even predictive shifts of attention
towards likely referents in a visible scene. In situated
language comprehension, perceptual and linguistic
processing are closely intertwined (Altmann & Kamide,
1999; Knoeferle & Crocker, 2006). For example,
perceptual-linguistic integration has been shown to quickly
disambiguate syntactic structure, referents of noun phrases,
and the interpretation of verbs. In spatial language, semantic
uncertainty concerns locations and spatial relations. For
example, “right of” often denotes a region rather than a
specific location. Multiple additional constraints can take
effect in spatial language processing to sharpen the
interpretation of spatial descriptions. This includes the
visible context as well as functional constraints (Coventry &
Garrod, 2004).
Whereas the interplay of perceptual, linguistic, and
semantic processing has been studied extensively for the
comprehension of single utterances including statements of
spatial relations, there have been few attempts to
demonstrate its effect on reasoning with spatial premises.

In experiments on spatial relational reasoning, reasoners
are asked to infer or evaluate spatial relations based on
several stated spatial relations. For example: The apple is to
the left of the banana, the carrot is to the right of the
banana. Where is the apple with respect to the carrot? The
spatial array or spatial mental model that satisfies the
relations stated in the example is:
A(pple) B(anana) C(arrot)
The model yields the relation that holds between the apple
and the carrot and thus the sought inference: The apple is to
the left of the carrot. Such one-dimensional three-term
series problems have been studied extensively with spatial
and non-spatial relations (e.g., better and worse). Twodimensional problems (Byrne & Johnson-Laird, 1989) have
become standard tasks for studying spatial relational
reasoning as well. Such problems are used here embedded
in the context of planning seating arrangements for guests at
tables.
Table 1 shows three types of two-dimensional problems,
which differ with regard to the number of alternative seating
arrangements fulfilling the set of spatial premises. One
arrangement is possible for one-model problems. Two
arrangements are possible for the two-model problems, in
which the second premise introduces this indeterminacy.
In determinate two-model problems, the spatial relation
between the guests in the bottom row (D and E) is the same
in both possible arrangements (D sits to the left of E),
whereas this relation differs between the arrangements for
indeterminate two-model problems. Thus, the correct

1539

indeterminate problems conforms with model theory’s
prediction that accuracy should decrease if multiple mental
models have to be considered to solve a reasoning problem
(Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991).

Spatial Reasoning with Visible Functional Context
Figure 1: The two table arrangements
answer for indeterminate two-model models is “both are
possible”. When participants are presented with these three
types of problems and are asked to indicate or evaluate the
spatial relation between D and E, their accuracy is reliably
higher for one-model and two-model determinate problems
than for two-model indeterminate problems (Byrne and
Johnson-Laird, 1989). The difficulty of two-model

In an earlier study with two-model problems (Coventry,
Venn, & Armstead, 2002), functional relations between
familiar objects (e.g., cup on saucer) did not constrain
interpretations, possibly, because participants did not regard
functional relations as relevant to the reasoning task. Guided
by these prior findings, we designed a novel task with
stronger functional constraints. The physical context
consisted of the table arrangements shown in Figure 1.

Table 1: Examples of reasoning problems
Problem Type

Premises and Response Alternatives

Possible Interpretations

<C prefers to sit alone>
A sits to the left of B
C sits to the right of B
D sits in front of B.
E sits in front of C

AB C
D E

One Model Problem

1) D sits to the left of E (correct)
2) E sits to the left of D
3) both are possible
Determinate Two-model Problem
<C prefers to sit alone>
A sits to the left of B
C sits to the right of A
D sits in front of A
E sits in front of C

AB C
D E

AC B
D E__

AB C
D E

AC B
E D

1) D sits to the left of E (correct)
2) E sits to the left of D
3) both are possible
Indeterminate Two-model Problem
<C prefers to sit alone>
A sits to the left of B
C sits to the right of A
D sits in front of B
E sits in front of C
1) D sits to the left of E (implied)
2) E sits to the left of D
3) both are possible
Note. Participants were presented auditorily with the assertions of a problem while seeing a schematic table arrangement
on the screen and then selected one of the three response alternatives to indicate the relationship between D and E. The
listed problems were presented together with the left table arrangement shown in Figure 1. The assertion shown in bold
face (<C prefers to sit alone>) was only presented in the one-model-implied condition. Models of seating arrangements
that satisfy the <additional information> are indicated in bold face.

1540

Consider the left table arrangement in Figure 1 together
with the problems in Table 1. The sentence indicated in bold
that states a seating preference of one individual (C prefers
to sit alone) extends the standard problems. Without this
additional sentence, participants should behave as in earlier
studies with the standard problems and the table
arrangement should remain inert. With the additional
sentence, however, the visible table array should become
relevant. Only a single table affords sitting alone and thus,
the stated seating preference creates a functional constraint.
We predicted that the array co-present during reasoning in
combination with the stated seating preference should direct
participants towards the single seating arrangement
satisfying the preference (indicated in bold face in Table 1).
We recorded participants’ eye movements while they
worked through problems in two conditions: the control
condition (neutral) without the additional sentence stating a
seating preference and the experimental condition with the
additional sentence (one-model-implied).

completed two training problems and the 12 experimental
problems. The order of conditions was counterbalanced.
At the beginning of each trial, a table arrangement was
shown and the introductory sentence (6.6 s) was presented
auditorily. In the one-model-implied condition, after a 500
ms delay, the sentence identifying the individual who
prefers to sit alone (1.8 s) was presented. Then, presentation
of the first premise started after a delay of 1000 ms. In the
neutral condition, the first premise was presented 500 ms
after the introductory sentence. The presentation of the
following premises was self-paced and triggered with the
space key. Premises 1 and 2, each lasted 2.4 s, premises 3
and 4, each lasted 2.2 s. With a 500 ms delay after the fourth
premise, the three response alternatives (e.g., Darcey sits to
the left of Ernest, Ernest sits to the left of Darcey, Both are
possible) were presented (9.0 s) in constant order.
Participants chose one of the response alternatives with the
number keys 1, 2, and 3. Responses were possible as soon
as the presentation of response alternatives had started.

Method

Results and Discussion

Participants. Twenty-four students of the University of
Greifswald served as paid participants. The mean age of the
15 women and 9 men was 23.6 (SD 3.1).
Materials. Examples of one-model, two-model determinate,
and two-model indeterminate problems are shown in
Table 1. Each problem was paired with a fixed layout of
tables. Two layouts of tables were used (see Figure 1). The
location of the single table in the back row was important,
because it should interact with the seating preferences stated
in one-model-implied problems. We constructed four
problems of each type for each condition (24 problems in
total). The German sentence materials were digitally
recorded spoken by a female voice.
We prepared instructional videos, in which a female who
introduced herself as a restaurant manager motivated the
experimental task as an exercise in planning seating
arrangements. The restaurant manager explained with toy
tables and chairs that participants should start with seating
individuals in the back row and that left of and right of mean
left of and right of from the participants’ perspective.
Finally, she explained the alternative responses to choose
from. In the instructional video for the one-model-implied
condition, the restaurant manager mentioned that sometimes
guests are incompatible and should not be forced together.
The table arrangements subtended 21.0 by 16.4 degrees of
visual angle and were shown on a 19” LCD monitor, below
which the IR-camera unit of the 50Hz remote eye tracker
(SMI RED) was mounted. Participants sat 70 cm in front of
the monitor with the head on a chin rest, wore headphones
and responded with keys on a standard keyboard.
Procedure. Participants were tested individually. After they
had watched the instructional video, they completed two
training problems and the 12 experimental problems for one
condition. Then, after a short break, they watched the
instructional video for the other condition, and again

We first report response frequencies and response accuracy.
In addition, we report processing times for the second
premise, which distinguished one-model and two-model
problems, and finally, we discuss selected gaze data.
Premise processing times were measured from the end of
presentation until the participant triggered the next
presentation. We eliminated outliers higher than 2.5
standard deviations above the mean for processing times
(3.9%). The analysis of gaze behavior was restricted to trials
with sufficient data quality (98% for 22 participants; two
participants with few remaining trials were excluded).
Response frequencies. Response frequencies are shown in
Table 2 and reflect the effect of the one-model-implied
condition on indeterminate two-model problems. “Both are
possible” responses were less frequent and the response
alternative reflecting the implied single model was chosen
more frequently than in the neutral condition (57 vs. 33,
respectively), paired t-test of mean frequencies, t(23) = 3.32,
p < .01, d = 1.03. In contrast, for both remaining problem
types, the response distributions were similar.
In the neutral condition, the two determined response
alternatives were chosen with approximately equal
frequencies for indeterminate two-model problems (33 and
40). Note that these frequencies could reflect a preference
for one of the two possible models. The first determined
model results if the guests in premise 1 are kept together
and the third guest mentioned in premise 2 is placed
“outside”. The second determined model results if the third
guest is placed “inside” the initial pair. Outside placements
avoid a revision of the initial pair, but disregard the
pragmatic implicature to pair the guests in premise 2 (van
der Henst, Chevallier, Schaeken, Mercier, & Noveck, 2008).
The slight trend towards “inside” placements as opposed to
a common “outside” preference in the neutral standard task
is probably the result of the presented table arrangement as
explained in the section on fixation proportions below.

1541

Table 2: Frequencies of responses, mean accuracy (with standard error), and mean processing times for the second premise
(with standard error) for each problem type by condition (one-model-implied vs. neutral)
Response
Determined

Problem Type

Determined

Both possible

Total

Percent
Correct

Processing Time 2nd
Premise (in msec)

One Model Implied
One Model

54 (correct)

32

10

96

57.3 (5.7)

2900 (240)

Two Model Determinate

67 (correct)

24

5

96

69.8 (4.5)

3254 (296)

Two Model Indeterminate

57 (implied)

33

6

96

(not applicable)

3212 (255)

Neutral
One Model

57 (correct)

33

6

96

59.4 (5.2)

3946 (437)

Two Model Determinate

60 (correct)

27

9

96

62.5 (5.2)

5568 (586)

Two Model Indeterminate

33

40

23 (correct)

96

26.0 (5.1)

6339 (698)

One Model Implied

Neutral

Figure 2: Mean proportions of fixations on the single table in the top row (shown in the top row) and on the double table in
the top row (shown in the bottom row) for the sequential intervals within a trial separately for the one-model-implied
condition (left column) and the neutral condition (right column) and for problem types; error bars indicate the standard error.

1542

One Model Implied

Neutral

Figure 3: Mean number of horizontal transitions between seats in the top row (shown in the top row) and in the bottom row
separately for the one-model-implied condition (left column) and the neutral condition (right column) and for the problem
types; error bars indicate the standard error
Response accuracy. Mean percentages of correct responses
are shown in Table 2. In both conditions, accuracy was
slightly, but not significantly higher for two-model
determinate problems than for one-model problems. In the
neutral condition, accuracy for indeterminate two-model
problems was significantly lower than for determinate twomodel problems, paired t-test, t(23) = 5.29, p < .001, d =
1.44. This difference is consistent with the typical
accuracypattern in the standard task. Furthermore, the low
accuracy of 26 % correct for neutral indeterminate twomodel problems is common if premises are presented
auditorily (van der Henst et al., 2008).
Premise processing times. Mean processing times after the
second premise are shown in Table 2. Elevated processing
times for two-model problems suggest that participants
considered multiple interpretations because the second
premise introduced ambiguity in two-model problems. Only
in the neutral condition, mean processing times were
significantly higher for two-model problems than for onemodel problems. This interaction was confirmed in an
overall 2 x 3 repeated-measures ANOVA, F(2, 46) = 6.67, p
< .01. The main effect of condition, F(1, 23) = 22.34, p <

.001, and the main effect of problem type, F(2, 46) = 13.88,
p < .001, were also significant. Separate one-way repeatedmeasures ANOVAs confirmed the effect of problem type in
the neutral condition, F(2, 46) = 11.10, p < .001, but not in
the one-model-implied condition, F(2, 46) = 2.01, p = .15.
Fixation proportions for the top row of tables. Figure 2
shows proportions of fixations measured from the start of a
sentence to the start of the next sentence. In the one-modelimplied condition after the introduction of the guests to be
seated (Names), an additional sentence indicated the guest
who “prefers to sit alone” (NameAlone). The presentation of
this sentence triggered fixations of the single table in the top
row, at which this guest had to be seated to meet the stated
preference.
During processing of premises 1 and 2, fixation
proportions indicate that attention was allocated mainly at
the double table, and they hardly differed between problem
types. For one-model problems in the neutral condition,
however, premise 1 directed less gazes to the single table
and more gazes to the double table. This probably reflects a
subtle interaction of the table arrangement in the top row
with the wording of premise 1: In all four one-model

1543

problems, left-of in premise 1 was combined with a left
double table and right-of with a right double table. In half of
the two-model problems, however, left-of in premise 1 was
combined with a single table on the left and right-of with a
single table on the right, which presumably prompted
seating the subject of premise 1 at the single table. This
effect of the combination of spatial relational terms and
table arrangement was absent in the one-model-implied
condition. There, the functional constraint biased against
seating guests mentioned in premise 1 at the single table
because those mentioned in premise 1 never were the
dedicated singles. Hence, fixations after premise 1 were
directed to the double table irrespective of problem type.
After premise 2, fixation proportions for the top row
decreased. Only for the top double table in the neutral
condition, they were slightly higher for two-model problems
suggesting the consideration of alternative arrangements.
Horizontal transitions. Mean numbers of horizontal
transitions between tables in the top and bottom rows are
plotted in Figure 3. Note that premises 1 and 2 were
identical for determinate and indeterminate two-model
problems. Thus, all differences between determinate and
indeterminate two-model problems up to premise 2 reflect
error variance. In the neutral condition but not in the onemodel-implied condition, horizontal transitions in the top
row were more frequent for two-model problems, paired ttest, t(21) = 2.49, p < .05, d = 0.43. This result confirms the
conclusion drawn from premise 2 processing times: In the
neutral but not in the one-model-implied condition,
participants sometimes considered alternative seating
arrangements for the top row. This additional processing
took time and was accompanied by fixations and transitions
within the top row.
Horizontal transitions in the bottom row rarely occurred
before the response interval. The following steep increase
while considering the response suggests that participants
actually placed and processed spatial indices corresponding
to the two guests mentioned in premises 3 and 4 within the
bottom row of the visible table arrangement instead of, for
example, just considering spatial relations of the associated
guests in the top row.
Selected fixation proportions for the bottom row. Finally,
we focus on fixation data for a single seat to infer the
interpretations considered in reasoning. As visible in
Table 1, the middle seat in the bottom row remains free in
one of the two possible models for the determinate twomodel problem. This was true for all four determinate twomodel problems. The model with the free middle seat is
always the one that meets the seating preference in the onemodel-implied condition. Thus, a reduced fixation
proportion for this seat affords direct evidence that
participants considered predominantly this model in the
one-model-implied condition. We computed the respective
fixation proportion for the interval from the onset of
premise 3 until the response for both conditions. As
expected, the fixation proportion was lower in the onemodel-implied condition than in the neutral condition (.35

vs. .44, respectively; SDs .15 and .14), paired t-test t(21) =
2.47, p < .05, d = 0.63.

Conclusions
As expected, participants considered predominantly the
implied model in the one-model-implied condition and
processed two-model problems as one-model problems. By
employing strong functional constraints we succeeded in
demonstrating the disambiguation of spatial relation terms
in reasoning, which previously had failed with weaker
functional constraints.
Eye-tracking proved valuable for providing direct
evidence of situated language processing and perceptual
grounding in a spatial reasoning task. Participants directed
their attention to those locations on the visible arrangements
where the verbally mentioned guests were explicitly seated.
Moreover, they also directed their attention to the top single
table as soon as the seating preference for this table was
mentioned. Thus, it was not only spatial language that
induced attention shifts, but immediate inferences from
object affordances and functional constraints (Coventry &
Garrod, 2004). This corroborates the coordinated interplay
account (Knoeferle & Crocker, 2004) and similar theories of
situated language processing.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Dorothea Epting, who kindly volunteered
to play the restaurant manager in the instructional videos,
and to Rebekka Stahnke for her help in conducting the
experiments. We thank Markus Knauff for comments on an
earlier draft.

References
Altmann, G. T. M., & Kamide, Y. (1999). Incremental
interpretation at verbs: Restricting the domain of
subsequent reference. Cognition, 73, 247-264.
Byrne, R. M. J., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1989). Spatial
reasoning. Journal of Memory and Language, 28, 564575.
Coventry, K. R., & Garrod, S. C. (2004). Saying, seeing,
and acting. The psychological semantics of spatial
prepositions. Hove and New York: Psychology Press.
Coventry, K. R., Venn, S. F., & Armstead, P. (2002). Object
knowledge and the construction of spatial mental models.
Cahiers de Psychologie Cognitive/ Current Psychology of
Cognition, 21, 635-652.
Van der Henst, J.-B., Chevallier, C., Schaeken, W., Mercier,
H., & Noveck, I. (2008). Dealing with indeterminacy in
spatial descriptions. Psychological Research, 72, 553566.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (1991). Deduction.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Knoeferle, P., & Crocker, M. W. (2006). The coordinated
interplay of scene, utterance, and world knowledge:
Evidence from eye tracking. Cognitive Science, 30, 481529.

1544

