UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Spatial biases in understanding descriptions of static scenes: The role of reading and writing
direction

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/31k2t9vj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Roman, Antonio
El Fathi, Abderrahman
Santiago, Julio

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Spatial biases in understanding descriptions of static scenes: The role of reading and
writing direction
Antonio Román (reche@ugr.es)
Dept. of Experimental Psychology, University of Granada,
Granada, SPAIN

Abderrahman El Fathi (elfathi@uae.ma)
Dept. of Hispanic Philology, Université Abdelmalek Esaadi, Morocco
Tetouan, MOROCCO

Julio Santiago (santiago@ugr.es)
Dept. of Experimental Psychology, University of Granada,
Granada, SPAIN
Abstract

Language serves to provide instructions that guide mental
model construction in the interlocutor. From a linguistic
statement such as “The table is between the lamp and the
TV”, the listener can construct a mental model that
represents the spatial position between those three objects.
Although many different spatial arrangements are consistent
with the statement, people tend to create a single model that
captures only one spatial configuration. Many results show
that, in a task like this, the preferred mental model places
the mentioned objects in a linear spatial array, either a
horizontal or vertical one (see Evans, Newstead, & Byrne,
1993, for a review).
Jahn, Knauff, and Johnson-Laird (2007) studied how
mental models are used to reason about static spatial
configurations such as this one. They presented sets of
descriptions of scenes, and asked participants to judge
whether the set was consistent or not. To use their same
example:
A table is between the TV and a chair
The light is on the left of the TV
The table is next to the light

Habitual reading and writing direction (RWD) is known to
induce spatial biases in meaning construction from
descriptions of actions. We extended prior studies to
descriptions of static scenes and assessed the flexibility of
these spatial habits in bicultural minds. Sentences like "the
table is between the lamp and the TV” were auditorily
presented, and the task was to draw the described situation. A
Spanish group preferred to deploy the objects from left to
right, whereas a Moroccan group preferred right to left. A
third group of highly Spanish-acculturated Arabs showed a
pattern very similar to Spanish, but milder. Despite these
differences, the three groups equally preferred those options
generating a lower memory load. We conclude that RWD is
able to bias the understanding of static descriptions; that these
spatial habits are flexible; and that memory management
follows universal principles.
Keywords: reading-writing direction; spatial bias; mental
model; flexibility; working memory; bilingualism.

Introduction
How is linguistic content represented such that people can
reason about it? One theory that has received strong support
in the literature is the theory of mental models (JohnsonLaird, 1983). Mental models are working memory
representations about situations and events in the world.
They are analogical (including spatial information when
relevant) and populated by concrete contents, although by
these means they can also represent abstract or temporal
contents (Boroditsky, 2000; Goodwin & Johson-Laird,
2005).
The most important feature of mental models is that they
act as a tool that allows us to represent, manipulate and
understand reality in working memory in order to take
decisions and deal with the situation. Working memory is
characterized by limited capacity and effortful processing.
Therefore, people tend to create only one such mental
model, integrating in it all the information that is relevant to
solving the problem at hand. The greater the amount of
information that must be kept simultaneously in working
memory, the more difficult the resolution of the problem.

They predicted that people tend to make a single mental
model of the first statement, and then try to integrate the
next two in it. Depending on the configuration of the initial
model, the integration may be easy or difficult (as in the
example above). In this example, the descriptions are
consistent (that is, there is a single spatial layout where the
three statements are true), but because the solution does not
coincide with the initial model, participants tend to claim
that the premises are inconsistent, or take longer to find the
correct answer.
Jahn et al (2007) postulated that the preferred initial
model should include the three mentioned objects in left-toright order. For the example above, a schematic model
would be:
TV table
chair
This postulate was based on evidence of scanning biases
linked to RWD (e.g., Spalek & Hammad, 2005; Nachson,

784

1981). Their data strongly supported that the preferred
initial model of their German participants actually runs from
left-to-right.
However, the interpretation of RWD effects in conceptual
tasks is still being debated. It is well established that RWD
is able to change the direction of the mapping of time to
space (Furhman & Boroditsky, 2010; Ouellet, Santiago,
Israeli & Gabay, 2010; Tversky, Kugelmass & Winter,
1991) and of numbers to space (Dehaene, Bossini & Giraux,
1993; Gevers & Lammertyn, 2005; Zebian, 2005). In
contrast, evidence from language comprehension tasks is
more mixed. Chatterjee, Southwood and Basilico (1999)
observed a trend to locate agents on the left and patients on
the right, as well as to depict push and pull actions as
flowing from left to right, and Maass and Russo (2003)
showed that this tendency reverses in users of languages
with right-to-left RWD (see also Maass, Pagani & Berta,
2007). Nevertheless, there are two published failures at
replicating this effect (Barrett, Kim, Crucian, & Heilman,
2002, with right-to-left vertical Korean readers, and
Altmann, Saleem, Kendall, Heilman & Rothi, 2006, with
Arabic readers). Finally, it is possible that the spatial bias in
agent-patient organization is not related to language
comprehension processes, as Maass, Suitner, Favaretto and
Cignacchi (2009) found a tendency to place agentive social
groups to the left of less agentive groups, which reversed in
readers of right-to-left RWD.
Moreover, there is a total lack of evidence regarding the
relevance of RWD for mental model construction from
descriptions of static scenes. The present research was
aimed to provide a first exploration of the influence of
RWD on mental model construction avoiding any potential
confounding with agentivity. In order to do so, we devised a
simpler version of Jahn et al's (2007) task. Participants were
asked to listen to sentences such as "The table is between
the lamp and the TV”, and then draw the scene described by
the sentence. Both order of drawing the mentioned objects
and order of filling the spatial locations in the paper were
measured. These measures allow us to study independently
working memory management processes and spatial biases
in the construction of mental models (see below). In order to
assess the effect of RWD, the task was carried out by two
groups of participants: native Spanish users who read and
write from left to right, and native Arabic users from
Morocco who do it from right to left. A final goal was to
evaluate the degree of flexibility of these mental habits, so
we also included a group of native users of Arabic
languages who had been living in Spain for a number of
years and were highly acculturated into Spanish culture and
language.

in an Arabic country for longer than an occasional stay and
did not know any Arabic language.
The Moroccan group was made of 18 Moroccan students
from the Abdelmalek Esaadi University, Tetouan, Morocco
(mean age 22 years, 12 males). Linguistic and family
information of three participants was lost due to a computer
problem (which also affected information of three
participants from the next group). All the remaining
participants were born in Morocco and had never lived in a
Western country. They all were native speakers of
Moroccan Darija (the local Arabic dialect) and nine of them
were also native speakers of Standard Arabic (starting
before age 4). Fourteen of them were also highly fluent in
French, and nine participants in this group also had some
knowledge of Spanish (started in high school or university).
All of them were highly proficient and habitual readers of
Standard Arabic.1 The Moroccan group did the task in
Darija.
The Arabs-in-Spain group was composed of 26 Arab
students at the University of Granada (mean age 22 years,
12 males). As mentioned above, information from three
participants was lost. For the remaining sample, 18 were
originally from Morocco, three from Jordan, one from Iraq
and one from Mauritania. Their average number of years
living in Spain was 5.8 (range 1-11). All of them were
native speakers of at least one Arabic language (Standard
Arabic, Moroccan Darija, Mauritanian Hassania, Jordanian
Levantine, Iraqi Arabic). All of them were also native or
highly fluent speakers of at least one European language
(mostly French and/or Spanish). All of them were highly
proficient readers of Standard Arabic, and only three of
them reported not to read it on a daily basis. All of them
were fluent in Spanish and had no problems in
understanding the instructions or having a conversation in
Spanish with the experimenter. As described in detail
below, the Arabs-in-Spain group did the task in Spanish.
It is important to note that all participants in both Arab
groups are bilingual (often multilingual), knowing at least
one left-to-right RWD language (modally French). The
difference between them is not so much a difference of
bilingualism, but of immersion in a particular language and
writing system, and intensive experience with it.
The Spanish Group received course credit, and the two
Arabic groups received a small gift or monetary
compensation.
Materials. Five sentences were constructed, all of which
consisted of an assertion that referred to a between relation
among three different entities.
1 - The table is between the lamp and the TV.
2 - The bike is between the lamppost and the car.
3 - The cup is between the bottle and the dish.
4 - The pencil is between the book and the eraser.
5 - The man is between the house and the tree.

Method
Participants. There were three groups of participants. The
Spanish group was composed of 21 Spanish Psychology
students at the University of Granada (mean age 21 years, 5
males). All of them were native Spaniards, had never lived

1

Standard Arabic is the only written Arabic language. Local
Arabic languages are only oral (Lewis, 2009).

785

We selected those objects or entities because they are
very common in both cultures, thereby avoiding
comprehension problems or potential biases due to different
degrees of familiarity. Importantly, all mentioned objects
are inanimate entities (with the exception of “the man” in
the last sentence), and they are embedded in sentences using
a copulative verb. In other words, they all refer to
completely static scenes without any agentive structure.
Even in the case of the last sentence, the animate entity “the
man” is located in the center of the scene carrying out no
action, and thus, it is unlikely that its animacy or agentivity
may bias the location of the surrounding objects in the
mental model in any particular direction.

lamp on the left side and the TV on the right side (a left-toright model).
Our first hypothesis is that RWD will exert clear effects
on the spatial order in which objects are drawn, and
therefore, on the final spatial configuration of the drawn
model. Spanish participants will tend to draw left-to-right
models, with the lamp on the left and the TV on the right,
whereas the Moroccan participants will prefer the opposite
model, with the lamp on the right and the TV on the left. We
had no specific expectations for the group of Spanishacculturated Arabs. If the original habits of mental model
construction are not flexible and remain unchanged after
extended immersion in a language with a different RWD,
they will show the same pattern as the Moroccan group. If
these habits are flexible, they will tend to behave like
Spanish participants.

Procedure. The participants were seated at a desk with a
pile of five blank sheets and a pen. They then listened to the
first sentence and were asked to draw the scene on a sheet.
Once they were done, they put away the first sheet and were
ready to listen to and draw the next sentence on a new sheet.
The Spanish and Arabs-in-Spain groups were tested at the
University of Granada, Spain, and did the task in Spanish.
The Moroccan group was tested at the Abdelmalek Esaadi
University and did the task in Darija.

Table 1: Mentioned object order and spatial order
combinations, and the resulting drawn models.
Mentione
d Object
Order
123
132

Data coding. For each item, we measured the order in
which each of the three mentioned objects were drawn
(mentioned object order, or just object order) and the order
in which the three positions (left, center, right) were filled
(spatial order).
Each sentence presents auditorily the three objects in a
temporal sequence or order of mention. In the sentence “The
table is between the lamp and the TV”, table is the first
object mentioned, followed by lamp and then TV.
Participants can draw the three objects in one out of six
possible combinations of object order (see Table 1). For
example, combination 213 means that the first object to be
drawn is the second object mentioned in the sentence
(lamp), followed by the object mentioned first (table) and
then by the object mentioned third (TV).
Regarding the order of location filling, or spatial order,
there are also six possible combinations (see Table 1). For
example, LCR means that the object on the left was drawn
first, then the central object, and then the object on the right.
Combinations LCR, CLR, and LRC were grouped as pattern
from left to right (L-R); and combinations RCL, CRL, and
RLC were grouped as pattern from right to left (R-L).
The combination of each object order with one out of two
possible spatial orders produce only one possible drawn
model with the lateral objects (e.g., lamp and TV) in
different positions (see Table 1 for details). To carry on with
the example sentence “The table is between the lamp and
the TV”, suppose that a participant shows a 213 (LampTable-TV) object order and a RCL (Right-Center-Left)
spatial order. The resulting drawn model has the lamp on
the right side and the TV on the left (which we call a rightto-left model). If the same object order is combined with a
LCR spatial order, the resulting drawn model will have the

213
231
312
321

In our
example

Spatial
Order

Pattern

Drawn Model

Table-LampTV
Table-TVLamp
Lamp-TableTV
Lamp-TVTable
TV-TableLamp
TV-LampTable

CLR
CRL
CLR
CRL
RCL
LCR
LRC
RLC
RCL
LCR
LRC
RLC

L-R
R-L
R-L
L-R
R-L
L-R
L-R
R-L
L-R
R-L
R-L
L-R

Lamp-Table-TV
TV-Table-Lamp
TV-Table-Lamp
Lamp-Table-TV
TV-Table-Lamp
Lamp-Table-TV
Lamp-Table-TV
TV-Table-Lamp
Lamp-Table-TV
TV-Table-Lamp
TV-Table-Lamp
Lamp-Table-TV

Our second hypothesis follows from the fact that each
object order imposes different costs on working memory
resources. For example, the pattern 123 means that we draw
the objects in the same order as they appear auditorily. This
pattern imposes the lowest memory load. The pattern 231
imposes a greater memory load because it draws last the
object presented first. Table 1 lists the combinations of
object order from the one requiring less cognitive resources
(123) to the one requiring most (321). We expected that all
the groups would prefer to use object orders that require
fewer memory resources. For each one, the left-right spatial
order will be preferred by Spanish participants and the rightleft spatial order will be preferred by Moroccans.

Results
If any central entity (e.g., the table) was drawn anywhere
else than the center, the trial was considered invalid and was
not included in the final analysis. We also excluded those
items drawn vertically or however differently from the
horizontal axis. The number of items rejected by these
reasons amounted to 12%.
In the analysis of drawn models, the proportion of valid
L-R trials was submitted to a one-way ANOVA, which
found significant differences (F(2,58) = 5.52, p = 0.006)
among the groups. Planned comparisons showed that the

786

Spanish and Moroccan groups were significantly different
(F(1,58) = 10.86, p = 0.001). Consistent with the findings of
Jahn et al (2007) with German participants, Spanish
participants preferred to represent the mentioned objects
from left to right (with the lamp on the left and the TV on
the right). In contrast, Moroccan participants showed the
opposite trend (see Figure 1).
The Arabs-in-Spain group did not differ from the Spanish
group (F(1,58) = 1.78, p = 0.18), whereas it differed from
the Moroccan group (F(1,58) = 4.87, p = 0.03). Thus, the
Spanish-acculturated Arabs behaved more like Spaniards
than like Moroccans immersed in their culture.
Regarding spatial order, a one-way ANOVA on the
proportion of valid L-R trials showed a significant effect of
Group (F(2, 58) = 5.36, p = 0.007; see Figure 2). Spanish
participants tended to fill up before the left than the right
space (combinations LCR, CLR, LRC). In contrast, the
Moroccan group showed the opposite preference (RCL,
CRL, RLC), a significant difference in planned comparisons
(F(1,58) = 9.68, p = 0.002). Again, the comparison between
the Spanish and the Arabs-in-Spain groups failed to be
significant (F < 1), whereas the Arabs-in-Spain differed
from the Moroccan group (F(1,58) = 6.71, p = 0.01).

R-L

Moroccans

Arabs-in-Spain

Spanish

0%

20%

40%

60%

80%

100%

% of valid trials

Figure 2: Spatial order preference in each group.
60
50

% of valid trials

L-R

L-R

R-L

Moroccans

40
30
20
10

Arabs-in-Spain
0
123

132

213

231

312

321

Mentioned object order

Spanish

Figure 3: Percentage of trials for each combination of
object order.
0%

20%

40%

60%

80%

100%

Conclusion

% of valid trials

A first conclusion to be obtained from present data is that
readers of Spanish (a language with left-to-right RWD) and
Arabic (right-to-left RWD), when tested in their native
language and immersed in their own culture, differ in their
spatial choices when constructing mental models of static
scenes from auditory input: Spanish prefer left-to-right
models and Arabic prefer right-to-left models. We suggest
that this difference is mediated by their habitual RWD.
Effects of habitual RWD can, therefore, be observed also in
static scenes, as well as in the dynamic events which have
received attention so far in the literature (e.g., Chatterjee et
al, 1999; Maass & Russo, 2003).
Prior reports of spatial biases in the comprehension of
linguistic descriptions of scenes with an agent-patient
structure may reflect wider biases toward locating agents
and patients in left or right space (Maass et al, 2009) that do

Figure 1: Drawn model preference in each group.
We then turned to analyze the differences in preferred
object orders. Here, we expected no cultural differences: in
both cultures, participants would prefer the orders that
impose a smaller working memory load. Figure 3 shows the
frequency of each order combination. All groups preferred
the 123 order, followed at a great distance by 132, from
where proportions decreased progressively as memory load
increases. An ANOVA with object order as within-subject
factor and the three groups found a highly significant effect
of the former (F(5,290) = 43.99, p < 0.001), a null effect of
group (F < 1) and a null interaction between object order
and group (F < 1).

787

not necessarily involve the intermediation of mental model
construction processes from linguistic input. Because of the
use of static scenes, present data do not suffer from this
potential confound, and allow us to assert that RWD affects
how mental models are created on-line as the referents of
heared words are accessed. Thus, the resulting picture is one
in which reading and writing habits affect the position
where word referents are placed in the mental space. As
agents tend to be mentioned earlier than patients in most
languages, mental models constructed from auditory input
will tend to place them in earlier locations as defined by
reading habits. This tendency is then, probably, the cause of
the observed overall bias that affects the relative location of
more agentive groups with respect to less agentive groups
(Maass et al, 2009).
Present results also reveal that cultural differences in
mental model construction due to RWD are confined to
spatial preferences, but the management of working
memory resources follows common, possibly universal
principles.
Finally, present results show that Spanish-acculturated
Arabs tested in Spanish do not behave like Arabic
participants immersed in their culture and tested in their
native Arabic dialect. The habits of mental model
construction from language are, therefore, flexible.
What the present study cannot discern is the nature of this
flexibility. As the two Arabic groups were tested in
conditions that differed both in the language used in the
experiment (Spanish versus Darija) as well as in the cultural
context (Spain versus Morocco), there remains the
possibility that any (or both) of these factors is responsible
for the observed differences in mental habits. If language is
responsible, mental model construction would be highly
context-dependent: mental models would be generated in
the spatial format linked to the language in use in that
moment. If cultural immersion and extended experience is
necessary, mental model construction would show a greater
inertia, and a relative independence of the particular
language used at a given moment and task. Research is
currently under course to try to disentangle these
possibilities.

Korean subjects. Neuropsychologia, 40, 1003-1012.
Boroditsky,
L.
(2000).
Metaphoric
structuring:
Understanding time through spatial metaphors. Cognition,
75, 1-28.
Chatterjee, A., Southwood, M. H., & Basilico, D. (1999).
Verbs,
events
and
spatial
representations.
Neuropsychologia, 37, 395–402.
Dehaene, S., Bossini, S. & Giraux, P. (1993). The mental
representation of parity and number magnitude. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 122, 371-396.
Evans, J. S. B. T., Newstead, S. E., & Byrne, R. M. J.
(1993). Human reasoning: The psychology of deduction.
Hove, U.K.: Erlbaum.
Fuhrman, O., & Boroditsky, L. (2010). Cross-cultural
differences in mental representations of time: Evidence
from an implicit nonlinguistic task. Cognitive Science, 34,
1-22.
Gevers, W., & Lammertyn, J. (2005). The hunt for SNARC.
Psychology Science, 47, 10-21.
Goodwin, G. P., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2005). Reasoning
with relations. Psychological Review, 112, 468-493.
Jahn, G., Knauff, M., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2007).
Preferred mental models in reasoning about spatial
relations. Memory & Cognition, 35, 2075-2087.
Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1983). Mental Models. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Lewis, M. Paul (ed.) (2009). Ethnologue: Languages of the
World, Sixteenth edition. Dallas, Tex.: SIL International.
Online version: http://www.ethnologue.com/.
Maass, A., & Russo, A. (2003). Directional bias in the
mental representation of spatial events: Nature or culture?
Psychological Science, 14, 296–301.
Maass, A., Pagani, D., & Berta, E. (2007). How beautiful is
the goal and how violent is the fistfight? Spatial bias in
the interpretation of human behavior. Social Cognition,
25, 833-852.
Maass, A., Suitner, C., Favaretto, X., Cignacchi, M. (2009).
Groups in space: Stereotypes and the spatial agency bias.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 45, 496–504.
Nachson, I. (1981). Cross-cultural differences in
directionality. International Journal of Psychology, 16,
199-211.
Ouellet, M., Santiago, J., Israeli, Z., & Gabay, S. (2010). Is
the future the right time? Experimental Psychology, 57,
308-314.
Spalek, T., & Hammad, S. (2005). The left-to-right bias in
inhibition of return is due to the direction of reading.
Psychological Science, 16, 15-18
Tversky, B., Kugelmass, S. & Winter, A. (1991). Crosscultural and developmental trends in graphic productions.
Cognitive Psychology, 23, 515-557.
Zebian, S. (2005). Linkages between number concepts,
spatial thinking, and directionality of writing: The
SNARC effect and the REVERSED SNARC effect in
English, Arabic monoliterates, biliterates, and illiterate
Arabic speakers. Journal of Cognition and Culture, 5,
165-190.

Acknowledgments
We gratefully acknowledge the assistance in Morocco by
Omar Badessi, Tarik Boubker, Bouthaina Ben El Amin and
Mouad El Mejdki. This research was supported by Grant
P09-SEJ-4772, Junta de Andalucía and European Regional
Development Fund (ERDF), to Julio Santiago (PI).

References
Altmann, L. J. P., Saleem, A., Kendall, D., Heilman, K. M.,
& Rothi, L. J. G. (2006). Orthographic directionality and
thematic role illustration in English and Arabic. Brain
and Language, 97, 306-316.
Barrett, A. M., Kim, M., Crucian, G. P., Heilman, K. M.
(2002). Spatial bias: Effects of early reading direction on

788

