UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Statistical Learning of a Morse Code Language is Improved by Bilingualism and Inhibitory
Ability

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6rt4964b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Bartolotti, James
Marian, Viorica
Schroeder, Scott
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Statistical Learning of a Morse Code Language
is Improved by Bilingualism and Inhibitory Ability
James Bartolotti, Viorica Marian, Scott R. Schroeder, Anthony Shook
Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, 2240 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208 USA
Abstract

semantic level. Increased flexibility in either of these
processes would allow for accelerated vocabulary
acquisition in bilinguals, leading to rapid gains in novel
language knowledge.
Vocabulary learning is particularly important in attaining
language fluency; by some estimates learners need to know
98% of the words they hear to comprehend speech which
translates to roughly 8000 lexical items (Nation, 2006). The
size of vocabularies means that many words are acquired
incidentally, either by reading or listening to speech
(Schmitt, 2008). Words acquired from speech are
notoriously difficult to learn, in part because the boundaries
between words are not always obvious. One way to
overcome the word boundary problem is to attend to the
regularities in speech. Sounds that co-occur often are likely
to comprise part of a single word, whereas rare sound
sequences are likely to mark transitions between words.
These transitions can mark the beginning of novel words,
which should be attended to and encoded by the learner.
Infants demonstrate attention to statistical probabilities in a
continuous auditory sequence (Saffran, Aslin, & Newport,
1996), as do adults (Saffran, Johnson, Aslin, & Newport,
1999), and this skill has been associated with word-learning
ability (Mirman, Magnuson, Estes, & Dixon, 2008). It is a
flexible process that can be applied to successfully learn
words composed of speech phonemes, musical tones, or
visual sequences (Saffran, et al., 1999; Slemmer, Kirkham,
& Johnson, 2010), and may reflect the process by which
language learners acquire words from spoken speech.
A potential difficulty during novel language acquisition
remains, though, in that the novel language is prone to
interference from already known languages. Interaction
between languages is observed during language processing
and can lead to interference (Bijeljac-Babic, Biardeau, &
Grainger, 1997; Blumenfeld & Marian, 2007; Duyck,
Assche, Drieghe, & Hartsuiker, 2007; Marian & Spivey,
2003a; 2003b; Schwartz & Kroll, 2006; van Heuven,
Dijkstra, & Grainger, 1998). In the process of acquiring a
new language, interference from known languages may be
particularly destructive, as known languages are highly
practiced and may activate more easily. Better suppression
of non-target language activation may consequently
improve attention to novel language cues and facilitate
acquisition.
Inhibitory control ability is one way to manage this
interference, by reducing activation of irrelevant items.
Strong inhibitory control has been associated with improved
statistical learning in situations where interference during
learning was particularly pronounced (Weiss, Gerfen, &
Mitchel, 2010). Bilinguals display advantages in inhibitory

We examine the influence of bilingualism and inhibitory
control on the ability to learn a novel language. Using a
statistical learning paradigm, participants learned transitional
probabilities in two novel languages based on the
International Morse Code. First, participants listened to a lowinterference language to test word segmentation skill. Next,
participants listened to a high-interference language, in which
a colliding cue to word boundaries in the form of compressed
pauses between words conflicted with the language’s
transitional probabilities. Results suggest that high
proficiency in a second language can improve word learning
in a novel language, but when interference during learning is
high, language experience no longer confers a benefit and
strong inhibitory control ability is necessary for learning to
occur.
Keywords:
recognition

language

acquisition; bilingualism; pattern

Introduction
Language learning is a complex phenomenon that requires
the learner to incorporate novel phonology, vocabulary, and
grammatical rules. Not surprisingly, acquiring a new
language can be difficult, particularly later in life, and many
learners never achieve full native-like proficiency
(Birdsong, 2006; 2009; DeKeyser, 2005). Learning
outcomes may be improved by identifying the processes that
contribute to successful acquisition of a novel language.
One of the first steps to language acquisition is to
understand the way in which sounds are combined to create
words. After identifying novel sound sequences, they can be
assigned to semantic concepts and the complete word added
to one’s vocabulary. Here we consider how two related
factors, bilingual language experience and inhibitory
control, may influence this word acquisition process.
Bilingualism has been shown to provide a language
learning advantage, and bilinguals acquiring a third
language outperform monolinguals acquiring a second
language (Cenoz & Valencia, 1994; Kaushanskaya &
Marian, 2009a; 2009b; Keshavarz & Astaneh, 2004; Sanz,
2000; Thomas, 1992). This may be due in part to bilinguals’
enhanced working memory, which allows them to sustain
novel words in the focus of attention until they can be
encoded in long-term memory (Papagno & Vallar, 1995;
van Hell & Mahn, 1997), and is linked to high secondlanguage proficiency (Majerus, Poncelet, van der Linden, &
Weekes, 2008; Service, Simola, Metsänheimo, & Maury,
2002). These novel words may be more readily linked to
novel sound sequences at the phonological level, or mapped
onto concepts shared with translation equivalents at the

885

Method

control compared to monolinguals on non-linguistic tasks
involving distracting cues (Bialystok, 1999; 2007;
Bialystok, Craik, Klein, & Viswanathan, 2004; Costa,
Hernández, & Sebastián-Gallés, 2008), which may also
contribute to their language learning ability by suppressing
interference and increasing the saliency of novel words.
To separately investigate the influences of bilingual
experience and inhibitory control, we tested participants
who varied in second language proficiency and level of
inhibitory control on their ability to learn two languages that
were based on the International Morse Code. Morse code is
different from natural languages in that all information is
conveyed rhythmically by changes in duration of pure tone
sequences and silences. Morse code is sufficiently difficult
to learn to discriminate learners from non-learners, and
because it does not overlap in form with any languages
participants knew, it avoids favoring speakers of one
language over another. Since overlap with participants’
known languages was low, we were able to create a lowinterference condition in which learning required detecting
statistical regularities within the Morse stream, but did not
require inhibiting competitive interference from known
languages. Because the inhibitory demands were reduced,
the low-interference condition allowed us to assess whether
proficiency in a second language has an effect on incidental
word learning from speech, independent of inhibitory
control ability.
In addition to the low-interference condition, we also
designed a second, high-interference condition to assess the
influence of inhibitory ability on word segmentation. The
words in this second, high-interference condition conflicted
with the previously-learned words in the low-interference
condition. Additionally, a colliding cue to word boundaries
that conflicted with the transitional probabilities between
words was inserted to create interference within the new
language itself, a paradigm shown to recruit inhibitory
control (Weiss et al., 2010). Learning in our highinterference condition depended on both suppressing the
first Morse code language and selectively attending to one
of the two sets of word boundary cues (by inhibiting the
other) in the second Morse code language. The second,
high-interference condition therefore enabled us to examine
the influence of inhibitory ability on word segmentation in
contexts where learners have to reduce interference from
conflicting linguistic information.
To summarize, in the present study, we examined the
contributions of second language experience and inhibitory
control to word segmentation. Participants who varied in
second language experience and level of inhibitory control
were taught Morse code words in a low-interference
condition and a high-interference condition. The lowinterference condition placed few demands on inhibition; in
this condition, high proficiency in a second language was
expected to contribute to successful word segmentation. The
high-interference condition placed high demands on
inhibition; in this condition, inhibitory ability was expected
to promote successful word segmentation.

Participants
Twenty-four Northwestern University students (Mean age =
21.6, SD = 2.23) participated for course credit. Participants
completed the LEAP-Q (Marian, Blumenfeld, &
Kaushanskaya, 2007) to provide information about language
proficiency and language use. Age of second language
acquisition ranged from 0-14 (M = 7.78, SD = 4.92) A
version of the Simon task was used to assess participants’
inhibitory control ability. Median splits were used to
separate participants into high/low second-language
proficiency (composite of L2 oral production and
comprehension: median of 5, scale of 0-10), and
strong/weak inhibitory control (Simon effect: median of
33.2 ms). While some studies find a relationship between
second language experience and inhibitory control
(Bialystok, 2007), others do not (Morton & Harper, 2007).
In the current study, second language proficiency and
inhibitory control were not correlated (r = -0.35, p > 0.1),
allowing their effects on learning to be considered
independently.

Materials
Two artificial languages were created based on the
international Morse code alphabet. In Morse code, letters
are composed of combinations of short tones, or 'dots'
(440Hz for 100ms) and long tones, or 'dashes' (440Hz for
300ms). A short pause (100ms) separates tones within a
letter, and a long pause (300ms) separates letters within a
word. Three words were created for each language such that
the length of each word was a constant 1100ms, and no
letter was used twice (See Table 1).
Table 1: Morse Code Languages
Language 1 --/. (ME) -./.. (NI)
.-/- (AT)
Language 2 ./-- (EM) ../-. (IN)
-/.- (TA)
Note: English translations were never shown to participants
Morse code training streams were created for each
language with two restrictions: a word could not
immediately follow itself, and each word was followed by
the other two words an equal number of times. Since the
first letter of each word perfectly predicted the second letter,
transitional probability within-words was a constant 1.0.
Since each word could be followed by either of the two
other words, the between-word transitional probability was
a constant 0.5.
The training stream in the low-interference condition had
a 300ms long pause inserted between words, identical to the
long pause that separated letters within a single word. To
learn the words, participants would have to attend to the
transitional probabilities within and between words (see
Figure 1A). In contrast, the training stream in the highinterference condition replaced the long pause between

886

Figure 1: Morse code listening streams. Dots and dashes represent 100 ms and 300 ms tones, short and long gaps
represent 100 ms and 300 ms silences. In the low interference condition, words are marked by statistical probabilities
between letters (e.g., A follows T, but either E or I follow A). In the high interference condition, the gap between words is
reduced, and the statistically defined words (TA, EM, IN) compete with words defined by the long pauses (AE, MT, AI).
words with a 100ms short pause, identical to the short pause
that existed between elements within a single letter. The
300ms long pause between letters within a single word
remained, only this pause now marked a competing word
boundary. There were thus two colliding cues to word
boundary: the between-word transitional probabilities (as in
the low-interference condition), and the pause-based cues
(see Figure 1B). To learn the words, participants would have
to inhibit one of the two word-boundary cues and attend to
the other.

was more familiar by pressing the '1' (first word) or '9'
(second word) key on a computer keyboard. Word pairs
were presented with a one-second pause between words, and
a four-second pause between trials. Each of the three words
was presented in four trials: twice before and twice after two
different part-words. Part-words were created by
concatenating the second letter from one word with the first
letter of another word, and had appeared in the listening
stream half as often as the actual words. In the highinterference condition, the part-words were words that could
have been learned by using pause-based cues instead of
statistical cues. Accuracy scores were obtained and
normalized to chance performance, with a score of zero
indicating six out of twelve correct. In the low-interference
condition, positive scores above chance indicated word
learning. In the high interference condition, positive scores
above chance also indicated word learning based on the
statistical cues, while negative scores indicated learning
based on the pause cues. Either type of learning was a valid
way of parsing the Morse code stream, but they entailed
different inhibitory demands. The pauses competed with the
statistical cues only, while the statistical cues competed with
both the pauses and the previously learned words (due to
overlapping letters between conditions). Learning by pauses
in the high-interference condition may thus reflect a strategy
that minimizes competition during learning and reduces
inhibitory demands.
All participants also completed a visual Simon task to
index inhibitory control. Participants viewed blue and
brown rectangles that appeared on the left, right, or center of
a computer screen and selected a response based on the
item’s color, while ignoring its location. The instructions
were to press a blue button on the left side of the keyboard if
the rectangle was blue, or to press a brown button on the

Procedure
The Morse code language associated with each condition
was counterbalanced across participants, but the order of the
two conditions was fixed, with all participants completing
the low-interference condition first, followed by the highinterference condition. This was done to ensure that no
previously learned Morse code words could compete with
targets during the low-interference condition. Learned
words would then have to be inhibited during the following
high-interference condition, adding to its inhibitory
demands.
At the beginning of each learning condition, participants
were instructed to listen to a series of tones and were told
that they would be tested on information about the tones
later. Participants wore headphones and listened to the
Morse code stream over three blocks, each four minutes and
twelve seconds long. Participants received a one-minute
silent break between blocks.
Immediately after the third training block, participants
were tested on their knowledge of the language with a
twelve-item two-alternative forced-choice task. Participants
were instructed to indicate which of two Morse code words

887

right side of the keyboard if the rectangle was brown. In
Congruent trials, the stimulus and the response were on the
same side (e.g., a blue rectangle on the left side of the
screen). In Incongruent trials, stimulus and response were
on opposite sides (e.g., blue rectangle on the right side of
the screen). In Neutral trials, the stimulus appeared in the
center of the screen. Congruent, Incongruent, and Neutral
trials appeared in an equal ratio. A single trial involved (1) a
fixation cross for 350ms, (2) a blank screen for 150ms, (3) a
colored rectangle for 1500ms, (4) in the event of an error, a
red ‘X’ as feedback for 1500ms, and (5) a blank screen for
an 850ms inter-trial interval. All participants completed a
practice session before the actual task. The Simon effect
was calculated by subtracting reaction time on Congruent
trials from reaction time on Incongruent trials. A small
Simon effect indicates better ability to ignore the
inconsistent location cue, and improved inhibitory control.

0.1). In the low-interference condition, second language
proficiency was marginally correlated with learning, r =
0.40, p = 0.06. In the high-interference condition, neither the
high L2 proficiency group (M = -0.27, SD = 2.10; p > 0.1)
nor the low L2 proficiency group (M = -0.09, SD = 1.70; p >
0.1) were able to learn, and second language proficiency
was not correlated with learning, r = 0.01, p > 0.1 (Figure
2).

Inhibitory Control
Strong inhibitory control was associated with increased
learning of a second Morse code language in the highinterference condition, but did not discriminate learners of
the first Morse code language in the low-interference
condition (Figure 2). Both strong and weak inhibitory
control groups successfully learned the Morse-code
language in the baseline low-interference condition (strong
inhibitory control: M = 1.79, SD = 2.46; t(11) = 2.52, p <
0.05; weak inhibitory control: M = 1.92, SD = 1.98; t(11) =
3.36, p < 0.01); inhibitory control was not correlated with
learning, r = -0.25, p > 0.1. When these same participants
were compared in their ability to learn a subsequent Morse
code language in the high-interference condition,
participants with strong inhibitory control demonstrated
learning according to the pause-based rules (M = -1.18, SD
= 1.60; t(10) = -2.45, p < 0.05), while participants with
weak inhibitory control did not demonstrate learning (M =
0.58, SD = 1.73; p > 0.1). The difference between groups
was significant (t(21) = -2.53, p < 0.05), and inhibitory
control was correlated with learning, r = 0.47, p < 0.05.

Results
Second Language Proficiency
Experience in a second language positively influenced
ability to learn in the low-interference condition, but did not
affect ability to learn in the high-interference condition
(Figure 2). Successful learning was characterized by greater
than chance performance. In the low-interference condition,
those with high proficiency in an L2 were able to learn (M =
2.41, SD = 2.01; t(10) = 3.97, p < 0.01), while those with
low L2 proficiency did not learn (M = 1.09, SD = 2.34; p >

Figure 2: Effects of second language proficiency and inhibitory control on learning the new language.
(Asterisks indicate a significant difference from chance, alpha of 0.05. Error bars indicate one standard error)

888

Discussion

increase in inhibitory control would not allow for increased
information extraction from the signal.
Natural language learning is likely to benefit from both
effects of second language proficiency and inhibitory
control. When language interference occurs during learning
it can disrupt acquisition, but bilinguals appear to be better
able to manage this interference and have improved learning
outcomes (Kaushanskaya & Marian, 2009a). One of the
ways that interference during language learning can be
managed is to globally suppress the native language (Levy,
McVeigh, Marful, & Anderson, 2007; Linck, Kroll, &
Sunderman, 2009). Bilinguals, though, appear to rely on
facilitation of the newly-learned language to reduce
interference (Bartolotti & Marian, 2010). These different
patterns of controlling language interference reflect the
development of the underlying control processes, which can
influence learning success in difficult, high-interference
contexts. By reducing interference, the saliency of novel
words can be increased, and may be more readily acquired
by bilinguals, who better remember novel words. Overall,
our results demonstrate that novel language acquisition, a
task that begins with the need to identify and remember new
words, can benefit from linguistic experience and inhibitory
ability. Prior experience acquiring words and an ability to
attend to relevant cues can both improve learning, and may
contribute to the bilingual advantage for novel language
acquisition.

In the present study, we found that bilingualism and
inhibitory control can each contribute to novel language
acquisition, depending on the level of interference present
during learning. Specifically, when interference during
training was low, high second language proficiency was
associated with successful learning of words in the novel
language, but inhibitory control ability did not discriminate
between learners and non-learners—both groups showed
acquisition of the novel language words. In contrast, when
interference during training was high, strong inhibitory
control was associated with successful acquisition, but
second language proficiency did not affect learning—in this
case, neither group was able to acquire the novel words. The
results highlight the relative roles of previous language
experience and inhibitory control on beginning language
learning in different contexts.
Previous research has shown that bilinguals learn words
in a novel language better than monolinguals (Cenoz, 2003;
Cenoz & Valencia, 1994; Kaushanskaya & Marian, 2009b;
Keshavarz & Astaneh, 2004; Sanz, 2000; Thomas, 1992;
van Hell & Mahn, 1997). Here we suggest a possible
mechanism for this advantage, in the form of improved
word segmentation in a novel language by bilinguals. This
ability to segment words from speech may depend in part on
phonological working memory, which has previously been
associated with improved statistical learning (Misyak &
Christiansen, 2007). High proficiency in a second language
has been associated with gains in phonological working
memory (Majerus et al., 2008; Service et al., 2002), which
may have contributed to bilinguals’ ability to learn the
words.
The failure of bilingualism to improve novel language
learning in the high interference condition, though, suggests
that second-language experience alone may not be sufficient
to promote successful word segmentation in all learning
contexts. Learning in the high-interference condition
depended on inhibitory control ability; participants with
strong inhibitory control learned words based on the pause
lengths between letters, reflecting a strategy that minimized
sources of interference. Recall that in the high-interference
condition, the pauses conflicted with one source
(transitional
probabilities),
while
the
transitional
probabilities conflicted with two sources (pauses and
previously learned words). The participants with strong
inhibitory control may have been sensitive to this difference
and applied inhibition most effectively, by suppressing all
statistical cues and engaging learning of the pauses between
words. While inhibitory control ability alone was sufficient
to promote learning in a high-interference context, it may
not be a good predictor of overall language learning ability.
Inhibitory control did not discriminate learners and nonlearners of the low-interference language, which had low
inhibitory demands that both groups could conceivably
manage. When there were few distractors in the signal, or
between the signal and prior language knowledge, an

Acknowledgments
This research was funded in part by grants NICHD
1R01HD059858 and NSF BCS-0418495 to the second
author. The authors would like to acknowledge Sarah
Chabal, Jen Krizman, Natalia Daniel, and Vivian Chang for
comments on an earlier draft of this paper.

References
Bartolotti, J. V., & Marian, V. (2010). Linguistic control in
monolingual and bilingual language learners. In S.
Ohlsson & R. Catrambone (Eds.), Proceedings of the
32nd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(p. 532). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Bialystok, E. (1999). Cognitive complexity and attentional
control in the bilingual mind. Child Development, 70(3),
636-644.
Bialystok, E. (2007). Cognitive effects of bilingualism:
How linguistic experience leads to cognitive change.
International Journal of Bilingual Education and
Bilingualism, 10(3), 210.
Bialystok, E., Craik, F. I. M., Klein, R., & Viswanathan, M.
(2004). Bilingualism, aging, and cognitive control:
Evidence from the Simon task. Psychology and Aging,
19(2), 290-303.
Bijeljac-Babic, R., Biardeau, A., & Grainger, J. (1997).
Masked orthographic priming in bilingual word
recognition. Memory & Cognition, 25(4), 447-457.

889

Birdsong, D. (2006). Age and second language acquisition
and processing: A selective overview. Language
Learning, 56, 9-49.
Birdsong, D. (2009). Age and the end state of second
language acquisition. In W. Ritchie & T. Bhatia (Eds.),
New Handbook of Second Language Acquisition.
Blumenfeld, H. K., & Marian, V. (2007). Constraints on
parallel activation in bilingual spoken language
processing: Examining proficiency and lexical status
using eye-tracking. Language and Cognitive Processes,
22(5), 633-660.
Cenoz, J. (2003). The additive effect of bilingualism on
third language acquisition: A review. International
Journal of Bilingualism, 7(1), 71-87.
Cenoz, J., & Valencia, J. F. (1994). Additive trilingualism:
Evidence from the Basque Country. Applied
Psycholinguistics, 15(2), 195-207.
Costa, A., Hernández, M., & Sebastián-Gallés, N. (2008).
Bilingualism aids conflict resolution: Evidence from the
ANT task. Cognition, 106(1), 59-86.
DeKeyser, R. M. (2005). What makes learning secondlanguage grammar difficult? A review of issues.
Language Learning, 55(S1), 1-25.
Duyck, W., Assche, E. V., Drieghe, D., & Hartsuiker, R. J.
(2007). Visual word recognition by bilinguals in a
sentence context: Evidence for non-selective lexical
access. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 33(4), 663-679.
Kaushanskaya, M., & Marian, V. (2009a). Bilingualism
reduces native-language interference during novel-word
learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 35(3), 829-35.
Kaushanskaya, M., & Marian, V. (2009b). The bilingual
advantage in novel word learning. Psychonomic Bulletin
& Review, 16(4), 705-10.
Keshavarz, M. H., & Astaneh, H. (2004). The impact of
bilinguality on the learning of English vocabulary as a
foreign language (L3). International Journal of Bilingual
Education and Bilingualism, 7(4), 295-302.
Levy, B. J., McVeigh, N. D., Marful, A., & Anderson, M.
C. (2007). Inhibiting your native language: the role of
retrieval-induced forgetting during second-language
acquisition. Psychological Science, 18(1), 29-34.
Linck, J. A., Kroll, J. F., & Sunderman, G. (2009). Losing
access to the native language while immersed in a second
language: Evidence for the role of inhibition in secondlanguage learning. Psychological Science, 20(12), 150715.
Majerus, S., Poncelet, M., van der Linden, M., & Weekes,
B. S. (2008). Lexical learning in bilingual adults: the
relative importance of short-term memory for serial order
and phonological knowledge. Cognition, 107(2), 395-419.
Marian, V., Blumenfeld, H. K., & Kaushanskaya, M.
(2007). The language experience and proficiency
questionnaire (LEAP-Q): Assessing language profiles in
bilinguals and multilinguals. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 50, 940-967.

Marian, V., & Spivey, M. J. (2003a). Bilingual and
monolingual processing of competing lexical items.
Applied Psycholinguistics, 24(2), 173-193.
Marian, V., & Spivey, M. J. (2003b). Competing activation
in bilingual language processing: Within- and betweenlanguage competition. Bilingualism: Language and
Cognition, 6(2), 97-115.
Mirman, D., Magnuson, J. S., Estes, K. G., & Dixon, J. A.
(2008). The link between statistical segmentation and
word learning in adults. Cognition, 108(1), 271-280.
Morton, J. B., & Harper, S. N. (2007). What did Simon say?
Revisiting the bilingual advantage. Developmental
Science, 10(6), 719-26.
Nation, I. (2006). How large a vocabulary is needed for
reading and listening? The Canadian Modern Language
Review, 63(1), 59-81.
Papagno, C., & Vallar, G. (1995). Verbal short-term
memory and vocabulary learning in polyglots. The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 48A(1),
98-107.
Saffran, J. R., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E. L. (1996).
Statistical learning by 8-month-old infants. Science,
274(5294), 1926-1928.
Saffran, J. R., Johnson, E. K., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E.
L. (1999). Statistical learning of tone sequences by human
infants and adults. Cognition, 70(1), 27-52.
Sanz, C. (2000). Bilingual education enhances third
language acquisition: Evidence from Catalonia. Applied
Psycholinguistics, 21(01), 23-44.
Schmitt, N. (2008). Review article: Instructed second
language vocabulary learning. Language Teaching
Research, 12(3), 329-363.
Schwartz, A. I., & Kroll, J. F. (2006). Bilingual lexical
activation in sentence context. Journal of Memory and
Language, 55(2), 197-212.
Service, E., Simola, M., Metsänheimo, O., & Maury, S.
(2002). Bilingual working memory span is affected by
language skill. European Journal of Cognitive
Psychology, 14(3), 383-408.
Slemmer, J., Kirkham, N. Z., & Johnson, S. P. (2010).
Visual statistical learning in infancy. Journal of Vision,
1(3), 25-25.
Thomas, J. (1992). Cognitive processing in bilinguals.
Advances in Psychology, 83, 531-545.
Van Hell, J. G., & Mahn, A. C. (1997). Keyword
mnemonics versus rote rehearsal: Learning concrete and
abstract foreign words by experienced and inexperienced
learners. Language Learning, 47(3), 507-546.
van Heuven, W. J. B., Dijkstra, T., & Grainger, J. (1998).
Orthographic neighborhood effects in bilingual word
recognition. Journal of Memory and Language, 39(3),
458-483.
Weiss, D., Gerfen, C., & Mitchel, A. (2010). Colliding cues
in word segmentation: The role of cue strength and
general cognitive processes. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 25(3), 402-422.

890

