UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Strategic Resources Support the Interpretation of Doubly-Quantified Sentences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/547112vb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
McMillan, Corey
Ryant, Neville
Coleman, Danielle
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Strategic Resources Support the Interpretation of Doubly-Quantified Sentences
Corey T. McMillan (mcmillac@mail.med.upenn.edu)
Neville Ryant (nryant@babel.ling.upenn.edu)
Danielle Coleman (daco@sas.upenn.edu
Robin Clark (rclark@babel.ling.upenn.edu)
Murray Grossman (mgrossma@mail.med.upenn.edu)
University of Pennsylvania, 3400 Spruce Street, 3 West Gates
Philadelpha, PA 19104 USA
Abstract
Quantifiers like “all” and “every” are frequent in daily
language. However, when a sentence contains two quantifiers
or is “doubly-quantified” (e.g., “Every boy ate a cookie”)
the meaning can often be ambiguous since there are two
potential interpretations: collective (e.g., several boys sharing
a single cookie) and distributive (e.g., several boys each eating
their own cookie). Psycholinguistic studies have established
empirical evidence for conflict between interpretations
of a doubly-quantified sentence and have proposed that the
interpretation of these sentences is “underspecified”. However,
little is known about the the neural mechanisms that support
the interpretation of doubly-quantified sentences. In an fMRI
experiment we demonstrate that conflict between possible
interpretations of doubly-quantified sentences is supported by
brain regions situated in fronto-parietal cortex. We propose
that an “underspecified” account is insufficient to account for
our neuroanatomical results and instead argue that strategic
decision-making resources may support the interpretation of
doubly-quantified sentences.
Keywords: Quantifiers; Semantics; Language Processing;
Decision-Making; fMRI

Introduction
Quantifiers like “all” and “every” are extraordinarily frequent
in daily language. The meaning of these quantifiers is well
known. However, when these words are used in a doublyquantified sentence the meaning can often be ambiguous.
Consider for example, the following doubly-quantified
sentences containing the quantifier “all”:
(1) a. All the men built a stadium.
b. All the men ate a cookie.
The quantifier “all” prefers a collective interpretation such
as in 1(a) when there is a set of men and they worked
together to build a single stadium. However, in 1(b) a conflict
arises between the preferred collective interpretation and the
unlikely possibility that a set of men collectively eat a single
cookie.
The quantifier “every” also has a preferred interpretation,
but it is distributive. For example, 2(b) is consistent with the
preferred interpretation – a set of men and each man ate a
different cookie. However, in 2(a) a conflict arises due to
the preferred distributive interpretation and unlikely event of
several men each building a unique stadium.

(2) a. Every man built a stadium.
b. Every man ate a cookie.
Together, the examples in (1) and (2) illustrate that a
conflict arises when individuals read doubly-quantified
sentences with a preferred interpretation and this
interpretation is unlikely. Empirical evidence for quantifier
interpretation conflict has been well established within the
psycholinguistic literature (Kurtzman & MacDonald, 1993;
Filik et al., 2004; Paterson et al., 2008) . In a seminal
reading experiment Kurtzman and MacDonald (1993)
presented readers with doubly-quantified sentences like
“Every boy climbed a tree” followed by a continuation
sentence with either a collective interpretation (e.g., “The
tree was full of apples”) or a distributive interpretation
(e.g., “The trees were full of apples”) and asked readers
to make a plausibility judgement. Participants were more
likely to accept, and therefore preferred, the distributive
interpretation rather than the collective interpretation.
However, the preference for a distributive interpretation
was diminished when doubly-quantified sentences were in
a passive voice (e.g., The tree was climbed by every kid)
or in a more complex noun phrase (e.g., George has every
photograph of an admiral). This prompted Kurtzman and
MacDonald (1993) to tentatively endorse a parallel parsing
model that simultaneously incorporates several principles
for resolving quantifier ambiguity and when a principle is
not available readers randomly choose between a distributive
and collective interpretation. In an eye-tracking experiment,
Filik et al. (2004) demonstrated that reading times for
doubly-quantified sentences containing “every” were longer
for sentences with a less preferred collective continuation
compared to a more preferred distributive continuation. This
suggests there is a processing cost when readers encounter a
less preferred interpretation and is consistent with Kurtzman
and MacDonald (1993) parallel processing account (see also
Paterson et al. (2008)).
More recently, in an event related potential (ERP)
experiment Dwivedi et al. (2010) presented individuals with
doubly-quantified sentences and continuation sentences
similar to Kurtzman and MacDonald (1993) and these were
compared relative to matched unambiguous baselines (Every

2433

kid climbed [a different / the same] tree). This comparison
did not yield any significant effects such as the N400 or
P600 commonly observed in the presence of semantic
violations, but rather within the ambiguous sentences a slow
negativity shift was observed. Dwivedi et al. (2010) used
this evidence to argue that individuals do not immediately
resolve the meaning of ambiguous quantifiers and instead
have an underspecified meaning and therefore do not commit
to a particular interpretation. Moreover, Dwivedi et al.
(2010) characterize their slow negative shift as a Slow Wave
and interpret its pattern in the context of Ruchkin et al.
(1988) claim that a Slow Wave reflects conceptually difficult
processing.
Together, these psycholinguistic investigations establish
empirical evidence for conflict during the interpretation
of “every” in doubly-quantified sentences. However, it is
not clear from previous investigations whether individuals
commit to a particular interpretation or do not resolve the
meaning of an ambiguous quantifier. In this paper we use
BOLD fMRI to investigate the neural basis for interpreting
conflicting or underspecified doubly-quantified sentences.
According to the “underspecified” hypothesis outlined
above readers simply interpret quantifiers using their
preferred meaning (“all” is collective; “every” is distributive)
and if that meaning is in conflict readers choose an arbitrary
interpretation as suggested by Kurtzman and MacDonald
(1993) or do not choose an interpretation at all (Dwivedi et
al., 2010). If readers only rely on the preferred interpretation
of a quantifier, we predict that neural mechanisms that
support quantifier comprehension will be recruited. Several
previous investigations have demonstrated that inferior
parietal cortex supports quantifier comprehension. This is
because of the role that number knowledge appears to play
in the meaning of quantifiers, and number knowledge is
supported by inferior parietal cortex. In fMRI studies healthy
adults recruited inferior parietal cortex when comprehending
sentences like “At least 3 cars are red” (McMillan et al.,
2005; Troiani et al., 2009). Converging evidence for the role
of inferior parietal cortex in quantifier comprehension comes
from neurodegenerative disease patient investigations that
have demonstrated that patients with inferior parietal cortex
disease have difficulty evaluating a quantifier’s meaning
(McMillan et al., 2006; Troiani et al., 2009).
While there are no neuroimaging studies to our
knowledge on the resolution of quantifier ambiguity,
several neuroimaging investigations on semantic ambiguity
have suggested that additional mechanisms may be recruited
to support semantic ambiguity resolution. For example,
fMRI investigations focusing on homonym comprehension
have demonstrated that ventrolateral prefrontal cortex and
inferior frontal cortex are recruited to support cognitive
control demands associated with processing a subordinate
meaning (Whitney et al., 2009). Another fMRI study
suggested that both frontal and temporal cortex are recruited
to support both cognitive control and semantic demands

(Rodd et al., 2005). Together, these studies suggest that
mechanisms beyond those required to support semantic
resources may also be required to support the resolution of
ambiguous doubly-quantified sentences.
In the fMRI study reported in this paper we presented
readers with sentences like (1) and (2) and probed them to fill
quickly”)
in a completion sentence (e.g., “They devoured
with “it” or “them”. We manipulated the size of the final
noun object paired with the quantifier at the beginning of the
sentence in order to modulate conflict between the preferred
interpretation and the likelihood of the event − smaller
objects are associated with a distributive interpretation and
the quantifier “every”, while larger objects are associated
with a collective interpretation and the quantifier “all”.
We predict that if ambiguous quantifier interpretation is
underspecified we will observe recruitment of regions
commonly implicated in quantifier comprehension, including
inferior parietal cortex. If, however, individuals do resolve a
quantifier’s meaning we predict that individuals will recruit
neuroanatomic regions beyond those commonly associated
with quantifier processing.

Methods
Participants
18 healthy young adults [Mean Age=25.4 years (SD=4.9);
Mean Education= 17.0 years (SD=2.4)] from the University
of Pennsylvania community participated in the study for
monetary payment. All participants were native speakers of
English, right-handed, and in good health with no history
of neurological difficulty. Informed consent was obtained
from all participants according to a protocol approved by the
University of Pennsylvania Institutional Review Board.

Experimental Materials
A total of 104 experimental stimulus sentences were
generated that contained two quantifiers. Half of the
sentences included the quantifier “every X” and half included
“all of the X”. The second quantifier in all of the sentences
was the existential quantifier “a Y”. All of the experimental
sentences (e.g., “All of the men built a stadium”) followed the
same simple grammatical structure: a quantifier statement
including a noun phrase (e.g., “All of the boys”, “Every
man”), a verb phrase (e.g., “ate”), an existential quantifier
(e.g., “a”), and a final noun (e.g., cookie, stadium).
In half of the sentences the final noun was a small
object (e.g., a cookie) to yield either a more compatible
interpretation for “every” or a less compatible interpretation
for “all”. In the remaining half of the sentences the final noun
was a large object (e.g., a stadium) to yield a more compatible
interpretation for “all” and less compatible for “every”. The
size of the object was determined in a pretest questionnaire in
which we probed participants to rate each object’s size on a
1−7. Together, this yielded a 2x2 design with Quantifier (All,
Every) and Object Size (Small, Large) as within-participant
factors. Each experimental stimulus item was paired with a

2434

completion sentence containing a verb phrase followed by a
blank and an adverb (e.g., “All the boys ate a cookie” was
quickly”). Each sentence
paired with “They devoured
was designed so that a forced-choice completion with “it”
would reflect a collective interpretation (e.g., several boys
sharing a single cookie) and a choice of “them” would reflect
a distributive interpretation (e.g., several boys, each with
their own cookie).

Experimental Procedure
Stimuli were presented using an event-related design
comprised of three events.
The first event was the
presentation of the doubly-quantified sentence for 3000 ms,
the second event was a presentation of the completion
sentence for 3000 ms and the third event involved the explicit
decision between “it” or “them” for 5000 ms. Participants
were instructed to complete each sentence with “it” or
“them” in order to make the sentences as natural as possible.
Experimental stimuli were presented using E-Prime
software (Psychology Software Tools; Pittsburgh, PA)
and projected to a screen outside the bore of the magnet.
Participants made their responses using a fiber optic
responses pad by pressing the left button for “it” and right
button for “them”. The experimental session began with
a brief practice session outside of the scanner comprised
of instructions and 8 experimental trials (2 from each
condition). Participants were then given an opportunity to
ask questions and receive feedback on performance. The
session then include the acquisition of a high resolution
volumetric localizer image followed by 4 equal length BOLD
fMRI blocks lasting approximately 7 minutes per block. An
equal number of each experimental condition were presented
in randomized order within each experimental block. Within
each experimental block we added an additional 20% of
trials to generate “null” events (consisting of a blank screen)
in order to dissociate individal trials in the time-series.

Figure 1: Percent of behavioral responses for the preferred
collective interpretation of “all” and the preferred distributive
interpretation of “every”.
space using tissue probability maps (Ashburner & Friston,
1997). During spatial normalization functional data were
interpolated to isotropic 2 mm voxels. The data were
spatially smoothed using a 9 mm FWHM isotropic Gaussian
kernel.
For each stimulus category, hemodynamic response was
estimated by convolving the onset times of the explicit
decision event with a canonical hemodynamic response
function. Each event type (doubly-quantified sentence,
completion sentence, explicit decision) was entered into a
general linear model in order to calculate parameter estimates
for each variable for each subject, and linear contrasts for
comparisons of interest. These estimates were then entered
into second-level random effects analyses to allow us to
make inferences across participants. We focus on the explicit
decision event in our reported contrasts, though we observed
similar activation patterns in contrasts involving the passive
reading events. We report the MNI peaks of regions of
activation in our analyses which survive a FDR-corrected
height threshold of p<0.05.

MRI Acquisition & Analysis
Scans were acquired on a Siemens 3.0T Trio scanner.
Each session began with acquisition of a high-resolution
T1-weighted structural volume using an MPRAGE protocol
(TR = 1620 ms, TE = 3 ms, flip angle = 15◦ , 1 mm slice
thickness, 192 × 256 matrix, resolution = 1 mm3 ). A total of
584 BOLD fMRI images were acquired in 4 separate runs of
equal length. Each image was acquired with fat saturation,
3 mm isotropic voxels, flip angle of 15◦ , TR = 3 s, TEeff =
30 ms, and a 64 × 64 matrix.
Image preprocessing and statistical analyses were
performed using SPM5 (Wellcome Trust Centre for
Functional Neuroimaging, London, UK). We first modeled
each individual participants data. Low-frequency drifts were
removed with high-pass filtering with a cutoff period of 128
seconds and autocorrelations modeled using a first-order
autoregressive model. Images for each participant were
realigned to the first image in the series, coregistered with
the structural image, and then transformed to MNI152

Results
Behavioral Results
To establish behavioral evidence for conflict between
two competing interpretations we analyzed the percent of
preferred responses for each quantifier across small (e.g.,
“cookie”) and large (e.g., “stadium”) object sizes. We report
the percent of “it” responses for sentences containing “all”
since “all” prefers a collective interpretation and thus a
large object. We report the percent of “them” responses
for sentences containing “every” since “every” prefers a
distributive interpretation and thus a small object. Figure 1
illustrates that participants prefer a collective interpretation of
“all” when followed by a large object but have a conflicting
interpretation preference when it is followed by a small
object. Also, participants prefer a distributive interpretation
of “every” when it is followed by a small object and
have conflicting interpretations when it is followed by a

2435

Figure 3: fMRI activation for parametric analysis revealing
increased activation associated with increased conflict
between object size and preferred interpretation [p<0.05
(FDR-corrected)]

Figure 2: fMRI activation for items with conflicting
interpretations (“all” with small objects; “every” with large
objects) minus items with more preferred interpretations
(“all” with large objects; “every” with small objects).
[p<0.05 (FDR-corrected)]
large object. Paired samples t-tests confirmed an effect
of conflict for both quantifiers: participants prefer larger
objects more than smaller objects for “all” [t(17)=6.54;
p<0.001]; and prefer smaller objects over larger objects
for “every” [t(17)=3.99; p<0.001]. We did not observe
any significant differences between “all” and “every” (all
p>0.3). Therefore, we collapsed “all” and “every” for the
neuroimaging analyses. These behavioral results establish
empirical evidence for conflict when a doubly-quantified
sentence has a preferred interpretation and that interpretation
conflicts with the object size.

Neuroimaging Results
To investigate the neural basis for resolving quantifier scope
ambiguity we compared activation during the interpretation
of sentences with conflicting interpretations (“all” with small
objects; “every” with large objects) relative to sentences
consistent with the preferred interpretation (“all” with large
objects; “every” with small objects). By comparing activation
across closely-matched doubly-quantified sentences we
subtracted out, and therefore controlled for, activation
that may be associated with making an explicit decision
(e.g., motor responses for a button press) and reading (e.g.,
visual processing). This subtraction revealed recruitment of
several regions situated in frontal cortex including bilateral
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex [DLPFC; 42 26 14; -50 28
4], bilateral ventrolateral prefrontal [48 24 -6; -50 28 4],
left inferior frontal [-52 18 28], left dorsal inferior [-44 -4
44] and dorsomedial prefrontal [2 34 48] cortex, along with
bilateral occipital cortex [22 -92 2; -22 -92 12; see Figure 2
for lateral regions]. The recruitment of these frontal regions,
all of which are not language-specific, is not consistent with
the “underspecified” hypothesis that predicts up-regulation
of resources known to contribute to unambiguous quantifier
comprehension.
To further evaluate the contribution of these mechanisms
for resolving quantifier interpretation conflict we conducted
a parametric analysis. In this analysis we used object size
as a continuous measure of quantifier interpretation conflict.
Values for object size were collected in a survey in which
individuals were asked to rate how large each object was

on a 1−7 scale. For example, for the quantifier “every”
the preferred distributive interpretation becomes more
conflicting as the object size (cookie → tree → stadium)
increases. Conversely, for the quantifier “all” the collective
interpretation becomes more conflicting as the object size
decreases. To account for the polarity of “all” and “every”
each of the object sizes for “all” were converted to their
reciprocal so that a higher number represents a higher level of
conflict. We computed the parametric model by correlating
the BOLD signal with object size and observed activation of
several frontal regions including left DLPFC [-50 28 28; -32
24 16], right inferior frontal [44 22 28], bilateral ventrolateral
prefrontal [42 20 -4; -48 48 -8; -46 20 -4], bilateral dorsal
inferior frontal [34 2 48; -36 4 44] and right dorsomedial
prefrontal [2 34 52] cortex that are recruited to support
increasing conflict. We additionally observed recruitment of
right inferior parietal [46 -56 42], left ventral temporal [-38
-50 -22; -44 -74 -14] and bilateral occipital [20 -96 0; -18
-100 10; see Figure 3 for lateral regions] cortex.

General Discussion
Doubly-quantified sentences can often be ambiguous
between a collective and distributive interpretation. In
particular, a conflict arises when a quantifier’s preferred
interpretation is inconsistent with the likelihood of an event
happening. For example, a set of boys are unlikely to
share a single cookie because of the typically small size
of a cookie. We observed in this study that individuals
recruit a large-scale fronto-parietal network to support the
interpretation of ambiguous doubly-quantified sentences.
Moreover, the activation in this network scales in magnitude
with increasing conflict between possible interpretations.
This is incompatible with the account of the behavioral
literature suggesting that conflict results in an arbitrary
decision about quantifier interpretation. Moreover, extensive
frontal activation indicates that these findings are inconsistent
with the hypothesis that readers merely recruit brain regions
important for interpreting a quantifier. These findings instead
suggest that we engage a decision-making mechanism seen
in other studies of ambiguity, such as homonyms (Whitney et
al., 2009; Rodd et al., 2005).

2436

Critically, while it is important to evaluate our
hypothesized model in a more “naturalistic” setting, we
believe that the observed patterns of activation that support
the decision-making processes of resolving quantifier
ambiguity are distinct from narrow, task-related demands.
First, the cortical regions recruited in the current study are
neuroanatomically distinct from those reported for sentence
comprehension tasks with an explicit decision compared
to those that involve passive reading (Hasson et al., 2006).
Second, a task-related decision-making account can not
account for the selective recruitment of decision-making
mechanisms observed in the reported contrasts. Specifically,
all task-related resources such as working memory resources,
making a button press and orienting attention to a reading
task were held constant across all experimental conditions.

Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC)
We observed recruitment of DLPFC when individuals
processed sentences containing conflict between a preferred
meaning and the likelihood of an event. DLPFC is commonly
implicated as a strategic mechanism in both neuroimaging
(Smith et al., 2001) and patient (Mangels, 1997)
investigations. Specifically, neuroimaging investigations
have implicated DLPFC in a variety of domains requiring
probabilistic evaluation, including probabilistic category
learning (Fera et al., 2005), discriminating between
advantageous and disadvantageous choices (Christakou et
al., 2009), and evaluating a probabilistic distribution in a
decision-making task (Huettel et al., 2005). This is also
consistent with the observation of DLPFC activation during
the probabilistic calculation of a syntactic structure when
confronted with a temporary structural ambiguity (NovaisSantos et al., 2007). Critically, regardless of whether DLPFC
activation is a general strategic mechanism or a probabilityspecific estimator, activation of this region suggests that
resources beyond those implicated in unambiguous quantifier
processing support the comprehension of ambiguous
quantifiers. Future work may help identify the specific role
of DLPFC by more precisely localizing this region in order
to discriminate between different levels of cognitive and
strategic control (Koechlin et al., 2003).
While DLPFC has been implicated in previous studies of
unambiguous quantifier comprehension (McMillan et al.,
2005; Troiani et al., 2009), it has only been reported during
the comprehension of a different class of quantifiers than
those used in the current study. McMillan et al. (2005) only
observed DLPFC activation during the comprehension of
higher-order quantifiers (e.g, “more than half”) compared
to first-order quantifiers (e.g., “at least 3”). More recently,
Troiani et al. (2009) demonstrated that logical quantifiers
such as “all” used in the current study recruit rostralmedial prefrontal cortex. The fact that we did not observe
rostral-medial prefrontal cortex activation in the current
study is consistent with the claim that readers were not
merely recruiting regions important in the interpretation of
quantifier meaning, but were instead recruiting additional

neuroanatomic resources.

Inferior frontal cortex
When a doubly-quantified sentence yields conflict between
a preferred interpretation and the likelihood of an event
we observed activation of dorsal and ventrolateral portions
of inferior frontal cortex. Dorsal inferior frontal cortex is
often implicated as an updating mechanism for working
memory which involves substituting information held in
working memory when trying to resolve conflict (Wager
& Smith, 2003). Our observation of anterior cingulate
activation is also consistent with reports of this region
contributing to conflict resolution (Botvinick et al., 2001).
Ventrolateral prefrontal cortex also has commonly been
implicated in the resolution of competing responses (Badre
& Wagner, 2007). Specifically, Thompson-Schill et al.
(1997) have proposed that ventrolateral prefrontal cortex
does not simply maintain competing responses in working
memory, but rather it is involved in the strategic selection
of relevant semantic information to choose one alternative
over another. In our study ventrolateral prefrontal cortex
is up-regulated relative to increasing conflict between a
collective and distributive interpretation of ambiguous
quantifiers. Consistent with Thompson-Schill et al. (1997)
we argue that this mechanism contributes to strategically
selecting one quantifier interpretation over another.

Inferior parietal cortex
We observed that individuals up-regulated inferior parietal
cortex as a function of increasing quantifier meaning conflict.
The role of inferior parietal cortex’s contribution to resolving
quantifier meaning requires further investigation. On the
one hand our observation that the magnitude of inferior
parietal cortex scales with increased quantifier conflict can
be attributed to increased processing demands associated
with identifying an underspecified quantifier’s meaning. A
number of neuroimaging investigations have demonstrated
inferior parietal recruitment during the comprehension of
unambiguous quantifiers which has been hypothesized to
support number knowledge required for quantifier meaning
(McMillan et al., 2005; Troiani et al., 2009). Similarly,
patients who have cortical atrophy in inferior parietal
cortex due to neurodegenerative disease have difficulty with
quantifier comprehension (McMillan et al., 2006; Troiani
et al., 2009). On the other hand, inferior parietal cortex
recruitment may be associated with increased strategic
processing demands associated with deciding on the
interpretation of an ambiguous quantifier. Inferior parietal
cortex has been implicated in integrating different sources of
information to make a decision (Naghavi & Nyberg, 2005)
and has been reported to support strategic resources when
comprehending sentences that do not contain quantifiers but
have a preferred interpretation (Novais-Santos et al., 2007).
For example, Novais-Santos et al. (2007) observed inferior
parietal cortex activation when readers processed sentences
with a less compatible compared to more compatible and

2437

attributed this to a verbal working memory mechanism that
works together with DLPFC to support increased resources
during sentence processing.

Conclusion
Together, we propose DLPFC, dorsal and ventrolateral
portions of inferior frontal cortex and inferior parietal
cortex form a large-scale neural network to support the
interpretation of doubly-quantified sentences. All of these
components of our proposed network have previously been
implicated in strategic processing and their recruitment in
this study suggests that strategic mechanisms contribute
to the interpretation of ambiguous quantifiers.
This
observation is in contrast to an “underspecified” account
that hypothesizes that the up-regulation of resources which
support unambiguous quantifier comprehension are sufficient
to support the interpretation of quantified sentences with
more than one meaning.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the following grants from
the National Institutes of Health: HD050406, NS44266,
AG17586, AG15116, AG32953, and NS53488.

References
Ashburner, J., & Friston, K.
(1997).
Multimodal
image coregistration and partitioning–a unified framework.
NeuroImage, 6(3), 209–17.
Badre, D., & Wagner, A. (2007). Left ventrolateral
prefrontal cortex and the cognitive control of memory.
Neuropsychologia, 45(13), 2883–901.
Botvinick, M., Braver, T., Barch, D., Carter, C., & Cohen, J.
(2001). Conflict monitoring and cognitive control. Psychol
Rev, 108(3), 624–52.
Christakou, A., Brammer, M., Giampietro, V., & Rubia, K.
(2009). Right ventromedial and dorsolateral prefrontal
cortices mediate adaptive decisions under ambiguity by
integrating choice utility and outcome evaluation. J
Neurosci, 29(35), 11020–8.
Dwivedi, V. D., Phillips, N. A., Einagel, S., & Baum, S. R.
(2010). The neural underpinnings of semantic ambiguity
and anaphora. Brain Research, 1311, 93–109.
Fera, F., Weickert, T. W., Goldberg, T. E., Tessitore, A.,
Hariri, A., Das, S., et al. (2005). Neural mechanisms
underlying probabilistic category learning in normal aging.
J Neurosci, 25(49), 11340–8.
Filik, R., Paterson, K. B., & Liversedge, S. P. (2004).
Processing doubly quantified sentences: evidence from eye
movements. Psychon Bull Rev, 11(5), 953–9.
Hasson, U., Nusbaum, H., & Small, S. (2006). Repetition
suppression for spoken sentences and the effect of task
demands. J Cogn Neurosci, 18(12), 2013–29.
Huettel, S. A., Song, A. W., & McCarthy, G. (2005).
Decisions under uncertainty:
probabilistic context
influences activation of prefrontal and parietal cortices. J
Neurosci, 25(13), 3304–11.

Koechlin, E., Ody, C., & Kouneiher, F. (2003). The
architecture of cognitive control in the human prefrontal
cortex. Science, 302(5648), 1181–5.
Kurtzman, H. S., & MacDonald, M. C. (1993). Resolution of
quantifier scope ambiguities. Cognition, 48(3), 243–79.
Mangels, J. A. (1997). Strategic processing and memory
for temporal order in patients with frontal lobe lesions.
Neuropsychology, 11(2), 207–21.
McMillan, C., Clark, R., Moore, P., DeVita, C., & Grossman,
M. (2005). Neural basis for generalized quantifier
comprehension. Neuropsychologia, 43(12), 1729–1737.
McMillan, C., Clark, R., Moore, P., & Grossman, M. (2006).
Quantifier comprehension in corticobasal degeneration.
Brain and Cognition, 62(3), 250–260.
Naghavi, H., & Nyberg, L. (2005). Common fronto-parietal
activity in attention, memory, and consciousness: shared
demands on integration? Conscious Cogn, 14(2), 390–
425.
Novais-Santos, S., Gee, J., Shah, M., Troiani, V., Work, M.,
& Grossman, M. (2007). Resolving sentence ambiguity
with planning and working memory resources: Evidence
from fmri. NeuroImage, 37(1), 361–78.
Paterson, K. B., Filik, R., & Liversedge, S. P. (2008).
Competition during the processing of quantifier scope
ambiguities: evidence from eye movements during reading.
Q J Exp Psychol (Colchester), 61(3), 459–73.
Rodd, J., Davis, M., & Johnsrude, I. (2005). The neural
mechanisms of speech comprehension: fmri studies of
semantic ambiguity. Cerebral Cortex, 15(8), 1261.
Ruchkin, D. S., Johnson, R., Mahaffey, D., & Sutton, S.
(1988). Toward a functional categorization of slow waves.
Psychophysiology, 25(3), 339–53.
Smith, E. E., Geva, A., Jonides, J., Miller, A., Reuter-Lorenz,
P., & Koeppe, R. A. (2001). The neural basis of taskswitching in working memory: effects of performance and
aging. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America, 98(4), 2095–100.
Thompson-Schill, S., D’Esposito, M., Aguirre, G., & Farah,
M. (1997). Role of left inferior prefrontal cortex in retrieval
of semantic knowledge: a reevaluation. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A, 94(26), 14792–7.
Troiani, V., Peelle, J. E., Clark, R., & Grossman, M. (2009).
Is it logical to count on quantifiers? dissociable neural
networks underlying numerical and logical quantifiers.
Neuropsychologia, 47(1), 104–11.
Wager, T. D., & Smith, E. E. (2003). Neuroimaging studies
of working memory: a meta-analysis. Cogn Affect Behav
Neurosci, 3(4), 255–74.
Whitney, C., Grossman, M., & Kircher, T. T. J. (2009). The
influence of multiple primes on bottom-up and top-down
regulation during meaning retrieval: Evidence for 2 distinct
neural networks. Cerebral Cortex, 19(11), 2548–2560.

2438

