UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Subitizing and Mathematics Performance in Early Childhood

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8hs5h4f2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Yun, Cathy
Havard, Amanda
Farran, Dale
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Subitizing and Mathematics Performance in Early Childhood
Cathy Yun (Cathy.Yun@Vanderbilt.Edu)
Peabody Research Institute, Box 0181 GPC, 230 Appleton Place
Nashville, TN 37203 USA

Amanda Havard (Amanda.Havard@Gmail.Com)
Peabody Research Institute, Box 0181 GPC, 230 Appleton Place
Nashville, TN 37203 USA

Dale C. Farran (Dale. Farran@Vanderbilt.Edu)
Peabody Research Institute, Box 0181 GPC, 230 Appleton Place
Nashville, TN 37203 USA

Mark W. Lipsey (Mark.Lipsey@Vanderbilt.Edu)
Peabody Research Institute, Box 0181 GPC, 230 Appleton Place
Nashville, TN 37203 USA

Carol Bilbrey (Carol.Bilbrey@Vanderbilt.Edu)
Peabody Research Institute, Box 0181 GPC, 230 Appleton Place
Nashville, TN 37203 USA

Kerry G. Hofer (Kerry.G.Hofer@Vanderbilt.Edu)
Peabody Research Institute, Box 0181 GPC, 230 Appleton Place
Nashville, TN 37203 USA

but many studies agree on a range of 1-4 (Trick & Pylyshyn,
1994).
Children as young as 2 can subitize, but both children’s
subitizing speed and range may differ from that of adults.
Children have been shown to be slower, taking an average
of 100-200 ms per item when subitizing (Chi & Klahr,
1975; Svenson & Sjöberg, 1978). Estimates of children’s
subitizing range have varied from two to five items, but
evidence from several studies suggests that the upper limit
of the subitizable range is 3 or 4 for young children (e.g. Chi
& Klahr, 1975; Gelman & Tucker, 1975).
Some evidence suggests that children’s ability to subitize
3 objects or 4 is somewhat age-related. For example,
Gelman and Tucker (1975) found differences in the
subitizing accuracy of 3-, 4-, and 5-year-olds. For sets of
three items, only about 58% of 3-year-olds were accurate,
compared to 77% of 4-year-olds and 90% of 5-year-olds.
The differences were even more dramatic for sets of four
items, for which only about 19% of 3-year-olds were
accurate, compared to 48% of 4-year-olds and 69% of 5year-olds. Starkey and Cooper (1995) also found an Age x
Set size interaction among children aged 2-5 for sets of
three and four items. They suggested that the subitizing
range may begin to gradually extend from 3 to 4 around the
age of 3 ½.
Though such estimates are applicable across young
children, in general, there are individual differences in
subitizing ability among children. Svenson and Sjöberg

Abstract
Subitizing is thought to be an important precursor to
mathematical development in young children. However,
evidence for this relationship is sparse. This study examined
the relationship between subitizing range and mathematical
performance in kindergarten-aged children. The large sample
included typically-developing children from urban
backgrounds. Findings indicated a significant link between
subitizing ability and mathematical skills.
Keywords: math development; early childhood; subitizing.

Introduction
Subitizing ability is believed to underlie development of
fundamental mathematics skills in early childhood and to
support mathematics achievement. However, neither the
development of subitizing nor its relationship to
mathematics performance is well understood. Moreover,
much of the existing research has been conducted with
adults or special populations of children. The current study
examines the relationship between subitizing ability and
mathematics performance in a large sample of typicallydeveloping children.
Subitizing is a fast small-number enumeration process
different from counting. Subitizing in adults is estimated to
take from 20-100 ms per item compared to counting, which
is estimated to take 250-350 ms per item (Chi & Klahr,
1975; Trick & Pylyshyn, 1994; Wender & Rothkegel,
2000). Reports of the subitizable range among adults vary,

680

(1978), for instance, demonstrated wide variability in
subitizing performance for 7- and 8-year-old children. Such
individual differences, in concert with age-related
differences, are of consequence because of the evidence that
suggests that subitizing is a foundational skill for
mathematical development.
Several recent studies have linked subitizing ability to
counting, arithmetic, and number system knowledge.
However, studies with young children have generally been
small (e.g. Desoete & Grégoire, 2006; Kroesbergen, Van
Luit, Van Lieshout, Van Loosbroek, & Van de Rijt, 2009;
Penner-Wilger et al., 2007). For example, a study of 146
first-graders found that subitizing skill was related to both
number system knowledge and calculation skills (PennerWilger et al., 2007). In a different study, Desoete and
Grégoire (2006) demonstrated that subitizing skill is
predictive of later mathematics performance. They
administered a standardized mathematics assessment to 82
children at the end of kindergarten, and again in first grade
and found that below-average subitizing skill in
kindergarten significantly predicted low mathematics
achievement in first grade. One larger study, with 375
participants, demonstrated that subitizing ability was related
to arithmetic skills through high school, and that subitizing
ability actually declined over time, but did not include
children younger than 7 years old (Fischer, Gebhardt, &
Hartnegg, 2008).

(Clements, Sarama, & Liu, 2008) and the Applied Problems
and Quantitative Concepts assessments of the WoodcockJohnson III Achievement Battery (WJ-III, Woodcock,
McGrew, & Mather, 2001).

Mathematics Assessments
The REMA was developed to be used in conjunction with
the Building Blocks (Clements & Sarama, 2007)
prekindergarten mathematics curriculum. It is made up of
two components: one that assesses number knowledge and
one that assesses geometry skills. The items on the REMA
Number Assessment measure the developmental
progression of the following skills: recognition of number
and subitizing, verbal counting and object counting, number
comparison, number sequencing, number composition and
decomposition, adding and subtracting, place value, and
multiplication and division.
The REMA Geometry Assessment measures development
in the areas of shape recognition, shape composition and
decomposition, congruence, construction of shapes, spatial
imagery (turns), geometric measurement, and patterning
using geometric shapes. These assessments are
comprehensive measures of mathematics development, and
so are used as the designated measures of mathematics
performance in this study. The REMA can be used with
children from 3 to 8 years old and is a scripted assessment
that is administered in a one-on-one interview format.
The WJ-III is a standardized achievement assessment
made up of many subtests. Two mathematics subtests,
Applied Problems and Quantitative Concepts, were
employed to measure mathematical reasoning. The WJ-III
subtests are also scripted and administered individually.
Based on prior evidence, subitizing was expected to be
related to performance on the REMA Number Assessment
but not on the REMA Geometry Assessment or either of the
WJ-III subtests because subitizing has been presumed to be
related specifically to numeracy skills.

The Current Study
The current study also examined the link between subitizing
ability and mathematics skill, but is unique in several ways.
First, rather than measuring accuracy or speed of subitizing,
this study investigated the upper limit of the subitizing
range and its relationship to mathematical skill. Second, the
subitizing data in this study were voice recordings of
children performing a mathematics task rather than
frequency counts or reaction times. Third, this study
included a sample of typically-developing young children
that is larger than the samples of any other known study of
subitizing and early mathematics skill. Furthermore, the
low-income, racially diverse, urban children in this sample
comprise a population that has been neglected in much of
the extant subitizing research.

Subitizing Assessment
For the basal item on the REMA Number Assessment,
children are shown a picture of a bear, below which are
three green dots representing grapes, and a picture of a cat,
below which are four green dots. Children are required to

Table 1: Subitizing groups and sample responses.

Methods

compare the two sets and to explain how they determined
whether or not the sets are the same in quantity.
Children’s responses were audio-recorded and
transcribed. The inter-rater reliability rate between two
raters was 98.53%. Responses were categorized into one of

As part of a larger study of a prekindergarten mathematics
curriculum, 562 children were assessed in the spring of
kindergarten using the Number and Geometry Assessments
of the Research-based Early Maths Assessment, or REMA

681

proxy for socioeconomic status). For all outcome measures,
over and beyond pretest, subitizing group membership had a
significant unique relationship with mathematics
performance. Compared to children who could subitize
neither 3 nor 4 (Group 0), children who could subitize 3 but
not 4 (Group 1) performed significantly better on REMA
Number, WJ-III Applied Problems, and WJ-III Quantitative
Concepts assessments. Children who could subitize both 3
and 4 (Group 2) performed significantly better than children
who could not subitize on all measures. The effect sizes
between the scores of a child who can subitize neither 3 nor
4 and those of a child who can subitize both 3 and 4 were d
= 0.67 for the WJ-III Applied Problems subtest, d = 0.62 for
the REMA Number Assessment, d = 0.52 for the WJ-III
Quantitative Concepts subtest, and d = 0.48 for the REMA
Geometry Assessment.

three groups, based on the indicated subitizing range. In
Group 0, children provided responses that indicated that
they subitized neither 3 nor 4. Typically, children in Group
0 counted aloud both sets by ones. Children in Group 1
counted only the set of 4, having subitized 3. Finally,
children in Group 2, subitized both sets and did not have to
count.
In all 562 cases included in these analyses, children’s
responses began immediately after the assessor’s question
and did not include any pauses during which children may
have counted inaudibly. The current sample excludes 122
children whose responses were not indicative of subitizing
range. Table 1 includes examples of such excluded
responses.

Results
Over 77% of the analysis sample was African American,
93% was receiving free-and-reduced meals. Overall, age
ranged from 66 months to 90 months, with a mean of 72.61
months. Group 0 was comprised of the fewest children
(11%) and Group 2 included the greatest number of children
(70.3%), (X2 = 350.246, df = 2, p < .001). A between-group
age comparison found there were no significant differences
among the subitizing groups (F (2, 555), F=2.384, p <.093).
Results from an ANOVA demonstrated significant
differences among subitizing groups in performance on the
REMA Number Assessment (F (2,559), F=48.919, p <.001),
REMA Geometry Assessment scores (F (2,559), F=24.644,
p <.001), WJ-III Applied Problems subtest (F (2,559),
F=52.224, p <.001), and WJ-III Quantitative Concepts
subtest (F (2,559)), F=32.073, p <.001). Post-hoc pairwise
comparisons revealed significant differences among all
groups on all assessments, with Group 0 scoring the lowest
and Group 2 scoring the highest (see Table 2).

Discussion
The current analyses found a significant relationship
between subitizing range and mathematics performance in
kindergarten-aged children. Children who demonstrated
ability to subitize both 3 and 4 had higher scores on all four
mathematics outcome measures compared to children who
could subitize 3 but not 4 or children who could subitize
neither 3 nor 4. These findings provide further support that
subitizing skill may be foundational for mathematics
development in early childhood, and that the ability to
subitize 4 might be an important milestone. Furthermore, all
four measures of mathematical performance were
significantly correlated, suggesting that mathematical
understanding in young children may be domain general and
not specific to particular aspects of mathematics. Subitizing
appears to be linked to overall mathematical skill rather than
only to numeracy.

Table 2: Mean scores on mathematics assessments by subitizing group.

Linear mixed modeling was employed to take into
account the hierarchical nature of the data. Children were
nested within classrooms and classrooms nested within
schools. Each mathematics outcome measure was modeled
separately. Demographic variables, school system, age, and
pretest scores were entered into each model as covariates.
There were no significant effects of age, gender, ethnicity,
or free-and- reduced-priced meal program status (used as a

However, there is an important difference in the age range
of the children in the current study from that of children in
previous studies. Other studies have reported that children
can generally subitize 3 by age 3 (Benoit et al., 2004;
Starkey & Cooper, 1995), and that older 3-year-olds and 4and 5-year-olds were generally able to subitize 4 (Starkey &
Cooper, 1995). However, almost a third (29.72%) of the

682

more intentional measure may have prevented 17% of the
sample from being excluded from the analyses.
Related to this point, it could be argued that children’s
subitizing range was inferred from children’s responses
rather than directly measured. However, the speed and
confidence with which children responded when subitizing
contrasted with the slowness and deliberateness when
counting clearly distinguished the two processes in all
included cases. Furthermore, there were no pauses in the
recording during which children might have been counting
sub-vocally.
Finally, children’s subitizing range was assessed based on
a response to one item. Therefore, it is important to point
out that these data represent only a single snapshot of
children’s subitizing ability. Again, intentionality in
designing future studies would remedy this limitation.

children in this study, though much older with ages ranging
from 5 ½ to 7 ½, did not subitize 4. Because the lowincome, urban population from which the current sample
was drawn has not been extensively studied in regards to
subitizing ability, it is possible that the present findings are
indicative of differences specifically linked to the lowincome, urban backgrounds of children who attend
government-funded Head Start or public prekindergarten
programs and qualify for the free-and- reduced-priced meal
program. This is a possibility that warrants further
investigation in future studies.

Educational Implications
Based on the findings in this study, subitizing range is a
strong indicator of students’ mathematical abilities, and
subitizing skill assessment could convey important
information to a teacher about a child’s mathematical
development. It may be useful to consider subitizing as a
screening tool that could provide a rough estimate of
children’s mathematical abilities, an idea that has been
suggested by others (Desoete, Ceulemans, Roeyers, &
Huylebroeck, 2009).
In prior studies, poor subitizing skills have been linked to
mathematics learning disability (MLD) (Desoete &
Grégoire, 2006; Fischer, Gebhardt, & Hartnegg, 2008;
Fischer, Köngeter, & Hartnegg, 2008; Koontz & Berch,
1996), and it is a fact that, in the current study, the students
who fell into the lowest subitizing group scored
significantly lower than their peers on all mathematics
assessments. Though it would be impossible to link the
subitizing abilities of children in the current sample with
MLD, one may wonder if some of the students who did not
effectively subitize 3 might be identified as having MLD at
a later age. It is possible that a short measure of subitizing
could serve as a screen for identifying children who, without
intervention, may be at risk of developing MLD, or
mathematics difficulties, later on. Early identification of risk
for MLD followed by focused mathematical intervention
may attenuate initial delays in mathematical development
due to poor subitizing skills.
There are, in fact, several studies that have been able to
successfully produce changes in subitizing ability with
teaching or coaching (Fischer, Köngeter, & Hartnegg, 2008;
Wilson, Revkins, Cohen, Cohen, & Dehaene, 2006).
However, the children in these studies were older and had
already been identified as having MLD. Thus, currently,
there is very little evidence that subitizing can be taught to
young children, or that doing so would interrupt the
development of later mathematical difficulties or MLD.

Conclusion
Despite its limitations, this study provides important
evidence for a relationship between subitizing ability, as
defined by range, and mathematics skills in early childhood.
Having included typically developing children from lowincome urban backgrounds in a sample much larger than
those of previous studies contributes uniquely to the extant
research. Understanding the link between subitizing and
mathematical development in diverse populations of
children has important implications for both researchers and
practitioners.

Acknowledgments
This study was possible through a grant from the Institute of
Education Sciences of the U.S. Department of Education,
(No. R305U060002).

References
Benoit, L., Lehalle, H., & Jouen, F. (2004). Do young
children acquire number words through subitizing or
counting? Cognitive Development, 19(3), 291-307.
Chi, M. T. H., & Klahr, D. (1975). Span and rate of
apprehension in children and adults. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 19, 434-439.
Clements, D. H., & Sarama, J. (2007). Building Blocks.
Columbus, OH: SRA/McGraw-Hill.
Clements, D. H., Sarama, J., & Liu, Xiufeng (2008).
Development of a measure of early mathematics
achievement using the Rasch model: The Research-based
Early Maths Assessment. Educational Psychology, 28(4),
457-482.
Desoete, A., Ceulemans, A., Roeyers, H., & Huylebroeck,
A. (2009). Subitizing or counting as possible screening
variables for learning disabilities in mathematics
education or learning? Educational Research Review, 4,
55-66.
Desoete, A., & Grégoire, J. (2006). Numerical competence
in young children and in children with mathematics

Limitations
There are several limitations to the current study. It is
important to note that the mathematical task used to
determine subitizing range was not intended as a measure of
subitizing. The audio recordings of the children’s responses
provided incidental data on children’s subitizing ability. A

683

learning disabilities. Learning and Individual Differences,
16, 351-367.
Fischer, B., Gebhardt, C., & Hartnegg, K., (2008).
Subitizing and visual counting in children with problems
in acquiring basic arithmetic skills. Optometry & Vision
Development, 39, 24-29.
Gelman, R. & Tucker, M. F. (1975). Further investigations
of the young child’s conception of number. Child
Development, 46, 167-175.
Kroesbergen, E. H., Van Luit, J. E. H., Van Lieshout, E. C.
D. M., Van Loosbroek, E., &Van de Rijt, B. A. M.
(2009). Individual differences in early numeracy: The role
of executive functions and subitizing. Journal of
Psychoeducational Assessment, 27, 226-236.
Penner-Wilger, M., Fast, L., LeFevre, J., Smith-Chant, B.
L., Skwarchuk, S., & Kamawar, D., et al. (2007). The
foundations of numeracy: Subitizing, finger gnosia, and
fine motor ability. Proceedings of the 29th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum, 1385-1390.
Starkey, P., & Cooper, R. (1995). The development of
subitizing in young children. British Journal of
Developmental Psychology, 19, 399-420.
Svenson, O., & Sjoberg, K. (1978). Subitizing and counting
processes in young children. Scandinavian Journal of
Psychology, 19, 247-250.
Trick, L. M., & Pylyshyn, Z. W. (1994). Why are small and
large numbers enumerated differently? A limited-capacity
preattentive stage in vision. Psychological Review,
101(1), 80-102.
Wender, K. F., & Rothkegel, R. (2000). Subitizing and its
subprocesses. Psychological Research, 64, 81-92.
Wilson, A. J., Revkin, S. K., Cohen, D., Cohen, L. &
Dehaene, S. (2006). An open trial assesssemnt of “The
Number Race”, an adaptive computer game for
remediation of dyscalculia. Behavioral and Brain
Functions, 2:20.
Woodcock, R. W., McGrew, K. S., & Mather, N. (2001).
Woodcock-Johnson III. Itasca, IL: Riverside Publishing.

684

