UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Syntactic Biases in Intentionality Judgments

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/89m5h9tw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Strickland, Brent
Fischer, Matt
Peyroux, Elodie
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Syntactic Biases in Intentionality Judgments
Brent Strickland (brent.strickland@yale.edu)
Department of Psychology, Yale University
Matt C. Fischer (matthew.c.fisher@biola.edu)
Biola University
Elodie Peyroux (elodie.peyroux@hotmail.fr)
Universite Lumiere Lyon 2
Frank Keil (frank.keil@yale.edu)
Department of Psychology, Yale University
Abstract: The notion of a “thematic role” has been
an important one in linguistic theories concerning the
syntax/semantics interface (Fillmore, 1968), but their
effects on high-level cognition remain relatively
unexplored. Thematic roles,like AGENT and
PATIENT, are said to be linked with specific
grammatical positions like that of “subject” and
“direct object”. Here we ask if the link between
grammatical subjects and the thematic role AGENT
might create an intentionality bias for subjects. We
tested this in a series of studies examining both
response times and accuracy. These studies reveal a
quick and reflexive bias to treat grammatical subjects
(but not prepositional objects or direct objects) as
being more intentional than they actually are.
However, this bias may be overcome when people
are encouraged to reflect on their true knowledge.
Broader implications of our findings for research in
psychology and linguistics are discussed.

following four verbs as an example: “eat,” “help,”
“deceive,” and “construct.” Despite large differences
in meaning, for each verb it is nearly always the case
that the syntactic subject denotes an agent who
intentionally brought about some state of affairs. Of
course, there are syntactic subjects who do not act
intentionally but do other things like cause or initiate
an event (as in “the tornado destroyed the power
lines”). Nevertheless, the notion of intentionality
does seem to be strongly associated with the syntactic
subject position across many verbs and many verb
classes (Sorace, 2000).
The computational logic of on-line language
processing suggests that inferring others’ intentions is
likely to reflexively influence decisions regarding
syntactic subjects. Imagine someone producing the
sentence the sentence “Man bites dog” in context.
When the speaker decides to put “man” as the subject
instead of the object, he/she must have identified
something about the role the man played in the event
in order to decide that “man” is a grammatical subject
and not an object. In this case, intentionality is a
pretty good indicator of which actor goes in the
subject position of the sentence.
In comprehension contexts, there is also some
recent empirical evidence suggesting that the
representation of others’ intentions interacts with
one’s grammatical knowledge. Childers & Echols
(2004) showed that when learning the meaning of a
new word, children have a strong expectation for
grammatical subjects to be intentional, animate
actors. While this bias could interfere with learning in
some cases, it improves performance in prototypical
events where an animate agent acts on an inanimate
patient, and that event is described with by a sentence
placing the animate actor in the grammatical subject
position.
Thus, both empirical studies and common sense
suggest that the theory of mind concept of “intention”

Keywords: Intentionality Bias, Theory of Mind,
Dual Systems, Thematic Roles

Introduction
Linguists have hypothesized the existence of
“thematic roles” in order to explain semantic
similarities between actors mentioned in specific
syntactic positions (Dowty, 1991; Carlson &
Tanenhaus, 1988; Fillmore, 1968). The most relevant
example here is that syntactic subjects are said to be
associated with the AGENT thematic role, where
semantic agents are those things which prototypically
cause events to happen, intend them to happen, and
initiate their occurrence (Dowty, 1991).
Given their association with the AGENT thematic
role, syntactic subjects in English are often
understood to have acted intentionally. Take the

601

could influence language processing. But here we
want to ask the novel, opposite question. Could a
noun’s syntactic position relative to a verb influence
how that noun’s role in an event is conceptualized?
More specifically, perhaps the grammatical subject
of a sentence undergoes more of an intentionally bias
than other parts of speech due to its association with
the AGENT thematic role. So while people can
reflect on the intentionality of the actors described in
a sentence in a deeper, more reflective way, there
may also exist a simple heuristic like, “Syntactic
Subject  Intentional,” which operates in quick,
reflexive manner and trumps deeper knowledge in
some cases.

except that list of verbs was limited to exchange,
trade and swap. Both nouns were the grammatical
subject in this condition. An example sentence is:
“Frank and Steven exchanged books.”
Experiment 1c was identical to 1a with the
following exceptions. The verbs employed were:
“exchange”, “swap”, “loan”, “borrow”, “sell”, “buy”.
Each verb had two constructs: a clefted subject (“It
was Frank that exchanged books with Steven”) or a
clefted object (“It was Frank that Steven exchanged
books with”).

Results
The results of Experiments 1a-1c matched our
predictions (see Figure 1 below). All subsequent
analyses below are by item analyses unless otherwise
stated. In Experiment 1a, participants judged the
grammatical subject as having acted more
intentionally (M = 5.63) than the prepositional object
(M = 5.01), t(6), = 3.7, p < .05.
In Experiment 1b where both actors were the
grammatical subject, both the first noun (M = 5.56)
and the second noun (M = 5.64) were judged to be
equally intentional, p = .71.
In Experiment 1c the clefted subject (M = 5.68)
was rated as being more intentional than the clefted
object (M = 4.94), t(5) = 4.02, p <.05.

Experiment 1
While the notion of a general intentionality bias has
recently become a hot topic in cognitive science (see
Rosset, 2008), the question of how syntactic
heuristics may influence any putative intentionality
bias has not, to our knowledge, been explored.
In order to determine whether there may be more
of an intentionality bias for subjects compared to
other parts of speech, we employed logically
equivalent sentences like “Frank exchanged products
with Steven” and “Steven exchanged products with
Frank.” (see Gleitman et al, 1996). In such sentences,
each sentence is both necessary and sufficient for it’s
reverse to be true. Given their logical equivalence,
both sentences necessarily describe an event (or set
of possible events) in which Frank must be acting
equally intentionally in both cases. However, we
predicted that “Frank” would be judged as more
intentional when he was described as the grammatical
subject than when he was described as the object of
the preposition.
In order to test for any effects of word order we ran
control Experiment 1b. In order to test for any effects
of distance from the beginning or end of the sentence,
we also ran control Experiment 1c.

Discussion
Experiment 1 shows that participants use
grammatical position as a heuristic for intentionality
judgments. Participants judged the grammatical
subject of logically reversible sentences as acting
more intentionally than the prepositional object. Thus
the same actor from the exact same event will be
treated differently depending on how that event is
described. Experiments 1b and 1c rule out the
possibility that these effects are due to simple word
order or recency effects.

Method
1000 paid online participants from Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk.
Materials and Procedure: In Experiment 1a,
participants saw a single sentence from a pair of
logically equivalent sentences like the “exchange”
example above. The other verbs were: “swap”,
“trade”, “loan/borrow”, and “buy/sell”. All verbs
contained “Frank” and “Steven” as the proper nouns
designating the actors in the event.
Each participant read only one sentence and rated
on a scale of 1-7 how intentionally they thought
either the subject (e.g. “Frank”) or the prepositional
object acted (e.g. “Steven”).
Experiment 1b employed used the same method

602

sentence entails the same sentence with the actors
reversed. For example, participants might be asked
“If Bill swapped books with Susan, is it necessarily
the case that Susan swapped books with Bill?”
Participants responded “Yes” or “No.”
After making each response they then rated the
intentionality of both the grammatical subject and
grammatical object on a seven-point scale.

Figure 1: Results from Experiments 1a – 1c.
The grammatical subject of the sentence is
reliably rated as more intentional than the
prepositional object in logically reversible
sentences.

Results
Participants “qualified” for data analysis if they
indicated that they believed all logically reversible
sentences were in fact logically reversible (45 out of
56 subjects). We selected this group because we were
mainly interested in those participants who were
reasoning in the relevant way.
These participants indeed showed less of an
intentionality bias for the subject after logical
priming than before. The mean ratings are as follows:
pre-prime subject M=6.32; pre-prime object M=5.1;
post-prime subject M=6.35; post-prime object
M=5.97. The pre-prime difference between subjects
and objects was statistically significant t(44)=3.53, p
< .001, and the post-prime difference was also
statistically significant t(44)=3.53, p < .001. Crucially
however, the interaction between the conditions was
also statistically significant, p<.001. This indicates
that intentionality bias for the subject significantly
decreased after the logical prime.
For the 11 participants who did not agree with the
principle of logical reversibility, they also treated
grammatical subjects as being more intentional than
grammatical objects both pre-prime (M=5.48,
M=4.06, t(10)=3.47, p<.01.) and post-prime
(M=4.97, M=3.97, t(10)= 3.169, p<.05). However,
the interaction between priming condition and
grammatical position was not significant, p=.37.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2 we ask two related questions. (1)
Can people hold this intentionality bias for syntactic
subjects while still believing in the logical
equivalence of our sentences? (2) Can people
overcome this bias by shifting to a more logical mode
of thought?
Here, we employed a slightly more complicated
design than in the previous experiment. The
experiment was divided into three parts. In the preprime phase, we probed participants on their
intentionality judgments for grammatical subjects
and objects in logically reversible sentences as well
as non-logically reversible sentences. We then
“primed” them to think logically by asking them if
they agreed that the logically reversible sentences
from Experiment 1 were in fact logically reversible.
Then we re-tested them as in the pre-prime phase.
First, we predicted that people would show an
intentionality bias even if they would later agree that
our “logically reversible” sentences were in fact
logically reversible. In other words, we predicted that
participants would contradict themselves. Secondly,
we predicted that participants would eliminate or
reduce their intentionality bias for grammatical
subjects after being encouraged to think about the
logic of our sentences.

Discussion
Experiment 2 supported our two predictions. First,
some participants held contradictory beliefs with
regards to the intentionality of the actors described in
our sentences. They were biased to see the
grammatical subjects as more intentional than other
logically equivalent actors. However, they also
recognized that these actors were in fact logically
equivalent. Thus, for the sentence “Bill swapped
books with Susan,” they simultaneously believed that
“Bill” was more intentional than “Susan” while being
logically committed to their being equally intentional.
When confronted with this fact, participants
adjusted their intentionality ratings for logically
equivalent subjects and objects by making them more
similar. Thus participants were able to reduce the
influence of the heuristic “subject  intentional” by

Method
56 paid online
Mechanical Turk.

participants

from

Amazon’s

Procedure and Stimuli: In the “pre-prime” phase,
subjects first saw nine sentences, three of which were
logically reversible and six of which were not. They
rated both the subject and object on how intentionally
they acted.
During the priming phase, participants were then
shown nine different sentences, three of which were
logically reversible and six of which were not. For
each sentence, participants were asked whether the

603

entering a more logical mode of thought that clearly
contrasted with their less reflective judgments.
It is worth pointing out that in adjusting their
ratings in this way, intentionality ratings for the
prepositional objects went up instead of ratings going
down for the grammatical subject. This is pattern
consistent with an “unintentionality bias” for nonsubjects. But this pattern is also consistent with an
intentionality bias for the subject since it could have
resulted from simple preference to always move
ratings up whenever adjusting. Experiment 3
addresses this point in a more direct fashion.

The heuristic account of intentionality judgments
thus predicts for “avoir” verbs, correct “intentional”
judgments should be faster than correct
“unintentional” judgments since the surface subject is
the deep structure subject. If time pressure
exacerbates the intentionality bias for subjects, there
should also be more “intentional” false alarms than
“unintentional” false alarms for “avoir” verbs. In
other words, people should be more likely to mistake
an unintentional character as acting intentionally than
the opposite. On the other hand, such biases should
not exist for “être” verbs since the surface subject is
actually the displaced deep structure object.

Experiment 3

Method
14 paid native French speakers from Brest, France
participated in the experiment.

Experiments 1 and 2 addressed the nature and
flexibility of the intentionality bias for the
grammatical subject of a sentence. Experiment 3
addressed its expression under time pressure. We did
this by gathering intentionality judgments from
native French speakers for two types of verbs:
unaccusative and unergative. According to linguistic
theory, unaccusative verbs are verbs whose surface
grammatical subject has been moved from the
grammatical object position (Levin & Rappaport
Hovav, 1994). Unergative verbs, on the other hand,
have surface subjects who are also the deep structure
subject1.
In French, unaccusative verbs take “être” as the
auxiliary in the past tense while unergative verbs take
“avoir” as the auxiliary in the past tense. Both verb
types can express actions that are clearly intentional
and actions that are clearly unintentional. Take the
following examples (“trace” represents the syntactic
position out of which the underlined noun is moved):

Procedure and Stimuli: Participants saw 72
sentences: 18 “avoir” intentional, 18 “avoir”
unintentional, 18 “être” intentional and 18 “être”
unintentional. Participants sat in front of a computer
screen and were instructed to indicate (via keypress)
“as quickly as possible” whether the person described
in the sentence was acting intentionally. All
sentences were made such that they only described
one person.
All stimuli were normed beforehand on a different
group of non-time pressured participants in order to
ensure broad agreement that each sentence was either
clearly intentional or clearly unintentional. We biased
the stimuli against our experimental hypothesis such
that norming agreement for “avoir” sentences was
higher for unintentional actions (M=98.73%) than
intentional actions (M=94.74). On the other hand,
agreement was higher for “être” intentional actions
(M=90.46) than unintentional actions (M=84.21).

(1) Unaccusative (Etre) Intentional:
Christophe est sorti (trace) à neuf heures
Christophe left (trace) at nine o’clock

Results
For “avoir” verbs, participants were indeed faster to
correctly judge an action to be intentional (M = .24
sec./syllable) than unintentional (M = .26), t(13) =
2.62, p < .05. However for “être” verbs there was no
significant difference in correctly identifying an
intentional action (M = .274) compared to an
unintentional action (M = .269), p = .66 (see figure 2
below).
Accuracy data also revealed that participants were
indeed more likely to make “intentional” false alarms
on “avoir” verbs but not “être” verbs. “Avoir”
accuracy rates differed significantly between
intentional (M=.94) and unintentional actions
(M=.82), t(13)=4.22, p<.001. However “Etre”
accuracy rates did not differ between intentional
(M=.88) and unintentional (M=.88). In other words,
for “avoir” verbs, participants were more likely to

(2) Unergative (Avoir) Intentional:
Emilie a marché en ville
Emelie walked around in town
(3) Unaccusative (Etre) Unintentional:
François est tombé (trace) sur la glace
Francois fell (trace) on the ice
(4) Unergative (Avoir) Unintentional
Marc a glissé sur la chaussée
Marc slipped on the walkway
1

Most modern syntacticians would disagree with the term “deep
structure,” as it has been made somewhat obsolete by minimalism.
We choose this term simply for clarity of explanation to a broad
audience.

604

mistake an unintentional actor as acting intentionally
than vice-versa. However, there was no difference in
false alarm rates for “etre” verbs.

time and a more reflective mindset. These findings
have potentially interesting implications for other
areas of cognitive science and linguistics.
Two Systems?
Apperly & Butterfill (2009) have recently argued for
a two systems view of belief representation whereby
there exists a quick and efficient system for
automatically calculating others’ belief states, along
side a slower more inefficient system (see also Cohen
& German, 2009).
Although we were principally interested in the
representation of intentions as opposed to beliefs, the
findings from the current set of studies are
compatible with the two systems account. The results
from Experiment 3 show that under time pressure, the
intentionality bias for grammatical subjects is
exaggerated. However the bias is overcome when
participants have more time to reflect on the meaning
sentences. The results from Experiment 2 show that
participants are generally influenced by the syntactic
subject bias even when they simultaneously hold a
deeper commitment to the logical equivalence of
subjects and objects.
One plausible explanation for these discrepancies
between performance in speeded and unspeeded (or
natural vs. logical) tasks is that the presence vs.
absence of the bias is dictated by which “system” is
being tapped to generate the relevant judgment.
However, there is another possible explanation of
our effects that would be incompatible with the two
systems account. Instead of multiple systems, there
could be a single system that prioritizes different
intentionality cues differently. Under time pressure or
certain task conditions, only those cues highest on the
priority list may be employed employed. Right now,
our results cannot distinguish between these two
possibilities, and this is an area for further research.

Figure 2: Response times for “avoir” (unergative) and
“être” (unaccusative) verbs. Only “avoir” verbs showed
evidence of an intentionality bias.

Figure 3: Accuracy data. Despite the fact that unspeeded
intentionality judgments from norming experiments were
biased against our hypothesis, participants displayed a bias
to incorrectly label unintentional “avoir” sentences as being
intentional. This did not hold for “être” verbs.

Discussion
Experiment 3 demonstrates that under time pressure
people have a bias to treat deep structure grammatical
subjects (in the “avoir” verbs) as being more
intentional than they should be treated. However,
they have no such bias for the deep structure
grammatical object that has been covertly moved to
the subject position (in the “etre” verbs). This bias
was revealed both by “intentional false alarm rates”
and response times.
Furthermore, these results suggest that there is a
specific intentionality bias for grammatical subjects
as opposed to an unintentionality bias for nonsubjects since the main differences in response times
and false alarm rates concerned syntactic subjects as
opposed to transposed objects.

Linguistic Theory and Thematic Roles
There are arguments in the linguistics literature about
the nature and role of “thematic roles”. Notably, there
have been disagreements about logically reversible
verbs, with some authors arguing that logically
reversible verbs like “exchange” or “buy/sell”
necessarily assign identical thematic roles to all
actors in the event (Dowty, 1991) while others have
argued the exact opposite (Jackendoff, 1987).
The data presented here strongly suggest that in so
far as thematic roles are generating any intentionality
bias specific to syntactic subjects, then logically
reversible verbs do not assign identical thematic roles
to their actors. Instead, even when two logically
reversible sentences describe the exact same
situation, the way that the actors will be
conceptualized depends (at least initially) on the

Conclusion
Together, the three experiments presented here tell a
coherent story. There are at least two ways of
generating an intentionality judgment from verbal
reports. One is a quick, heuristic judgment that is
perhaps generated from an association between the
syntactic subject position and the AGENT thematic
role. However this bias may be overcome with more

605

thematic role associated with the syntactic position
they appear in.
More generally, methods like those employed in
the above studies could be used in deciding between
two seemingly plausible theories regarding the nature
of thematic roles in an empirically grounded way. In
this regard, it is at least possible that methods like
ours could help advance theories dealing with the
syntax/semantics interface.
Another possible theoretical advance afforded by
empirical methods like these may be the ability to
deduce the contents of the AGENT thematic role.
One possibility is that the notion of “intention” is part
of the primitive AGENT concept, and that the link
from syntax (i.e. subject) to semantics (i.e. intention)
is more or less direct. However, another possibility is
that the link between grammatical subject and
intention is less direct. For example, the AGENT
concept could instead refer to event iniators, and the
intentionality bias for syntactic subjects could be an
indirect result of that. In our studies, people may
subconsciously be reasoning that if “Frank” is the
grammatical subject he must have started the event.
And since he started the event, he must therefore be
more intentional. Both theories are plausible, and
methods like these may offer straightforward tools
for making progress on this question and others like
it.2

Cohen, A.S. & German, T.C. (2009). Encoding of
others’ beliefs without overt instruction. Cognition,
111, 356-363.
Dowty D.R (1991). Thematic Proto-Roles and
Argument Selection. Language 67: 547-619.
Fillmore, C. (1968). The Case for Case. In Universals
in Linguistic Theory. Bach. E. and Harms, R. (eds.)
pp. 1--90.
Gao, T., Newman, G. E., & Scholl, B. J. (2009). The
psychophysics of chasing: A case study in the
perception of animacy. Cognitive Psychology,
59(2), 154 - 179.
Gergely, G., Nádasdy, Z., Csibra, G., & Bíró, S.
(1995). Taking the intentional stance at 12 months
of age. Cognition, 56(2), 165-193.
Gleitman, L., Gleitman, H., Miller, C., and Ostrin, R.,
(1996) 'Similar' and similar concepts, Cognition 58,
321-376.
Hamlin, J.K., Wynn, K., & Bloom, P. (2007). Social
evaluation by preverbal infants. Nature, 450, 557559.
Jackendoff, R. 1987. The status of thematic relations
in linguistic theory. Linguistic Inquiriy 18, 369412.
Levin, B. & Rappaport Hovav, M. (1995)
Unaccusativity: At the Syntax-Lexical Semantics
Interface, Linguistic Inquiry Monograph 26.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Newman, G.E., Keil, F.C., Kuhlmeier, V., & Wynn,
K. (2010). Sensitivity to Design: Early
Understandings of the Link between Agents and
Order. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 107, 17140-17145.
Rosset, E. (2008). It’s no accident: Our bias for
intentional explanations. Cognition, 108 , 771–780.
Saxe, R. (2009). Theory of Mind (Neural Basis).
Encyclopedia of Consciousness.
Sorace, A. (2000). Gradients in auxiliary selection
with intransitive verbs. Language, 76, 859–890.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Joshua Knobe, Bernard
Victorri, Beth Levin and Isabelle Tapiero for useful
comments on this paper. Preparation of this report
and some of the research described therein was
supported by NIH grant # R37HD023922 to F. Keil.
References
Apperly, I.A. & Butterfill, S.A,, (2009). Do humans
have two systems to track beliefs and belief-like
states? Psychological Review.116(4), 953-970.
Baron-Cohen, S. (1995). Mindblindness: an essay on
autism and theory of mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Carlson, G. and M. Tanenhaus (1988). Thematic
Roles and Language Comprehension. In W.
Wilkins, (ed.), Syntax and Semantics, Vol. 21:
Thematic Relations, Academic Press, pp. 263-89.
Childers, J. B., & Echols, C. H. (2004). Two ½ yearold children use animacy and syntax to learn a new
noun. Infancy, 5, 109-125.

2

Indeed follow up studies in our lab actually indicate that this
second possibility may in fact be the correct one.

606

