UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of Working Memory in Implicit and Explicit Language Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0r55c3fk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Tagarelli, Kaitlyn M.
Mota, Mailce Borges
Rebuschat, Patrick

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of Working Memory in Implicit and Explicit Language Learning
Kaitlyn M. Tagarelli (kmt49@georgetown.edu)
Department of Linguistics, Georgetown University
37th and O Streets, NW, Washington, DC 20057

Mailce Borges-Mota (mailce@cce.ufsc.br)
Department of Foreign Languages and Literature, Federal University of Santa Catarina
CCE – Building B, Florianopolis, Santa Catarina, 88040900, Brazil

Patrick Rebuschat (per6@georgetown.edu)
Department of Linguistics, Georgetown University
37th and O Streets, NW, Washington, DC 20057
Abstract

The Role of Context

Working memory capacity (WMC) has been shown to correlate
with performance on complex cognitive tasks, including language
comprehension and production. However, some scholars have
suggested that performance outcomes result from an interaction
between individual differences (IDs), such as WMC, and learning
conditions (Robinson, 2005a). Reber, Walkenfeld, and Hernstadt
(1991) specifically claimed that IDs influence performance on
explicit, but not implicit, processes. In this study, English nativespeakers were exposed to a semi-artificial language under
incidental or rule-search conditions, and their WMC was measured
by two complex-span tasks. Both conditions produced a clear
learning effect, with an advantage for the rule-search group. No
significant correlations between overall performance on a
grammaticality judgment task and WM scores were found for
either group. However, WMC predicted performance on
grammatical items for the rule-search group. These results support
Reber et al.’s (1991) claim that aptitude measures may only be
predictive of learning in explicit conditions.
Keywords: implicit learning; explicit learning; working memory

Introduction
Working memory has been shown to play a role in many
aspects of first language (L1) processing and performance.
Yet because of certain limitations on second language (L2)
learners, such as maturational constraints, WM may be more
important in L2 than in L1 (Miyake & Friedman, 1998).
Many studies have found relationships between WM and L2
proficiency and development. WM capacity (WMC) has
been shown to positively correlate with performance on
sections of the TOEFL, reading comprehension abilities (for
a review, see Miyake & Friedman, 1998), gender and
number agreement processing (Sagarra & Herschensohn,
2010), the ability to make use of interactional feedback in
classroom settings (Mackey, Philp, Egi, Fujii, et al., 2002),
and L2 proficiency (van den Noort, Bosch, and Hugdahl,
2006). Overall, the evidence suggests that WMC plays a
role in L2 acquisition. However, the predictive power of
WMC may be mediated by learning conditions.

Research into individual differences (IDs) and pedagogical
approaches to L2 acquisition have recently merged because
of the inextricable link between the two. Skehan (2002) has
suggested that aptitude is more predictive of L2 acquisition
success in formal, structured learning contexts. Support for
combining these lines of research has also come from
Robinson (2002) and Erlam (2005), who expressed that “a
particular method of instruction may not (...) benefit all
learners uniformly” (p. 147). However, Robinson and Erlam
make no claims about whether IDs should have a greater
effect in one learning condition than in others.
Research in cognitive psychology suggests that there
should be differences in how aptitude influences learning in
implicit and explicit conditions because these two systems
are fundamentally distinct. Reber et al. (1991) explain this
distinction by evoking the idea of the “primacy of the
implicit” (p. 888). The basis of this primacy is that implicit
processes have older biological substrates, which vary little
among “corticated species” (Reber, 1989, p. 232), and even
less from human to human. Thus, implicit processes should
be more robust than explicit processes, unconscious
functions should operate relatively uniformly within the
population as compared to conscious functions, and IDs
should not contribute to variance in implicit processes, but
should in explicit processes.
Studies that investigate implicit and explicit learning
adhere to several fundamental criteria when operationalizing
these conditions. In explicit conditions, subjects are made
aware that they are supposed to learn something, and they
usually know that they will be tested. There are two main
options for explicit conditions. In rule-search conditions,
subjects are exposed to the system to be learned and
instructed to find rules. Alternatively, subjects can be
presented with rules (rule-instruction) and exposed to the
system. In some cases, explicit conditions consist of simply
drawing the subjects’ attention to the target structure
without indicating that there is a system to be learned
(awareness raising). In implicit conditions, subjects are not
informed about the true purpose of the experiment; they do
not know that they should be learning something or that

2061

they will be tested. Sufficient exposure to the system is an
important component of implicit conditions. Exposure tasks,
such as Reber et al.’s (1991) memorization task, are
generally used to draw subjects’ attention away from the
true objective of the experimenter. Learning in such
conditions in often therefore referred to as incidental.
Reber et al. (1991) investigated the relationship between
IQ and learning in implicit and explicit (awareness raising)
conditions and found greater variance in accuracy on
grammaticality judgment tasks (GJTs) between subjects in
the explicit condition than in the implicit condition, and a
significant correlation between accuracy and IQ for the
former group, but not for the latter. Replicating Reber et
al.’s (1991) implicit and explicit learning conditions,
Robinson (2005b) also found less variation in implicit than
explicit learning outcomes. However, he found that learning
in the implicit condition was significantly negatively
correlated with the verbal abilities component of IQ,
whereas there were no correlations between learning in the
explicit condition and IQ. Robinson (2005b) added an
additional condition, incidental learning of Samoan, in
which subjects were presented with sentences and asked to
try to understand the meaning, but were not told about
grammar rules. Performance on a GJT was not related to
any aptitude measures.
In a study on eXperanto, an artificial language, deGraff
(1997) found that the explicit group (rule-search)
outperformed the implicit group (sentence rehearsal), but
performance in both conditions correlated positively with
aptitude. Erlam (2005) investigated the effects of aptitude
on learning in three conditions: deductive (rule-instruction +
practice), inductive (practice only), and structured input
(rule-instruction only). There were few correlations for the
deductive group, suggesting that “instruction that provides
students with explicit rule explanation and then gives them
opportunities to engage in language production tends to
benefit al language learners” (p. 163). The relationships
between aptitude measures and learning differed for each
condition. A measure of WMC correlated with performance
in the structured input group, leading Erlam to conclude that
students with higher WMC are better at processing explicit
input. However, it must be noted that Erlam’s “WM task”
was actually a simple-span task which measures
phonological short-term memory, not WM (Miyake &
Friedman, 1998), so these findings cannot be generalized to
WM, but only a component of this system.
In fact, few studies have specifically looked at the
interaction between WM and instructional contexts.
Considering the importance placed on the central executive
in WM (Engle, 2001), one might expect WM to be a good
predictor of language success in explicit rather than implicit
learning conditions because explicit processes are closely
related to attention, whereas implicit processes are not
(DeKeyser, 2003). Robinson (2005b) included a measure of
WMC and found that it positively correlated with incidental
learning of Samoan, but not with learning in implicit or

explicit conditions. He concluded that incidental learning
involves “the ability to process for meaning while
simultaneously switching attention to form during problems
in semantic processing,” and that this is “an ability strongly
related to [WMC]” (p. 55). Perhaps when the target system
has meaning, as in natural language, rather than only form,
as in meaningless letter strings (used in the implicit learning
conditions in Reber et al. (1991) and Robinson (2005b)),
learners rely more on general cognitive processes such as
WM when explicit instructions are not provided. A study on
Japanese 5th grade students learning English (Ando,
Fukunaga, Kurahashi, Suto, et al., 1992) found a complex
interaction between WM and L2 success in naturalistic
learning conditions. Children with high WMC benefited
from an explicit, form-focused teaching approach, whereas
children with low WMC benefited from an implicit,
communicative teaching approach.
The research outlined above demonstrates that the
relationship between WMC and learning in explicit and
implicit conditions is a complicated one, and there is thus
far little consensus as to how this component of aptitude
interacts with learning conditions.

The Current Study
In this study, we seek to contribute to the research on the
role of WM in L2 acquisition, and how this ability interacts
with learning conditions. We are interested in whether
WMC influences an individual’s ability to learn L2 syntax,
and whether it has a differential effect on learning under
implicit or explicit learning conditions.

Method
Participants
Participants were 62 native speakers of English with no
background in German or any other V2 language. They
were assigned to one of two experimental groups: incidental
and rule-search. The groups did not differ across the
variables age, gender, occupation, and number of languages
acquired, all p > .05. Participants were compensated for
their participation.

Stimulus material: Semi-artificial language
A semi-artificial language consisting of English words and
German syntax was used to generate the stimuli for this
experiment (see also Rebuschat, 2008). The advantages of
using a semi-artificial language of this nature are that the
grammatical complexity of natural languages is maintained
and semantic information is present. The sentences
generated by the grammar follow three specific verbplacement rules, each associated with a specific syntactic
pattern (see Table 1). A total of 180 sentences were drafted
for this experiment. See Rebuschat (2008) for a more
extensive description of the system.

2062

Table 1: Descriptions of the verb-placement rules.
Rule
V2

V1

VF

Description (Example)
Place finite verb in second phrasal position of
main clauses that are not preceded by a
subordinate clause. (Today bought John the
newspaper in the supermarket.)
Place finite verb in first position in main
clauses that are preceded by a subordinate
clause. (Since his teacher criticism voiced,
put Chris more effort into his homework.)
Place finite verb in final position in all
subordinate clauses. (George repeated today
that the movers his furniture scratched.)

Training set The training set consisted of 120 sentences (40
for each rule) and was subdivided into 60 plausible and 60
implausible constructions. For example, a sentence like
“Chris entertained today his colleagues with an interesting
performance.” was semantically plausible, while “After his
wife a thief surprised, communicated George with the police
banana.” was semantically implausible.
Testing set The testing set consisted of 60 new sentences
subdivided into 30 grammatical and 30 ungrammatical
items, all of which were plausible. Ungrammatical sentences
were similar to the grammatical ones, but the VP position
was incorrect. With the exception of a limited number of
function words, no words were repeated from the training
set, making the test analogous to the transfer paradigm in
Artificial Grammar Learning research (Reber, 1969).

Procedure
Subjects attended two sessions: an artificial language
learning session and a WM session. For each subject, the
WM session occurred at least one day and no more than two
weeks after the artificial learning language session. Stimuli
and instructions for both sessions were presented on a
Macintosh computer using SuperLab, version 4.
Artificial Language Learning This session consisted of
two parts: an exposure phase, during which subjects were
presented with 120 instances of the artificial language in
random order, and a testing phase.
Exposure phase. Participants in the incidental condition
(n = 31) were asked to listen the 120 sentences of the
training set, repeat each sentence after a delayed prompt
(1,500 ms) and judge the semantic plausibility of each
sentence. Importantly, subjects were not told that the syntax
underlying the training sentences followed a rule system,
nor were they told that there would be a test on word order
after the exposure phase. Instead, these subjects were simply
informed that they were taking part in a sentence
comprehension experiment that sought to investigate how
scrambling affects our ability to understand the meaning of

sentences. Subjects were thus exposed to the artificial
language under incidental learning conditions.
Participants in the rule-search condition (n = 31) were
asked to listen to the same 120 sentences. They were told, at
the beginning of the experiment, that the word order of the
sentences was determined by a “complex rule-system” and
that their task was to listen carefully to each sentence and to
discover the word-order rules. Subjects were also informed
that they would later be tested on the rules. Subjects were
thus exposed to the artificial language under intentional
learning conditions.
Testing phase. After exposure, subjects in the incidental
condition were told that the word order of the previous 120
sentences was determined by a “complex rule-system;”
subjects in the rule-search condition were reminded of this
fact. All subjects then listened to 60 new sentences, as
described in the testing set. For each sentence, subjects were
asked to judge whether the sentence followed the rule
system of the sentences in the exposure phase (GJT), report
how confident they were in their judgment (not confident,
somewhat confident, very confident), and indicate the basis
of their judgment (guess, intuition, memory, rule). The
confidence ratings and the source attributions were used as
subjective measures of awareness (Dienes, 2008).
After the testing phase, subjects completed a debriefing
questionnaire which prompted them to verbalize any rule or
regularity they might have noticed during the course of the
experiment. The questionnaire also asked participants to
provide their gender, age, nationality, occupation and
language background.
Working memory assessment On a separate day, subjects
performed two WM tasks, the operation-word span task
(OWST, Turner & Engle, 1989; Unsworth, Heitz, Schrock
& Engle, 2005) and the letter-number ordering task (LNOT,
Wechsler, 1997). The order in which subjects completed
these tasks was counterbalanced. In the OWST, subjects
saw an equation and word appear on the computer screen.
They read the equation out loud, stated whether the answer
provided was correct or not, and then read the following
word out loud. For example, if the participant saw “IS (6 x
2) + 1 = 10 ? CAT,” they would say “Is six times two plus
one equal to ten…no…cat.” Once the subject said the word,
the experimenter advanced to the next operation and word in
the set. There were 12 sets overall, with two to five words in
a set. At the end of each set, a cue appeared to prompt
participants to write down all of the words that they could
remember from that set. Subjects were awarded one point
for every word remembered in the correct order, for a total
possible score of 42 points.
The LNOT is part of the WAIS-III Intelligence Scale
(Wechsler, 1997). We used an English version of the task,
adapted from van den Noort et al. (2006). In this task, the
experimenter read aloud series of letters and numbers, from
two to eight digits long. The subject was asked to repeat the
numbers in numerical order and then the letters in

2063

alphabetical order. For example, if the experimenter read
“W-1-K-5,” the subject would repeat “1-5-K-W.” Subjects
received one point for every series repeated back correctly,
for a maximum of 21 points. If a subject missed three series
in a row, the experimenter discontinued the task and
counted the subject’s score from all of the previous series.

Results
Seven participants were excluded from the analysis because
they did not follow directions correctly in the testing phase,
for a total of 29 participants (23 women, 6 men, Mage = 21.4
years) in the incidental group and 26 participants (20
women, 9 men, Mage = 23.0 years) in the rule-search group.

Grammaticality Judgments
The analysis of the GJT showed that the incidental group
classified 58.9% (SD = 8.6%) of the items correctly, while
the rule-search group classified 71.2% (SD = 15.5%) of the
items correctly. This difference was significant, t(53) =
3.692, p < .001. Both the rule-search group, t(25) = 6.977, p
< .001, and the incidental group, t(28) = 5.563, p < .001,
performed significantly above chance. The training phase
thus produced a clear learning effect in both experimental
groups, with an advantage for the rule-search group.
The rule-search group endorsed 75.9% (SD = 16.9%) of
grammatical items and 33.4% (SD = 19.5%) of
ungrammatical items. The incidental group endorsed 71.7%
(SD = 14.2%) of grammatical items and 54.0% (SD =
19.1%) of ungrammatical items. A mixed ANOVA with
learning condition as a between groups factor and
grammaticality as a within groups factor revealed a main
effect of grammaticality, F(1,53) = 27.415, p < .001, and an
interaction between grammaticality and group, F(1,53) =
5.937, p < .05. Bonferroni corrected post-hoc tests showed
that both groups endorsed more grammatical items than
ungrammatical items, p < .001. That is, performance on the
GJT was driven by memory for previously encountered
syntactic patterns.
Bonferroni corrected post-hoc tests also showed that the
difference between rule-search and incidental groups on the
endorsement of grammatical items was not significant, p >
.05, i.e. neither group was more likely to correctly endorse
grammatical strings, but the difference between groups on
ungrammatical strings was significant, p = < .001. The
lower accuracy of the incidental group was therefore largely
due to poorer performance on ungrammatical items.

Confidence Ratings and Source Attributions
Subjective measures reveal the extent to which knowledge
was conscious or unconscious. Dienes (2008) distinguishes
two types of knowledge, namely structural knowledge and
judgment knowledge. Structural knowledge is knowledge
about the structure of sequences in the language, and
judgment knowledge is knowledge about whether test items

share this structure with training items. Structural and
judgment knowledge are conscious only if the individual is
aware of having that knowledge (e.g., I know the verb comes
in final position in a subordinate clause or I know that this
sentence is not like the training sentences).
Confidence ratings show that participants in the rulesearch group had unconscious judgment knowledge by the
guessing criterion. That is, their accuracy was above chance
when they said they were not confident (67%), indicating
that subjects in this group acquired knowledge about the
grammaticality of test sentences, but they were not aware of
having acquired that knowledge. Learners in the incidental
group were at chance when they said they were not
confident (56%); the guessing criterion for unconscious
judgment knowledge was thus not satisfied for this group.
The Chan difference score was computed in order to
establish whether learning was implicit by the zerocorrelation criterion. The difference between the average
confidence for correct and incorrect judgments was not
significant for either group, p > .05; they were not more
confident in correct decisions than in incorrect ones. This
indicates unconscious judgment knowledge by the zerocorrelation criterion. At least for some of the knowledge,
subjects were not aware of the fact that they had acquired it
during the exposure phase.
An analysis of source attributions shows that there were
no differences in accuracy between groups based on which
type of knowledge they reported using for classification
judgments. Both groups performed significantly above
chance when basing their judgments on intuition (rulesearch: 64%; incidental: 61%), memory (70%; 58%), and
rule (69%; 59%), but only the rule-search group performed
above chance when basing their judgments on a guess (69%;
55%). Above-chance accuracy when using intuition
suggests that participants in both groups developed at least
some unconscious structural knowledge of the grammar.
Above chance accuracy when reporting high confidence
(69%; incidental: 61%) and basing judgments on memory
and rules (see above) suggests that both groups also
developed conscious structural and judgment knowledge.

Verbal Reports
In both the incidental and rule-search groups, most
participants verbalized incorrect rules for the artificial
grammar. Participants frequently mentioned that the verb
could appear at the end of the sentence, but they did not
indicate that this was only possible in a subordinate clause.
A few participants provided examples of one sentence type,
but not the other two. However, three participants in the
rule-search group provided examples of all sentence types
and verbalized all verb-placement rules.

Working Memory Tests
The average score on the OWST was 29.6 (SD = 5.5) for the
incidental group and 29.6 (SD = 5.0) for the rule-search

2064

group. For the LNOT, the average scores were 13.0 (SD =
2.8) for the incidental group and 12.1 (SD = 2.5) for the
rule-search group. The difference between groups was not
significant on the OWST or the LNOT, p > .05.

There were no other significant correlations between WM
score and accuracy.

When all subjects were analyzed together, there were no
correlations between accuracy on the GJT and performance
on either the OWST, r = .117, p > .05, or the LNOT, r =
.223, p > .05. For the incidental group, there were no
significant correlations between accuracy on the GJT and
either WM task (OWST: r = .168, p > .05; LNOT, r =.182,
p > .05). For the rule-search group, there was no correlation
between accuracy on the GJT and performance on the
OWST, r = .117, p > .05, but there was a significant
correlation between accuracy on the GJT and performance
on the LNOT, r = .477, p < .05, suggesting that according to
one of our WM measures, WM predicts learning only in one
learning condition.
As mentioned above, three participants demonstrated
awareness of the rules of the artificial language. These
subjects were 98%, 100%, and 100% accurate on the GJT.
Their scores on the LNOT were 16, 15, and 17, and their
scores on the OWST were 25, 35, and 23, respectively.
Because the three verbalizers seem to behave differently
than the rest of the participants in the rule-search group,
further analyses were conducted without these participants.
When the relationship between WM and accuracy for the
rule-search group was analyzed without the verbalizers, the
correlation between LNOT and accuracy disappeared, r =
.156, p > .05, and the correlation between OWST and
accuracy remained non-significant, r = .309, p > .05.

The analysis of the GJT produced similar results to those
found previously for incidental and rule-search conditions in
this semi-artificial language (Rebuschat, 2008). Both
incidental and rule-search groups performed significantly
better than chance, and this observed learning effect appears
to be driven by the correct endorsement of grammatical
items. That is, both groups memorized learned patterns from
the training phase. The rule-search condition gave learners
an advantage in distinguishing learned patterns from novel
patterns, as demonstrated by their superior accuracy on
ungrammatical items. Confidence ratings, source
attributions, and verbal reports indicate that subjects in both
groups had at least some explicit knowledge of the grammar
they were exposed to, and also that subjects in both groups
had at least some implicit knowledge, which is expected
based on previous findings (Rebuschat, 2008, Exp. 6).
Our analyses of individual differences suggest that WM
does affect an individual’s ability to learn L2 syntax, but
this effect is apparent only in certain conditions, and for
certain items. Overall, we found no correlations between
either WM test and accuracy in the incidental group, nor for
the OWST and accuracy for the rule-search group. The
LNOT appeared to predict learning for the rule-search
participants, but the importance of assessing awareness
becomes clear, as we determined that this correlation was
entirely driven by three exceptional learners who were able
to verbalize rules on the debriefing questionnaire. These
three learners had very high WMC as measured by the
LNOT, which may have helped them discover rules.
However, many other variables could have influenced their
performance. Therefore, we cannot make any claims about
the relationship between the WM skills involved in the
LNOT and L2 acquisition based on these participants alone.
A deeper analysis of the relationship between WM and
item classes revealed that in the rule-search condition, WM
predicted performance on grammatical items only. Thus,
while WM, as measured by the OWST and the LNOT, does
not appear to affect an individual’s ability to learn L2 syntax
in incidental learning conditions, it may play a role in
helping learners in more explicit conditions incorporate
positive evidence from a new language.
Our findings support Reber et al’s (1991) claim that
individual differences influence learning in explicit, but not
implicit conditions. However, the differential effect of
WMC on grammatical and ungrammatical items suggests
that this relationship is complex. Furthermore, while we can
make some claims about the predictive value of WM in L2
learning under implicit and explicit conditions, there are
several limitations of this study that must be acknowledged.
Firstly, untimed GJTs such as the ones used in this study
might favor explicit processes. In the future, it would be

OWST

LNOT
NO
1

1

0.9

0.9

0.8

0.8

0.7

0.7

0.6

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4
9

11

13

15

22

27

32

37

Figure 1. Correlations between WM and accuracy on grammatical
items for the rule-search group, excluding verbalizers. The y-axis
represents accuracy; the x-axis represents WM score for LNOT
(left) and OWST (right).

Because of the differential performance observed for
grammatical and ungrammatical items, we analyzed these
items separately. These analyses revealed a positive
correlation between WM and accuracy on grammatical
items for participants in the rule-search group only
(excluding verbalizers; see Figure 1). This was true for both
the LNOT (r = .424, p < .05) and the OWST (r = .542, p <
.05). The correlations were not significantly different, t < 1.

Discussion

2065

worth employing a learning measure that favors implicit
processes, e.g. the elicited imitation task proposed by Ellis
(2005). Additionally, some studies have found that
correlations become significant when comparing aptitude
measures and delayed posttests, (Erlam, 2005; Mackey et
al., 2002), so it would be of interest to include a retention
phase. Also, we explored the role of WM, which involves
the control of attention and may therefore be more related to
explicit than implicit learning. Contrary to the claims of
Reber et al (1991), recent evidence suggests that implicit
learning is indeed an ability that varies across individuals
(Kaufman, DeYoung, Gray, Jiménez, et al., 2010). Yet as
Kaufman et al. found, typical cognitive abilities, such as IQ
and WM, do not correlate with implicit learning outcomes,
whereas other cognitive abilities do. The incorporation of
cognitive factors that might draw on some of the same
processes as implicit learning might yield different results.
Finally, it is crucial to note that this study investigates the
relationship between WM and learning in two different
conditions, not types of learning. As shown by measures of
awareness, implicit and explicit conditions do not
necessarily nor exclusively result in implicit and explicit
knowledge, respectively; the relationship is more complex.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to gratefully acknowledge the
financial support of this study by a research grant from the
Federal University of Santa Catarina, Brazil, as well as Luke
Amoroso, Phillip Hamrick, Katie Jeong-Eun Kim, Julie
Lake, and John Williams for their feedback.

References
Ando, J., Fukunaga, N., Kurahashi, J., Suto, T., Nakano, T.,
and Kage, M. (1992). A comparative study of the two
EFL teaching methods: The communicative and
grammatical approach. Japanese Journal of Educational
Psychology, 40, 247–256.
de Graaff, R. (1997). The eXperanto experiment: Effects of
explicit instruction on second language acquisition.
Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 19, 249-276.
DeKeyser, R. (2003). Implicit and explicit learning. In C. J.
Doughty, & M. H. Long, Handbook of Second Language
Acquisition. Oxford: Blackwell.
Dienes, Z. (2008). Subjective measures of unconscious
knowledge. Progress in Brain Research , 168, 49-64.
Ellis, R. (2005). Measuring implicit and explicit knowledge
of a second language: A psychometric study. Studies in
Second Language Acquisition, 27, 141-172.
Engle, R. W. (2001). What is working-memory capacity? In
H. L. Roediger III & J. S. Nairne (Eds.), The nature of
remembering: Essays in honor of Robert G.
Crowder. Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Erlam, R. (2005). Language aptitude and its relationship to

instructional effectiveness in second language acquisition.
Language Teaching Research, 9(2), 147-171.
Kaufman, S.B., DeYoung, C.G., Gray, J.R., Jiménez, L.,
Brown, J., Mackintosh, N. (2010). Implicit learning as an
ability. Cognition, 116, 321-340.
Mackey, A., Philp, J., Egi, T., Fujii, A., & Tatsumi, T.
(2002). Individual differences in working memory,
noticing of interactional feedback, and L2 development.
In P. Robinson (Ed.), Individual differences and
instructed language learning (pp. 181-209). Amsterdam:
John Benjamins.
Miyake, A. & Friedman, N.P. (1998). Individual differences
in second language proficiency: Working memory as
language aptitude. In Healy, A. & Bourne, L. (eds.),
Foreign Language Learning: Psycholinguistics studies on
training and retention. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Reber, A. S. (1969). Transfer of syntactic structure in
synthetic languages. Journal of Experimental Psychology,
81, 115-119.
Reber, A. S. (1989). Implicit learning and tacit knowledge.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General , 118 (3),
219 - 235.
Reber, A. S., Walkenfeld, F. F., & Hernstadt, R. (1991).
Implicit and explicit learning: Individual differences and
IQ. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 17(5), 888-896.
Rebuschat, P. (2008). Implicit learning of natural language
syntax. Unpublished PhD thesis, University of
Cambridge.
Robinson, P. (2002). Individual differences and instructed
language learning. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Robinson, P. (2005a). Aptitude and second language
acquisition. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 25, 4673.
Robinson, P. (2005b). Cognitive abilities, chunk-strength,
and frequency effects in implicit artificial grammar and
incidental L2 learning. Studies in Second Language
Acquisition, 27, 235-268.
Sagarra, N. & Herschensohn, J. (2010). The role of
proficiency and working memory in gender and number
agreement processing in L1 and L2 Spanish. Lingua,
120(8), 2022-2039.
Skehan, P. (2002). Theorizing and updating aptitude. In P.
Robinson (Ed.), Individual differences and instructed
language learning. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Turner, M. L. & Engle, R. W. (1989). Is working memory
capacity task dependent? Journal of Memory and
Language, 28, 127-154.
Unsworth, N., Heitz, R. P., Schrock, J. C., & Engle, R. W.
(2005). An automated version of the operation span
task. Behavior Research Methods, 37, 498-505.
van den Noort, M. W. M. L., Bosch, P., & Hugdahl, K.
(2006). Foreign language proficiency and Working
Memory Capacity. European Psychologist, 11, 289-296.
Wechsler, D. (1997). The Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale:
Revised. New York: The Psychological Corporation.

2066

