UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Simpler, the Better: A New Challenge for Fair-Division Theory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/98n408td

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Dupuis-Roy, Nicolas
Gosselin, Frederic

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Simpler, the Better:
A New Challenge for Fair-Division Theory

Nicolas Dupuis-Roy (nicolas@dupuis.ca)

Université de Montréal, Départment de Psychologie,
C.P. 6128, succ. Centre-ville, H3C 3J7, Montréal, QC, Canada
Frédéric Gosselin (frederic.gosselin@umontreal.ca)

Université de Montréal, Départment de Psychologie,
C.P. 6128, succ. Centre-ville, H3C 3J7, Montréal, QC, Canada

Abstract
According to John Rawls, there exists a perfect procedural
justice for which there is no conflict between process and
outcome. One such procedure is the Divide and Choose.
Recently, the mathematical theory of fair-division extended
this idea by developing procedures that offer fairer outcomes
and a better guarantee of justice. Here, we tested the extent to
which the distributive and procedural properties of these
perfect and improved division procedures were perceived as
more satisfactory and fairer than imperfect division
procedures. Thirty-nine pairs of participants divided six $10
gift certificates between them using seven division
procedures. They rated their satisfaction and their perceived
fairness before and after they executed each division
procedure. Contrarily to our hypothesis, the results show that
perfect procedural justice does not really translate into the
perception of a fairer and more satisfactory outcome and
process. The most sophisticated division procedures failed to
select fair and satisfactory solutions.
Keywords: Fair-division theory, fair-division procedures,
satisfaction, perceived fairness, procedural and distributive
justice, John Rawls.

Introduction
Social psychological studies on justice distinguish
between the perception of the outcome and the perception of
the process that leads to the outcome (Lind & Tyler, 1988).
The former concerns issues of distributive justice such as
the criteria under which an outcome is considered fair or
unfair (e.g., equitability or envy-freeness), whereas the latter
relates to issues of procedural justice such as voicing—to
express oneself in the process of justice. Perception of
distributive and procedural justice does not always coincide:
for instance, a procedure seen as fair can lead to undeserved
outcomes (e.g., an innocent individual found guilty by a
court of justice) and conversely, an outcome perceived as
fair can result from an unjust procedure (e.g., a monarch
applying a just sentence).

According to Rawls (1971), there exists a perfect
procedural justice for which there is no conflict between
process and outcome. This idea is based on an age-old fairdivision procedure termed Divide and Choose. A first player
divides a ‘cake’ (or any divisible object) in what she
considers to be two equal pieces, and a second player
chooses the piece she sees as the largest. This procedure
exemplifies perfect procedural justice because it has an
independent criterion for what constitutes a fair outcome
and a process that guarantees that such an outcome will be
reached. More specifically, the solution derived from Divide
and Choose is envy-free since both players will have no
incentive to exchange their share with the other player’s
share. Also, its process always leads to such solution given
that the players comply with the rules and adhere to specific
mathematical assumptions. Nonetheless, Divide and Choose
has weaknesses. First, it only applies to conflicts that
involve two parties and a divisible good (e.g., money).
Second, it is vulnerable to strategic manipulation (Crawford
& Heller, 1979). Third, it does not guarantee that the divider
will "cut the cake" in the most efficient way. A division is
efficient if no other division can make one participant better
off without hurting another.
The mathematical theory of fair-division extended Rawls’
idea of a perfect procedural justice mainly by focusing on
solutions that are fair and efficient, and by strengthening the
guarantee of fairness with game-theoretic tools. In the
context of game theory, a procedure’s fair and efficient
solution is said to be guaranteed when the strategy it
prescribes (e.g., “cut the cake in what you consider two
equal pieces”) is optimal for rational and self-regarding
players.
Following these improvements, mathematicians have
recently designed dozens of fair-division procedures
presenting sophisticated mechanisms (for a review, see
Barbanel, 2004; Brams, 2008; Brams & Taylor, 1996a;
Moulin, 2003; Robertson & Webb, 1998; Young, 1994).
One of such algorithms, called the Adjusted Winner (Brams
& Taylor, 1996a), has recently been patented in the United

3229

States by New York University (U.S. Patent 5983205). This
procedure guarantees an envy-free, equitable and efficient
solution (a brief description of the procedure is provided at
viscog.psy.umontreal.ca/~nicolas/FDAs.pdf). It has been
shown to be useful to resolve bipartite conflicts involving
indivisible goods such as divorces (Brams & Taylor, 1996b)
and international disputes (Denoon & Brams, 1997;
Massoud, 2000).
Despite their immense potential for conflict resolution,
very few empirical studies have put fair-division procedures
to the test (Daniel & Parco, 2005; Dupuis-Roy & Gosselin,
2009, submitted; Pratt & Zeckhauser, 1990; Schneider &
Krämer, 2004). Therefore, many key issues regarding the
distributive and procedural determinants of justice involved
in the implementation of fair-division procedures with
humans have yet to be investigated. The following
experiment examines how Rawls’ theoretical notion of
procedural perfection translates into the perception of a fair
and satisfactory process and outcome.
Table 1. List of the main properties of seven fair-division procedures.

Name

Criteria
of fairness

Guarantee
of fairness

Strict Alternation

None

None

Balanced
Alternation

None

None

Divide and
Choose

Envy-freeness

Weak

Adjusted Knaster

Envy-freeness
Equitability
Efficiency

Strong

Adjusted Winner

Envy-freeness
Equitability
Efficiency

Strong

Compensation
Procedure

Envy-freeness
Efficiency

Strong

Price Procedure

Envy-freeness
Efficiency

Strong

Hypotheses
Based on Rawls’ theoretical conception of procedural
justice, we expect fair-division procedures to produce more
satisfactory outcomes and elicit more confidence in the
process of justice than imperfect procedures, that is,
procedures which do not implement any criterion of fairness
or do not offer any guarantee of reaching such a criterion
(Hypothesis 1). To test this hypothesis, a selection of fairdivision procedures will be compared with two imperfect
procedures: the Strict Alternation and the Balanced

Alternation. In the Strict Alternation, one participant from a
pair of participants, say P1, is randomly chosen to select a
first object; then the other participant, say P2, selects
another object; previous steps are repeated until all objects
are chosen. The Balanced Alternation is simply an improved
version of the Strict Alternation where the selection cycle is
balanced: when there are four objects, the selection cycle
becomes P1-P2-P2-P1 rather than P1-P2-P1-P2. These
procedures do not meet any criterion of fairness per se and
are thus not considered mathematically fair (Brams &
Taylor, 1996). Nonetheless, the Strict Alternation is still
used nowadays by juridical institutions to divide
inheritances or family patrimonies.
Considering the recent improvements brought by fairdivision theory, one can also expect more sophisticated fairdivision procedures such as the Adjusted Winner to perform
better than more simple and intuitive ones such as the
Divide and Choose (Hypothesis 2). This hypothesis will be
tested by contrasting the perception toward distributive and
procedural properties of four sophisticated fair-division
procedures (the Adjusted Knaster by Raith, 2000; the
Adjusted Winner by Brams & Taylor, 1996a; the
Compensation Procedure by Haake, Raith & Su, 2000; the
Price Procedure by Pratt, 2007) with a simple one (the
Divide and Choose). Note that all these division procedures
are
described
at
viscog.psy.umontreal.ca/~nicolas/FDAs.pdf.
As shown in Table 1, the four most sophisticated fairdivision procedures that were selected for this experiment
all guarantee at least an envy-free and efficient outcome
(column 2). The Adjusted Knaster and the Adjusted Winner
also guarantee equitability. A solution is equitable when all
players put the same value on their own share. The
guarantee of fairness of these procedures is considered
strong because the strategies they prescribe also lead to an
optimal outcome for rational and self-regarding participants
(column 3). Since the Divide and Choose is vulnerable to
strategic manipulation (Crawford & Heller, 1979), its
guarantee of fairness is considered weak.

Experimental Design
To disentangle the distributive and procedural properties
of a fair-division procedure, the subject’s perception of a
division solution will be measured before and after she
applies a given procedure. In this context, a change of
perception can be readily attributed to the procedural
properties since the distributive properties remain constant.
The perception of the procedural and distributive properties
will be assessed by a direct subjective measure of perceived
fairness and satisfaction. If the former specifically elicits
judgments based on interpersonal comparisons and social
values, the latter could integrate everything that influences
one’s well-being—including fairness.
The seven division procedures will be tested in the
context of the division of six $10 gift certificates between
two participants. First, the participants will rate their
satisfaction and perceived fairness regarding the 64 possible

3230

discrete division solutions; then, they will learn and execute
each division procedure in a random order; and finally, they
will rate their satisfaction and perceived fairness regarding
the division solution provided by each procedure.

Methods
Participants
Thirty-nine dyads of students from the Université de
Montréal (mostly from the Departments of Psychology and
Mathematics) completed a three-hour lab experiment.
Twenty dyads were friends (20 men and 20 women) who
had known each other for at least three years (M=8.37
years; SD=4.73 years) and the remaining dyads were
strangers (20 men and 18 women) that were randomly
paired. All participants were naïve to the purpose of the
experiment.

Indivisible Goods
Before the experiment, the participants were shown a list
of 70 vendors (e.g., Esso, Canadian Tire, Starbucks) and had
to select at least 15 vendors from which they would have
liked to receive a $10 gift certificate. After the participants
were paired in dyad, six vendors that were in both
participants’ selections were selected. Color pictures of
these vendors were taken from the Internet and resized to
span approximately the same surface of the computer
monitor.

Apparatus
The experiment was conducted on six computers (PC and
Macintosh) that were linked to a server through a local area
network. Experimental programs displaying the instructions
(or questions) and recording the answers were written for
the Matlab environment.

Experimental Procedure
On their arrival in the lab, all dyads were brought into a
large computer room and were seated opposite to each
other. Those in the “stranger” group were told that they
would be randomly paired with a stranger who was
conducting the experiment in another experimental room.
After being instructed to remain silent, they were told that
the goal of the experiment was to divide six $10 gift
certificates between them and their partner with the help of
seven division procedures that they would have to learn and
apply. They were advised to pay close attention to the
instructions even if the local computer would perform all
mathematical computations required by the procedure. They
were asked to engage in this experiment as if they were part
of a problematic family succession in which they had to
split the six gift certificates. Finally, they were told that the
division solutions they would obtain from the division
procedures would determine which gift certificates they
would receive as a compensation for their participation.

The experiment lasted approximately three hours and
involved three steps. (1) Participants first answered some
questions regarding their socioeconomic status, their level
of education and their level of friendship with their partner.
Then, they were shown images of the six disputed
certificates and were asked to express their preferences for
every item by distributing a total of 100 points over them
(the more points attributed to an item, the greater the
preference). (2) Next, the participants rated their satisfaction
and their perceived fairness toward the 64 possible discrete
ways of dividing six items between two persons. For each
rating, a division solution was displayed on the monitor
screen until a response was given: the top row contained the
items given to the participant and the bottom row contained
the items given to his/her partner. Participants were told to
use a scroll bar to express their level of satisfaction or
fairness associated with the illustrated division solution on a
scale ranging from 0 (‘not satisfied at all’ or ‘totally unfair’)
to 100 (‘fully satisfied’ or ‘totally fair’). Note that the
division solutions were presented in a random order. (3)
Participants read a brief description of a given division
procedure and answered three questions assessing their
comprehension. After having correctly answered all
questions, they were submitted to five practice trials during
which they applied the procedure with a fictitious partner
(the computer) whose preferences for the six items were
public. Then, they applied the fair-division procedure with
their partner and evaluated their satisfaction and perceived
fairness toward its division solution. They repeated this
process seven times, one time per procedure. The order in
which each dyad applied the procedures was randomized.

Results
Figure 1 shows the average satisfaction (upper plot) and
perceived fairness (lower plot) measured before (left side)
and after (right side) the implementation of the fair-division
procedures (x-axis). At first glance, these group results
contradict our hypotheses: the solutions produced by the
most sophisticated fair-division procedures are perceived as
less fair and less satisfactory than the ones derived from the
imperfect and simple procedures. Even more surprisingly,
the Strict Alternation produced, on average, the fairest
solutions of all. In order to better understand these
seemingly counterintuitive results, the procedural and
distributive factors will be disentangled with analyses of
variance.
First, a MANOVA was run to evaluate the differences
between both assessment of the dependent variables (TIME)
and possible interactions with the type of fair-division
procedures (PROC). In addition to these three withinsubjects factors (dependent variables (DVs), TIME and
PROC), we also examined the differences between the types
of dyad (either consisting of friends or strangers). Wilks test
revealed no difference between types of dyad
(F(1,81)=0.01, ns) but significant interactions between
PROC and TIME (F(6,81)=19.81, p<0.001), PROC and

3231

DVs (F(6,81)=40.92, p<0.001), TIME and DVs
(F(1,86)=6.29, p<0.02), and PROC, TIME and DVs
(F(6,81)=13,49, p<0.001). To boost the power of the
analysis, types of dyad were pooled together, and a PROC x
TIME within-subject ANOVA was performed on each DV
separately (type I error was controlled with Bonferroni
adjustments).
The first ANOVA was computed on satisfaction ratings.
Results show a main effect of PROC (F(6,82)=9.53,
p<0.001) and TIME (F(1,87)=42.05, p<0.001) but no
interaction between them (F(6,82)=0.81, ns). This means
that the application of a fair-division procedure, regardless
of its type, increased satisfaction. It also suggests that the
differences between the procedures do not stem from their
implementation per se but from the type of division solution
they produced. In other words, procedures differ from one
another because of their distributive, not their procedural
properties.
A similar ANOVA was computed on perceived fairness.
Results show two significant main effects and a significant
interaction between PROC and TIME (F(6,82)=8.10,
p<0.001). This means that the procedural properties of some
division procedures had an effect on perceived fairness1.
Statistical contrasts were computed at each level of PROC:
we found that the Adjusted Knaster (F(1,87)=46.41,
p<0.001) and the Compensation Procedure (F(1,87)=16.91,
p<0.001) had a significant positive effect on the perceived
fairness. This indicates that even though imperfect and
simple procedures produced the fairest solutions, their
procedural properties had no positive effect on the
perception of fairness. This is also true for the Adjusted
Winner and the Price Procedure. An additional statistical
contrast run on difference scores (‘after’ minus ‘before’)
also revealed that the procedural properties of the
sophisticated procedures had a larger positive effect on the
perceived fairness than the simple ones (t=8.28, p<0.001).
Given that we tested only seven fair-division procedures,
one could wonder if the best solutions they generated were
really the fairest and the most satisfactory. To assess this
question, the solutions of the best division procedures were
contrasted with the MaxSum solutions, that is, the solutions
that maximized the sum of both participants ratings (see
MaxSum in Figure 1). Results show that the MaxSum
solutions were significantly more satisfactory than the
Divide and Choose’s solutions (t(87)=3.23, p<0.002) and
significantly fairer than the Strict Alternation’s solutions
(t(87)=2.61, p<0.02).

Knaster, the Adjusted Winner, the Compensation Procedure
and the Price Procedure) were perceived as more
satisfactory and fairer than simple (the Divide and Choose)
and imperfect procedures (the Balanced Alternation, the
Strict Alternation).

Discussion

Thirty-nine pairs of students divided six $10 gift
certificates between them using seven division procedures.
They rated their satisfaction and their perceived fairness
regarding the 64 possible discrete division solutions; then,
they learned and executed each division procedure; and
finally, they rated their satisfaction and their perceived
fairness regarding the discrete division solution prescribed
by each procedure. This experimental design allowed us to
disentangle the effect of the procedural and distributive

Following Rawls’ theoretical notion of perfect procedural
justice, this experiment tested the extent to which the
distributive and procedural properties of the most
sophisticated fair-division procedures (the Adjusted
1
Note that there was no linear trend between the order in which the
participants applied the procedures and the satisfaction (r=-0.08, ns) or the
perceived fairness (r=-0.06, ns) ratings. Thus, we consider these repeated
measures as being independent from each other.

1

0.6

0.4

0.2

SA

BA

DC

AK

AW

CP

PP

MaxSum

Satisfaction

0.8

0.8

*

*

0.6

0.4

0.2

SA

BA

DC

AK

AW

CP

PP

MaxSum

Perceived Fairness

1

Figure 1. The average satisfaction and perceived fairness ratings (in
percentiles) of seven fair-solutions generated by seven fair-division
procedures, namely the Strict Alternation (SA), the Balanced Alternation
(BA), the Adjusted Winner (AW), the Adjusted Knaster (AK), the Price
Procedure (PP), the Divide and Choose (DC) and the Compensation
Procedure (CP). Left-side error bars represent the first assessment of a
division solution and the right-side error bars represent the assessment of a
division following the implementation of a given division procedure. Error
bars represent two standard errors. MaxSum represents the best tested
alternative solution.

3232

properties of each fair-division procedure on the satisfaction
and perceived fairness.
Contrarily to our hypothesis, the results show that perfect
procedural justice does not really translate into the
perception of a fairer and more satisfactory outcome and
process. The results also refute the idea that recent
improvements made to the procedural and distributive
properties of fair-division procedures increased their
positive impact on satisfaction and perceived fairness.
More specifically, the expected difference between
sophisticated and imperfect (or simple) division procedures
did not manifest itself in the satisfaction ratings. At the
distributive level, we saw that the most satisfactory
solutions came from simple and imperfect division
procedures. At the procedural level, all division procedures
had a similar positive impact on the satisfaction, suggesting
that the mere application of a procedure, no matter which
one, improved the participants’ subjective well-being.
At first glance, the results on fairness suggest that the
procedural properties of the most sophisticated division
procedures did have a greater positive impact on the
perception of fairness than simple and imperfect procedures.
Notwithstanding, this positive procedural effect did not
compensate for their weaknesses at the distributive level.
By comparison, the simple and imperfect procedures
produced solutions that were perceived as fairer even if it
could not be ascribed to their procedural properties. Note
that this absence of a procedural effect is unlikely to be due
to a ceiling effect because there are more satisfactory and
fairer solutions. In fact, of all the solutions rated by the
dyads, 15.56% had a summed satisfaction higher than the
Strict Alternation’s solution and 16.18% had a summed
perceived fairness greater than the Divide and Choose’s
solution—the two best division procedures.
Table 2. Multiple linear regressions between four distributive factors
(column 1) and the two DVs. Regression coefficients, associated t-values
(in parentheses) and statistical significance (asterisk) are shown.

Predictors

Satisfaction

Perceived
Fairness

Object equality

0.27
(5.56)*

0.39
(9.25)*

Envy-free

-0.05
(-0.82)

0.03
(0.46)

Equitability

-0.07
(-1.26)

0.001
(0.03)

0.001
(0.05)

-0.28
(-4.18)*

Efficiency

These results suggest that the most sophisticated fairdivision procedures have poor distributive justice, that is,
they fail to select solutions that are perceived as fair and
satisfactory. This is surprising given that they implement
mathematically fairer solutions, which are also guaranteed

against the most self-regarding and rational players. Hence,
this raises the question whether the mathematical definitions
of fairness match the implicit conception of fairness used by
the participants. To answer this question, we performed a
multiple linear regression between the criteria of justice met
by the procedures’ solutions (envy-freeness, equitability and
efficiency) and each DV (satisfaction and perceived
fairness).
Table 2 shows the regression coefficients of each factor
and their associated t-values (in parentheses). The asterisks
indicate significant t-values (p<0.0001). The results show
that efficiency is negatively correlated with perceived
fairness. This is consistent with the fact that inefficient
procedures—the imperfect and simple ones—are also
perceived as the fairest. This is also compatible with the
observation of Herreiner and Puppe (2007) that a majority
of participants are willing to sacrifice some efficiency in
exchange of fairness. However, this result needs to be
interpreted with caution because it probably does not
generalize to all division contexts. In fact, although Fehr,
Naef and Schmidt (2006) confirmed that most students were
more concerned with equality than with efficiency, they also
discovered that economics or business students were more
concerned with efficiency than with equality.
Glancing at the best distributive solutions, we noticed that
most exhibited an equal split of objects (i.e. three objects for
each participant). In addition to the three standard criteria of
justice, we thus added object equality—the distance to an
equal split—in our analysis. We found that object equality is
indeed positively correlated with both satisfaction and
perceived fairness ratings. Object equality is usually not
considered as a mathematical criterion of justice since it
does not account for subjective preferences toward the
objects. In fact, object equality does not entail envyfreeness, equitability or efficiency. Even if it is hard at this
point to explain this preference for object equality over
envy-freeness, equitability and efficiency, these results
illustrate the mismatch between the implicit conception of
fairness of humans and the mathematical conception of
fairness.
Altogether, the results of this experiment show that the
solutions from fair-division procedures could still be
improved and that future work on fair-division should
consider the psychological determinants of distributive and
procedural fairness.

Acknowledgments
Research supported by a SSHRC scholarship and a
NSERC grant.

References
Barbanel, J. B. (2004). The Geometry of Efficient Fair
Division. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Brams, S. J. (2008). Mathematics and Democracy:
Designing Better Voting and Fair-Division Procedures.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

3233

Brams, S. J., & Taylor, A.D (1996a). Fair Division: From
Cake-Cutting to Dispute Resolution. New York, NY:
Cambridge University Press.
Brams, S. J., & Taylor, A.D (1996b). A procedure for
Divorce Settlement. Mediation Quarterly, 13 (3), 191-205.
Brams, S. J., & Taylor, A.D (1999). The Win-Win
Solution: Guaranteeing Fair Shares to Everybody. New
York, NY: W.W. Norton.
Crawford, V. P., & Heller, W. P. (1979). Fair division
with indivisible commodities. Journal of Economic Theory,
21 (1), 10-27.
Daniel, T. E., & Parco, J. E. (2005). Fair, efficient and
envy-free bargaining: An experimental test of the BramsTaylor adjusted winner mechanism. Group Decision and
Negotiation, 14 (3), 241-264.
Dupuis-Roy, N. & Gosselin, F. (submitted). Why We
Can’t Get No Satisfaction With Fair-Division Solutions.
Dupuis-Roy, N. & Gosselin, F. (2009). An Empirical
Evaluation of Fair-Division Algorithms. In B. C. Love, K.
McRae, & V. M. Sloutsky (Eds.), Proceedings of the 30th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 26812686. Amsterdam, NL: Cognitive Science Society.
Denoon, D., & Steven J. Brams. (1997). Fair division: A
new approach to the Spratly Islands controversy.
International Negotiation, 2 (2), 303-329.
Fehr, E., Naef, M. and Schmidt, K. (2006). Inequality
aversion, efﬁciency and maximin preferences in simple
distribution experiments: comment. American Economic
Review, 96 (5), 1912–1917.
Herreiner, D., & Puppe, C. (2002). A simple procedure
for finding equitable allocations of indivisible goods. Social
Choice and Welfare, 19 (2), 415-430.
Herreiner, D., & Puppe, C. (2007). Distributing
Indivisible Goods Fairly: Evidence from a Questionnaire
Study, Analyse und Kritik, 29 (2), 235-258.
Massoud, T. G. (2000). Fair division, Adjusted Winner
procedure (AW), and the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Journal
of Conflict Resolution, 44 (3), 333-358.
Moulin, H. J. (2003). Fair Division and Collective
Welfare. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Offerman, T., Sonnemans, J., & Schram, A. (1996). Value
Orientations, Expectations and Voluntary Contributions in
Public Goods. The Economic Journal, 106 (437), 817-845.
Pratt, J. W., & Zeckhauser, R. J. (1990). The fair and
efficient division of the Windsor family silver. Management
Science, 36 (11), 1293-1301.
Pratt, J. (2007). Fair (and not so fair) division. Journal of
Risk and Uncertainty, 35 (3), 203-236.
Rawls, J. (1971). A theory of justice. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Robertson, J., & William Webb. (1998). Cake-Cutting
Algorithms: Be Fair If You Can. Cambridge, MA: AK
Peters.
Schneider, G., & Kramer, U. S. (2004). The limitations of
fair division - An experimental evaluation of three
procedures. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 48 (4), 506-524.

Young, H. P. (1994). Equity in Theory and Practice.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton.

3234

