UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The contribution of cognitive style, cognitive abilities and expertise to the solving of
complex problems

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5j59905v

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Sevenants, Aline
Verschueren, Niki
Schaeken, Walter

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The contribution of cognitive style, cognitive abilities and expertise to the solving
of complex problems
Aline Sevenants (aline.sevenants@psy.kuleuven.be)
Niki Verschueren (niki.verschueren@ppw.kuleuven.be)
Walter Schaeken (walter.schaeken@psy.kuleuven.be)
University of Leuven, Laboratory of Experimental Psychology
102 Tiensestraat, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium
Abstract
The influence of Need for Cognition, cognitive abilities and
expertise on complex problem-solving was examined. A ‘Need for
Cognition’ questionnaire, a cognitive abilities test and five
complex problems were presented to a group of experts
(Experiment 1) and to a group of novices (Experiment 2).
Generally, experts performed better on the complex problems than
did novices. Experts low in cognitive ability solved complex
problems better than those high in cognitive ability; in addition,
experts high on NfC solved complex problems better than those
low on NfC. Furthermore, experts low on cognitive ability and
low on NfC did best. Within the group of novices, no effect of
cognitive ability and NfC on the complex problems was observed.

Petty (1982) showed that individuals with a high NfC
consider a larger number of possibilities, generate a higher
number of task relevant thoughts and try out more
alternative hypotheses during the problem-solving process
than individuals with a low NfC.
To date, the influence of NfC on the solving of complex
problems has only been studied by Nair and Ramnarayan
(2000). They found that individuals with a high NfC (1)
were much more likely to solve the problems, (2)
considered more informative elements of the problem, and
(3) found the problems easier, compared to individuals with
a low NfC."

Cognitive abilities

Introduction
Problems can be situated on a continuum ranging from
well-structured to ill-structured, according to whether the
initial states and goal states are well-defined or looselydefined in the problem statement Problem-solving has been
an important research area since several decades, but rather
little research has been conducted on the solving of
complex problems, the problems we will focus on.
Amongst others, three major variables influence the
capacity to solve this kind of problems: cognitive style,
cognitive abilities and expertise.

Cognitive style
Cognitive style is described as the individual variation in
modes of perceiving, remembering and thinking, or as
distinctive ways of apprehending, storing, transforming,
and utilizing information (Capitiano & Mason, 2000;
Kogan, 1971). One of the most important requirements for
an individual to solve complex problems is his motivation
to understand and actively structure the relevant variables
constituting the problem in meaningful, integrated ways.
This kind of intrinsic motivation can be construed as the
personality trait ‘Need for Cognition’ (NfC).
Cohen, Stotland and Wolfe (1955) defined NfC as “a
need to structure relevant situations in meaningful,
integrated ways” (p. 291) and Cacioppo and Petty (1982) as
“the tendency for an individual to engage in and enjoy
thinking” (p. 116). Both the concept NfC as well as its
influence on information processing has been studied
extensively. Over the years, there has been an accumulation
of research results indicating a significant relationship
between NfC and various cognitive performance measures.
Cohen (1957) reported that individuals with a high NfC are
more likely to organize, elaborate on and evaluate the
information they are presented. Furthermore, Cacioppo and

3396

The capacity to solve complex problems does not only
depend on the individual’s NfC, but is also influenced by
the cognitive abilities one has at his disposal. Whereas
cognitive style bears on the individual differences in the
way people process information, cognitive abilities that are
related to the diffuse concept ‘intelligence’, refer to the
level of skill by which information is processed (Kogan,
1971).
Gottfredson (1997, p. 13) asked 52 professors, all experts
in the field of intelligence, to state their meaning of the
concept. Their response was the following: “Intelligence is
a very general mental capacity that, among other things,
involves the ability to reason, plan, solve problems, think
abstractly, comprehend complex ideas and learn quickly
from experience”. In his influential triarchic theory of
intelligence, Sternberg (1985) and Cianciolo and Sternberg
(2004) stressed experience and adaptation to various
environmental contexts as highly important.
Despite the lack of consensus in the literature on the
questions what intelligence exactly involves and whether
there are one or more types of intelligence, it is clear that
problem-solving and the ability to learn, make up two
crucial components of cognitive ability.

Expertise
Regarding complex problems, consistently superior
performing problem solvers are referred to as experts
(Ericsson & Lehmann, 1996). It is widely accepted that
experts not only have more knowledge at their disposal,
but that this knowledge is also better organised. Before
they actually apply solving strategies to the stated
problem, experts go through an elaborate qualitative
analysis of the problem. Novices on the other hand analyze
a problem in terms of superficial features, resulting in a

poor problem representation and weak solving strategies
(Chi, Glazer, & Rees, 1982). Based on his theory of
human abilities, Sternberg (1995) presented a triarchic
view of expertise, in which context and experience play a
crucial role.
Although expertise is often attributed to the gross
amount of experience in a specific domain, Hatano (1982)
proposed a distinction between routine expertise, restricted
to the domain of expertise, and adaptive expertise,
transferable to novel domains and problems. Holyoak
(1991, p. 310) characterises the consequences of this
difference as follows:”Whereas routine experts are able to
solve familiar types of problems quickly and accurate, they
have only modest capabilities in dealing with novel types
of problems. Adaptive experts, on the other hand, may be
able to invent new procedures derived from their expert
knowledge”.
The aim of this study is to shed light on the influence of
cognitive style, cognitive abilities, expertise and the
interactions between these variables, on one’s ability to
solve complex problems. Therefore, we investigate to what
extent cognitive style and cognitive capacities contribute to
the capacity to solve complex problems, and this within a
group of expert problem-solvers (Experiment 1) and within
a group of novices (Experiment 2), after which we will
compare the performance of both groups. Moreover, in
Experiment 1 we will examine whether the experts’
knowledge is transferable to problems outside their domain
of expertise.

Cognitive Style The NfC questionnaire was a Dutch
adaptation (Pieters, Verplanken en Modde, 1987) of
Cacioppo and Petty’s (1982) 34-itemscale, consisting of
15-items. All items measured participants’ intrinsic
motivation to engage in reasoning and problem solving and
had to be judged on five-point scales ranging from A
(strongly agree) to E (strongly disagree). Items looked as
follows:
⋅
I really enjoy a task that involves coming up with new
solutions to problems.
⋅
I tend to set goals that can be accomplished only by
expending considerable mental effort.
⋅
I take pride in the products of my reasoning.
⋅
I don't usually think about problems that others have
found to be difficult.
⋅
…

Experiment 1

Complex Problems Five one-page complex problems
exceeding domain specific knowledge of the consultants
were constructed (for an example of a comparable complex
problem, see Barnett & Koslowksi (2002). All problems
consisted of an equal amount of 15 informative elements.
There were three management-related problems, about (1)
a restaurant loosing clients due to the opening of a new
restaurant in the neighborhood, (2) a high-school with a bad
reputation needing to suspend specializations and (3) a
chemicals factory with unsatisfied employees due to
pressure of work and interpersonal conflicts). The two
everyday-problems dealt with (1) about a young couple
having trouble deciding where to live and (2) a boy with an
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder causing tension at
school and in his family.

Barnett and Koslowski (2002) reported that, given their
experience with the solving of management-related
complex problems, business-consultants are considered as
experts. This is why we investigate the role of NfC and
cognitive abilities in the process of complex problemsolving within a group of business-consultants.
We hypothesise a positive relation between the NfC and
the performance on the complex problems. More exactly,
we expect the consultants with a high NfC to achieve a
higher quality- and quantity-score on the complex
problems, than the consultants with a low NfC.
Furthermore, we expect the participants with more
cognitive abilities to score better on both types of complex
problems than participants with less cognitive abilities. The
consultants are given two types of complex problems: three
management-related problems, contiguous to their domain
of expertise, and two everyday-problems. When they solve
both types of complex problems equally well, this bears
evidence of the hypothesis that their expertise is
transferable to novel domains.

Method
Participants 14 business consultants (8 male, 6 female)
with a minimum of 5 years (range 5 -21 years) of
professional experience as a management consultant for
organizations, took part on a voluntary basis.

Cognitive Ability The test assessing cognitive abilities was
a set of 35 well-defined problems, selected from the Dutch
intelligence test ‘Combined Test for Intellectual adults’.
The items were selected in order to assess the capacities
needed to solve our selection of complex problems. The test
included the following categories: ‘diagnostic reading’ (the
capacity to extract critical information from a text), ‘logical
reasoning’ (deductive reasoning with syllogisms), ‘digit
spans’ (arithmetic), ‘word classifications’ (verbal
comprehension),
‘mathematical
problems’(analytical
thinking and numerical skills), ‘sorting out words’
(chronological ordering of social situations), ‘proverbs’
(associations and verbal comprehension) and ‘analogies’
(inductive reasoning with word series).

Procedure All participants were tested individually and the
tests were presented in the same order. They had 5 minutes
to complete the NfC questionnaire. Next, they were given
the set of 35 well-defined problems, which had to be
resolved within 30 minutes. The well-defined problems
were presented in a fixed order. It was explicitly mentioned
not to write anything down during the problem-solving.
After completing the well-defined problems, participants
were presented with the five complex problems in
randomized order. They had 12 minutes per problem to
write down as many elaborated solutions to the problem as
possible. All parts of the experiment were presented in
Dutch.
Coding For the 35 well-defined problems, a score of one
point was attributed to each correct answer. Coding the

Material

3397

complex problems, a quality- as well as a quantity-score
was calculated. The quantity-scores were obtained by
attributing one point a) to each proposed solution, b) to
each element of information used in that solution, c) to each
element of information the participant thought that was
missing in the problem statement and necessary to solve the
problem. The quality-scores were calculated by attributing
one to three points, according to their degree of elaboration,
to each proposed solution, as well as to each of the
elements. To this quality-score, a score ranging from one to
five was added, depending on the degree of integration of
the global answer. Pilot work showed that the scoring was
reliable: The quality- and quantity-scores were determined
by two independent raters, with the interrater correlation
ranging from .89 to .97.

Results and discussion
We analysed the relation between the NfC scores and the
scores on the well-defined problems on the one hand, and
the performance on the complex problems on the other
hand. For this purpose we conducted two analyses of
variance with repeated measures. The dependent variables
were the quality-score respectively the quantity-score on
the two types of complex problems. The independent
variables were the categorical predictors NfC and cognitive
abilities, both made up of two levels (1 = low-group, 2 =
high-group). This division into a low-group and a highgroup was performed by a median split. All variables were
tested within-subjects. Finally, we compared the
performance on the management-related and the everyday
complex problems by means of a t-test, in order to examine
the adaptiveness of the consultants’ expertise.
The relation between the NfC scores and the experts’
quality- and quantity-scores on the complex problems was
in the expected direction (the higher the score on NfC the
better the performance) but did not meet the .05
significance level. This can be put in perspective as
follows: Since our participants chose for a job as a
business-consultant, we infer that their search for problemsolving strategies is satisfactory. Moreover, we contacted a
large group of consultants with the request to participate in
this study, and only 14 individuals took part entirely free of
charge. So we are dealing with a select group of
participants having a maximal NfC. In addition, the
consultants filling in the NfC items used a reference-group
(their colleagues) with a higher NfC than average.
Therefore, in a second experiment we will select a ‘low
group’ and a ‘high group’ on this variable.
The global score on the variable cognitive abilities
affected the quality- and quantity-scores on the complex
problems in the expected direction, although not
significant. Concerning the cognitive abilities, we are also
dealing with a select, homogenous group: individuals with
one or more university diplomas. Within the general
population, the range of cognitive abilities is larger, thus a
positive relation between their cognitive abilities and the
performance on solving complex problems is to be
expected. The difference between convergent thinking, as
measured by the well-defined problems, and divergent
thinking, which is needed to solve complex problems,

3398

might be another explanation. We come back to that in the
general discussion.
Both types of complex problems were solved equally
well. There was no significant difference between the
scores on the management-related and the everydayproblems, neither concerning the quality-scores, nor
concerning the quantity-scores. Even within the low-group
and the high-group of both NfC and cognitive abilities, no
significant difference between the two types of complex
problems was found. This bears evidence of the hypothesis
that the participating consultants are no routine experts but
adaptive experts.

Experiment 2
It is possible that the relation between the scores on NfC
and cognitive abilities on the one hand, and the scores on
the complex problems on the other hand, is masked by the
expertise the consultants have at their disposal, cancelling
out the smaller effects of NfC and cognitive abilities. In
order to examine this supposition, the same hypotheses are
tested within a group of novices in problem-solving:
undergraduate students.

Method
Participants A total of 145 first year psychology students
filled in the NfC questionnaire. The 30% students with the
highest score and the 30% with the lowest score were asked
to take part in the continuation of the experiment. 21
individuals from the low-group and 26 from the high-group
accepted.
Material The same material as described in Experiment 1
was used.
Procedure and coding The procedure and coding were
identical to those described in Experiment 1. The
participants were pre-tested for NfC. They first solved the
well-defined problems, next the ill-defined problems.

Results and discussion
Within this group of novices we analyzed, similar to
Experiment 1, the relation between NfC and cognitive
abilities on the one hand, and the performance on the
complex problems on the other hand. We conducted the
same two analyses of variance with repeated measures,
with respectively the quality-scores and the quantity-scores
on the two types of complex problems as dependent
variables. The independent variables were the categorical
predictors NfC, and cognitive abilities, both made up of a
low-group and a high-group-level. This division into a lowgroup and a high-group was executed according to a
median split. All variables were tested within-subjects. For
this group of participants we also compared their
performance on the management-related and the everyday
complex problems by means of a t-test.
We found a pattern of results similar to the one observed
within the group of consultants. The influence of the NfC
scores on the quality- and quantity-scores for both types of
complex problems, did not meet significance, but was in
the right direction. The same goes for the relation between

Experts versus novices
In order to draw a straight comparison between the novices
and the experts regarding their scores on the NfC
questionnaire, on the well-defined problems and on both
categories of complex problems, we will conduct the same
analyses on the pooled. The hypotheses are as follows:
Given their professional activities, we expect the
consultants to have a higher NfC than the average student.
Regarding the students from the high-group for NfC, we
expect their score to approximate to the score of the
consultants. Concerning the well-defined problems, we do
not expect the performance of the students and consultants
to be widely divergent. All participants have a universitylevel and have therefore already proven to have disposal of
the needed cognitive abilities. In the view of their expertise
and experience with problem-solving, we expect the
consultants to perform better on the complex problems than
the students. When they are only better at solving the
management-related problems, we can infer that the
consultants are routine experts, but when they also achieve
a higher score on the everyday-problems, this constitutes
evidence for the adaptiveness of their expertise. Finally, we
examine once more the relation between NfC and cognitive
abilities on the one hand and the performance on the
complex problems on the other hand. We hypothesise the
participants with a high NfC to obtain a higher score on the
complex problems than the participants with a low NfC,
and we expect the participants with high cognitive abilities
to score better on the complex problems in comparison to
those with low cognitive abilities.

Results
The consultants generally scored higher on NfC than the
students (60.0 > 49.04, t(59) = -3.95, p < .01), both groups
having a comparable range (9.25 ≈ 8.57). The consultants
and the students did not differ regarding their cognitive
abilities (22.14 ≈ 22.36), nor did the range (4.14≈ 4.17).
The consultants had only a marginally significant higher
NfC score than the students from the high-group, 56.5 ≈ 60,
t(38) = -1.754, p = .09, and achieved virtually the same
score on the well-defined problems than the students, 22.4
≈ 22.1, t(59) = .172, p = .864.
We wanted to examine the relation between the
participant’s status (novice or expert), their score on the
variables NfC and cognitive abilities on the one hand and
their score on the complex problems on the other hand. For
this purpose, we conducted two analyses of variance with
repeated measures: the first for the quality-scores on the
management-related and everyday complex problems, and

the second for the quantity-scores. Categorical independent
variables were expert status, NfC and cognitive abilities.
The analysis of variance with the quality-score on the
complex problems as a dependent variable yielded a maineffect of expert status. The consultants’ score on the
complex problems was significantly higher than the
students’ score, 20.9 > 13.9, F(1, 53) = 61.22, MSE =
1020.20, p < .01. This goes for both the managementrelated problems, 21.3 > 14, F(1, 53) = 62.686, MSE =
547.927, p < .01, and for the everyday-problems 20.5 >
13.8, F(1, 53) = 40.892, MSE = 473.627, p < .01. The
interaction NfC x cognitive abilities was also significant,
F(1, 53) = 4.147, MSE = 69.11, p < .05. Both effects were
involved in a significant three-way interaction expert status
x NfC x cognitive abilities (see Figure 1), F(1, 53) = 9.337,
MSE = 155.59, p < .01. Within the group of novices, there
was neither a significant relation between the NfC and the
quality-score, nor between the cognitive abilities and the
quality-score. Within the group of consultants, we observed
another pattern of results: Regarding the low-group on
cognitive abilities, the consultants from the low-group on
NfC obtained a higher quality-score than the consultants
from the high-group on NfC. This difference was
significant, both for the management-related problems, 25.1
> 19.6, F(1, 53) = 5.19, MSE = 45.375, p < .05, and for the
everyday-problems, 25.7 > 18.1, F(1, 53) = 7.63, MSE =
86.26, p < .01. Regarding the high-group on cognitive
abilities, the consultants with a high NfC achieved a higher
score on the complex problems than did those with a low
NfC. This effect was marginally significant for the
management-related problems, 22.2 > 18.3, F(1, 53) = 3.51,
MSE = 30.681, p = .067. The difference in quality-score
between the two NfC-groups was not significant
concerning the everyday-problems.
The analysis of variance with the quantity-score on the
complex problems as a dependent variable yielded a pattern
of results similar to the analysis with the quality-scores as a
dependent variable: There was a main-effect of expert
status, with the experts achieving a significant higher
quantity-score on the complex problems than the novices,
12.9 > 9, F(1, 53) = 38.135, MSE = 314.63, p < .01. The
interaction was significant for the management-related
problems, 13 > 9.3, F(1, 53) = 38.43, MSE = 144.207, p <
.01, as well as for the everyday-problems, 12.9 > 8.8, F(1,
53) = 24.967, MSE = 170.992, p < .01. The interaction NfC
x cognitive abilities was also significant, F(1, 53) = 5.078,
MSE = 41.9, p < .05. Similar to the previous analysis of
variance, these effects were involved in the significant
higher order interaction expert status x NfC x cognitive
abilities, F(1, 53) = 8.203, MSE = 67.68, p < .01.
28
26
24
22
20
18
16
14
12
10
'Cogn ab'

Mean quality-scores
complex problems

the score on the variable cognitive abilities and the qualityand quantity-scores on the complex problems. We come
back to possible explanations in the general discussion
Students solved the management-related and the
everyday-problems equally well, and this adds for both the
quality- and the quantity-scores. Within the low- and highgroup of both NfC and cognitive abilities, no significant
difference between the two types of complex problems
occurred.

Low

High

Students

'Cogn ab'

NfC Low
NfC High
High

Low

Consultants

Figure 1. Quality-score: Interaction between expert status,
NfC and cognitive abilities.

3399

Within the group of novices, no significant relation
between NfC and the score on the complex problems was
observed, neither was there a significant relation between
cognitive abilities’ and the performance on the complex
problems. Regarding the consultants, results similar to the
quality-scores were observed. Within the low-group on
'Cognitive abilities, the experts from the low-group on NfC
achieved a higher quantity-score than the experts from the
high-group on NfC. This contrast was significant, both for
the management-related problems, 14.3 > 11, F(1, 53) =
4.29, MSE = 16.116, p < .05, and for the everydayproblems, 15.9 > 10.3, F(1, 53) = 7.03, MSE = 48.167, p <
.05. Within the high-group on cognitive abilities, there was
a significant difference in quantity-score between the two
groups on NfC regarding the management-related
problems: The consultants from the high-group on NfC
achieved a higher score than the ones within the low-group,
14.8 > 11.8, F(1, 53) = 4.93, MSE = 18.503, p < .05. This
difference was not significant regarding the everydayproblems.

Discussion
The first result catching the eye is the superiority of the
consultants compared to the students regarding both the
quality- and quantity-scores on the complex problems. This
shows that the expert status is an important factor in the
solving of (complex) problems, over and above intelligence
and intrinsic motivation.
The experts perform better than the novices, both on the
management-related problems, contiguous with their
domain of expertise, and the everyday-problems, not
related to their domain-specific knowledge. This bears
evidence of the adaptive nature of the consultants’
expertise.
We infer the following from the significant expert status
x NfC x cognitive abilities interaction (see Figure 1):
Regarding the students, there was no significant relation
between NfC, and cognitive abilities on the one hand and
their performance on the complex problems on the other
hand. Similar results were already discussed in Experiment
2. Regarding the consultants, we observe other quality- and
quantity-scores on the complex problems. Concerning the
low-group on cognitive abilities, consultants from the lowgroup on NfC perform, against all expectations, better on
the complex problems than the consultants from the highgroup on NfC. The experts within the high-group on
cognitive abilities did perform as hypothesised on the
complex problems: the consultants with a high NfC score
better than those with a low NfC. In our opinion, this
pattern of results can be explained as follows: The
consultants having disposal of high cognitive abilities,
make good use of these skills, but especially when they are
motivated (having a high NfC). The consultants with low
cognitive abilities, who in addition are not motivated, are
exactly the ones who will use resources facilitating the
problem-solving process. This are external resources such
as pen and paper compensating their lack of cognitive
abilities. Experts having disposal of more cognitive abilities
make less use of these external resources since they trust in
their own abilities. That is why they sometimes perform

3400

less well in comparison to situations in which they would
make use of these resources. We will come back to this
tentative explanation in the general discussion.

General Discussion
In the conducted experiments, we investigated to what
extent cognitive style, operationalised as NfC, and
cognitive capacities, assessed by means of well-defined
problems, contribute to the capacity to solve complex
problems. This was examined within a group of consultants
(experts) and within a group of students (novices). We
hypothesised the participants with a high NfC-score to
perform better on complex problems. Moreover, we
expected those with much cognitive abilities to achieve a
higher score on the complex problems.
Neither in Experiment 1, nor in Experiment 2 the
hypothesised relation between NfC and the score on the
complex problems was found. A possible explanation for
this is in terms of motivation: Cacioppo et al. (1996)
describe NfC as a more or less stable, intrinsic motivation.
The test situation however, and the instructions
accompanying the complex problems to write down as
many as possible elaborated solutions within a span of 12
minute, make up a source of extrinsic motivation. The
influence of adding extrinsic motivation to already existing
intrinsic motivation has been investigated extensively (for a
review, see Deci, Koestner & Ryan, 1999). The general
conclusion is that intrinsic and extrinsic motivation are not
necessarily additive, but that the addition of extrinsic
motivation can undermine and replace existing intrinsic
motivation. Applied to our experiments, it is not
inconceivable that we do not find a significant influence of
NfC, because this intrinsic motivation was cancelled out by
the extrinsic directions and limitations characteristic to the
test situation and the instructions.
In both conducted experiments, no significant relation
was found between the participants’ cognitive abilities
(their score on the well-defined problems), and their score
on the complex problems. Next to restriction of range,
another explanation is worth considering: Well-defined
problems require convergent thinking or the application of
particular rules in well-defined situations to find the one
correct solution. In order to solve the complex problems
presented to the participants, not only convergent but also
divergent thinking is necessary, since the given information
has to be processed in a creative manner to obtain various
elaboration solutions. In the psychological literature,
divergent thinking and creativity are often put on the same
level. Creativity can be defined as the capacity to come up
with new and applicable solutions to a problem (Lubart,
1994). This property is required to achieve a high score on
the complex problems in our experiments, but is not
necessary to solve the well-defined problems.
When we take a look at the results from the analyses on
the pooled dataset, the most striking finding is that the
consultants perform better on the complex problems than
the students although their performance on well-defined
problems it al level with the students. This bears evidence
of the fact that experience with complex problems plays an
important role in the performance to do so. Considering the

global results, we also revealed a remarkable interaction
between expert status, NfC and cognitive abilities. Within
the students there is no relation between NfC and cognitive
abilities on the one hand, and the score on the complex
problems on the other hand. Possible explanations were
described above. Within the group of consultants however,
we observe a surprising pattern of results. The consultants
with a low score for both NfC and cognitive abilities
perform better on the complex problems than those with a
high NfC. The consultants with much cognitive abilities
perform equally well on the complex problems, but only
when they have a high NfC. The consultants with little
cognitive abilities and a low intrinsic motivation, choose
the line of the least resistance and solve the complex
problems by means of external resources as pen and paper.
The consultants with more cognitive abilities make less use
of these written elaborations, since they know from
experience they have enough cognitive abilities to perform
a large amount of mental operations without the help of
external resources. When they are intrinsically motivated,
they achieve a high performance; otherwise they easily
overestimate their competence and perform worse. Since
we scored the written elaboration coding the answers, the
compensatory use of external resources may lead to a
higher performance-level.
Finally, our experts solved the everyday-problems
equally well compared to the management-related
problems. Moreover, comparing the score of the students
and the consultants, we observe that the consultants
perform considerably better than the students and this on
both types of complex problems. From this we can
conclude that our consultants are adaptive experts since
they are capable to transfer their domain specific
knowledge to novel problems.
A concluding practical advice to the consultancy firms:
Keep your most intelligent consultants motivated and stress
the others to rely on external resources.

References
Barnett, S. M., & Kolowski, B. (2002). Adaptive expertise:
Effects of type of experience and the level of theoretical
understanding it generates. Thinking and Reasoning, 8(4)
237-267.
Capitiano, J. P., & Mason, W. A. (2000). Cognitive style.
Journal of Comparative Psychology, 114, 115-125.
Cacioppo, J. T., & Petty, R. E. (1982). The ‘Need for
Cognition’. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 42, 116-131.
Cacioppo, J. T., Petty, R. E., Feinstein, J. A., & Jarvis, W.
B. G (1996). Dispositional differences in cognitive
motivation: The life and times of individuals varying in
need for cognition. Psychological Bulletin, 119, 197-253.
Chi, M. T. H., Glaser, R., & Rees, E. (1982). Expertise in
problem solving. In R. J. Sternberg (Ed.), Advances in
the psychology of human intelligence (pp. 7-75).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Cianciolo, A. T., & Sternberg, R. J. (2004 ). Intelligence: A
brief history. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing.
Cohen, A. R. (1957). ‘Need for Cognition’ and order of
communication as determinants of opinion change. In C.

3401

I. Hovland (Ed.), The order of presentation in persuasion
(pp. 79-97). New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Cohen, A. R., Stotland, E., & Wolfe, D. M. (1955). An
experimental investigation of ‘Need for Cognition’.
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 51, 291294.
Deci, E. L., Koestner, R. & Ryan, R. M. (1999). A metaanalytic review of experiments examining the effects of
extrinsic rewards on intrinsic motivation. Psychological
Bulletin, 125, 512-598.
Ericsson, K. A., & Lehmann, A. C. (1996). Expert and
exceptional performance : Evidence of maximal
adaptation to task constraints. Annual Review of
Psychology, 273-305.
Gottfredson, L. S. (1997). Mainstream science on
intelligence: An editorial with 52 signatories, history and
bibliography. Intelligence, 24(1), 13-23.
Hatano, G. (1982). Cognitive consequences of practice and
culture specific procedural skills. The Quarterly
Newsletter of the Laboratory of Comparative Human
Cognition, 4(1), 15-18.
Holyoak, K. J. (1991). Symbolic connectionism: Toward a
third generation theories of expertise. In K. Anders & J.
Smith (Eds.), Toward a general theory of expertise:
Prospects and limits (pp. 301-335). New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Kogan, N. (1971). Educational implications of cognitive
styles. In G. S. Lesser (Ed.), Psychology and educational
practice (242-292). Glenview, IL: Scott Foresman.
Lubart, T. I. (1994). Creativity. In R. J. Sternberg (Ed.),
Thinking and problem solving (pp. 290-323). New York :
Academic Press.
Nair, K. U., & Ramnarayan, S. (2000). Individual
differences in ‘Need for Cognition’ and complex problem
solving. Journal of Research in Personality, 34, 305-328.
Pieters, R. G. M., Verplanken, B., & Modde, J. M. (1987).
Neiging tot nadenken: Samenhang met beredeneerd
gedrag. Nederlands Tijdschrift voor de Psychologie, 42,
62-70.
Sternberg, R. J. (1985). Beyond IQ: A triarchic theory of
human intelligence. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press.
Sternberg, R. J. (1995). Expertise in complex problem
solving: a comparison of alternative conceptions. In P. A.
Frensch & J. Funke (Eds.), Complex problem solving, the
European perspective (pp. 295-321). NJ: Erlbaum
Hillsdale.

