UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Rational Hypocrite: Informal Argumentation and Moral Hypocrisy

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1qx6x55v

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Rai, Tage
Holyoak, Keith

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Rational Hypocrite: Informal Argumentation and Moral Hypocrisy
Tage S. Rai (tage.rai@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095 USA

Keith J. Holyoak (holyoak@lifesci.ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095 USA

Abstract
We suggest that in some instances the apparent logical
inconsistency of moral hypocrisy stems from different
evaluations of a weak argument, rather than dishonesty per se.
Extending Corner, Hahn, and Oaksford’s (2006) analysis of
slippery slope arguments, we propose that inferences of
hypocrisy depend on perceived similarity of actions to
previous standards. In Experiment 1, dissimilar actions were
rated as less hypocritical than their similar counterparts. If
observers are choosing between competing theories (i.e.,
hypocrisy or legitimate dissimilarity), evidence of self-serving
motives will positively support inferences of hypocrisy
independent of changes in similarity. In Experiment 2, we
manipulated potential self-serving interests that an action
would produce while keeping similarity between cases
identical. Actions that would result in a beneficial outcome
for the actor were seen as more hypocritical than their nonself-serving counterparts.
These results support the
possibility that Bayesian analyses of weak arguments have
implications for assessing moral reasoning.
Keywords: moral reasoning; hypocrisy; Bayesian inference;
argumentation

Introduction
“I respect the jury’s verdict. But I have concluded that
the prison sentence given to Mr. Libby is excessive.” With
these words former President George W. Bush commuted
the sentence of I. Lewis “Scooter” Libby, Jr., for obstruction
of justice and leaking the identity of CIA operative Valerie
Plame. Critics of the decision noted that Libby actually had
received the minimum sentence allowable for his offense
under the law, and that many of Libby’s supporters,
including the Bush administration, were actively pressing
for mandatory minimum sentencing laws at a national level
(Goodman, 2007). Accordingly, critics of the decision saw
it as a textbook case of moral hypocrisy: different rules were
being applied to Bush’s underling, Libby, than to everyone
else in the United States.
As the example illustrates, moral hypocrisy is typically
viewed as an ethical accusation: someone is applying
different moral standards to essentially identical cases,
dishonestly claiming that one action is acceptable whereas
otherwise equivalent actions are not (Valdesolo & DeSteno,
2007). In this framework, accusations of hypocrisy entail
an inherent logical inconsistency with moral implications, in

that the morally hypocritical action is of the same category
as previous standards, and therefore should not be treated
any differently according to some norm of justice. The
assumption (at least implicitly) is that the hypocrite is being
dishonest, or at least self-deceptive. The hypocrite must be
aware (or should be aware) of the logical inconsistency, and
is therefore committing a falsehood (Batson et al., 1997; for
a review of hypothesized bases for moral disagreements, see
Rai & Fiske, 2011).
Although people no doubt sometimes engage in such
genuine hypocrisy, there may be an alternative explanation
of apparent hypocrisy, one that leaves open the possibility
that the (perceived) hypocrite is both honest and rational.
This possibility arises as an extension of recent Bayesian
analyses of informal argumentation. Hahn and Oaksford
(2007) have argued that many seeming fallacies of informal
reasoning (e.g., arguments from ignorance, circular
arguments, and slippery slope arguments), are not in fact
illogical in all cases, but rather are more or less rationally
persuasive depending on the content of the argument. For
example, Corner, Hahn and Oaksford (2006) analyzed the
slippery slope argument, in which a proposed action A is
criticized because it may lead to an undesirable outcome B.
Corner et al. (2006) argued that such arguments hinge in
part on the conditional probability that undesirable outcome
B will in fact occur if action A is taken. The conditional
probability value,1 depends in part on the prior probability
that action A will expand a category boundary far enough to
include B in the future. In general, the greater the perceived
similarity of A and B, the greater the probability that
including A will expand the category boundaries to
incorporate B.
For example, the claim that legalizing marijuana use
might lead to the eventual legalization of heroin may seem
less persuasive than the claim that legalizing cocaine might
lead to the legalization of heroin, because heroin seems
more similar to cocaine than to marijuana. In general, to the
extent the slope in fact seems “slippery” (high similarity of

1
More precisely, the relevant quantity would presumably be a
function of the difference between the probability of B conditional
on A versus not-A (intuitively, a judgment of the probability that A
will causally lead to B).

2475

A to B), a slippery slope argument against taking action A
may be rationally persuasive.
The logical structure of an allegation of moral hypocrisy
is related to the structure of slippery slope arguments. A
critic of a slippery slope argument is likely to claim that
cases A and B do not (and will not) belong to the same
category. In contrast, one who alleges moral hypocrisy is
likely to claim that A and B in fact belong to the same
category, and hence should be viewed as the “same” from a
moral perspective. Thus when we perceive someone as a
hypocrite, it is not necessarily because there is an inherent
logical inconsistency in their argument, and their claim may
not be motivated by their selfish desire to do A while
blocking B. An alternative possibility is that we estimate the
similarity between A and B to be high, whereas the
(alleged) hypocrite’s premise is that they are actually
dissimilar, so that doing A does not morally require
acceding to B.
The close link between slippery slope arguments and
allegations of moral hypocrisy can be illustrated by
returning to the Scooter Libby commutation. We could turn
the critique of Bush’s action into a slippery slope argument
by claiming that commuting Libby’s sentence would
morally require us to commute everyone else convicted of
similar crimes because Libby’s crime was no less heinous
than theirs (i.e., the slope is so slippery as to be impossible
to resist). The stronger this slippery slope argument seems,
the weaker is Bush’s perceived defense against the
allegation of moral hypocrisy. However, perhaps Bush in
fact viewed Libby’s offense as dissimilar to the crimes of
others convicted of the same charges (because, for example,
Libby was a “patriot” motivated by “noble” motives, such
as increasing the security of the United States by advancing
the agenda of the Bush administration in overcoming
opposition to its plan to invade Iraq). Given such prior
beliefs, Bush could rationally decide that commuting Libby
(based on his exculpatory circumstances and exemplary
character) was rationally and morally consistent with not
commuting the sentences of others convicted of similar
crimes.
To take a different example, a critic might label a prochoice individual as hypocritical if that person thinks it
should be illegal for pregnant women to drink alcohol. From
this critic’s point of view, both issues may be seen as
involving a woman’s right to control her own body; hence if
a woman has the right to choose abortion, she should surely
have the right to drink alcohol. However, the allegation of
hypocrisy could be countered by arguing that the actions are
in fact quite dissimilar in relevant respects (e.g., demanding
that a woman maintain a pregnancy may have much greater
negative utility for her than demanding that she stop
drinking for the same period of time). As this example,
illustrates, making a distinction between the utilities of A
and B is an important way to show that A and B are
dissimilar in a morally relevant way.
That apparent moral hypocrisy may sometimes be the
result of disagreement over content does not imply that

there is no “genuine” moral hypocrisy stemming from
deception and differential treatment in the service of selfish
ends. For example, critics of Bush’s decision to commute
Libby’s sentence have noted that if Bush had given Libby a
full pardon, Libby would have had to relinquish his Fifth
Amendment rights, whereas commuting the sentence
maintained those rights (Goodman, 2007). Thus, although
Bush claimed that he chose commutation rather than a full
pardon in order to appropriately punish Libby, in fact it was
in Bush’s own best interests to commute Libby rather than
to either pardon him or allow him to go to jail, as either
alternative would have increased the probability of Libby
cooperating with prosecutors and revealing the possible
involvement of President Bush or Vice-President Cheney in
Libby’s crimes.
Such self-serving interests can be modeled in Bayesian
terms when assessing the probability of moral hypocrisy.
For the critical observer faced with Bush’s decision, the two
competing hypotheses are that Bush had different prior
beliefs that lead to his decision, or that Bush believed that
criminals should go to jail and that Libby was a criminal,
but hypocritically commuted his sentence. Viewed in a
Bayesian framework, evidence that Bush may have had selfserving reasons to commute Libby’s sentence would count
as positive evidence in support of the hypothesis that Bush
was a hypocrite, independent of any changes in the
similarity between Libby’s case and that of other convicts.
In the present paper we test our proposal that perceptions
of moral hypocrisy depend on underlying probabilities
related to content. In Experiment 1 we manipulated the
similarity between a precedent action A and a proposed
action B. We hypothesized that as A and B became more
similar, participants would be increasingly likely to view
treating them differently as morally hypocritical. In
Experiment 2 we manipulated the self-serving benefits to
the actor while keeping the similarity identical between
precedent action A and proposed action B.
We
hypothesized that as the potential for self-serving interests
increased, participants would be increasingly likely to view
treating the actions differently as morally hypocritical.

Experiment 1
Participants in both experiments were recruited via the
Internet, and completion of the questionnaires was
voluntary. Questionnaires were posted on the Craigslist
website under their “volunteers” section in Los Angeles,
New York, and Chicago. After giving consent to participate,
each participant was randomly assigned to a condition. The
IP addresses of participants’ computers were recorded to
ensure that participants did not participate in the study
multiple times.
Experiment 1 employed a within-subjects design in
which participants (n = 59) were presented with two
different vignettes, each representing a different
experimental condition, counterbalanced for order. Each
vignette was varied to experimentally manipulate the
similarity between a precedent action A and a proposed

2476

and utility similarity (M = 4.54) than when the actions were
more dissimilar (M = 3.27), F (1, 55) = 7.69, p < .01 (see
Figure 1). Ratings did not differ across the two vignettes, F
(1, 55) < 1. More importantly, there was no interaction
between vignette and experimental manipulation, F (1, 55)
= 1.85, p = .18, indicating that the basic effect was observed
for both vignettes (see Figure 1). There was also no effect
of presentation order, F (1, 55) = 1.43, p = .24.
7

For several years John Smith ran a successful investment company,
but during the recession he made some bad investments. Realizing
that all of his savings were going to disappear, John made a
desperate move to embezzle some of the money from his company.
He knew it was wrong, but gave in to temptation. John was
caught, and in his state his crime carried a mandatory sentence of 5
years in prison. John’s lawyer has asked the judge to reduce the
sentence to 2 years. Other convicted felons are in prison for
monetary crimes, such as theft and money laundering (violent
crimes, such as homicide and assault).
How morally hypocritical would it be for the judge to reduce
John’s sentence to two years when other convicts are sentenced to
more time?
In Norway, they have passed a law making it illegal to drink
alcohol while pregnant because of the side-effects that it may have
on the developing infant. When pregnant women drink alcohol,
the alcohol is passed directly to the infant, and can lead to severe
side-effects, including fetal-alcohol syndrome. Some people are
advocating that this class of laws be expanded to include caffeine
consumption during pregnancy. Caffeine consumption is passed
directly to the infant. It can lead to severe side-effects, including
type 2 diabetes. (Caffeine consumption is passed indirectly to the
infant. It can lead to some side-effects, including a slightly higher
likelihood of consuming caffeine in the future.)

low similarity

6
Mean rated hypocrisy

action B. Similarity varied along two dimensions: surface
similarity based on features and utility based on
consequences. A given participant read one vignette in
which the two actions were made to appear quite similar on
the surface and the utility of the outcome was relatively
more negative (from the participants’ perspective), and
another vignette in which the two actions were made to
appear less similar and the utility of the outcome less
negative. Participants were asked to rate how morally
hypocritical it would be to adopt the proposed action B on a
Likert scale ranging from 1 (not hypocritical at all) to 7
(completely hypocritical). The information in parentheses
refer to the low similarity condition:

high similarity

5
4
3
2
1
0
John's embezzlement

Outlawing caffeine

Figure 1: Mean ratings of moral hypocrisy as a function of
similarity between cases, for each of two vignettes
(Experiment 1). A rating of one corresponded to “not
hypocritical at all” while a rating of seven corresponded to
“completely hypocritical”. Error bars indicate one standard
error of the mean.

Experiment 2

How morally hypocritical is it for the law to permit caffeine
consumption while restricting alcohol consumption during
pregnancy?

According to our hypothesis, reducing John’s sentence to
2 years should be seen as less hypocritical when his crime is
markedly different from that of other criminals in a way that
reduces the negative utility of John’s crime to society
(monetary rather than violent). Similarly, it should be seen
as less hypocritical to allow pregnant mothers to consume
caffeine but not alcohol when the effects of caffeine are
different from those of alcohol (indirect rather than direct
causal pathway) and less harmful to the infant (less negative
utility).

Results
ANOVA analyses revealed that ratings of hypocrisy
were significantly higher when the precedent action A and
the proposed action B were highly similar based on surface

Whereas Experiment 1 demonstrated the effects of
varying similarity on accusations of hypocrisy, in
Experiment 2 we varied the likelihood of self-serving
motives while keeping similarity between cases constant.
Experiment 2 employed a between-subjects design in
which participants were presented with one vignette that
was varied to experimentally manipulate the benefit an actor
would likely receive from performing an action. Benefit
was manipulated via a financial incentive for performing the
action. Specifically, a given participant read a vignette in
which a governor can choose to reduce a man’s sentence.
Participants were either told that the man comes from a rich
family (n = 22) or a poor family (n = 24):
James has been convicted of vehicular homicide due to killing a
homeless person while driving drunk. There were extenuating
circumstances, as James had no prior record, visibility was
particularly poor due to inclement weather, and it was not a direct
collision. The victim was not crossing at a cross-walk and was in
poor health. However, because of mandatory sentencing laws in
the state, the judge had to sentence James to seven years in prison.
James has submitted a request to have his sentence reduced to
three years. However, the governor of the state has been a strong
proponent of minimum sentencing laws. James comes (does not
come) from a very rich family, and they would (not) likely become
large donors to the governor if he pardoned their son.

2477

How morally hypocritical would it be for the governor to reduce
the sentence James received for his crime?

According to our hypothesis, reducing James’ sentence
to 3 years should be seen as less hypocritical when his
family is poor, because observers would perceive that the
governor has no self-serving interest in taking the action

Results
Accusations of hypocrisy were significantly higher
among participants who were told James came from a rich
family (m = 5.64) than among participants who were told
James came from a poor family (m = 3.58), t (44) = 3.76, p
< .001 (see Figure 2). Thus, information about the potential
for selfish gain supported accusations of hypocrisy
independent of any changes to the similarity between
James’ crime and the crimes of others.
7

Mean rated hypocrisy

6

Rather than being based on illogical motivated cognition, at
least some apparent instances of moral hypocrisy may be
rooted in Bayesian notions of argument strength.
Differences in prior beliefs can lead to conflicting
interpretations of argument strength and consequent
accusations of hypocrisy and attempts at rebuttal. By linking
moral hypocrisy to Bayesian decision theory, we extend
recent work that has argued for more domain-general
accounts of moral cognition (Rai & Holyoak, 2010;
Waldmann & Dieterich, 2007; Waldmann, Nagel, &
Wiegmann, in press).
An interesting question is whether people are sensitive to
the roles of similarity and motives in inferences toward
hypocrisy. If so, one might predict that genuine hypocrites
will adjust their beliefs regarding the similarity between
cases and the potential gains they will receive from taking
the proposed action. Future studies should investigate how
estimates of underlying probabilities related to similarity
and gain change under conditions that are likely to lead to
hypocrisy, such as when making judgments of others
actions versus one’s own actions (Valdesolo & Desteno,
2008).

5

Acknowledgments

4

Preparation of this paper was supported by the UCLA
Center for Society and Genetics (TR) and AFOSR grant
FA9550-08-1-0489 (KH). We thank Hongjing Lu and Chris
Carroll for comments on earlier drafts.

3
2
1
0
1
Poor family

References

Rich 2family

Figure 2: Mean ratings of moral hypocrisy as a function of
potential for selfish gain between cases (Experiment 2). A
rating of one corresponded to “not hypocritical at all” while
a rating of seven corresponded to “completely hypocritical”.
Error bars indicate one standard error of the mean.

Discussion
The present findings demonstrate that apparent moral
hypocrisy varies as a function of underlying probabilities
related to content.
Specifically, observers have two
competing hypotheses for analyzing an actor’s actions:
Either he is a dishonest hypocrite or the proposed action B
is actually different from precedent action A. As precedent
action A and proposed action B become more similar,
perceptions of moral hypocrisy will increase (Experiment 1)
because the likelihood of the two actions being in the same
category is increased. Perceptions of moral hypocrisy will
also increase independent of changes in similarity if the
potential for selfish gain is believed to be present
(Experiment 2), as this will count as positive evidence in
support of the hypothesis that the actor is a hypocrite.
These results extend work on other forms of informal
argumentation (Hahn & Oaksford, 2007), and represent the
first attempt to analyze moral hypocrisy in Bayesian terms.

Batson, D., Kobrynowicz, D., Dinnerstein, J., Kampf, H., &
Wilson, A. (1997). In a very different voice: Unmasking
moral hypocrisy. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 72, 1335-1348.
Corner, A., Hahn, U., & Oaksford, M. (2006). The slippery
slope argument—Probability, utility & category
reappraisal. In R. Sun (Ed.), Proceedings of the 28th
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
1145–1150). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hahn, U., & Oaksford, M. (2007). The rationality of
informal argumentation:
A Bayesian approach to
reasoning fallacies. Psychological Review, 114, 704-732.
Goodman, A. (2007). Commuting sentence, Bush spares
Libby from 30 month jail-term. Democracy Now: The
War and
Peace Report.
Retrieved
from
http://www.democracynow.org/2007/7/3/commuting_sent
ence_bush_spares_libby_from.
Rai, T. S. & Fiske, A. P. (2011). Moral psychology is
relationship regulation: Moral motives for unity, hierarchy,
equality, and proportionality. Psychological Review, 118,
57-75.
Rai, T. S., & Holyoak, K. J. (2010). Moral principles or
consumer preferences? Alternative framings of the trolley
problem. Cognitive Science, 34, 311-321.
Valdesolo, P., & DeSteno, D. (2007). Moral hypocrisy:
Social groups and the flexibility of virtue. Psychological
Science, 18, 689-690.

2478

Valdesolo, P., & Desteno, D. (2008). The duality of virtue:
Deconstructing the moral hypocrite.
Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 44, 1334-1338.
Waldmann, M. R., & Dieterich, J. H. (2007). Throwing a
bomb on a person versus throwing a person on a bomb:
Intervention myopia in moral intuitions. Psychological
Science, 18, 247-253.
Waldmann, M. R., Nagel, J., & Wiegmann, A. (in
press).Moral judgment. In K.J. Holyoak & R. G.
Morrison (Eds.),The Oxford handbook of thinking and
reasoning. New York: Oxford University Press.

2479

