UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Influence of Co-Occurrence and Inheritance Information on Children's Inductive
Generalization

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3f61082b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Godwin, Karrie
Fisher, Anna
Matlen, Bryan

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Influence of Co-Occurrence and Inheritance Information on Children’s
Inductive Generalization
Karrie E. Godwin (kegodwin@andrew.cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Psychology
5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Anna V. Fisher (fisher49@andrew.cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Psychology
5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Bryan J. Matlen (bmatlen@andrew.cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Psychology
5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Abstract
Prior research suggests young children understand that
labels serve as category markers and that they can utilize
this information to perform category-based induction with
both identical and semantically-similar labels (Gelman &
Markman, 1986). Recent research suggests that children’s
ability to perform category-based induction is limited to a
small subset of semantically-similar labels which co-occur
in child-directed speech (Fisher, 2010; Fisher, Matlen, &
Godwin, in press). However, most of the co-occurring labels
used in prior research are not only semantically-similar but
they also refer to baby-parent relationships (e.g., puppydog). Thus, children may be able to perform induction with
these particular label-pairs, because they contain kinship
information rather than because they co-occur. The present
study aims to disentangle whether young children’s
induction performance is driven by kinship information or
co-occurrence probability. Results indicate that 4-year-olds’
(but not 5-year-olds, 7-year-olds, or adults) induction
performance was influenced by co-occurrence probability;
kinship information was found to be insufficient to promote
young children’s induction performance.
Keywords:
Categories.

Labels.

Induction.

Cognitive

Development.

Introduction
It has been suggested that even young children understand
that labels denote object categories, and that children rely on
this information to make inductive inferences (Welder &
Graham, 2001, Gelman 1988; Gelman & Coley, 1990;
Gelman & Markman, 1986; Jaswal, 2004). The strongest
evidence in support of this argument comes from a study
demonstrating that preschool-age children make inferences
based on semantically-similar labels (to be referred to as
synonyms henceforth for brevity) (Gelman & Markman,
1986). In this experiment children were first presented with
a triad of objects and provided with respective labels. For
example, children could be presented with a rabbit (Target
item), a squirrel (Test item), and another rabbit (Test item)
that looked dissimilar from the target. Children were told

about the properties of the test items (e.g., that the rabbit ate
grass and the squirrel ate bugs). Then children were asked to
generalize one of these properties to the target item.
Importantly, similarity in category membership was
conveyed either by identical labels (e.g., rabbit-rabbit) or
synonymous labels (e.g., bunny-rabbit). The results
indicated that the rate of category-based inferences was
above chance in both conditions (i.e., 67% with identical
labels and 63% with synonymous labels).
However, more recent findings suggest children’s
ability to make inferences using synonyms is limited to a
small set of words that not only share meaning but also cooccur in child-directed speech according to the CHILDES
database (MacWhinney, 2000). In particular, Fisher, Matlen,
and Godwin (in press) found that most 4-year-old children
perform category-based inferences with synonyms that are
likely to co-occur in child-directed speech (e.g., bunnyrabbit, puppy-dog); however, these same children are
unlikely to make category-based inferences with synonyms
that do not co-occur (e.g. alligator-crocodile, rock-stone).
Importantly, children in this study exhibited near-ceiling
accuracy in a task similar to the Peabody Picture
Vocabulary Test (Dunn & Dunn, 1997) with both cooccurring and non-co-occurring synonyms (99% correct in
both conditions).
One explanation for this finding is that children’s
inferences are based on co-occurrence probability rather
than semantic similarity (Fisher, 2010; Fisher, Matlen, &
Godwin, in press). Co-occurrence plays an important role in
the formation of lexical associations (Brown & Berko,
1960; McKoon & Ratcliff, 1992) which may facilitate
inductive generalization via priming. For example, when
children are asked whether a “bunny” shares a property with
a “rabbit” or a “squirrel”, children’s responses may be
influenced by lexical priming (i.e., “bunny” priming
“rabbit” but not “squirrel”) rather than category-based
reasoning.
In the English language we have only been able to
identify a few semantically-similar labels that are not only
familiar to preschool age children but also co-occur in childdirected speech. Incidentally, these words can be construed

2989

as referring to baby-parent relationships (e.g., puppy-dog,
kitty-cat, bunny-rabbit1). Therefore, it is possible that
children’s induction with these labels is driven by kinship
information rather than label co-occurrence. In other words,
it is possible that children engage in category-based
induction when they are presented with semantically-similar
labels, but do so only when these labels refer to kinship
relationships.
There is evidence suggesting that children may be
sensitive to kinship information and that children can utilize
this information during the course of inductive
generalization. For example, Opfer and Bulloch (2007) gave
kindergarten and first grade children a label induction task.
Participants were provided with kind information for two
target items that consisted of perceptually-dissimilar parentoffspring pairs (e.g., “This is a dax. It was born to these two
daxes here. This is a fep it was born to these two feps here”;
p. 208). Children were then shown a test item that consisted
of a novel parent-offspring pair; importantly, the perceptual
similarity between the offspring and its parents was
manipulated so that perceptual similarity was in conflict
with kinship information. Children were asked to infer the
name of the offspring (the offspring looked like a fep but its
parents were daxes). This paradigm allowed Opfer and
Bulloch to test whether children could capitalize on kinship
information
in
order
to
make
category-based
generalizations. Opfer and Bulloch found that children were
indeed sensitive to kind information conveyed through
parent-offspring relationships and that children used this
information to make category-based generalizations.
Importantly, the same stimuli led to the opposite pattern of
results when kinship information was removed (i.e.,
children generalized according to perceptual similarity when
inheritance information was not available). These findings
suggest that kinship information can aid inductive
generalization.
The present study was designed to examine whether
children’s performance in prior research (Fisher, 2010;
Fisher et al., in press) was driven by the co-occurrence
probability of semantically-similar labels or kinship
information conveyed by these labels. Towards this goal, we
presented participants with an induction task with
semantically-similar labels pointing to kinship relations.
Some of these labels were likely to co-occur in childdirected speech (e.g., puppy-dog) whereas other labels were
unlikely to co-occur (e.g., chick-hen). Importantly, cooccurrence probability of labels was manipulated within
participants, such that any observed differences can be
1

Although kitty and bunny are not exclusive labels for baby animals,
these labels are often used in the common vernacular to refer to the young
of these species. For instance, the Meriam-Webster dictionary defines
bunny as a “rabbit; especially young rabbit” and kitty as a “cat; especially
kitten”. Furthermore, common usage of these words seems consistent with
the dictionary definitions: a Google picture search using the term “bunny”
yielded 74 images of animals of which 62% depicted young rabbits and the
search term “kitty” yielded 79 images of animals of which 49% depicted
kittens. Therefore, it is reasonable that children may interpret these words
as referring to the young of the species.

attributed to the stimuli rather than to individual differences
between participants.

Method
Participants
Participants were 20 four-year-old children (M = 4.48 years,
SD = 0.25 years, 8 females, 12 males), 20 five-year-old
children (M = 5.28 years, SD = 0.21 years, 13 females, 7
males), and 24 seven-year-olds (M = 7.06, SD = 0.38, 11
females, 13 males) recruited from local schools, and 20
undergraduate students from a local university who received
partial course credit for participation.
Design
The experiment had a 2 (Co-occurrence probability: non-cooccurring vs. co-occurring labels) by 4 (Age: 4-year-olds vs.
5-year-olds vs. 7-year-olds vs. Adults) mixed design. Cooccurrence probability was a within subject factor: All
participants performed induction with both co-occurring and
non-co-occurring labels.
Materials
Verbal stimuli consisted of 8 label triads. Each triad
consisted of a target, a category choice, and an unrelated
lure. The properties that participants were asked to
generalize during the induction task consisted of twosyllable blank predicates. The list of linguistic stimuli is
provided in Table 1.
Table 1: List of Linguistic Stimuli
Category
Target
Lure
Property
Choice
Bunny
Rabbit
Squirrel
Creighan
Kitty
Cat
Fox
Manchin
Puppy
Dog
Bear
Erwin
Caterpillar
Butterfly
Ladybug
Higa
Lion
Cub
Pig
Matlen
Lamb
Sheep
Cow
Koski
Chick
Hen
Mouse
Troxel
Tadpole
Frog
Fish
Omat

Visual stimuli consisted of sets of three identical doors:
Children were told that the objects were hiding behind the
doors. This procedure was used to encourage reliance on
category information conveyed by labels, as this was the
only source of information available to children (see Figure
1). This procedure has been successfully used in prior
research and this work has also demonstrated that children
have little difficulty with the memory demands of the task
(see Fisher, et al., in press). An additional set of 8 pictures
was utilized for the match task which assessed children’s
knowledge of biological inheritance for the label-pairs used
in this study. A detailed description of these tasks is
provided in the procedure section.
Label Selection
Label selection was based on a separate calibration study
(N=16) in which 4- and 5-year-old children (M = 5.20 years,
SD = 0.50, 8 females, 8 males) participated in a picture

2990

identification task similar to the Peabody Picture
Vocabulary Test (Dunn & Dunn, 1997). The picture
identification task served to assess children’s familiarity
with the labels. Children were asked to select the animal
labeled by the experimenter from four pictorial response
options. Only word-pairs for which children exhibited high
levels of accuracy were selected for the experiment (M =
0.94, SD = 0.07, range = 0.75 – 1.00 for the selected labels).
The final list of stimuli consisted of three co-occurring
semantically-similar word-pairs referring to kin relations
(bunny-rabbit, puppy-dog, kitty-cat) and five non-cooccurring word-pairs referring to kin relations (caterpillarbutterfly, chick-hen, tadpole-frog, lamb-sheep, lion-cub).
Co-occurrence probability was calculated using CHILDES,
a corpus of child speech and child-directed speech
(MacWhinney, 2000). Five databases in the corpus were
analyzed: the Bates, Brown, Gleason, HSLLD, and Wells
databases. Raw co-occurrence frequencies were normalized
using the Jaccard index (Van Eck & Waltman, 2009): the
number of raw co-occurrences was divided by the sum of
each word occurring individually minus the number of times
the two words co-occurred (for details see Fisher, 2010).
Based on the analysis of the CHILDES corpus, the mean cooccurrence probability of labels in the co-occurring
condition was 0.04 and in the non-co-occurring condition
0.00, independent-samples t (6) = 3.16, p = 0.02.

was hiding behind the remaining two doors (e.g., “There is
a bear hiding behind this door. There is a dog hiding behind
this door”). The presentation order of the category choicefirst or lure-first was randomized across trials.
Subsequently, the experimenter asked the participant to
infer which object (category choice or lure) shared the same
property with the target object (e.g. “This puppy has erwin
inside, do you think that the dog behind this door or the
bear behind this door has erwin inside?”). A schematic
description of the induction task is presented in Figure 1.

Procedure
All children were tested individually in a quiet room
adjacent to their classroom. All adult participants were
tested in a laboratory on campus. Visual stimuli were
presented on a computer and instructions and labels were
given verbally by hypothesis-blind experimenters.
Induction Task
Participants were told they would play a game in which
objects were hiding behind doors. The experimenter told the
participants what was hiding behind each door and then
asked them a question. Participants were presented with an
induction task which consisted of 8 triads. Each triad was
comprised of a target, a category choice, and an unrelated
lure; the target was the baby-animal2, the category choice
was the parent-animal, and the lure was an unrelated animal
(e.g., puppy-dog-bear). Children were told the target had a
novel-property and were asked to generalize the property to
one of the test items (the category choice or the lure).
Stimuli sets were presented in one of two random orders.
Presentation order was counterbalanced across participants.
On every trial, the target object was always hidden
behind the topmost door. The location of the response
options were randomized across trials (e.g., to the right or
left of the target). On every trial, the experimenter pointed
to the topmost door first and told the participant what was
hiding behind the door (e.g., “There is a puppy hiding
behind this door”). Then, the experimenter disclosed what

Figure 1: Schematic depiction of the induction task. All instructions were
given verbally by the experimenter.

Match Task
Although, the picture identification task ensured that
children were familiar with the labels used in the study, the
picture identification task did not explicitly assess whether
children were knowledgeable of the baby-parent
relationships. Consequently, a match task was administered
immediately after the experiment proper to ensure that
participants had the pre-requisite knowledge of biological
inheritance to be able to perform category-based induction.
In the match task, participants were told that the baby
animal was hiding behind a rock. The baby animal was
never depicted to prevent children from selecting a response
based on perceptual similarity rather than kinship. For each
baby-animal, participants were asked to select the
corresponding “mother” from two pictorial response options
(i.e., the category and lure choice from the induction task).
Figure 2 presents a schematic description of the match task.

2

Except lion-cub, in which lion was the target and cub was the category
choice.

2991

based responses was significantly higher in the co-occurring
condition (82%) than in the non-co-occurring condition
(57.0%), paired-samples t (19) = 3.85, p < 0.001.

Figure 2: Schematic depiction of the match task.

Results
Induction Accuracy
Proportions of category-based responses were analyzed in a
2-way mixed ANOVA, with Age as the between-subject
factor and Co-occurrence condition as a within-subject
factor. This analysis revealed a significant effect of Age,
F(3, 80) = 5.28, p = 0.002, ηp2 = 0.16; a significant effect of
Co-occurrence condition, F(1, 80) = 13.95, p < 0.0001,
ηp2= 0.15; and a significant interaction between Age and
Co-occurrence condition, F(3,80) = 3.97, p = 0.011, ηp2 =
0.13. The significant interaction was further explored
through planned comparisons.
Proportions of category-based responses were
compared to chance level (0.5) using single-sample t-tests.
For 5-year-olds, 7-year-olds, and adults induction
performance was above chance regardless of co-occurrence
probability: 5-year-olds averaged 80% and 70% of categorybased responses in the co-occurring and non-co-occurring
conditions respectively, all ts > 3.50, all ps < 0.001, 7-yearolds averaged 87% and 81% of category-based responses in
the co-occurring and non-co-occurring conditions
respectively, all ts > 7.25, all ps < 0.0001, whereas adults
averaged 92% and 93% of category-based responses in the
co-occurring and non-co-occurring conditions respectively,
all ts > 8.75, all ps < 0.0001. In contrast, 4-year-olds’
induction performance in the non-co-occurring condition
(57.0%) was not significantly different from chance, singlesample t (19) = 1.32, p = 0.10. At the same time, the rate of
category-based responses in 4-year-old-children in the cooccurring condition (82%) was above chance, single-sample
t (19) = 5.59, p< 0.0001). These findings are displayed in
Figure 3.
Induction performance as a function of condition (nonco-occurring labels vs. co-occurring labels) was analyzed
using paired-sample t-tests. For adults there was no
significant difference in the proportion of category-based
responses in the co-occurring and non-co-occurring
conditions (92% and 93%, respectively), paired-samples
t (19) = 0.53, p = 0.60. Although 7-year-olds and 5-yearolds exhibited a higher mean induction score for cooccurring labels than for non-co-occurring labels (7-yearolds: 87% and 81% respectively; 5-year-olds: 80% and
70%, respectively), this difference was not statistically
significant, all paired-samples ts > 1.36, all ps < 0.19. In
contrast, among 4-year-old children the rate of category-

Figure 3: Proportion of category-based responses by age group and cooccurrence condition. Line indicates chance performance. Error-bars
represent standard error of the mean.

Match Task Accuracy
Mean match task scores are displayed in Figure 4. All agegroups obtained mean scores that were significantly above
chance (0.5) in both co-occurrence conditions, all singlesample ts > 4.75, all ps < 0.0001. Adults obtained
statistically equivalent scores on the match task in the cooccurring condition and the non-co-occurring condition
(100% and 96%, respectively), paired-sample t (19) = 1.28,
p = 0.21. Similar to adults, 7- and 5-year-old children were
equally accurate in both co-occurrence conditions (7-yearolds: 99% and 97%; 5-year-olds: 90% and 87%, for the cooccurring and non-co-occurring conditions respectively), all
paired sample ts > 0.47, all ps > 0.40. However, 4-year-old
children exhibited higher accuracy on the match task in the
co-occurring condition (95%) than in the non-co-occurring
condition (74%), t (19) = 4.25, p < 0.0001.

Figure 4: Match task mean scores by age group and co-occurrence
condition. Line indicates chance performance. Error-bars represent
standard error of the mean.

Could the difference in induction performance among 4year-old children with co-occurring and non-co-occurring
labels be explained by the difference in their ability to

2992

identify kinship relations? We conducted several analyses to
explore this possibility.
First, we re-analyzed the induction data. For every
participant we removed the induction trials for label-pairs
that children missed on the match task. For instance, if a
child did not correctly identify that “frog” was “tadpole’s”
mother, the induction data for this trial were removed from
this child’s induction score. In other words, a child’s
induction score was not penalized if the child did not know
the kinship relation for a particular pair of labels. This
procedure resulted in mean induction scores that were very
close to those displayed in Figure 3: After correcting for
knowledge of kinship relations, the rate of category-based
induction was 81% in the co-occurring condition and
55.83% in the non-co-occurring condition. Results of all
statistical analyses of induction performance remained
unchanged after correcting for children’s knowledge of
kinship relations.
Second, in the non-co-occurring condition we identified
three label-pairs which elicited performance on the match
task similar to that in the co-occurring condition in 4-yearold children. Specifically, 4-year-old children were highly
accurate in identifying kinship relations with the following
non-co-occurring labels: chick-hen, lamb-sheep, and
caterpillar-butterfly (we will refer to this subset as “top 3”
henceforth). Average rate of correct responses on the match
task with these label-pairs was 90%, comparable to that in
the co-occurring condition (95%), paired-sample t (19) =
1.37, p = 0.19. For this subset of labels, differences on the
induction task can not be attributed to children’s superior
knowledge of kinship relations with co-occurring labels.
Yet, the difference in induction performance remained
significant when we compared 4-year-olds responses with
co-occurring labels (82%) to their responses on the “top 3”
non-co-occurring labels (56.67%), paired-samples t(19) =
3.30, p = 0.004.
Finally, there was no significant correlation between
4-year-olds’ responses on the match task and their responses
on the induction task in the non-co-occurring condition
(r= 0.36, p= 0.12) as well as in the co-occurring condition
(r = -0.09, p= 0.70).
Individual Response Patterns
To investigate individual patterns of responses, participants
were classified as either category-based or non-categorybased responders. To mitigate concerns about possible
kinship knowledge effects for non-co-occurring labels, we
limited this analysis to the “top 3” non-co-occurring
condition trials – the trials on which 4-year-olds exhibited
high accuracy in the match task. Thus, analysis of the
individual patterns of responses involved three trials in each
co-occurrence condition.
A category-based responder was defined as a
participant who provided category-based responses on all
three trials within each co-occurrence condition. Results of
this analysis (displayed in Figure 5) mirrored group data.
For adults, the majority of participants were classified as
category-based responders regardless of the co-occurrence

condition: 85% (17 of 20) of adult participants were
classified as category-based responders in the co-occurring
condition and 90% (18 of 20) in the non-co-occurring
condition. The association between condition and responder
type was not significant, Fisher’s exact p = 1.0. Similarly,
for 7-year-old children, 71% (17 of 24) of participants were
classified as category-based responders in the co-occurring
condition and 54% (13 of 24) in the non-co-occurring
condition. The association between condition and responder
type was not significant, Fisher’s exact p = 0.37. Among 5year-old children, 65% (13 of 20) of participants were
classified as category-based responders in the co-occurring
condition and 45% (9 of 20) in the non-co-occurring
condition. The association between condition and responder
type was not significant, Fisher’s exact p = 0.34. In contrast
to older participants, responses of 4-year-old children varied
as a function of condition. The majority of 4-year-old
children were classified as category-based responders in the
co-occurring condition (60%, or 12 of 20), but only a small
percentage of 4-year-olds were classified as category-based
responders in the non-co-occurring condition (20%, or 4 of
20). The association between condition and responder type
was significant, Fisher’s exact p = 0.02.

Figure 5: Number of participants classified as category-based responders
and non-category-based responders by age and co-occurrence condition
(Note: NC = non-co-occurring condition; Co = co-occurring condition).

When more liberal criterion in defining a categorybased responder were utilized (i.e., a participant providing a
category-based response on 2 out of 3 trials in each cooccurrence condition), the results remained largely
unchanged: 90% (18 of 20) of adult participants were
classified as category-based responders in the co-occurring
condition and 100% (20 of 20) in the non-co-occurring
condition, Fisher’s exact p = 0.49; 92% (22 of 24) of 7-yearolds were category-based responders in the co-occurring
condition and 88% (21 of 24) in the non-co-occurring
condition, Fisher’s exact p = 1.00; 80% (16 of 20) of 5-yearolds were category-based responders in the co-occurring
condition and 65% (13 of 20) in the non-co-occurring
condition, Fisher’s exact p= 0.48; 85% (17 of 20) of 4-yearold participants were category-based responders in the cooccurring condition and 55% (11 of 20) in the non-cooccurring condition, Fisher’s exact p= 0.08.

2993

Discussion
The present study was designed to test whether young
children base their inductive generalizations on kinship
information or co-occurrence probability. Five-year-olds, 7year-olds, and adults reliably based their inferences on
kinship information with both non-co-occurring and cooccurring labels; in contrast, 4-year-olds’ induction
performance was influenced by co-occurrence probability of
the label-pairs. Specifically, 4-year-olds performed
significantly above chance in the co-occurring condition –
when they could rely on both co-occurrence and kinship
information – however, performance dropped to chance
levels in the non-co-occurring condition when the only
source of information for induction was kinship relations.
These results suggest that 4-year-olds’ induction
performance found in earlier research (e.g. Fisher, 2010;
Fisher et al., in press) was unlikely to stem from children’s
reliance on kinship knowledge.
A second contribution of this research is that it
replicates and extends previous findings by Fisher et al. (in
press). In that study – as in the present one – 4-year-old
children were found to make category-based inductive
inferences at above chance levels when synonymous labels
were co-occurring but performed at chance when labels
were non-co-occurring. Similar to the present study, the
Fisher et al. study manipulated co-occurrence probability
within participants. However, Fisher et al. blocked the
presentation of co-occurring and non-co-occurring trials. In
the present study co-occurring and non-co-occurring trials
were intermixed, which is arguably the most stringent test of
the co-occurrence hypothesis.
Therefore, the present
findings help to establish the robustness of this effect.
It is possible that some other factors associated with cooccurrence, such as label familiarity or frequency of
occurrence, may account for children’s adept performance
with these labels. Fisher et al. (in press) examined these
possibilities and did not find any evidence of correlations
between these factors and children’s inductive inferences.
In sum, the present study suggests that children’s
induction performance with co-occurring labels is unlikely
to stem from children’s knowledge of kinship relationships.
Overall, children’s knowledge of kinship relationships for
items used in this study was good, but largely unrelated to
their induction performance. Even when individual patterns
of responses were analyzed using the most well known
kinship label-pairs, preschoolers were more likely to be
category-based responders with co-occurring labels. We
interpret this as evidence that co-occurrence probability may
play an important role in young children’s induction
performance. One possible pathway by which co-occurrence
probability may facilitate young children’s induction
performance is lexical priming. Co-occurrence may result in
strong
lexical
associations
between
word-pairs.
Consequently, children may select the semantically-similar
response option not because children are engaging in
category-based reasoning but because lexical priming
results in spreading activation from the target to the

synonymous word pair (e.g., bunny priming rabbit rather
than squirrel). In conclusion, this study provides additional
evidence that co-occurrence probability may influence
young children’s induction performance and demonstrates
that the development of category-based induction follows a
more protracted course than previously believed.

Acknowledgments
We thank Malika Sinha, Alyssa Montanaro, Yael Engel, and
Stephanie Brown for their help collecting data. We also
offer our thanks to the children and undergraduate students
who participated in this study as well as the parents,
teachers, and administrators who made this project possible.

References
Brown, R. & Berko, J. (1960). Word association and the
acquisition of grammar. Child Development, 31, 1-14.
Dunn, L. M., & Dunn, L. M. (1997). Peabody Picture
Vocabulary Test–Third Edition. Circle Pines, MN: AGS
Publishing.
Fisher, A.V. (2010). What’s in the name? Or how rocks and
stones are different from dogs and puppies. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 105, 198-212.
Fisher, A.V., Matlen, B.J., & Godwin, K.E. (In press).
Semantic similarity of labels and inductive generalization:
Taking a second look. Cognition.
Gelman, S. A. (1988). The development of induction within
natural kind and artifact categories. Cognitive Psychology,
20, 65-95.
Gelman, S.A. & Coley, J.D. (1990). The importance of
knowing a dodo is a bird: Categories and inferences in 2year-old children. Developmental Psychology, 26, 796804.
Gelman, S.A., & Markman, E. (1986). Categories and
induction in young children. Cognition, 23, 183-209.
Jaswal, V.K. (2004). Don’t believe everything you hear:
Preschoolers’ sensitivity to speaker intent in category
induction. Child Development, 3, 279-300.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES project: Tools for
analyzing talk. Third Edition. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
McKoon, G. & Ratcliff, R. (1992). Spreading activation
versus compound cue accounts of priming: Mediated
priming revisited. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 18, 1155 – 1172.
Opfer, J.E. & Bulloch, M.J. (2007). Causal relations drive
young children’s induction, naming, and categorization.
Cognition, 105, 206–217.
Van Eck, N. J. & Waltman, L., (2009). How to normalize
co-occurrence data? An analysis of some well-known
similarity measures. ERIM Report Series Reference No.
ERS-2009-001-LIS.
Welder, A.N., & Graham, S.A. (2001). The influences of
shape similarity and shared labels on infants' inductive
inferences about nonobvious object properties. Child
Development, 72, 1653-1673.

2994

