UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The different effects of thinking aloud and writing on graph comprehension

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5953g00t

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Ali, Nadia
Peebles, David

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The different effects of thinking aloud and writing on graph comprehension
Nadia Ali (n.ali@hud.ac.uk)
David Peebles (d.peebles@hud.ac.uk)
Department of Behavioural and Social Sciences,
University of Huddersfield,
Queensgate, Huddersfield, HD13DH, UK
Abstract
We report an experiment which seeks to determine how novice
users’ conceptual understanding of graphs differs depending
on the nature of the interaction with them. Undergraduate psychology students were asked to interpret three-variable “interaction” data in either bar or line graph form and were required
to either think aloud while doing so or to produce written interpretations. Analysis of the verbal protocols and written interpretations showed that producing a written interpretation revealed significantly higher levels of comprehension than interpreting them while thinking aloud. Specifically, a significant
proportion of line graph users in the verbal protocol condition
was either unable to interpret the graphs, or misinterpreted information presented in them. The occurrence of these errors
was substantially lower for the bar graph users in the verbal
protocol condition. In contrast, analysis of the written condition revealed no significant difference in the level of comprehension between the two graph types. Possible explanations
for these findings are discussed.
Keywords: Graph comprehension, diagrammatic reasoning,
verbal protocols, writing to learn.

Introduction
Various tasks have been used to assess the different aspects
of graph comprehension and use. Zacks and Tversky (1999)
for example presented participants with bar or line graphs
together with the instruction “Please describe in a sentence
the relationship shown in this graph” (or a simpler variant)
and required written responses, or in one experiment to draw
graphs from written descriptions of data (e.g., “Height for 12year-olds is greater than for 10-year-olds”). Shah and Carpenter (1995) asked participants to produce verbal descriptions of the graphs they saw, and to then either compare them
to other graphs, reproduce them, or provide possible explanations for the data depicted. In a subsequent experiment
Carpenter and Shah (1998) asked people to answer specific
questions about relationships depicted (e.g., “What happens
to vocabulary score as age increases?”) while their eye movements were recorded. Other researchers have recorded participants’ verbal protocols while they carry out various graph
related tasks (e.g., Ratwani, Trafton, & Boehm-Davis, 2008)
Ericsson and Simon (1993) proposed the verbal protocol method as a means of tracing cognitive processes. One
type of verbal protocol involves “thinking aloud”, a processtracing method in which subjects report their thoughts continuously whilst attempting to complete a task. This method
can yield important information about the steps of problem
solving that would be difficult, if not impossible, to observe
using other measures, (e.g., the contents of working memory) which can suggest hypotheses concerning the strategies

employed (A. Newell & Simon, 1972; Larkin, McDermott,
Simon, & Simon, 1980; Koedinger & Anderson, 1990).
Since the original proposal, the think aloud method has
been widely adopted, resulting in a large body of research
into the processes underlying decision making, problem solving, text comprehension, diagrammatic reasoning, writing,
and various other tasks (Crutcher, 1994).
An alternative approach to assessing conceptual understanding of material is to provide subjects with specific questions or goals and require them to produce written responses.
Because the data are limited to the final written output, process tracing is not possible with this method alone. Written
responses can yield rich information however which may be
used to infer strategy choice in some cases (e.g., where different strategies result in different written responses).
Some researchers have attempted to employ writing as a
process tracing method by requiring people to write down
everything that comes to mind (Pugalee, 2004) while others have used both methods simultaneously (e.g., Flower &
Hayes, 1981)
There is a large body of literature investigating whether
writing improves conceptual understanding of material in a
number of disciplines (e.g., Britton, 1978; Young & Sullivan,
1984; G. E. Newell, 1984; Bereiter & Scardamalia, 1987;
Flower & Hayes, 1980). This research comes under the umbrella of “writing to learn” and advocates assert that writing
can help engender critical thinking and the formation of new
relationships between ideas, leading to knowledge construction (Klein, 1999).
Several processes involved in writing have been identified
as possible causes for these observed improvements in conceptual understanding. For example, the self-paced nature of
writing allows for reflection (Emig, 1977; Ong, 1982) while
the permanence of the text allows material to be reviewed
(Emig, 1977; Young & Sullivan, 1984). The process of reviewing allows the writer to judge what is written against
what is intended to be communicated and to evaluate (and
improve) the logical coherence of sets of sentences within the
text (Galbraith, 1992).
Furthermore, the context in which writing is produced can
result in improved conceptual understanding of material. For
example, the absence of an immediate audience requires writers to be explicit in their interpretation and presentation of
material (Olson, 1977).
In contrast, according to Ericsson and Simon (1993), the
think aloud method allows access to participants’ short-term

3143

Chick Weight as a function of Diet and Hormone Supplement

Hormone Supplement

50

45

MPE

45

40

GCE

40

●

100

25
20

30

Chilled

90

GCE

80

Non−chilled

80

●

25
20

●

70
60
50
40

15

15

10

10

5

5

10

0

0

0

Artificial

Natural
Diet

(a) Bar graph 1

●

Artificial

100

90

Plant CO2 Uptake

30

Plant CO2 Uptake as a function of Plant Type and Treatment

Treatment

MPE

35
Chick Weight

Chick Weight

35

Plant CO2 Uptake as a function of Plant Type and Treatment

Hormone Supplement

Natural

Plant CO2 Uptake

Chick Weight as a function of Diet and Hormone Supplement

50

Chilled
Non−chilled

70

●

60
50

●

●

40

30

30

20

20

●

10
0
Quebec

Diet

Mississippi

Quebec

Plant Type

(b) Line graph 1

Treatment

Mississippi
Plant Type

(c) Bar graph 3

(d) Line graph 3

Figure 1: Example bar and line graphs used in the experiment.

memory stream, and verbalisations uncover cognitive processes involved in task completion. According to their theory
of protocol generation, the act of thinking aloud concurrently
during a task should neither impair nor enhance performance
as participants are simply verbalising their thought processes.
When attempting to compare and evaluate performance
with different graphical formats, it is essential to have a set of
behavioural criteria or categories with which to do so. From
the considerable number of studies conducted into graph
comprehension a consensus has emerged on the broad threelevel taxonomy of skills required for the task. In a review
of five studies, Friel, Curcio, and Bright (2001) characterised
the three levels as elementary, intermediate, and advanced
(or more descriptively as “read the data”, “read between the
data” and “read beyond the data” respectively).
In previous studies (Peebles & Ali, 2009; Ali & Peebles,
submitted) we have demonstrated that undergraduate college
students’ ability to understand statistical data can vary significantly depending on the form of the graphical display. Specifically, we have shown that for a considerable number of students, conceptual understanding of three variable line graphs
of the type shown in Figure 1 does not meet the lowest level
of graph comprehension ability identified in the literature.
Peebles and Ali (2009) conducted an experiment in which
people were asked to interpret informationally equivalent bar
or line graphs representing two-way factorial design data as
fully as possible while thinking aloud. Analysis of the verbal protocols revealed significant differences in how people
interpreted the two graph formats. It was found that 39% of
line graph users were either unable to interpret the graphs, or
misinterpreted information presented in them. No bar graph
users performed at this level. This finding led us to propose
a fourth, lower category of comprehension ability which we
termed “pre-elementary” and subsequently to propose and
test a novel line graph design which we found successfully
reduces the error level to that of the bar graphs (Ali & Peebles, submitted).
Developing a adequate model of diagrammatic reasoning
requires taking into account three interacting factors: the nature of the graphical representation, the characteristics of the

user and the nature of the task. Our previous work explored
the role of graphical features in comprehension performance.
The aim of this study is to determine how, given the same
open-ended task (try to understand what the graph is portraying), the nature of the interaction can also significantly affect
performance. Specifically, we seek to determine whether the
reduction in performance found in novice line graph users
may be partially accounted for by the additional cognitive
demands imposed by producing a think aloud protocol and
whether this may be mitigated by engaging in a different way.

Experiment
Method
Participants Sixty-five undergraduate psychology students
(54 female, 11 male) from the University of Huddersfield
were paid £5 (approximately $8) in grocery store vouchers to take part in the experiment. The age of participants
ranged from 18.5 to 39.5 years with a mean of 21.5 years
(SD = 3.82). All participants were in their first year of a
three-year psychology degree.
Design The experiment was an independent groups design
with two between-subject variables: type of diagram used
(bar or line graph) and methodology employed (think aloud
or written responses). Sixty-five participants were randomly
allocated to each condition. There were 14 participants in the
verbal protocol bar condition, 16 in the written bar condition,
15 in the verbal protocol line condition and 20 in the written
line condition.
Materials The stimuli used were six bar and six line threevariable interaction graphs depicting a wide range of (fictional) content. The graphs were generated using the PASW
Statistics software package (produced by SPSS Inc.). Examples are shown in Figure 1.
The bar and line graphs were constructed from the same
six data sets (the variables of which are shown in Table 1).
The numerical values for the variables were selected in order to provide the range of effects, interactions and other relationships between three variables commonly encountered

3144

Table 1: Variables of the six graphs used in the experiment
Graph
Number
1

Dependent
Variable
Chick weight

2

Maize yield

3

Plant CO2 uptake

4

Cutting tool wear

5

Fixtural strength

6

Dopamine activity

Scale Range
(Increment)
0–50
(5)
0–10
(1)
0–100
(10)
0–10
(1)
0–1000
(100)
0–500
(50)

Independent Variable 1
(Levels)
Diet
(Artificial, Natural)
Plant Density
(Low, High)
Plant type
(Quebec, Mississippi)
Rock Type
(Limestone, Granite)
Cement type
(Monochem, Bischem)
Rat breed
(Lewis, Fischer)

in these designs (typically depicted in line graphs as parallel, crossed and converging lines, one horizontal line and one
sloped line, two lines sloping at different angles, etc.). Stimuli were printed in colour (with the levels of legend variable
in blue and green) on white A4-sized paper
Procedure Participants were instructed that they would see
six graphs and that their task was to try to understand each
graph as fully as possible whilst writing their response down
or thinking aloud. They were instructed to write or talk aloud
about the relationships each graph was showing, until they
felt they had provided as much detail as they could.
The instructions drew attention to the fact that the graphs
may depict more than one relationship, and that participants
should imagine they are in an exam in which more detailed
interpretations produced higher scores. In order to produce
as close a similarity as possible to the think aloud condition,
participants in the written condition were also encouraged to
write down their thoughts as they went along.
In the written condition the six stimuli were compiled as
a booklet with graph pages interleaved with blank paper for
writing. Participants completed these under the supervision
of the experimenter. In the verbal condition the graphs were
handed over to participants one at a time for them to interpret
while their verbal protocols were recorded using a portable
digital audio recorder. Stimuli were presented in random order and all participants were informed that there was no time
limit to the task.

Results
The verbal condition participants’ protocols were transcribed
and the content of the transcriptions and the statements from
the written condition participants were analysed. Only statements in which a sufficient number of concepts could be identified were included for analysis. For example, the statement
“Chick weight is higher for the GCE hormone supplement
than for the MPE supplement” was included whereas “Chick
weight is higher when. . . um. . . I’m not sure” was not.

Independent Variable 2
(Levels)
Hormone Supplement
(MPE, GCE)
Nitrogen level
(Low, High)
Treatment
(Chilled, Non-chilled)
Diamond type
(Bead, Wire)
Curing method
(Photocuring, Autocuring)
Brain region
(SNC, VTA)

Data analysis was conducted according to the procedure
and criteria employed in our previous studies (Peebles & Ali,
2009; Ali & Peebles, submitted). For each trial, the participant’s statements were analysed against the state of affairs
represented by the graph. If a participant made a series of incorrect statements that were not subsequently corrected, then
the trial was classified as an ‘incorrect interpretation’. If the
participant’s statements were all true of the graph or if an incorrect interpretation was followed by a correct one however,
then the trial was classified as an ‘correct interpretation’. In
this way, each participant’s trials were coded as either being
correctly or incorrectly interpreted.
The statements for each trial were initially scored as being either a correct or incorrect interpretation by the first author and a sample (approximately 25% from each graph type)
was independently scored by the second author. The level of
agreement between the two coders was approximately 96%
(κ = 0.91). When disagreements were found the raters came
to a consensus as to the correct code.
This measure was then used as the basis for subsequent categorisation into elementary and pre-elementary groups. For
the purpose of our analysis, we classified participants as preelementary for their graph type if they interpreted 50% or
more trials incorrectly (i.e., at least three of the graphs were
classified as incorrect interpretations). This criterion was considered appropriate because it indicates that the user is unable
to produce an accurate description of the data (even such basic information as point values) after at least two previous
encounters with the same graph type—suggesting a lack of
understanding of the basic representational features of the format (rather than just the content of the graph) and resulting in
comprehension performance that does not meet elementary
level criteria (Friel et al., 2001).
Figure 2 displays the proportion of bar and line users in the
verbal protocol condition in each of the three performance
categories. In this condition the difference between bar and
line graph users emerged as predicted; 60% of participants
were classified as pre-elementary in the line graph condition

3145

100

100

Graph Type

Graph Type

50

Percentage

60

70

80

90

Bar
Line

0

10

20

30

40

50
0

10

20

30

40

Percentage

60

70

80

90

Bar
Line

Pre−elementary

Elementary

Intermediate

Pre−elementary

Performance category

Figure 2: Percentage of bar and line graph users in the three
performance categories, verbal protocol condition.

Intermediate

Figure 3: Percentage of bar and line graph users in the three
performance categories, written condition.

Discussion

compared to 7% in the bar graph condition. A chi-squared
test revealed that this difference was statistically significant
(χ2 = .819, d f = 1, p < .01), replicating the result of the
original Peebles and Ali (2009) and Ali and Peebles (submitted) experiments.
As Figure 3 shows however, this large difference in preelementary performance is not found in the written condition,
with the number of participants classified as pre-elementary
being roughly equal between the line and bar graph formats
(15% and 19% respectively). A Fischer’s Exact test revealed
that this difference was not significant (χ2 = .09, d f = 1, p =
1.0).
To eliminate the possibility that these results may arise as
an artifact of our classification system we also analysed the
number of correct trials for each condition. This revealed
that for the think aloud condition the mean ranks for the line
graphs (11.0) was significantly lower than for the bar graph
condition (19.29) U = 45, z = 2.69, p < .01. In the written
condition, the mean ranks for the line and bar graphs were
much closer (bar = 19.41, line = 18.69) and so there was
no significant difference in number of correct trials between
them (U = 161.5, z = .212, p = .84). There was also no difference in the number of correct trials between the bar graph
users in the written (mean ranks = 16.16) and verbal (mean
ranks = 14.75) conditions, U = 141.5, z = .461, p = .667.
A significant interaction was found between graph format
and methodology (shown in Figure 4). Thinking aloud significantly reduced the comprehension of line graphs—but not
bar graphs—compared to producing written interpretations
U = 69.0, z = 2.91, p < .01.

Elementary
Performance category

The results of our experiment reveal a remarkable interaction of methodology employed to assess graph comprehension and graph format. Consistent with the results of our
previous experiments (Peebles & Ali, 2009; Ali & Peebles,
submitted), a significant proportion of line graph users was
classified as pre-elementary compared to bar graph viewers
in the think aloud condition.
We have explained this effect using Gestalt principles of
perceptual organisation (Ali & Peebles, submitted). In the
line graph diagram, data points are connected by a line, resulting in two lines at the centre of the display. Pre-elementary
line graph users were unable to integrate the information, primarily because they ignored the x variable entirely. This pattern of errors indicates that the salience of the lines is such
that it draws users’ attention to them and then—through a process of colour matching—to the legend variable, which they
then try to interpret. Because they are focusing on the lines
however, they are less able to identify the points at the ends
of the lines and interpret them as discrete values associated
with levels of the x variable.
In the bar graph however, each level of the legend variable
is depicted by a bar projecting from the x axis. This allows
participants to match bar colour to the appropriate variable
level in the legend but, crucially, because the bars are located
directly above the value labels on the x axis, also more easily
identify the associated x variable levels. The results of this
experiment reveal that this balances out attention to the two
IVs and promotes a richer understanding of the relationship
between them.
However, this effect does not emerge in the written re-

3146

100

Graph Type

60
50
40
0

10

20

30

Percent correct

70

80

90

Bar
Line

Written

Verbal
Condition

Figure 4: Percentage of correct trials for bar and line graphs
in the verbal protocol and written conditions.

sponse condition. Despite the imbalance of Gestalt features
associating the pattern to referents, the majority of graph
readers demonstrate conceptual understanding of both graph
formats at an elementary (and in a few cases intermediate)
level. Our results therefore reveal that the reduction in line
graph comprehension can be mitigated by changing the type
of interaction the user is required to engage in. Being required
to write down your understanding of the graph eliminates the
overwhelming salience of the lines in the line graphs which
produces the pre-elementary performance when also thinking
aloud (Friel et al., 2001; Peebles & Ali, 2009).
There are a number of potential competing explanations
for why this difference in conceptual understanding in the
line graph condition emerges between the two methodologies. Firstly, a number of researchers have noted the potential
problems with employing the verbal protocol method to investigate underlying cognitive processes. There is an ongoing
debate concerning whether thinking aloud is reactive (i.e., alters other cognitive processes). Reactivity can result in either
an improvement or a deterioration in task performance. The
question of whether producing a verbal protocol is reactive is
a complex one however and the current conclusion appears to
be that the demands of verbalisation can interact with task demands to affect output in at least some cases (Russo, Johnson,
& Stephens, 1989; Schooler, Ohlsson, & Brooks, 1993).
In terms of the detriment in performance, researchers have
argued that the additional demands for processing resources
(which occurs when individuals are required to verbalise
whilst performing a task) can explain this form of reactivity.
In order to deal with these additional demands, participants
can draw upon any unused resources which are not being em-

ployed by the task. When the demands of the task exceed
processing resources however, reactivity effects can occur,
resulting in a detriment in performance due to the resources
being divided between completing the task and verbalising
throughout (Russo et al., 1989; Wilson & Schooler, 1991).
Alternatively, verbal protocols could be providing an accurate reflection of underlying cognitive processes, and cognitive processes involved in writing could be facilitating task
performance. The writing to learn literature argues that various factors unique to written assessments can result in improved conceptual understanding of material under scrutiny.
For example, absence of an audience requires writers to be
explicit in their interpretation of material and permanence of
text allows them to review their ideas (Applebee, 1984; Klein,
1999).
Although the findings appear to be inconsistent
(Ackerman, 1993), Tynjälä (1999) explains these conflicting findings as resulting from differing tasks demands.
If the task simply involves learning factual knowledge, then
a passive method such as reading text will not be affected
by writing (Penrose, 1992). If higher-order thinking is
required however, writing can result in learning gains. For
example Tynjälä (1999) argues that, generally, writing is an
effective learning tool when attempting to advance students’
understanding and critical thinking skills, but not superior to
any other method when students are required to simply “tell
what they know”.
In a similar vein, the second factor that can explain the
conflicting results is how much information manipulation is
required by the task. The larger the demands of manipulation
of information are, the stronger the learning effects should be
(e.g., Applebee, 1984; Greene & Ackerman, 1995; Langer,
1986; Tynjälä, 1999).
The current experiment does not allow us to differentiate
between these competing explanations, and further empirical work is required to isolate and test the alternative hypotheses. What these initial results do suggest however is
that researchers should take great care when deciding which
methodology to employ to assess conceptual understanding.
Researchers make use of both methods to assess graph
comprehension (e.g., Shah & Carpenter, 1995; Carpenter &
Shah, 1998; Shah & Freedman, 2009), often interchangeably.
This study demonstrates that even for what may superficially
seem to be the same task, the precise details of the interaction
can significantly affect performance.

References
Ackerman, J. M. (1993). The promise of writing to learn.
Written Communication, 10, 334–370.
Ali, N., & Peebles, D. (submitted). The effect of Gestalt laws
of perceptual organisation on the comprehension of threevariable bar and line graphs.
Applebee, A. N. (1984). Writing and reasoning. Review of
Educational Research, 54(4), 577–596.
Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (1987). The psychology of

3147

written composition. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Britton, J. (1978). The composing processes and the functions of writing. In C. R. Cooper & L. Odell (Eds.), Research on composing: Points of departure (pp. 13–28). Urbana, IL: NCTE.
Carpenter, P. A., & Shah, P. (1998). A model of the perceptual and conceptual processes in graph comprehension.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 4, 75–100.
Crutcher, R. J. (1994). Telling what we know: The use
of verbal report methodologies in psychological research.
Psychological Science, 5, 241–244.
Emig, J. (1977). Writing as a mode of learning. College
Composition and Communication, 28, 122–128.
Ericsson, K. A., & Simon, H. A. (1993). Protocol analysis:
Verbal reports as data (Revised ed.). Cambridge, Mass:
MIT Press.
Flower, L., & Hayes, J. R. (1980). The cognition of discovery: Defining a rhetorical problem. College Composition
and Communication, 31, 21–32.
Flower, L., & Hayes, J. R. (1981). A cognitive process theory
of writing. College Composition and Communication, 32,
365–387.
Friel, S. N., Curcio, F. R., & Bright, G. W. (2001). Making
sense of graphs: Critical factors influencing comprehension and instructional implications. Journal for Research
in Mathematics Education, 32, 124–158.
Galbraith, D. (1992). Conditions for discovery through writing. Instructional Science, 21, 45–72.
Greene s., & Ackerman, J. M. (1995). Expanding the constructivist metaphor: A rhetorical perspective on literary
practice. Review of Educational Research, 65(4), 383–420.
Klein, P. D. (1999). Reopening inquiry into cognitive processes in writing-to-learn. Educational Psychology Review,
11, 203-270.
Koedinger, K. R., & Anderson, J. R. (1990). Abstract planning and perceptual chunks: Elements of expertise in geometry. Cognitive Science, 14, 511–550.
Langer, J. A. (1986). Children reading and writing: Structures and strategies. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Larkin, J. H., McDermott, J., Simon, D. P., & Simon, H. A.
(1980). Expert and novice performance in solving physics
problems. Science, 208, 1335–1342.
Newell, A., & Simon, H. A. (1972). Human problem solving.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Newell, G. E. (1984). Learning from writing in two content areas: A case study/protocol analysis. Research in the
Teaching of English, 18, 265–287.
Olson, D. R. (1977). From utterance to text: The bias of language in speech and writing. Harvard Educational Review,
47, 257–281.
Ong, W. J. (1982). Orality and literacy. New York: Methuen
Inc.
Peebles, D., & Ali, N. (2009). Differences in comprehensibility between three-variable bar and line graphs. In Proceed-

ings of the thirty-first annual conference of the cognitive
science society (pp. 2938–2943). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Penrose, A. M. (1992). To write or not to write: Effects
of task and task interpretation on learning through writing.
Written Communication, 9, 465–500.
Pugalee, D. (2004). A comparison of verbal and written
descriptions of students’ problem solving processes. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 55, 27–47.
Ratwani, R. M., Trafton, J. G., & Boehm-Davis, D. A. (2008).
Thinking graphically: Connecting vision and cognition
during graph comprehension. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 14(1), 36–49.
Russo, J. E., Johnson, E. J., & Stephens, D. L. (1989). The
validity of verbal protocols. Memory and Cognition, 17,
759–769.
Schooler, J. W., Ohlsson, S., & Brooks, K. (1993). Thoughts
beyond words: When language overshadows insight. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 122, 166–183.
Shah, P., & Carpenter, P. A. (1995). Conceptual limitations
in comprehending line graphs. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 124, 43–62.
Shah, P., & Freedman, E. (2009). Bar and line graph comprehension: An interaction of top-down and bottom-up processes. Topics in Cognitive Science, doi: 10.1111/j.17568765.2009.01066.x.
Tynjälä, P. (1999). Towards expert knowledge? A comparison between a constructivist and a traditional learning environment in university. International Journal of Educational
Research, 31(5), 357–444.
Wilson, T. D., & Schooler, J. W. (1991). Thinking too much:
Introspection can reduce the quality of preferences and decisions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 60,
181–192.
Young, R., & Sullivan, P. (1984). Why write? A reconsideration. In R. J. Conners, L. S. Ede, & A. A. Lunsford
(Eds.), Essays on classical rhetoric and modern discourse
(pp. 215–225). Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.
Zacks, J., & Tversky, B. (1999). Bars and lines: A study
of graphic communication. Memory and Cognition, 27(6),
1073–1079.

3148

