UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Influence of Conceptual Structure on Structural Priming

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/87h628nd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Bunger, Ann
Papafragou, Anna
Trueswell, John

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Influence of Conceptual Structure on Structural Priming
Ann Bunger (bunger@udel.edu)
Department of Psychology, 108 Wolf Hall
Newark, DE 19716 USA

Anna Papafragou (papafragou@psych.udel.edu)
Department of Psychology, 108 Wolf Hall
Newark, DE 19716 USA

John Trueswell (trueswel@psych.upenn.edu)
Department of Psychology, 3401 Walnut Street, Suite 400A
Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA

Knowledge of the kind of abstract structures that speakers
can be primed to repeat is informative about the nature of
the representations that are accessed during language
production. Bock & Loebell (1990) demonstrated, for
example, that speakers are more likely to produce a passive
sentence like ―The church was struck by lightning‖ when
they are first asked to repeat another passive sentence (1a)
or an active sentence that shares the same surface syntax as
the passive (1b) than when they are primed with an active
sentence that does not share the syntactic structure of the
passive (1c).

Abstract
This priming study investigates the role of conceptual
structure during language production, probing how English
speakers encode information about motion events.
Participants read prime sentences aloud before describing
dynamic motion events. Primes differed in 1) syntactic frame,
2) distribution of manner and path elements within frames,
and 3) degree of conceptual overlap with target events.
Results demonstrate that the conceptual level of
representation matters during production: structural priming
decreased as degree of conceptual overlap between primes
and targets decreased, and became nonexistent when there
was no overlap. Conceptual overlap also weakly licensed
priming of the mapping of event components to syntactic
positions.

(1)

Keywords: syntactic priming; event structure; motion events.

Introduction
When producing sentences, speakers have to make choices
about how they want to map elements from the conceptual
representation of their message—the idea they want to
convey—onto linguistic representations, and ultimately,
onto the utterances we use to convey messages. Different
mapping choices may result in utterances that convey
roughly the same information but that differ in the way that
information is linguistically encoded and, as a result, in the
pragmatic implications of the utterance. In the current study,
we investigate the way that conceptual structure comes into
play as speakers formulate utterances.
The structural priming paradigm provides a useful means
for probing the representations that speakers access during
language production. This paradigm builds on the
observation that speakers tend to repeat linguistic structures
that they have recently used or observed others using.
Repetition of linguistic structure is well-documented in
corpora of natural speech (e.g., Gries, 2005), and
experimental work has shown that speakers can be induced
(or ―primed‖) to repeat particular structures in controlled
settings as well (e.g., Bock, 1986; Bock & Loebell, 1990;
Hartsuiker, Kolk & Huiskamp, 1999; Pickering & Branigan,
1998; see Pickering & Ferreira, 2008 for an overview).

a. The man was hit by the bulldozer.
b. The man was walking by the bulldozer.
c. The man drove the bulldozer.

These findings are widely accepted as evidence that
speakers can be primed to produce a particular syntactic
structure independent from the meaning it conveys, and
hence, that syntactic structure is an independent level of
representation that speakers access during language
production.
It is important to point out, however, that in many studies
of structural priming there is significant overlap in the
semantic and/or conceptual nature of the events being
evoked in primes and targets. For example, studies that
investigate priming of the English ditransitive (2a) and
prepositional dative (2b) are hampered by the fact that in
English, the use of these frames is so tightly tied to the class
of events they describe (i.e., transfer events) that prime
sentences must describe situations that have the same event
structure as targets.
(2)

a. The girl gave the dog some ice cream.
b. The girl gave some ice cream to the dog.

Given this tight mapping between syntactic and
semantic/conceptual structure, it is not clear whether
successful priming in studies like these is based solely on
repetition of syntactic structure, or whether priming is also
driven by overlap between the kind of event evoked in
primes and targets. Indeed, it has been well-established that

3459

syntax is not the only level of linguistic representation that
plays a role in priming the structure of an output sentence.
Pickering & Branigan (1999) demonstrated, for example,
that the effects of syntactic priming are enhanced by lexical
overlap between primes and targets—specifically, between
the particular verb used in primes and targets. And the
success of priming is also affected by overlap of semantic
structure in primes and targets, e.g., the mapping of thematic
roles onto structural positions (Bernolet, Hartsuiker &
Pickering, 2009; Chang, Bock & Goldberg, 2003; Hare &
Goldberg, 1999; Hartsuiker et al., 1999; Hartsuiker &
Westenberg, 2000).
In the current study, we extend this line of research to
examine the influence of an even more abstract source of
information on structural priming, probing the effects of
overlap of conceptual event structure between primes and
targets. To do this, we focus on motion events, which offer
an event structure that allows for a relatively flexible
mapping between event components and structural
positions. Following Talmy (1985), we define a motion
event as one in which a Figure experiences a change in
location with respect to some Ground object. The details of
a motion event may be elaborated by optionally specifying
the Manner in which the Figure moves (e.g., bounce, drive)
or the trajectory, or Path, that the Figure takes in relation to
the Ground object (e.g., circle, exit, down). When
describing a motion event, speakers make choices about
which of these event components they want to mention and
how they want to package information about those
components in the sentence they produce. Some examples
of motion event descriptions are given in (3): note that both
manners and paths of motion may be encoded in a variety of
different structural positions, if they are mentioned at all.
(3)

Methods
Participants
Data were collected from 70 adult monolingual speakers of
American English. Participants were students at the
University of Delaware or the University of Pennsylvania
and received either $8 or course credit as compensation for
participation.

Materials
Two kinds of stimulus items were constructed: 1) dynamic
videos for elicitation of motion event descriptions and 2)
prime sentences to be presented before each video.
Videos were created by animating clip-art images. Target
events depicted 12 simple motion events in which an
animate agent used an instrument or vehicle to move in a
particular manner to a visible path endpoint. A still frame
from one of the target events is given in Fig. 1: in the
animation this still frame is taken from, the alien rides the
car across the screen and into the mouth of the cave. Sixteen
filler videos depicted animate agents involved in events that
did not include a specific endpoint, like flying a kite.

a. The ball bounced (around the tree).
b. The (bouncing) ball circled the tree.

English speakers usually prefer to use a sentence like (3a)
when describing motion events, with information about
manner of motion encoded early in the sentence (usually in
the verb) and path information mentioned later (usually in a
post-verbal prepositional phrase) or not at all, but this is a
language-specific bias, and not a strict rule (Talmy, 1985).
Using events with this kind of flexibility in the mapping
of event components to syntax allowed us to ask whether
conceptual overlap between primes and targets boosts
structural priming, just as linguistic overlap does. In
addition, we asked whether speakers could be primed to
produce dispreferred mappings of event components to
linguistic structure. If it is possible to prime the way that
speakers distribute information about events with in a
syntactic frame, this will provide additional evidence that
they are taking conceptual structure into account as they
prepare utterances.

Figure 1: Still frame taken from a target event.
Six different sets of prime sentences were created that
differed in their syntactic frame and in the degree to which
they overlapped conceptually with the target event to which
they were matched (Table 1). Two different syntactic frames
were used in prime sentences. In the Complex Subject
frame, the noun that labeled the agent of the event (i.e., the
subject) was always modified by a prepositional phrase:
[N_PP]_V_NP. The Complex VP frame had a simple noun
phrase (NP) subject, but an additional structural position
within the verb phrase (VP): NP_V_NP_PP.
Each frame was used to construct three different types of
prime sentences that differed in their conceptual overlap
with target events: Same Motion, Different Motion, and
Syntax Only primes. Same Motion prime sentences
overlapped with target events in two ways: they described
an event of the same type as the target video (a motion
event; conceptual overlap), and they included a verb that

3460

Table 1: Types of prime sentences
All of these prime sentences were associated with the event pictured in Fig. 1
Complex Subject primes
Same motion
Different motion
Syntax only

[N_PP]_V_NP
manner in subject, path in verb
The zebra on the motorcycle entered the garage.
The man in the helicopter circled the tower.
The nurse with the freckles baked a pie.

Complex VP primes

NP_V_NP_PP

Same motion
Different motion
Syntax only

path in verb, manner in postverbal prepositional phrase
The zebra entered the garage on a motorcycle.
The man circled the tower in a helicopter.
The nurse baked a pie with skill.

could also be used to describe the target event (lexical
overlap). Different Motion prime sentences also overlapped
with targets in event type (they described motion events),
but the verb in these sentences could never be used to
describe the target. Syntax Only primes used the same
syntactic frames as Motion primes, but described events that
did not overlap with the target either in event type (they did
not describe motion events) or in the particular verb used.
For Motion primes (Same Motion and Different Motion),
syntactic frame determined the distribution of manner and
path elements to structural positions. Complex Subject
frames preserved the manner-before-path ordering of
information used in canonical English motion event
descriptions, but encoded each element in a noncanonical
structural position, with path encoded in the verb and
manner information in the prepositional phrase that
modified the subject NP. In Complex VP frames, motion
event components were presented not only in dispreferred
structural positions, but also in a dispreferred order of
mention, with path encoded in the verb and manner encoded
in a post-verbal prepositional phrase.

be asked to participate in a memory task after viewing all of
the stimuli. The design and results of the memory task are
not discussed here.

Coding and Data Analysis
Participant descriptions of target events were transcribed
and coded by hand. Utterances were coded for two
dependent variables: syntactic frame use and structural
position of first manner mention.
Data are presented for the use of three syntactic frames:
the canonical frame used by English speakers for describing
motion events (4a), and the frames used in Complex Subject
(4b) and Complex VP (4c) primes.
(4)

Procedure and Design
Prime sentences and dynamic events were presented on a
computer screen. At the beginning of each trial, a prime
sentence appeared on the screen. Participants read the
sentence aloud, and then hit the spacebar to move on to the
next item. After the sentence disappeared from the screen, a
crosshair displayed briefly to redirect attention to the center
of the screen, and then the video began. Participants
watched the event unfold, and then viewed a still image of
the final frame of the animation as they provided a
description of the event. Event descriptions were recorded
by the experimenter using a digital audio recorder.
Experimental conditions differed between subjects and
were distinguished by the type of prime sentence presented
before video stimuli. There were seven experimental
conditions: one for each of the six types of prime sentence
(Table 1) and a control condition in which no prime
sentences were presented before videos were viewed and
described. To encourage them to pay attention to the stimuli,
participants in all conditions were informed that they would

Coding of syntactic frames
a.

Canonical frame
NP_V_PP
The alien drove into the cave.

b.

Complex Subject
[N_PP]_V_NP
The alien in the car entered the cave.

c.

Complex VP
NP_V_NP_PP
The alien entered the cave in a car.

Coding of syntactic frames was strict: in particular,
sentences with complex subjects (more than just a
determiner and a noun) were excluded from counts of
Canonical and Complex VP frames.
Words or phrases that referred to instruments (e.g., ―car‖)
or the agent’s manner of motion (e.g., ―driver,‖ ―driving,‖
―riding‖) were coded as Manner mentions. Manners were
coded as appearing in subject position—either as a subject
modifier or encoded in the subject itself (5a), as the main
verb of the sentence (5b), or in a post-verbal position (5c).1

1

While it is true that neither of sentences (5b) and (5c) provide
explicit encoding of the Manner of the motion event described
(i.e., in both cases the alien could be trapped in the trunk of a
moving car rather than driving it), in both sentences Manner of
motion can be inferred from the information provided.

3461

(5)

Coding of manner location
a. Manner in subject
The alien in the car … / The driver …
b.

Manner in verb
The alien drove …

c.

Post-verbal manner
The alien entered the cave in a car.

Results
Syntactic Priming
Figure 2 shows the proportion of use of coded syntactic
frames in participants’ motion event descriptions. In the
absence of a prime sentence, speakers produced the
Canonical frame more often than any other frame; they
never produced sentences that used the Complex Subject
frame; and they used the Complex VP frame about 14% of
the time. When primed with the Complex Subject frame
(Fig. 2A), participants significantly increased their use of
this frame only in the two motion event priming conditions.
Use of this frame decreased as the degree of conceptual
overlap between primes and targets decreased, and there
was no evidence of priming in the Syntax Only condition,
where there was no conceptual overlap. When primed with
the Complex VP frame (Fig. 2B), participants increased
their use of that frame only in the Same Motion condition,
which overlapped with the target event both in event
structure and in verb use. Again, there was no priming of the
use of this frame in the Syntax Only condition.
These observations were tested using multilevel mixed
logit modeling with crossed random intercepts for Subjects
and Items. Binary values at the trial-level for use of the
Complex Subject and Complex VP frames were modeled
using Condition (Control, Same Motion, Different Motion,
Syntax Only) as a first-level fixed factor. Modeling revealed
a main effect of Condition for each primed frame: use of the
Complex Subject frame was significantly higher than its use
in the control condition in both the Same Motion and
Different Motion conditions (both p<0.001), and use of the
Complex VP frame was significantly higher than its use in
the control condition only in the Same Motion condition
(p<0.05).

Event Component Mapping
Figure 3 shows the proportion of utterances in which
participants first mentioned the manners of motion events in
the three coded locations: subject, verb, and post-verb. In
the control condition, participants mentioned the manner of
target events most often in the verb and less often in the
subject and in post-verbal positions. Participants in the
Complex Subject conditions (Fig. 3A), who were primed
with sentences in which manner information appeared in the

Figure 2: Use of primed syntactic frames in the Complex
Subject (A) and Complex VP (B) conditions versus the No
Prime control condition. Details about syntactic frames are
given in in the text (ex. 4). Proportion use is calculated from
all syntactic frames used in event descriptions. Data from
the control condition are repeated across graphs for ease of
comparison. Use of this frame is significantly different from
its use in the control condition: *p<0.001, #p<0.05
subject of the sentence, were more likely to encode manner
in the subject only in the Same Motion condition, in which
primes provided both a lexical and a conceptual boost.
Speakers in this condition who were successfully primed to
produce the Complex Subject frame, then, were producing
sentences like (6), in which manner information is encoded
in the subject and path information in the verb.
(6)

The alien in the car entered the cave.

Participants in the Complex VP conditions (Fig. 3B), who
were primed with sentences in which manner was encoded
in a post-verbal phrase, did not exhibit any effects of
priming on event component mapping. Participants in this
condition who were successfully primed to produce the
Complex VP frame, then, were not producing sentences like
(7a), in which path information is encoded in the verb and
manner information after the verb. Instead, these speakers
repeated the syntactic frame they were primed with, but
mapped event components to that frame in their preferred
order of mention, producing sentences like (7b), in which
manner is encoded in the verb and path in a post-verbal
modifier.

3462

(7)

a. # The alien entered the cave in a car.
b. The alien drove a car into the cave.

Conclusions

Multilevel logit modeling was performed as described
above on binary values at the trial-level for production of
manner in subjects, verbs, and post-verbal positions using
Condition (Control, Same Motion, Different Motion) as a
first-level fixed factor. Separate sets of models were run for
Complex Subject and Complex VP primes. Modeling
revealed a main effect of Condition for the Complex Subject
primes. Production of subject manners in the Same Motion
condition was significantly higher than in the Control
condition (p<0.001). In addition, production of manners in
verbs (p<0.001) and in post-verbal positions (p<0.05) was
significantly lower in the Same Motion condition vs.
Control. Location of manner encoding in the Different
Motion condition was not significantly different from
Control for the Complex Subject primes, and no effects of
Condition were found for location of manner encoding in
the Complex VP primes.

Syntactic priming in this study was successful only when
primes and targets overlapped in event structure. If the
prime overlapped with the target both in verb and in event
type, use of the primed syntactic structure was most likely,
and if the prime and the target shared some more general
conceptual structure—i.e., if they were both motion
events—priming of syntactic structure was also boosted.
When there was no conceptual overlap between primes and
targets, syntactic structure was not primed.
In addition, priming of the mapping of event components
to linguistic structure was successful when there was
conceptual overlap between primes and targets. However,
speakers were only willing to deviate from canonical
mappings when event components were mapped to syntax
in the preferred order. As long as primes respected the
English bias to mention manners before paths, speakers
were willing to put that manner information in a
noncanonical position in the sentence, but they were
unwilling to violate that bias to produce a structure in which
paths were mentioned before manners.
Taken together, these results demonstrate that the
conceptual level of representation matters during language
production. In addition, they suggest that we should take a
second look at studies that have claimed to find evidence of
syntactic priming without controlling for possible sources of
conceptual overlap.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by NIH/NICHD Grant
3R01HD055498 to A.P. and J.T.

References

Figure 3: Location of first manner mention for utterances
produced in the Complex Subject (A) and Complex VP (B)
conditions versus the No Prime control condition. Manner
locations are described in in the text (ex. 5). Data from the
control condition are repeated across graphs for ease of
comparison. *Significantly different from control at p<0.05.

Bernolet, S., Hartsuiker, R.J., & Pickering, M.J. (2009).
Persistence of emphasis in language production: A crosslinguistic approach. Cognition, 112, 300–317.
Bock, J.K. (1986). Syntactic persistence in language
production. Cognitive Psychology, 18, 355–387.
Bock, K., & Loebell, H. (1990). Framing sentences.
Cognition, 35, 1–39.
Chang, F., Bock, J. K., & Goldberg, A. (2003). Can
thematic roles leave traces of their places? Cognition, 90,
29–49.
Gries, S.T. (2005). Syntactic priming: A corpus-based
approach. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 34, 365–
399.
Hare, M.L., & Goldberg, A.E. (1999). Structural priming:
Purely syntactic? Proceedings of the 21st Annual Meeting
of the Cognitive Science Society. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hartsuiker, R.J., Kolk, H.H.J., & Huiskamp, P. (1999).
Priming word order in sentence production. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 52(A), 129–147.
Hartsuiker, R.J., & Westenberg, C. (2000). Word order
priming in written and spoken sentence production.
Cognition, 75, B27–B39.

3463

Pickering, M.J., & Branigan, H.P. (1998). The
representation of verbs: Evidence from syntactic priming
in language production. Journal of Memory and
Language, 39, 633–651.
Pickering, M.J., & Ferreira, V.S. (2008). Structural priming:
A critical review. Psychological Bulletin, 134, 427–459.
Talmy, L. (1985). Lexicalization patterns: Semantic
structure in lexical forms. In T. Shopen (Ed.),
Grammatical categories and the lexicon. Language
typology and syntactic description, Vol. III. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

3464

