UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The integration of frequency and phonetic variation in the perception of accented speech

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8tv4h6ct

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
de Marneffe, Marie-Catherine
Tomlinson, John
Tice, Marisa
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The interaction of lexical frequency and phonetic variation
in the perception of accented speech
Marie-Catherine de Marneffe (mcdm@stanford.edu)
Department of Linguistics, Bldg. 460
Stanford University Stanford, CA 94305-2150

John Tomlinson, Jr. (Tomlinsonj2@cardiff.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, Cardiff University
Cardiff, CF10 3AT

Marisa Tice (middyp@stanford.edu)
Department of Linguistics, Bldg. 460, Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-2150

Meghan Sumner (sumner@stanford.edu)
Department of Linguistics, Bldg. 460, Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-2150
Abstract
How listeners understand spoken words despite massive variation in the speech signal is a central issue for linguistic theory.
A recent focus on lexical frequency and specificity has proved
fruitful in accounting for this phenomenon. Speech perception, though, is a multi-faceted process and likely incorporates
a number of mechanisms to map a variable signal to meaning.
We examine a well-established language use factor — lexical
frequency — and how this factor is integrated with phonetic
variability during the perception of accented speech. We show
that an integrated perspective highlights a low-level perceptual
mechanism that accounts for the perception of accented speech
absent native contrasts, while shedding light on the use of interactive language factors in the perception of spoken words.
Keywords: speech perception, cross-accent perception, lexical frequency, phonetic variation.

Introduction
A single word is produced differently each time it is uttered by one speaker. A single speaker naturally produces
a wide array of sound tokens that differ greatly in any
number of acoustic values — amplitude, F0 , duration, formant transitions, and so on. Each of these acoustically
distinct tokens must be understood sometimes as a single
sound (within-category), and other times as different sounds
(across-category). A central issue is how listeners, oftentimes
with no prior experience with a speaker, learn to navigate
through this variation to perceive two variants of a token as
instances of the same word or two different words. This is
particularly challenging considering that minimal differences
between words are oftentimes meaningful.
Theories of speech perception that are sensitive to variation, both phonetic and phonological, have typically focused on language use factors to explain how listeners accomplish the task of mapping a variable signal onto meaning (Goldinger, 1996; Johnson, 1997; Newman, Clouse, &
Burnham, 2001; Pierrehumbert, 2002). One factor that plays
an important role in this mapping task is frequency, or how

often a linguistic unit is produced (or experienced by a listener). We know that frequently produced units come with
perceptual benefits, e.g., in recognition time, (Dahan, Magnuson, & Tanenhaus, 2001; Forster, 1976; Fox, 1984; Grosjean, 1980; McClelland & Rumelhart, 1981). For example,
Fox (1984) found that listeners made more b responses to
words in a bad–dad continuum than to syllables in a ba–
da continuum when asked to identify the initial sound in the
word. He attributed this to a categorization bias toward frequent lexical items, showing that we can get Ganong-like
(lexical bias) effects with lexical frequency over and above
categorical word/non-word effects. Similar effects have been
shown for units smaller than a word (e.g., frequent phonological variants, Connine, 2004; Deelman & Connine, 2001)
and units larger than a word (e.g., chunks of commonly cooccurring words, Arnon & Snider, 2010).
Lexical frequency is also a factor shown to influence both
the production and perception of spoken words. For example,
Jurafsky, Bell, Gregory, and Raymond (2001) showed that
frequent words are shorter in duration than infrequent words.
Examining the perception of lexically-specific phonological
variants, LoCasto and Connine (2002) found that frequent
words that typically occur with a reduced vowel in the first
syllable (e.g., police) are recognized faster and more accurately with a reduced vowel than with a full initial vowel. On
the other hand an infrequent word, like obese, that is most
often produced with a full vowel, is recognized faster and
more accurately with a full vowel. Their study thus shows
that listeners are sensitive to phonological variant frequency
differences across words of a similar phonological shape.
These behavioral patterns are the result of years of experience and exposure with a native language (English). As
listeners, we must also map variable speech with less familiar speech patterns, and these speech patterns oftentimes use
contrasts that are novel to listeners. To circumvent this issue,
a number of studies have examined the perception of regional

3575

and non-native accented speech after large training sessions,
providing context for and experience with a novel contrast
(Barcroft & Sommers, 2005; Bradlow & Bent, 2008; Lively,
Logan, & Pisoni, 1993; Logan, Lively, & Pisoni, 1991; Clark
& Garrett, 2004). A robust result stemming from this research
is that highly variable training stimuli yield improved learning (where high variability is achieved via multiple speakers).
Factors such as lexical frequency, phonological and phonetic variability, and cross-accent speech perception are oftentimes examined independent of each other. In our everyday linguistic interactions, though, it is not unlikely that
these factors are rapidly integrated during speech perception.
We believe that further insight into the basic mechanisms underlying the perception of speech can be gained by examining the established effects of lexical frequency in combination with other language use factors — in this case, phonetic
variability. In this paper, we examine the perception of nonnative accented speech. We focus on the perception of accented speech that is missing a particular native contrast (final voicing contrast), to better understand the roles frequency
and phonetic variability have collaboratively in speech perception. We show that listeners rely on both in order to understand spoken words, and this utility surfaces by examining
accented speech with novel, unfamiliar contrasts.
Specifically, we show that as lexical frequency increases,
listeners increasingly rely on phonetic variability to map
sound to meaning. And, when understanding accented
speech, an invariant, but representative, token of a word produced in French-accented English is more costly than three
variable productions of that word. We consider two accounts
of this result — a cost of phonetic invariance and a benefit of
phonetic variance.

we examine the joint effect of variability in word production
and lexical frequency on the recognition of accented spoken
words.

Production experiment
Participants. Eleven native speakers of Belgian French
participated in the study (7 female, 4 male). Participants were
between the ages of 25 and 61. Exposure to English varied among the participants. In addition, as a native baseline,
eleven speakers of American English were recorded with the
same stimuli.
Stimuli. Productions were elicited from a reading passage
and a word list. Embedded in the passage were fourteen critical pairs differing in the voicing of the word-final stop (e.g.,
tack – tag). Critical items were all monosyllabic. Monosyllabic words provide more control over differences in stress,
while offering more minimal pairs for the perceptual experiment than bisyllabic pairs.
Procedure. Participants were asked to read the passage and
reading list four times at a comfortable speaking rate. All
recordings were made in a quiet room.
Acoustic measurements. Words ending in final stops were
extracted from the narrative and the reading list. Words were
annotated for vowel onset, vowel offset, and release onset,
and were measured with the Praat speech editor (Boersma &
Weenink, 2004).

Final devoicing in French-accented English
Contrast is language-dependent, and phonetic cues signaling
contrast may be lost in the speech of a non-native speaker.
This loss of contrast may require an adaptation on the part of
the listener: the use of a different cue to signal contrast, perhaps ultimately resulting in new mapping strategies. In this
paper, we are interested in the loss of the voicing contrast in
English words like bet – bed when produced by native speakers of French. Both of these productions sound like bet to English listeners (Hazan & Boulakia, 1993). Our interest in this
loss of contrast is to understand how listeners move from understanding a two instantiations of a word as instances of one
word to understanding two instantiations as different words.
We believe greater understanding will result from examining
the recognition of the variable and invariable acoustic values
in words collectively with the influence of lexical frequency.
First, we collected productions of voiceless-voiced minimal
pairs from native French speakers of English to have a better
understanding of both the loss of contrast and the natural phonetic variability that is inherent to voiced final and voiceless
final words. The results of this production experiment were
then used to create the stimuli for a second experiment, where

Results. The average vowel duration, final consonant duration, as well as the computed V/C ratio of the rhyme, show
gross difference between the native baseline and the Frenchaccented speakers of English. The average duration of the
vowels and consonants for voiced-final and voiceless-final
words are shown in Figure 1. For the native English speakers,
the V/C ratio of voiced-final words is 3.69, and 2.05 for the
voiceless-final words. The native French speakers had shorter
vowels overall, and nearly identical V/C ratios for the voicedand voiceless-final words (1.08 vs. 1.06).























Figure 1: Average vowel (black) and consonant (gray) duration for voiced-final and voiceless-final words for native English speakers and French-accented speakers.

3576

Perception experiment
We examined the effect of within-speaker variability in V/C
ratios and the interaction of this variability with lexical frequency in the perception of accented speech. The speech
reflects naturally occurring variation in French-accented English, but is very different from the sound patterns of English.
The patterns that surfaced from our production study suggest
that native English listeners should be biased toward perceiving a voiced-final word (e.g., tag) as voiceless (e.g., tack). We
are specifically interested in whether listeners are more likely
to shift away from this bias and correctly identify these tokens
as voiced-final. More critical, though, is the potential effect
variability (or the lack of variability) on well-established effects of lexical frequency.
We used a click-on paradigm in which participants saw two
pictures (e.g., a picture of a tag and a tack), heard a word,
and were asked to click on the picture corresponding to the
auditory stimulus.
Participants. Forty-eight native English speakers participated in this experiment. All subjects were undergraduate
students at Stanford University. None had any explicit exposure to French or Spanish (in their education, friends, and
family).
Stimuli. As critical items for the auditory stimuli, we used
twenty monosyllabic words ending in voiced consonants.
Each word is a minimal pair to its voiceless counterpart (e.g.,
tag – tack). We used words that are easily identifiable in
pictures. Important to our investigation of lexical frequency
and variation, we included a range of frequency values for
both the produced words and their minimal pair counterparts
(voiced-final: 0.16 – 415 msec, voiceless-final: 0.17 – 302
msec). In addition to the 20 critical pairs, we included 60
filler pairs. Forty of the pairs differed word-initially by one
sound (lush – rush), and twenty pairs differed word-finally
by one sound (moss – moth), to balance the location of the
disambiguating sound. In total, we had 80 auditory items.
We recorded all the items produced by a male, native speaker
of Belgian French with an obvious accent in English. Target
pictures representing each word were used (160 pictures total). The pictures were normalized for color, size of the object
in the picture, and mode of representation (i.e., photography,
drawing).
Critical manipulations. The critical words were manipulated to form two experimental conditions: one in which we
varied the V/C ratio of the words (Variance) and one in which
we left the ratio constant (NoVariance). Our manipulations
were based on the production patterns of the native French
speakers of English in our production study. For each speaker,
we computed the average duration for each vowel-consonant
pair (e.g., the V/C ratio for /ed/, /eg/, etc.). For some vowels
and consonants, the range of averages per speaker was quite
large. Taking the average of these averages did not result in a

duration close to one that was naturally uttered. Thus to avoid
the unintentional use of idiosyncratic patterns, we categorized
the vowel and consonant duration averages from each speaker
into bins (0.03-0.04, 0.04-0.05, . . . , 0.26-0.27), and took the
averages of the values falling in the median bin. Based on
these values, we created our stimuli. For each average V/C
pair, we created three variants: Lo, Med, High. To do this,
we modified the natural tokens recorded by our speaker. The
Med stimuli were generated using the median durations of
vowel and consonant. For the Lo and Hi variants, we altered
the consonant duration using PSOLA in Praat. We lengthened
or shorted the consonant durations by half of the standard deviation of the speaker averages resulting in a range of V/C
ratios from 0.831 – 2.627 for Lo variants, 0.707 – 1.802 for
Med variants, and 0.631 – 1.372 for Hi variants. In the Variance condition, subjects heard variable ratios: the Lo, Med
and High versions of each word. The NoVariance condition
contained only the Med variant.
Design. The experiment contained three blocks. Each block
contained the 80 words, but the presentation order was randomized. In the Variance condition, each variant of a word
(Lo, Med, Hi) was randomly assigned to one block. In the
NoVariance condition, a Med variant of the words was presented in each block. Participants heard each lexical item
three times by the end of the experiment, but in one condition (NoVariance) they heard only the median V/C ratios and
in the other condition (Variance), they heard three different
V/C ratios for each lexical item.
Procedure. The procedure consisted of a picture familiarization phase followed by the main task. Participants first
took a familiarization phase for all 160 target pictures. For
each word, they saw a picture and the word the picture represented written next to the picture. Subjects went through this
phase at their own pace, clicking on a key to see the next item.
This familiarization procedure was used to give the participants an opportunity to see the pictures before the task began.
No auditory stimuli were presented during the familiarization
phase.
Following familiarization, participants began the main
task. Listeners were presented with two target pictures followed by an auditory stimulus 100 msec after the onset of the
pictures. They were asked to click on the picture representing the word they heard. Before each trial, the mouse was
moved to a neutral prompt in the bottom center of the screen
(Freeman & Ambady, 2010). There was 1 second of silence
before the next trial began. If no response was made after
3 seconds, the next trial began automatically. Participants responded to all three blocks of 80 pairs. The pictures were 225
x 225 pixels and appeared at either side of the screen. Each
picture was 1/5 of the way up the screen and 1/5 the length of
the horizontal axis. To assure that participants did not develop
a strategy for selecting targets across blocks, the picture presentation order (either left of right) was counterbalanced for

3577

both fillers and targets across the three blocks.
Results. In the regression analyses reported, we excluded
two items (cod and cad) as listeners were unable to recognize any variant as voiced. Examining the reaction times,
we removed every data point above 2.5 standard deviations
from the overall mean and every data point below 500 ms.
Based on these criteria, 10% of the data were excluded from
all analyses. To examine the interaction of lexical frequency
and phonetic variability, we ran a mixed-effect logistic regression predicting voiced responses on all the subjects (with subject and item as random effects). The condition (Variance or
NoVariance), the ratio of lexical frequencies of the words in
the pair (FreqRatio), the lexical frequency of the word clicked
on by the participant (FreqChoice), and the lexical frequency
of the word not chosen (FreqOther) were included as fixed
effects. The fixed effects of the model, as well as the interaction between the variance condition and the frequency ratio,
are presented in Table 1.
We found significant main effects of the frequency ratio of
the words in the pair (voiced word frequency/voiceless word
frequency) as well as the frequency of the word clicked on
by the subject. Importantly, the interaction between the frequency ratio and the variability condition just missed significance at p = .057. One critical factor not to be overlooked in
this experiment is the fact that in the variable condition, the
Lo items (with a short consonant), by nature have a V/C ratio that is closer to the native English ratio. This alone could
bias the participants toward the voiced-final words in the variable condition. To rule out this bias, we ran two regressions,
one with only Lo and Med items, and one with only Med and
Hi items. The interaction effect goes away with the Lo/Med
analysis (p = 0.118) suggesting that the variant closest to
the natural bias is not driving this effect. Excluding these
items, the analysis of Med/Hi items results in a significant interaction (p < .001). Figure 2 compares the two conditions
(Variance and NoVariance) and shows that variability leads to
more percent voiced responses as the frequency ratio between
voiced and voiceless words becomes bigger.
Table 1: Experimental fixed effects
Factor
Variance
Log(FreqRatio)
Log(FreqChoice)
Log(FreqOth)
Variance
x log(FreqRatio)

Coefficient
0.1098
0.3111
0.2951
-0.1358
-0.1112

SD
0.2864
0.0809
0.0548
0.556
0.0585

P-value
0.7014
0.0001 ***
0.0000 ***
0.0146 *
0.0574

General discussion
In this paper, we examined the interaction of lexical frequency and phonetic variation in the perception of accented
speech. The result, excluding variability, is a Ganong-like

Figure 2: Percent voiced responses dependent on frequency
ratios (voiced word/voiceless word).

pattern in which listeners choose a picture corresponding to a
voiced-final word as the lexical frequency of the voiced-final
words increases (Fox, 1984; Ganong, 1980). In other words,
listeners are biased toward interpreting an ambiguous stimulus as the more frequent word of the pair. More interesting,
though, is the split that variability introduces as the frequency
of the voiced-final words increases. We consider two potential accounts of this effect, and explore implications for current theory.

Experience in production and perception
One question that arises from this study is whether frequent
words are more variable phonetically than infrequent words.
Unfortunately, we do not know the answer to this. We do
know that frequent function words have more pronunciation
variants (Keating, 1998), but whether the standard deviation
of a cloud of phonetic variables is larger for frequent words
than infrequent words, to our knowledge, has not been explored. This is an important consideration in linking language use factors in production to behaviors in perception.
More variable words could, in an experience-based model of
speech perception, predict greater perceptual flexibility in the
perception of spoken words, as there are more potential candidates matching varied productions.
This idea may go a long way in explaining the increase
in voiced responses when variability was introduced in the
experiment, but unfortunately falls short in explaining the inability of listeners to identify items as the voiced-final mem-

3578

ber of a pair when they were constantly produced the same
way. In any consideration of distributions of values, the Med
variant should always be the best. There is no reason a priori
for a difference between the two conditions (especially since
the interaction is driven by the Med and Hi variants) with this
type of explanation. This leads us to ask not why there is a
split, but whether the split is indicative of a benefit of variance
or a cost of invariance.

Facilitation or inhibition?
Whether variance improves a listener’s ability to identify the
appropriate item, or invariance worsens this ability is hard to
determine from this study. Having said that, we do believe
that the answer is both. To support this interpretation, we
consider first the NoVariance condition. Listeners are biased
by lexical frequency on par with the Variance condition to
a point. At the high frequency range, listeners plateau at approximately 60% voiced responses. One possible explanation
is that a ceiling exists because on first presentation, listeners
initially identified these tokens as voiceless final, and listeners
are reluctant to shift from that classification upon subsequent
presentations of the same item. If this were the case, why
would this only occur to the frequent lexical items? Recalling work by Connine and colleagues, perhaps the reduction
typical of frequent words is not present, and listeners shift toward the infrequent variant. This could be viewed as a cost of
invariance.
Why then, do listeners continue increasing voiced responses for variable items as lexical frequency increases?
Sumner (2011) has recently shown that for accented speech
sounds that map onto an unintended category (e.g., unaspirated [p] in Spanish-accented English is great match for English /b/), listeners are able to shift their categorization of that
sound only when phonetic variability is infused into the stimuli, outperforming consistent exposure to invariant tokens.
The listener behavior here exhibits a similar pattern. Why
might variability facilitate identification of frequent voicedfinal words? Taken together with the account of inability to
shift, the addition of variable items might trigger a low-level
matching mechanism in which the presence of a close-enough
sound enables a listener to treat a variety of sounds as similar when they otherwise might not. While the interaction
was not driven by the Lo tokens, this does not mean that the
presence of these tokens had no effect on the perception of
the Med/Hi items that might otherwise be categorized as the
voiceless member of a pair. On the contrary, we suggest that
the presence of these Lo items enabled listeners to interpret
the other two variants as similar enough to be mapped to the
same lexical item.
Again, though, we need to consider why this is the case
with highly frequent words only. The trajectory we see when
variability is introduced is what one would expect given the
well-established Ganong effect. Listeners are constantly exposed to variable speech, and the presence of this variation
does not alter the expected patterns based on lexical frequency. A low-level similarity metric may be used by lis-

teners constantly during speech perception. This pattern is
only detectable once we compare regular, variable speech to
an invariant, but potentially exemplary token. In other words,
the absence of this regular variation results in a reversal from
the norm.

Conclusion
Our goal in this paper was to begin to understand the interaction of one major language use factor — lexical frequency —,
with another language use factor — phonetic variability — in
the perception of accented speech. We show that phonetic
variation and lexical frequency interact in speech perception,
highlighting both an inability of listeners to shift from one
interpretation of a token based on production expectations
driven by frequency and the constant reliance of listeners on
phonetic variability in the perception of spoken words.

Acknowledgments
This material is based in part upon work supported by the
National Science Foundation under Grant Numbers 0720054
made to Meghan Sumner. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are
those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Science Foundation. We appreciate comments
and suggestions made by the members of the Stanford Phonetics Lab, and we thank Lily Guo for her help with data
collection.

References
Arnon, I., & Snider, N. (2010). More than words: frequency
effects for multi-word phrases. Journal of Memory and
Language, 62, 67-82.
Barcroft, J., & Sommers, M. S. (2005). Effects of acoustic
variability on second language vocabulary learning. Studies
in Second Language Acquisition, 27, 387-414.
Boersma, P., & Weenink, D. (2004). Praat: doing phonetics
by computer. (http://www.praat.org.)
Bradlow, A. R., & Bent, T. (2008). Perceptual adaptation to
non-native speech. Cognition, 106, 707-729.
Clark, C. M., & Garrett, M. F. (2004). Rapid adaptation
to foreign-accented english. The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 116, 3647-3658.
Connine, C. M. (2004). It’s not what you hear but how often
you hear it: On the neglected role of phonological variant
frequency in auditory word recognition. Psychonomic Bulletin Review, 11, 1084-1089.
Dahan, D., Magnuson, J. S., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2001).
Time course of frequency effects in spoken-word recognition: Evidence from eye movements. Cognitive Psychology, 42, 317-367.
Deelman, T., & Connine, C. (2001). Missing information
in spoken word recognition: Nonreleased stop consonants.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 27, 656-663.
Forster, K. I. (1976). Accessing the mental lexicon. In
R. J. Wales & E. Walker (Eds.), New approaches to lan-

3579

guage mechanisms (p. 257-287). Amsterdam: North Holland.
Fox, R. A. (1984). Effect of lexical status on phonetics categorization. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 10, 526-540.
Freeman, J., & Ambady, N. (2010). Mousetracker: Software
for studying real-time mental processing using a computer
mouse-tracking method. Behavior Research Methods, 42,
226-241.
Ganong, W. (1980). Phonetic categorization in auditory word
perception. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 6, 110-125.
Goldinger, S. D. (1996). Words and voices: Episodic traces in
spoken word identification and recognition memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 22, 11661183.
Grosjean, F. (1980). Spoken word recognition processes and
the gating paradigm. Perception and Psychophysics, 45,
189-195.
Hazan, V. L., & Boulakia, G. (1993). Perception and production of a voicing contrast by French-English bilinguals.
Language and Speech, 36, 17-38.
Johnson, K. (1997). Speech perception without speaker normalization. In K. Johnson & J. W. Mullenix (Eds.), Talker
variability in speech processing (p. 145-166). San Diego:
Academic Press.
Jurafsky, D., Bell, A., Gregory, M., & Raymond, W. D.
(2001). Probabilistic relations between words: Evidence
from reduction in lexical production. In J. Bybee &
P. Hopper (Eds.), Frequency and the emergence of linguistic structure (p. 229-254). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Keating, P. A. (1998). Word-level phonetic variation in large
speech corpora. ZAS Papers in Linguistics, 11, 35-50.
Lively, S. E., Logan, J. S., & Pisoni, D. B. (1993). Training
Japanese listeners to identify English /r/ and /l/. II: The role
of phonetic environment and talker variability in learning
new perceptual categories. The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 94, 1242-1255.
LoCasto, P. C., & Connine, C. M. (2002). Rule-governed
missing information in spoken word recognition: Schwa
vowel deletion. Perception Psychophysics, 64, 208-219.
Logan, J. S., Lively, S. E., & Pisoni, D. B. (1991). Training
Japanese listeners to identify English /r/ and /l/: A first report. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 89,
874-886.
McClelland, J. L., & Rumelhart, D. E. (1981). An interactive
activation model of context effects in letter perception. Part
I: An account of basic findings. Psychological Review, 88,
375-407.
Newman, R. S., Clouse, S. A., & Burnham, J. L. (2001).
The perceptual consequences of within-talker variability in
fricative production. The Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America, 109, 1181-1196.
Pierrehumbert, J. (2002). Word-specific phonetics. In Laboratory phonology VII (p. 101-139). Berlin: Mouton de

Gruyter.
Sumner, M. (2011). The role of variation in the perception of
accented speech. Cognition, 19, 131-136.

3580

