UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Effects of Numeral Classifiers and Taxonomic Categories in Chinese Speakers’Recall
of Nouns

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6fx330jm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Huang, Shuping
Chen, Jenn-Yeu

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Effects of Numeral Classifiers and Taxonomic Categories in Chinese Speakers’
Recall of Nouns
Shuping Huang (sphuang@staff.nsysu.edu.tw)
Department of Foreign Languages and Literature, National Sun Yat-Sen University
70 Lien-Hai Road, Kaohsiung 804, Taiwan ROC

Jenn-Yeu Chen (psyjyc@mail.ncku.edu.tw)
Department of Psychology, National Cheng Kung University
1 University Road, Tainan 701, Taiwan ROC

Abstract
It has been suggested that classifiers in Mandarin Chinese
serve a semantic function of categorizing the nouns in terms
of their perceptual and functional features. We investigated
the classifiers’ organizational utility in a recall task by
contrasting it with that of taxonomic categories. Mandarin
participants studied and recalled immediately two lists of
nouns, one associated with four taxonomic categories and the
other with four classifiers. The nouns were presented
randomly in bare forms or in four columns headed by
category names or classifiers. Comparable subjective
clustering effects were found in the recall of taxonomically
categorized nouns whether they were presented randomly or
in columns. The recall of classifier categorized nouns showed
no clustering when presented randomly, but some (though
smaller) clustering when presented in columns. The findings
suggest that classifiers do not serve the same function as
taxonomic categories and that their semantic function may be
limited.
Keywords: classifier; categorization; semantic memory;
subjective clustering

Introduction
Categorization is basic to language use and cognition. We
encounter an infinite number of entities everyday, and the
terms we adopt to talk about them are merely reference to
their “kinds,” such as tree, cup, love, etc. As the referring to
concepts is closely related to the linguistic labels of them,
the relation between language and thought has long
intrigued researchers in many fields. Along this line, a very
relevant issue pertains to the language-particularities of
nominal classification. Every language devises ways to
mark classes of nouns, and the carve-up of nominal
concepts varies drastically across languages. On the
assumption that the grammar of a language may reflect its
speakers’ mind, the possibility that different nominal
classifications are signs of varying worldviews has been
vigorously pursued by linguists and psychologists (cf. Lucy,
1992; Nisbett, 2003). The use of classifiers, for example, is
one way of signaling the class of a referred noun. Given that
each entity has multiple semantic facets, classifiers provide
unique ways to view objects in terms of a limited number of
semantic parameters: material, animacy, shape, consistency,
size, function, and orientation (Croft, 1994; Aikhenvald,
2004; Allan, 1977). Mandarin Chinese features a numeral
classifier system. In numeral or deictic constructions, a noun

is preceded by a classifier that specifies some salient
perceived features of the referred entity, such as yi ke shu
(one KE tree ‘a tree’) and zhe mei yingbi (this MEI coin
‘this coin’). Classifiers are believed to contribute to the
semantics of a noun phrase (Tai, 1994). For example, ke is
associated with plants, and mei, with small round and solid
objects. Members in some classifier categories may be
highly heterogeneous, but can mostly be accounted for by
motivated extensions (Lakoff, 1987).
Whether the Chinese classifier system has to do with the
organization of object concepts in the speakers’ mind has
attracted some attention recently. Kuo and Sera (2009), for
example, found that Chinese speakers classified objects
preferably by shape, which is the predominant semantics of
Chinese classifiers. Zhang and Schmitt (1998) also showed
that Chinese speakers, compared with English users, tend to
group objects according to their associated classifiers. On
the other hand, Saalbach and Imai (2007) argued that object
concepts generally followed a universal principle of
organization, and the role of classifiers was minor if any. It
appears that the nature of the classifier effect may be
complicated and further scrutiny is necessary.

Semantic Memory and Concept Organization
The question of what people know of “object concepts”
pertains to our belief of knowledge organization. The
structure by which a concept is stored for general purposes
is known as “semantic memory,” and it often reveals itself
in cognitive tasks relevant to learning and understanding
(Bransford, 1979). Recalling of a list, for example, pushes
us to call for our knowledge structure. When participants are
given a list of entities to memorize, the order and number of
entities being recalled are found to reflect subjective
clustering of concepts into smaller meaningful sequences
(Bousfield, 1953; Tulving, 1962).
Of various relations among objects, taxonomy is attested
as a prominent principle of concept organization. There
could also be other schemes of object organization, for
example, thematic relations (Lin & Murphy, 2001; Nisbett,
2003; Saalbach & Imai, 2007). In Chinese, the presence of a
classifier in front of a noun invites us to ask the question of
whether classifiers could be another scheme of object
organization. In fact, the question has been raised and tested
before. Using 16 nouns associated with four different

3199

classifiers, Zhang and Schmitt (1998) presented the nouns in
bare form and in a random order for Chinese and English
participants to memorize and recall. They observed higher
clustering of the nouns in the recall of the Chinese
participants than in the recall of the English participants.
Gao and Malt (2009) examined the role of classifier in recall
with greater details and depth. Classifiers were first
distinguished according to their relationship with the nouns.
Three groups were identified based on Chinese speakers’
ratings: well-defined, prototypical, and arbitrary. They
selected nouns that paired with the three groups of
classifiers and placed them in sentence frames. In one
version of the sentences, classifiers were present whereas in
another version (although equally grammatical), classifiers
were absent. The sentences were shown in blocks defined
by classifier groups and in a random order within a block to
the Chinese and English participants for later recall of the
nouns. The interesting findings of their study pertain to the
recall and clustering of the nouns associated with welldefined classifiers. For these nouns, clustering was greater
when classifiers were present than when classifiers were
absent, but this classifier effect was apparent only in the
recall of the Chinese participants. For the prototypical and
arbitrary classifiers, noun recall also displayed a clustering
trend, but the extent of clustering was comparable across
languages and whether classifiers were present. In terms of
the well-defined classifiers, Gao and Malt’s (2009) results
were consistent with those of Zhang and Schmitt (1998).
However, Gao and Malt did not show whether a significant
clustering beyond chance was present when classifiers were
not explicitly used in sentences and when the classifiers
were the prototypical and the arbitrary types. Furthermore,
neither study contrasted classifiers with other well-known
memory organizational schemes such as the taxonomic
categories. Saalbach and Imai (2007) contrasted classifier
with thematic and taxonomic relations in a categorization
task, a similarity judgment task, and an inductive reasoning
task. The authors observed a classifier effect in the
similarity judgment task and the inductive reasoning task,
and the effect was greater for the Chinese speakers than for
the German speakers. However, the classifier effect was
much smaller than the thematic and the taxonomic effects,
both of which were comparable across languages. Zhang
and Schmitt (1998) as well as Gao and Malt (2009) have
demonstrated the differential effectiveness of classifiers (at
least the well-defined type) as a memory organizational
scheme for classifier and non-classifier languages. But, their
work did not inform us of the relative effectiveness of
classifiers as compared with the more universal
organizational scheme such as the taxonomic categories.
Saalbach and Imai’s work (2007) shed much light on the
contrasting roles of classifiers and taxonomic categories as
an organizational scheme in speakers’ semantic memory.
But, the contrasting roles were not demonstrated in memory
recall. The purpose of the present study was two folds. First,
we wanted to determine whether Chinese speakers would
spontaneously, as opposed to being explicitly primed to,

detect the classifier relation among a set of nouns and to use
the relation to help them organize the nouns in their memory.
Second, we sought to determine the relative effectiveness of
classifiers and taxonomic categories in aiding memory
recall for Chinese speakers. Nouns that were associated with
four well-defined classifiers and nouns that fell in four
taxonomic categories were selected for study and recall.
Experiment 1 presented the nouns in random order without
the classifiers or the taxonomic categories. Experiment 2
presented the nouns in groups labeled by the classifiers or
the taxonomic categories.

Experiment 1
Two lists of nouns were presented to speakers for recall, one
with nouns organized by classifier relations (C-Nouns), and
the other with nouns organized by taxonomic relations (TNouns). By observing how participants recalled the items of
each list, we aimed to see whether these two schemes of
categorization are equally activated in the participants’
semantic memory for effective concept retrieval.

Method
Stimuli C-Nouns consisted of 20 nouns associated with 4
different classifier categories and T-Nouns comprised 20
nouns from 4 different taxonomic categories (Table 1). All
nouns were two-character words, and within each list, the
nouns shared no apparent orthographic similarity. To make
sure the two lists of nouns are equally memorable,
frequencies of occurrence were matched according to the
data of Google Query. Importantly, the C-nouns did not
share taxonomic relations, and the T-nouns did not share the
same classifier. Because a Chinese noun was likely to go
with more than one classifier, we relied on Chinese Sketch
Engine to make sure the C-nouns selected had a high
tendency to pair with a specific classifier.1
Table 1: C-Nouns and T-Nouns used in Experiment 1.
C-Nouns
tiao2
ba3
kuai4
mei2
du2she2
shou3qiang1
bu4liao4
jie4zhi3
‘serpent’
‘pistol’
‘cloth’
‘ring’
yao1dai4
shu1zi0
bing3gan1
you2piao4
‘belt’
‘comb’
‘cookie’
‘stamp’
he2liu2
fu3tou2
mu4ban3
hui1zhang1
‘river’
‘axe’
‘board’
‘badge’
mian2bei4
ji2ta1
fei2zao4
zha4dan4
‘quilt’
‘guitar’
‘soap’
‘bomb’
hong2zhuan1
ying4bi4
tie3gui4
yu3san3
‘brick’
‘coin’
‘rail’
‘umbrella’
1
Chinese Sketch Engine is devised by the Chinese WordNet
Research Group, Academia Sinica, Taiwan. The sketch engine is
provided by Lexical Computing Ltd., and our search was based on
the database Gigaword, which is provided by Linguistic Data
Consortium. Please visit http://wordsketch.ling.sinica.edu.tw to
learn more information.

3200

T-Nouns
BODY

CITY

jian1bang3
‘shoulder’
buo2zi0
‘neck’
xi1gai4
‘knee’
jiao3huai2
‘ankle’
shou3zhou3
‘elbow’

ba1li2
‘Paris’
man4gu3
‘Bangkok’
hua2sha1
‘Warsaw’
kai1luo2
‘Cairo’
ya3dian3
‘Athena’

MUSICAL
VEGETABLE
INSTRUMENT

da4gu3
cing1jiao1
‘drum’
‘green pepper’
chang2di2
buo1cai4
‘flute’
‘spinach’
la3ba1
huang2gua1
‘trumpet’
‘cucumber’
gang1cin2
suan4tou2
‘piano’
‘garlic’
xiang3ban3
luo2buo0
‘clappers’
‘carrot’

Participants Twenty undergraduate students from National
Cheng Kung University, Taiwan, participated in this
experiment. They were native speakers of Mandarin
Chinese, aging from 18 to 24 years old (mean age: 20.9 yrs).
There were 13 females and 7 males.
Procedure The participants were told to memorize two lists
of nouns. For each list, twenty bare nouns were presented on
a computer screen in a random order at a rate of two
seconds per word. At the end of presentation, the
participants wrote down on a sheet of paper as many words
as could be recalled in a period of three minutes. There were
grids on the sheet that guided the participants to write down
the nouns one in a separate line from the top to the bottom.
The same list was tested five times. Half of the participants
were given the C-Noun list before the T-Noun list, and the
other half received the T-Noun list first.
Measures Following Frender and Doubilet (1974), we
adopted the ratio of repetition (RR) as an indicator of
subjective clustering. RR was defined as the “fraction
representing the number of repetitions of items divided by
the total item listed” (Bousfield, 1953), given by the
equation in (1). Frender and Doubilet (1974) further
suggested that the clustering tendency can be efficiently
ascertained by comparing RR with its expected value in the
protocol. The expected ratio of repetition (ERR), or the rate
of clustering happening simply by chance, can be
determined by a simple formula, as defined in (2).
(1) RR: ratio of repetition
RR =

r
n −1

(2) ERR (Expected ratio of repetition)
c

E RR =

∑ e (e
i =1

i

i

− 1)

N ( N − 1)

where,
r = the number of category repetitions in a subject’s recall
n = the number of items recalled
c = the number of categories in the protocol
e = the number of exemplars in a category

N= the total number of items in a protocol
For any two directly adjacent nouns on the recalled list,
their sharing of the same categorical relation was counted
one time of category repetition (r).

Results and Discussion
Participants tended to recall more T-Nouns (17.43 out of
20 items) than C-Nouns (15.04 out of 20 items): F(1, 19) =
41.08, p < .0001. They also tended to recall more nouns in
later trials than in earlier ones: F(4, 76) = 148, p < .0001.
This practice effect was similar for C-Nouns and T-Nouns,
i.e., the interaction effect was not significant, p > .08.
Figure 1 shows the mean RR of participants’ recall of Cnouns and T-nouns in five successive trials. T-nouns
consistently yielded a higher RR than the expected ratio of
repetition. For recall of C-nouns, RR became slightly higher
only in later trials. For our design of 4 categories X 5
members, the optimal RR is [4*(5-1)]/(20-1)=0.84. That
means the RR of T-Nouns almost reached its highest point
in later trials. In other words, participants almost always
recalled T-Nouns in an organized pattern after the third trial.
For both C-Nouns and T-Nouns, the growth of RR slowed
down after the third trial.

Figure 1: RR plot of C-Nouns and T-Nouns over 5
successive trials in Experiment 1.
The RR of T-Nouns (0.71) was higher than that of CNouns (0.21): F(1, 19) = 450.6, p < .0001. There was a
significant practice effect. RR increased over trials: F(4, 76)
= 14.2, p < .0001. A significant interaction was also
observed, indicating greater practice effect for T-Nouns than
for C-Nouns: F(4, 76) = 6.7, p < 001. Additional t-tests
indicated that RRs were significantly greater than the
chance for all trials of T-Nouns, p’s < .001, whereas the
RRs were not significantly greater than the chance for CNouns, p’s > .2.
The results of this experiment showed that when nouns
were presented in bare forms, Chinese speakers could
spontaneously pick up the taxonomic relations among the
nouns and used the cues to organize the nouns for effective
memory recall. In contrast, the same participants failed to
detect the classifier relations among the nouns, even when

3201

they had studied the nouns multiple times, and their recall of
the nouns showed no sign of clustering whatsoever. The
results suggest that classifiers may not be inherently
conceptual and do not seem to play an active role in Chinese
speakers’ semantic memory.

effect is apparent in the recall of T-nouns. Importantly,
given explicit linguistic cues, recall of the C-Nouns also
shows significant clustering. For both C-Nouns and TNouns, RR was higher than the chance, but the RR of TNouns was higher than that of C-Nouns in all three trials.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 employed the same stimuli as Experiment 1,
but differed in the way items were presented to the
participants. Items of the same category were presented in
the same column, and a linguistic label of their shared
category was placed right above the column. For C-Nouns,
the labels were the shared classifiers among category
members, and for T-Nouns, the labels were taxonomic
nodes that properly expressed the commonalities among
category members. By labeling the nature of each category,
we aimed to examine whether taxonomic and classifier
categories would be equally activated for object
organization when made explicit to the participants.
Figure 2: RR plot of C-Nouns and T-Nouns over 3
successive trials in Experiment 2.

Method
Stimuli The same two lists of nouns from Experiment 1
were prepared in two booklet versions. In Version I, twenty
nouns were printed on the same page, arranged into four
columns corresponding to four categories. Shown above
each column was a linguistic label of the category that
properly represented the nature of the category. Three pages
of C-Nouns were followed by another three pages of TNouns. Version II differed from Version I only in the order
of the C-Noun pages and the T-Noun pages.
Participants Fifty-six undergraduate students taking the
“Psychology of Language” course at National Cheng Kung
University participated for an extra credit.
Procedure Participants were tested in the classroom in
group. They were given 40 seconds to memorize twenty
nouns on a page. After turning the page as instructed by the
experimenter, they wrote down on a separate sheet as many
words as they could recall in three minutes, in the same way
as required in Experiment 1. The participants repeated the
same list three times before switching to the other list.
Roughly half of the participants received Version I of the
booklet (n=27), and the other half received Version II
(n=29).

Results and Discussion
T-Nouns (17.76 out of 20 items) were recalled better than
C-Nouns (15.54 out of 20 items), F(1, 55) = 98, p < .0001.
Nouns were recalled better in later trials, indicating a
practice effect: F(2, 110) = 445.9, p < .0001. Practice effect
was greater for recall of C-Nouns than for T-Nouns, F(2,
110) = 30.8, p < .0001.
Figure 2 shows the RR in the recall of C-Nouns and TNouns over three successive trials. A significant clustering

The RR of T-Nouns (0.76) was higher than that of CNouns (0.66): F(1, 55) = 30.7, p < .0001. There was a
significant practice effect indicating that RR increased over
trials: F(2, 110) = 33.9, p < .0001. Practice effect was
similar for T-Nouns and C-Nouns: F(2, 110) = 2.4, p > .09.
T-tests showed that the clustering effect was greater than the
chance for both T-Nouns and C-Nouns, p’s < .0001.
Comparisons of the results of the two experiments (using
the first three trials of Experiment 1) indicate that explicit
linguistic labels of categories helped the amount of recall
only slightly for both T-Nouns (from 16.02 to 17.76) and CNouns (from 13.23 to 15.54)). The labels also exerted
minimal influence on the subjective clustering of the TNouns (from .67 to .76). In contrast, explicit classifier labels
increased subjective clustering of the C-Nouns substantially
(from .21 to .66).

General Discussion
The present study examined whether the organization of
Chinese speakers’ object concepts reflected the classifier
system of the language as opposed to the taxonomic system.
We found that when items were presented as bare nouns,
participants detected taxonomic relations among the items,
and accordingly clustered the items for effective recall. But
for items sharing the same classifier, participants did not
find the relation among them. Our findings were at odds
with those of Zhang and Schmitt (1999). Following
Pellegrino and Hubert (1982), they assessed the tendency of
subjective clustering by “adjusted ratio of clustering” (ARC)
which is a standardized score ranging from -1 to 1, with 0
indicating chance of accidental repetition. In Zhang and
Schmitt’s study, the ARC value of the Chinese speakers
reached 0.68, which indicates a positive classifier effect.
Computing the ARC with our data from Experiment 1, we
obtained a value of 0.085, very close to zero, indicating little

3202

classifier effect. By contrast, for recalling of taxonomicallyrelated items, the ARC reached 0.637.
Our results from both experiments indicate an effect of
classifier presence, which is in line with those of Gao and
Malt (2009) with respect to their well-defined classifiers.
The data from the first trials of our experiments reveal an
increase of clustering from chance (.21) in Experiment 1
to .57 in Experiment 2. The increase was from .56 to .81 in
Gao and Malt’s data when classifiers were absent as
opposed to present. Because Gao and Malt did not include a
chance estimate, it is unclear whether the classifier-absent
condition produced significant clustering. Our data showed
no clustering beyond chance when classifiers were absent.
More importantly, by including the taxonomic relations, we
were able to show that whereas the taxonomic relations are
an effective organizational scheme in semantic memory and
is activated automatically, the classifier relations are not as
effective and certainly do not emerge spontaneously without
explicit mention.
Our results invite two possible explanations. Firstly, it is
very likely for the classifier effect to be of a different nature
from taxonomic relations. Although members in a classifier
category usually share semantic similarities, the shared
features are not always as salient as taxonomic relations. In
fact, classifier categories reflect a variety of classifying
rationales: shape, material, rigidity, etc. which makes them
more arbitrary than taxonomic relations that operate only on
in-built characteristics of objects. In one classifier category,
it is common to involve more than one defining feature, for
example, TOU for huge and animate beings. In addition to
that, presentation of classifiers together with the stimuli may
have invoked participants’ linguistic knowledge rather than
conceptual information. In previous studies, Wang, Guo,
Bui, and Shu (2006) found a classifier effect only in naming
of “Classifier + Noun” phrases, but not in naming of bare
nouns. Similar result was also found in Alario, Yu, Geng,
and Bi (2009) which suggested that items with similar
shapes only produced an interference effect in naming of
objects in nominal phrases containing a classifier. Following
the notion of “thinking for speaking” (Slobin 1996), the
effect of classifier could be a dynamic one. It may be
activated when linguistic knowledge is demanded, such as
when reading nouns along with a specific classifier.
The significant difference between C-Nouns and T-Nouns
also invites another explanation, namely, “categorization” as
a graded notion. Discussion of “categorization” often
centered around categories that are constant and a priori,
such as BIRD, TREE and ANIMAL. In the past century,
psychologists began to take an interest in categories that are
created spontaneously for immediate problem-solving, such
as “things you take from your house when it is on fire” or
“possible costumes to wear to a Halloween party” (Barsalou,
1983; Little & Lewandowsky, 2006). Given the term “ad
hoc categories” (following Lawrence Barsalou), these
spontaneously-activated categories had graded internal
structure centralizing typical member(s), just like constant
categories. Nevertheless, they were less effective for

retrieving and clustering in recall experiments (Barsalou,
1983). Our findings seemed to be in resonance with
Barsalou’s, which called for rethinking of the nature of
classifier categories as ad hoc rather than constant.
This claim certainly demands a thorough consideration
regarding how ad hoc categories differ from constant ones.
Philosophers such as Vervaeke and Green (1997) have
argued the necessity to distinguish between “physical
relation” and “superphysical relation”. The former is
typically known as the “kind-of” relation. It is also called
“general-purpose taxonomy” that is autonomous,
disregarding linguistic or social considerations. On the
contrary, superphysical relations represent the so-called
“special-purpose taxonomy” that is constructed for a
specific demand, and is in this sense interactive with the
immediate context. According to Barsalou (1983), common
categories make superior mnemonic devices to ad hoc ones
probably because their “concept-to-instance” associations
are better established in memory, and we can activate them
even without context. Unlike physical relations,
superphysical relations have a short life span, and reflect a
wide variety of relations from metaphor, metonymy, to
propositional or perceptual similarities (Lakoff, 1987).
Chinese classifier system as ad hoc categories was
manifested in our two experiments: Classifier relations were
employed by our participants only when the contexts (labels
of categories) were given, but for taxonomic relations,
participants could detect them even without an explicit cue.
The distinction between these two submodels of
categorization is not always clear. Wierzbicka (1984), for
example, regarded FRUIT as a superphysical relation
whereas it was usually deemed a common category in
psychological experiments (cf. Freedman and Loftus, 1971).
Also, combining of common and ad hoc relations of a
category is possible. For example, classifier KE introduces
plants, and another classifier ZUO houses huge entities or
buildings. They are organized with conceptual similarities
and sometimes confront with taxonomic relations. For some
classifying categories, the shared commonalities are easy to
detect. That might account for the classifier effects found in
some studies, such as Zhang and Schmitt (1999). In addition,
frequency of category entrenchment plays a role. Barsalou
(1983) suggests that an ad hoc category can shift to a wellestablished one when it is processed frequently. Constant
use of classifiers to count or index objects is likely to
entrench the classifier relations, and Chinese speakers are
privileged to have an additional scheme of classification
which is activated when the duty calls.

Conclusion
In cognitive linguistics, categorization is considered of
crucial importance to language use (Croft & Cruse, 2004;
Taylor, 2002; Ungerer & Schmidt, 1997). Nevertheless,
Labov (1973, p. 342) was probably right in pointing out that
it is “such fundamental and obvious part of linguistic
activity that the properties of categories are normally
assumed rather than studied.” In the past few decades,

3203

psychological experiments have enabled us to look at the
nature of linguistic categorization in a less retrospective way.
Although previous psychological studies did not always
resonate in their answers, we believe we are collecting
pieces of a puzzle to get a grand picture.
Relative to Zhang and Schmitt (1999) and Gao and Malt
(2009), by two experiments, we found that classifier effect
was observed in participants’ recall of nouns in specific
contexts. Nevertheless, we also made further comparison of
classifier effect with taxonomy categories, demonstrating
that the relatively weaker conceptual-organizing function of
classifier knowledge found in Saalbach and Imai (2007) was
also detected in noun-recall task. The results calls for a view
to regard classifiers as ad hoc categories activated mostly
when speakers need to think for speaking. Questions
regarding the types of classifier categories and the degree of
their entrenchment are yet to be determined in our future
investigations.

Acknowledgments
This study is founded by National Cheng Kung University
as part of the Landmark Project entitled “An Interdisciplinary Approach to the Study of Natural Language
Processing and Acquisition,” directed by Prof. Jenn-Yeu
Chen. The authors are grateful to Academia Sinica CWS
team for letting us use the Chinese Sketch Engine, and to
Adam Cheng-yi Li for collecting data in Experiment 2. All
errors remain, of course, our own.

References
Aikhenvald, Y. A. (2003). Classifiers: A typology of noun
categorization devices. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Alario, X., Yu, X., Geng, J., & Bi, Y. (2009). How visual
shape may constrain lexical access: Evidence from
Chinese classifier production. Paper presented at the
Architectures and Mechanisms for Language Processing.
Barcelona, September 7-9, 2009.
Allan, K. (1977). Classifiers. Language, 53(2), 285-311.
Barsalou, L. W. (1983). Ad hoc categories. Memory and
Cognition, 11(3), 211-227.
Aikhenvald, A. Y. (2004). Nominal classification: Towards
a comprehensive typology. Sprachtypologie und
Universalienforschung, 57(2/3), 105-116.
Bransford, J. D. (1979). Human cognition: Learning,
understanding, and remembering. Belmont, CA:
Wadsworth.
Bousfield, W. A. (1953). The occurrence of clustering in the
recall of randomly arranged associates. Journal of
General Psychology, 49, 229-240.
Croft, W. (1994). Semantic universals in classifier systems.
Word, 45(2), 145-171.
Croft, W., & Cruse, D. A. (2004). Cognitive linguistics.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Freedman, J. L., & Loftus, E. F. (1971). The retrieval of
words from long-term memory. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 10, 107-115.

Frender, R., & Doubilet, P. (1974). More on measures of
category clustering in free recall - Although probably not
the last word. Psychological Bulletin, 81(1), 64-66.
Gao, M. Y., & Malt, B. C. (2009). Mental representation
and cognitive consequences of Chinese individual
classifiers. Language and Cognitive Processes, 24(7),
1124-1179.
Kuo, J. Y.-c., & Sera, M. D. (2009). Classifier effects on
human categorization: The role of shape classifiers in
Mandarin Chinese. Journal of East Asian Linguistics, 18,
1-19.
Labov, W. (1973). The boundaries of words and their
meaning. In C.-J. N. Bailey & R. W. Shuy (Eds.), New
ways of analyzing variation of English (pp. 340-373).
Washington D. C.: Georgetown University Press.
Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, fire, and dangerous things:
What categories reveal about the mind. Chicago: Chicago
University Press.
Lin, E. L., & Murphy, G. L. (2001). Thematic relations in
adults' concepts. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 130(1), 3-28.
Little, D. R., Lewandowsky, S., & Heit, E. (2006). Ad hoc
category restructuring. Memory and Cognition, 34(7),
1398-1413.
Lucy, J. A. (1992). Grammatical categories and cognition:
A case study of the linguistic relativity hypothesis.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Nisbett, R. E. (2003). The geography of thought: How
Asians and Westerners think differently ... and why. New
York: The Free Press.
Saalbach, H., & Imai, M. (2007). Scope of linguistic
influence: Does a classifier system alter object concepts?
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 136(3),
485-501.
Tai, J. H.-Y. (1994). Chinese classifier systems and human
categorization. In M. Chen & O. Tseng (Eds.), In honor of
Professor William S-Y. Wang: Interdisciplinary studies on
language and language change (pp. 479-494): Pyramid.
Taylor, J. (2002). Cognitive grammar. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Tulving, E. (1962). Subjective organization in free recall of
"unrelated words". Psychological Review, 69, 344-354.
Ungerer, F., & Schmid, H.-J. (1996). An introduction to
cognitive linguistics. Essex: Longman.
Vervaeke, J., & Green, C. D. (1997). Women, fire, and
dangerous theories: A critique of Lakoff's theory of
categorization. Metaphor and Symbol, 12, 59-80.
Wang, L., Guo, J., Bui, Y., & Shu, H. (2006). Classifier
congruency effect in the production of noun phrases.
Studies of Psychology and Behavior, 4, 34-38.
Wierzbicka, A. (1984). Apples are not a "kind of fruit": The
semantics of human categorization. American Ethnologist,
11, 313-328.
Zhang, S., & Schmitt, B. (1998). Language-dependent
classification: The role of classifiers in cognition, memory
and ad evaluation. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Applied, 4(4), 375-385.

3204

