UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Dispersion of Eye Movements During Visual Imagery is Related to Individual Differences
in Spatial Imagery Ability

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/70782950

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Johansson, Roger
Holsanova, Jana
Homqvist, Kenneth

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Dispersion of Eye Movements During Visual Imagery is Related to Individual
Differences in Spatial Imagery Ability
Roger Johansson (Roger.Johansson@ling.lu.se)
Department of Cognitive Science, Lund University
Kungshuset, Lundagård, 222 22, Lund, Sweden

Jana Holsanova (Jana.Holsanova@lucs.lu.se)
Department of Cognitive Science, Lund University
Kungshuset, Lundagård, 222 22, Lund, Sweden

Kenneth Holmqvist (Kenneth.Holmqvist@humlab.lu.se)
Humanities Laboratory, Lund University
Box 201, 221 00, Lund, Sweden
simulation of perception (Hesslow, 2002) in a „visual
buffer‟ (e.g., Kosslyn, 2006) of working memory. The eye
movements would thus reflect the process of activating and
arranging part images of a scene into their proper locations,
and would as in visual perception, create the illusion of
“seeing” this scene as a whole. Kosslyn (1988) has argued
that image generation in the visual buffer is processed
sequentially and Brandt and Stark (1997) have suggested
that eye movements are an important tool in this process,
and that they might be necessary for the construction and
utilization of visual imagery. Another prominent approach
has been favored by Thomas (2009), where perceptual
experiences are not considered to consist of internal
representations. Instead they are the consequence of an
ongoing exploration of the environment where a set of
procedures specify how we direct our attention. In this view,
visual imagery is a re-enactment of the appropriate
exploratory behavior, which includes eye movements.
Several studies have also reported large individual
differences in the amount and amplitude of eye movements
during visual imagery. An early study by Stoy (1930) found
large individual differences in both amplitude and frequency
of eye movements when thinking about spatial problems,
and Johansson et al. (2006) reported similar findings in a
more recent eye-tracking study. In Johansson et al. (2006)
participants inspected a complex picture which they
subsequently recalled while looking at a blank screen. Some
participants “painted” the visualized picture with their eyes
over the entire blank screen while others only looked at a
smaller part of it. But within this smaller area, positions and
directions from the visualization were frequently preserved
in the eye movements. Gaze patterns which differ in size,
between encoding and recall, have also been reported by
Brandt and Stark (1997), and Gbadamosi and Zangemeister
(2001). Furthermore, two of the nine participants in Brandt
and Stark‟s (1997) study did not show any eye movements
during visual imagery, and neither did two out of twelve
participants in Spivey, Tyler, Richardson and Young (2000).
Nevertheless, few studies of eye movements during
visual imagery have been dedicated to individual

Abstract
This study explored individual differences in eye movements
during visual imagery. Eye movements were recorded for
participants who recalled a picture from memory while
looking at a blank screen. All participants were tested for
working memory capacity and the OSIVQ (Blazhenkova &
Kozhevnikov, 2009) was used as an assessment for individual
differences in object imagery, spatial imagery and verbal
cognitive style. Results revealed a negative correlation
between the overall spatial dispersion of eye movements and
the spatial imagery score. Consequently, those with a lower
spatial imagery score employed a larger degree of eye
movements to blank spaces than those with a higher spatial
imagery score. No relationship was found between eye
movements and the other aspects. We propose that weaker
spatial imagery ability increases the “need” to execute eye
movements during recall and discuss this finding in relation to
the current literature on eye movements to „nothing‟.
Keywords: Eye movements, object imagery, spatial imagery,
spatial cognition, visual attention, working memory.

Introduction
Research of eye movements during visual imagery has a
rather long empirical history. Early studies (e.g., Perky,
1910; Jacobsen, 1932) reported a large amount of eye
movement activity during visual imagery, and indicated a
tight link between eye movements and mental images.
Neisser (1967) argued that eye movements are actively
associated with the construction of a visual image, and Hebb
(1968) suggested that eye movements are necessary to
assemble and organize “part images” into a whole
visualized image. Theories inspired by Hebb (1968) and
Neisser (1967) gained strong support from more recent eyetracking studies, where it has been shown that spontaneous
eye movements occur with visual imagery, and that those
eye movements closely reflect content and spatial relations
of the visualized scene (e.g., Brandt & Stark, 1997;
Gbadamosi & Zangemeister, 2001; Spivey & Geng, 2001;
Laeng & Teodorescu, 2002; Johansson, Holsanova &
Holmqvist, 2006). The dominant theoretical interpretation
of results from these studies is that eye movements reflect a
1

1200

differences. Two exceptions are Brown (1968) and Marks
(1973a). Brown (1968) compared eye movement amplitudes
during recall of a metronome‟s motion for poor and vivid
visualizers, but found no consistent differences.
Unfortunately, details on how visual imagery ability was
estimated were not reported. Marks (1973a) investigated
two experimental groups of “vivid” and “poor” visualizers
in the recall of pictures and reported that poor visualizers
had a higher eye movement rate (EMR) during recall than
vivid visualizers. Marks (1973a) used the visual imagery
questionnaire (VVIQ) (Marks, 1973b) to identify poor and
vivid visualizers, which provides a vividness score based on
ratings for 16 imagery items. However, the VVIQ only
considers vividness and does not make a difference between
object imagery and spatial imagery (e.g., Kozhevnikov,
Kosslyn & Shephard, 2005) which makes this result hard to
interpret. This distinction is important, since Farah,
Hammond, Levine and Calvanio (1988) have demonstrated
that there are dissociable systems for object and spatial
imagery, which relies either on the object (ventral) or the
spatial (dorsal) pathways of the brain (e.g., Gazzaniga,
2004).
An analogous result to the one by Marks (1973a) has
also been reported in a related but somewhat different
research field. Tikhomirov (1971) investigated photographs
of eye movements for chess players who imagined chess
moves. He found that expert chess players executed less eye
movements than novice chess players. This effect has been
confirmed in more recent studies of chess players and over
different tasks (e.g., Charness, Reingold, Pomplun and
Stampe, 2001). Charness et al. (2001) argued that experts
encode larger clusters of information into chunks of relevant
information and reported that expert chess players have a
larger visual span in these tasks. Weber and Malmstrom
(1979) have argued that chunking is used in a similar
fashion during visual imagery, and suggested that eye
movements are not necessary within a chunk and might only
be manifested between chunks. Consequently, higher
expertise/ability would decrease eye movements also during
visual imagery tasks, which would be consistent with the
findings by Marks (1973a).
Apart from imagery abilities and expertise there is also
reason to believe that working memory (WM) capacity is an
important factor for eye movements during visual imagery.
Engle (2002) has concluded that WM capacity is the same
as executive attention, and only indirectly linked to
memory. Greater WM capacity would therefore not mean a
larger memory store, but a better ability to control attention.
A tight link between eye movement control and WM
capacity has, for instance, been found for performance in the
antisaccade task (Kane, Bleckley, Conway and Engle,
2001). In this task, participants are looking at a fixation
cross in the centre of the screen and must respond to a target
presented randomly on either side of the fixation cross. Just
before the target is presented an attention-attracting cue
appears on the side opposite to where the target will appear.
In the study by Kane et al. (2001), participants with low

WM capacity executed more eye movements to the
misleading cue. Consequently, if eye movements during
visual imagery reflect the construction or scanning of
mental scene representations in working memory, then it is
most likely that individual differences in working memory
capacity would affect the degree to which these eye
movements are employed.
The goal of the current study was to explore whether
individual differences in object imagery ability, spatial
imagery ability and WM capacity are related to the spatial
dispersion of eye movements during picture recall. To our
knowledge, except for Marks (1973a), no previous eyetracking study has investigated any of these relationships
before. However, Marks (1973a) only considered individual
differences in vividness ability and did not investigate the
spatial layout of eye movements in detail.

Experiment
The experiment consisted of three parts. In the first part,
participants inspected a complex picture and subsequently
recalled it while looking at a blank screen. To ensure that
spatial scanning was employed during recall, the
experimental design and method from Johansson et al.
(2006) was used, where the imagery task is to orally
describe the picture from memory. Eye movements were
recorded both during encoding and during recall.
In the second part, participants answered a computerized
version of the Object-Spatial Imagery and Verbal
questionnaire (OSIVQ) (Blazhenkova & Kozhevnikov,
2009), which gives an assessment for individual differences
in object imagery, spatial imagery and verbal cognitive
style. The OSIVQ is based on a theoretical model by
Kozhevnikov et al. (2005), in which people are categorized
as either visualizers or verbalizers. Visualizers prefer to
process and represent information visually whereas
verbalizers prefer to process and represent information
verbally. Furhtermore, as a second step, the visualizers can
be divided into those who rely more on either object
imagery or spatial imagery. Many tests of individual
differences in visual imagery, like the VVIQ (Marks,
1973b), have only focused on vividness and have not
considered the two different dimensions of object imagery
and spatial imagery. Object imagery refers to information
processing of objects and scenes in regard to their color,
shape and texture (e.g., Paivio, 1991), and primarily
activates the neural architecture of the ventral stream (e.g,
Gazzaniga, 2004). Spatial imagery refers to information
processing of objects location, spatial relationships,
movement and spatial transformations (e.g., Paivio, 1991),
and primarily activates the neural architecture of the dorsal
stream (e.g, Gazzaniga, 2004). The self-assessment scores
of object imagery and spatial imagery provided by the
OSIVQ are highly correlated with several different
measures of object and spatial ability (Blazhenkova &
Kozhevnikov, 2009). Based on the results from the studies
by Marks (1973a), Tikhomirov (1971) and Charness et al.
(2001), we expected to find a negative correlation between
2

1201

either the object imagery score or the spatial imagery score
(from the OSIVQ) and spatial dispersion of the eye
movements during picture recall. No correlation was
expected for the score of verbal thinking.
In the third part, the participants were tested for working
memory capacity in an automated version of the operation
span test (OSPAN) (Unsworth, Heitz, Schrock & Engle,
2005). Based on the results by Kane et al. (2001) we
expected a negative correlation between the WM capacity
score and spatial dispersion of the eye movements during
picture recall.

seconds and that they were to inspect it as thoroughly as
possible. When they had understood the task instructions,
the picture appeared on the computer screen for thirty
seconds. They were then instructed to orally describe the
picture from memory as they liked, with their own words
and to try their best. They were told explicitly to keep their
eyes open and to look directly ahead so that the equipment
could record their pupil dilation. When they had understood
the task instructions, the screen went blank and they orally
described the picture. The experiment leader always
disappeared behind a large screen, which was located
behind the stimulus computer, and was never present when
the participants looked at the picture or described it from
memory. Figure 1 shows schematics of how the picture was
encoded and recalled.

Participants
Forty-seven students at the University of Lund – twenty-six
females and twenty-one males – participated in the
experiment. All subjects reported either normal vision or
vision corrected to normal (i.e., with contact lenses or
glasses). All participants were native Swedish speakers. The
mean age of the participants was 22.4 years (SD = 3.6).

Instruction

Instruction

Apparatus and stimuli
The participants were seated in front of a computer screen at
a distance of 600-700 mm. (The distance varied slightly
because of the subjects‟ freedom to move their head and
body.) Eye movements were measured using an SMI iView
RED250, tracking binocularly at 120 Hz. The data was
recorded with the iView X 2.4 software and participants
were calibrated using a 5-point calibration routine with
validation. The average calibration error was .41° (SD =
.25°). Fixations were identified using a dispersion threshold
of 100 pixels and a duration threshold of 80 ms. Eyetracking data was analyzed with BeGaze 2.4 and in-house
MatLab scripts.
The visual stimulus in the experiment was presented using
Experiment Center 2.4 on a 480 mm × 300 mm computer
screen with a resolution of 1680 × 1050 pixels.
The OSPAN-test (Unsworth et al., 2005) was presented in
E-prime 2.0 and the OSIVQ-test (Blazhenkova &
Kozhevnikov, 2009) was a Swedish translation of the
computerized OSIVQ v 2.0 from MM Virtual Design.

Encoding
Free Viewing
30 sec
Recall
Free Viewing
Oral description

Figure 1: Schematics of encoding and recall
When the participants had finished their descriptions they
rated how well they were able to visualize the picture during
recall on a scale ranging from 1 (no visualization at all) to 5
(almost as if the picture was still in front of me). Then they
did the self-paced OSIVQ and OSPAN-test on the same
computer, but without us recording their eyes. The OSIVQ
consists of 45 statements (15 object imagery, 15 spatial
imagery and 15 verbal), which are to be rated on a 5-point
scale according to agreement. For further details, see
Blazhenkova and Kozhevnikov (2009). In the OSPAN-test
they were required to judge as quickly as possible if
mathematics operations were false or correct while trying to
remember a set of letters. For further details, see Unsworth
et al. (2005). Finally, to assess whether any of the
participants had seen through the nature of the experiment,
we asked what they thought the true objective of the
experiment was.

Procedure
Participants were initially informed that the experiment
consisted of three different parts.
In the first part of the experiment they were initially told
that this part concerned pupil dilation in relation to mental
workload. This instruction was used to conceal the true
objective of the experiment. It was explained that we would
be filming their eyes, but nothing was said about us
recording their eye movements. They were throughout the
experiment asked to keep their eyes open so that we could
film their pupils, and to look directly ahead so that our
equipment could accurately measure their pupil dilation.
The eye tracker was calibrated using a five point calibration
routine. Then the participants were instructed that they
would soon see a picture, that it would be shown for thirty

Analysis
To analyze the overall spatial dispersion of the gaze pattern,
a coverage measure proposed by Holmqvist, Nyström,
Andersson, Dewhurst, Jarodzka & van de Weijer (in press,
subsection 11.2.8) was calculated for the gaze pattern during
recall. Using this measure an "attention map" was created
by centering a Gaussian function at each fixation point (
was set to span 10 % of the screen width;  = 0.1 × 1680
3

1202

pixels). Next, all the Gaussian functions were superimposed
and the volume under the attention map, after being
normalized to unit height, was used to estimate the spatial
dispersion of the gaze pattern. Finally, the computed volume
was normalized against its theoretical peak value (1680 ×
1050 × 1), which gives a proportion value between 0 and 1.
A Pearson‟s correlation analysis was then performed for the
overall spatial dispersion of the gaze patterns, the scores
from the OSPAN-test, the scores from the OSIVQ and the
participants‟ subjective visualization ratings.

spatial imagery score results in a lower object imagery
score, and vice versa. Kozhevnikov, Blazhenkova and
Becker (2010) have found similar results and have
concluded that there is a trade-off, rather than independence,
between object and spatial imagery abilities.
Figure 2 illustrates gaze patterns during encoding and
recall for one typical participant with a relatively low score
in spatial imagery (1.9), and figure 3 illustrates gaze patterns
for another typical participant with a relatively high score in
spatial imagery (3.8).

Results and discussion
Average values for spatial dispersion of the gaze pattern, the
OSIVQ object, spatial and verbal scores, the OSPAN scores
and the subjective visualization ratings are shown in table 1,
and the correlations among the measures are presented in
table 2.

Encoding
Inspecting a picture (30 s)

Table 1: Average values for all measures (with standard
deviations within brackets).
Measure

Figure 2: Gaze patterns after encoding and recall for one
participant with a low spatial imagery score of 1.9.

Mean (SD)

1. Gaze pattern: spatial dispersion
2. OSPAN
3. OSIVQ object
4. OSIVQ spatial
5. OSIVQ verbal
6. Visualization rating

.14 (.058)
62.22 (7.84)
3.11 (.66)
2.67 (.75)
3.25 (.54)
3.43 (.77)
Encoding
Inspecting a picture (30 s)

Table 2: The Pearson product-moment correlations
among the measures from table 1.
1
2
1
-.13

2

3
4
5
6
**
p < .01 (2-tailed)
*
p < .05 (2-tailed)

Recall
Orally describing the picture (52 s)

3
.08
-.10


4
-.32*
.00
-.35*


5
-.27
-.24
.16
.09


Recall
Orally describing the picture (126 s)

Figure 3: Gaze patterns after encoding and recall for one
participant with a high spatial imagery score of 3.8.

6
.06
-.03
.43**
-.05
-.06


The results partly confirmed our expectation and indicate
that the overall spatial dispersion of eye movements during
recall is related to individual differences in spatial imagery
ability. We propose that those with weaker spatial imagery
ability “need” to do more eye movements during recall to
compensate for weaker spatial imagery ability and to reduce
cognitive load. Possibly these eye movements support a reconstruction of the picture and enhance memory retrieval.
However, contrary to our expectation, no correlation was
found between eye movements and WM capacity (OSPAN).

A negative correlation (r = -0.32, p < 0.05) was found
between the OSIVQ spatial-imagery score and the overall
spatial dispersion of the eye-tracking data during recall. No
correlations were found between the other aspects and the
overall spatial dispersion of the eye-tracking data during
recall. However, a positive correlation (r = 0.43, p < 0.01)
was found between the participants subjective visualization
rating and object imagery. This correlation indicates that
when participants are to rate their own visualization this
judgment is primarily associated with vividness and object
imagery aspects (e.g., color, shape and texture).
Furthermore, a negative correlation (r = -0.35, p < 0.05) was
found between the OSIVQ object-imagery score and the
OSIVQ spatial-imagery score, suggesting that a higher

General discussion
The current study confirmed previous research that eye
movements are spontaneously executed to blank spaces
when engaged in recall of a scene (e.g., Brandt & Stark,
1997; Johansson et al., 2006). Furthermore, although not
analyzed in this study, those eye movements did – as in
Johansson et al. (2006) – closely correspond with content
and spatial relations from the original picture. The
documented finding (e.g., Johansson et al. 2006) that the
spatial dispersion of the eye movements are different in size
during the recall phase than during the encoding phase, and
4

1203

that this size varies among individuals, was also apparent in
the data.
A correlation analysis with scores from the Object
Spatial Imagery and Verbal Questionnaire (OSIVQ)
revealed a negative correlation between spatial dispersion in
eye movements and the spatial imagery score.
Consequently, it appears that weaker spatial imagery ability
constitutes a greater effect on eye movements to blank
spaces. We propose that eye movements during visual
imagery tasks are employed to reduce cognitive resources
associated with the processing of spatial information and
that weaker spatial imagery ability thus increases the need
for those eye movements.
For example, Blazhenkova and Kozhevnikov (2009)
have argued that when engaged in complex imagery tasks,
where pictorial details have to be maintained and combined
with spatial manipulations, there is an overload in
visuospatial working memory. Possibly, those with stronger
spatial imagery ability were able to divide their
visualizations into larger chunks of relevant information
than those with weaker spatial imagery ability, which would
be consistent with Weber and Malmstrom‟s (1979)
suggestion that eye movements are only manifested between
these chunks, not within them. This is also in line with a
situated view of cognition where motor processes and/or the
external world are used to minimize visuospatial working
memory demands. For instance, Ballard, Hayhoe, Pook and
Rao (1997) have argued that eye movements are used as
spatial indexes to coordinate elements of an internal model
with the external world, and Keehner, Hegarty, Cohen,
Khooshabeh and Montello (2008) have shown a strong
relationship between success in spatial reasoning tasks and
the ability to offload cognition in the external world.
However, to what degree visuospatial information in spatial
indexing relies on internal representations versus the
external world is debatable (cf., Richardson, Altmann,
Spivey & Hoover, 2009).
Our interpretation gains further support from findings that
eye movements to nothing are highly task and stimuli
dependent. We have, for example, in pilot studies observed
that eye movements during visual imagery are less likely to
appear for scenes of low complexity and for recall tasks that
are relatively easy (e.g., questions about color, shape and
location for single objects in a scene). Similar observations
have been made by Brandt and Stark (1997), who in the
discussion described pilot studies where they used simple
geometrical figures (circles, squares and rectangles) as
stimuli and where they failed to find corresponding eye
movements during recall.
Several studies have interpreted eye movements to blank
spaces during recall as a reinstatement of the encoding
phase (e.g., Laeng & Teodorescu, 2002), and it has been
proposed that those eye movements enhance memory
retrieval (Ferreira, Apel & Henderson, 2008). However,
Johansson, Holsanova and Holmqvist (2010) have shown
that participants who maintained central fixation during
encoding of a complex picture still employed eye

movements that corresponded to directions and positions
during recall, and concluded that eye movements during
visual imagery are not a pure reinstatement of those from
encoding. On the other hand, Laeng and Teodorescu (2002)
found the opposite results, i.e., maintaining central fixation
during encoding spontaneously induced participants to look
in the center also during recall. However, the study by
Laeng and Teodorescu (2002) used much simpler stimuli
during encoding (grid patterns or single objects) than the
complex scenes in Johansson et al. (2010). These
contrasting results give further support to an interpretation
that task complexity, stimuli complexity, expertise and
ability represent crucial aspects of the “need” to employ eye
movements to blank spaces.
There is, however, no proof for a strong relationship
between eye movements to nothing and memory retrieval
(cf., Richardson et al., 2009). But studies of memory
retrieval and eye movements to nothing (e.g., Spivey &
Geng, 2001; Laeng & Teodorescu, 2002) have used rather
simple stimuli and the memory task has mostly been related
to object imagery processing (e.g., color and shape). Results
from the present study indicate that eye movements during
visual imagery are primarily related to spatial imagery
processing and not to aspects of object imagery.
Finally, the current study only reported a correlative
relationship between eye movements and spatial imagery.
Further studies, where eye movements are manipulated as
an independent variable, have to be conducted before any
causal claims can be made between eye movements, spatial
imagery and/or memory retrieval.

Summary
This study showed that the spatial dispersion of eye
movements during recall of pictures is related to individual
differences in spatial imagery. We suggest that weaker
spatial imagery ability increases the “need” to employ eye
movements to blank spaces which correspond to positions in
the original scene.

Acknowledgements
This research was funded by the Swedish Research Council
(Vetenskapsrådet 2007–2637), by the Linnaeus center for
Thinking in Time: Cognition, Communication and Learning
(CCL), which is funded by the Swedish Research Council
(grant no. 349-2007-8695) and by a Fellowship at Hanse
Wissenschaftskolleg Delmenhorst. Special thanks to Marcus
Nyström for programming the MatLab scripts and to
Richard Dewhurst for valuable input.

References
Ballard, D. H., Hayhoe, M. M., Pook, P. K., & Rao, R. P. N.
(1997). Deictic codes for the embodiment of cognition.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 20, 723-767.
Blazhenkova, O., & Kozhevnikov, M. (2009). The new
object-spatial-verbal cognitive style model: Theory and
5

1204

measurement. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 23, 638663.
Brandt, S. A., & Stark, L. W. (1997). Spontaneous eye
movements during visual imagery reflect the content of
the visual scene. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 9,
27–38.
Brown, B. B. (1968). Visual recall ability and eye
movements. Psychophysiology, 4, 300-306.
Charness, N., Reingold, E. M., Pomplun, M.,&Stampe, D.
M. (2001). The perceptual aspect of skilled performance
in chess: Evidence from eye movements. Memory &
Cognition, 29, 1146–1152.
Farah, M. J., Hammond, K. M., Levine, D. N., & Calvanio,
R. (1988). Visual and spatial mental imagery: Dissociable
systems of representation. Cognitive Psychology, 20,
439–462.
Ferreira, F. Apel, A., & Henderson, J. M. (2008). Taking a
new look at looking at nothing. Trends in Cognitive
Science, 12(11), 405-410.
Gazzaniga, M. S. (2004). The cognitive neurosciences (3rd
ed.) Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press.
Gbadamosi, J., & Zangemeister, W. H. (2001). Visual
imagery in hemianopic patients, Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience. 13 (7), 45–56.
Hebb, D. O. (1968). Concerning imagery. Psychological
Review, 75, 466-477.
Hesslow, G. (2002). Conscious Thought as Simulation of
Behaviour and Perception. Trends in Cognitive Science, 6,
pp. 242-247.
Holmqvist, K., Nyström, M., Andersson, R., Dewhurst, R.,
Jarodzka, H., & van de Weijer, J. (in press). Eye tracking:
a comprehensive guide to methods and measures. Oxford
University Press.
Johansson, R., Holsanova, J., & Holmqvist, K. (2006).
Pictures and spoken descriptions elicit similar eye
movements during mental imagery, both in light and in
complete darkness. Cognitive Science, 30:6, 1053-1079.
Johansson, R., Holsanova, J., & Holmqvist, K. (2010). Eye
Movements During Mental Imagery are Not
Reenactments of Perception. In: Ohlsson, Stellan &
Catrambone, Richard (eds.), Cognition in Flux.
Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society. Portland, Oregon, pp. 1968–
1973.
Keehner, M., Hegarty, M., Cohen, C. A., Khooshabeh, P., &
Montello, D. R. (2008). Spatial reasoning with external
visualizations: What matters is what you see, not whether
you interact. Cognitive Science, 32, 1099–1132.
Kozhevnikov, M., Kosslyn, S., & Shephard, J. (2005).
Spatial versus object visualizers: A new characterization
of visual cognitive style. Memory and Cognition, 33,
710–726.
Kozhevnikov, M., Blazhenkova, O., & Becker, M. (2010).
Trade-off in object versus spatial visualization abilities:
Restriction in the development of visual-processing
resources. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 17(1), 29-35.

Kosslyn, S. M., Cave, C. B., Provost, D., & Von Gierke, S.
(1988). Sequential processes in image generation.
Cognitive Psychology, 20, 319–343.
Kosslyn, S. M., Thompson,W. L., & Ganis, G. (2006). The
case for mental imagery. New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.
Laeng, B., & Teodorescu, D.-S. (2002). Eye scanpaths
during visual imagery reenact those of perception of the
same visual scene. Cognitive Science, 26, 207-231.
Marks, D. F. (1973a). Visual imagery differences and eye
movements in the recall of pictures. Perception &
Psychophysics, 14(3), 407–412.
Marks, D. F. (1973b). Visual imagery differences in the
recall of pictures. British Journal of Psychology, 64, 17–
24.
Neisser, U. (1967). Cognitive psychology. New York:
Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Paivio, A. (1991). Dual coding theory: Retrospect and
current status. Canadian Journal of Psychology, 45, 255–
287.
Perky, C. W. (1910). An experimental study of imagination.
American Journal of Psychology, 21, 422-452.
Richardson, D. C., Altmann, G. T. M., Spivey, M. J., &
Hoover, M. A. (2009). Much ado about eye movements to
nothing: a response to Ferreira et al.,: Taking a new look
at looking at nothing, Trends in Cognitive Science, 13(6),
235-236.
Spivey, M., Tyler, M., Richardson, D., & Young, E. (2000).
Eye movements during comprehension of spoken scene
descriptions. Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 487-492). Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Spivey, M., & Geng, J. (2001). Oculomotor mechanisms
activated by imagery and memory: eye movements to
absent objects, Psychological Research, 65, 235-241.
Stoy, E. G. (1930). A preliminary study of ocular attitudes
in thinking of spatial relations. Journal of General
Psychology, 4, 379-385.
Thomas, N.J.T. (2009). Visual Imagery and Consciousness.
In W.P. Banks (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Consciousness
(volume 2, pp. 445-457). Oxford: Elsevier/Academic
Press.
Tikhomirov, O. K. (1971). [The structure of human thinking
activity] (JPRS 53982 and JPRS 52119). Arlington, Va,
Joint Publications Research Service.
Unsworth, N., Heitz, R. P., Shrock, J. C., & Engle, R. W.
(2005). An automated version of the operation span task.
Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers,
37, 498–505.
Weber, R. J., & Malmstrom, F. V. (1979). Measuring the
size of mental images. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 5, 1–
12.

6

1205

