UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Effect of Labels on Categorization: Is Attention to Relevant Features a Good Index of
Infants' Category Learning?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9rd3h4t9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Best, Catherine A.
Robinson, Christopher W.
Sloutsky, Vladimir M.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Effect of Labels on Categorization: Is Attention to Relevant Features A Good
Index of Infants’ Category Learning?
Catherine A. Best (best.140@osu.edu)
Department of Psychology and the Center for Cognitive Science, The Ohio State University
208G Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place, Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Christopher W. Robinson (robinson.777@osu.edu)
Department of Psychology, The Ohio State University
208F Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place, Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Vladimir M. Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
Department of Psychology and the Center for Cognitive Science, The Ohio State University
208D Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place, Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Abstract
Shifting attention to category relevant features has been
demonstrated in adults to be a successful strategy for
categorizing novel objects. The current experiment was aimed
at exploring whether infants would use a similar strategy for
category learning when objects were presented with and
without labels. Using an eye tracker, 6- to 8-month-old
infants were familiarized and tested with a novel visual
category where only half of the features were relevant for
category membership. There was some evidence that infants
learned the target category only when objects were not
labeled. Furthermore, infants who learned the target category
did not appear to optimize their attention to the category
relevant features. In addition, contrary to some theoretical
accounts, there was no evidence that labels facilitated
categorization by highlighting category relevant features.
Keywords: Categorization; Attention; Language; Infants

Introduction
Categorization, the ability to treat discriminable items as
similar, is a critical skill for making sense of the visual
world. One strategy for successful categorization of new
information is to optimize attention to features that may
predict category membership and away from features that
may not predict category membership. Selectively attending
to category relevant information while ignoring category
irrelevant information has been demonstrated by human
adults and non-human animals (e.g., Dixon, Ruppel, Pratt,
& De Rosa, 2009; Mackintosh, 1965). Adults tested in a
categorization task with an eye tracker demonstrated
attention optimization when they attended selectively to the
relevant features of a category during learning trials
(Hoffman & Rehder, 2010). It is less clear, however,
whether infants have the ability to optimize their attention in
a similar way as adults. Some research suggests that infants
would be less likely to engage in selective attention due to
an immature prefrontal cortex, which is responsible for
executive functions such as selective attention (e.g., Posner
& Petersen, 1990). Sloutsky (2010) further argues that
because the prefrontal cortex matures later in the course of
development, infants (who are known to categorize visual

input) ought to learn categories through means other than
selectivity. Therefore, the assumption that infants, like
adults, should optimize their attention to relevant features
over the course of learning may not be plausible based
solely on the prematurity of the prefrontal cortex. However,
there is research suggesting that linguistic labels may help
infants shift attention to relevant features during
categorization by focusing infants’ attention on perceptual
features that are shared by members of a category. If labels
can direct attention to commonalities among category
members, then infants should optimize their attention to
relevant features over time. Previous research demonstrates
that infants ranging from 3 to 12 months are often better at
learning visual categories when objects are associated with
labels than when the same visual stimuli are associated with
nonlinguistic sounds (Balaban & Waxman, 1997; Fulkerson
& Waxman, 2007; Robinson & Sloutsky, 2007; Ferry,
Hespos, & Waxman, 2010). However, labels have also been
shown to attenuate infants’ learning of visual categories
when performance was compared to learning of unlabeled
objects presented in silence (Robinson & Sloutsky, 2007).
What underlying mechanisms can account for the
facilitative effects of labels on infants’ categorization? It has
been argued that labels facilitate categorization by
highlighting the commonalities among labeled entities
(Fulkerson & Waxman, 2007; Waxman, 2003) and that
labeling objects directs attention to perceptual properties
that will aid successful categorization (Waxman, 2004). In
contrast, some researchers argue that infants have difficulty
processing multimodal information, with labels often
attenuating visual processing early in development
(Robinson & Sloutsky, 2007; Sloutsky & Robinson, 2008).
Therefore by this account, labels should have no facilitative
effect above a silent condition and may even overshadow
infants’ visual processing.
One limitation of previous research is that the
mechanisms underlying the effects of labels on
categorization are often inferred by examining infants’
novelty preference at test, rather than directly testing how
labels affect attention in the course of category learning.

2751

The few preliminary studies that have recently used an eye
tracker to examine how labels affect infants’ attention
during category learning have yielded mixed results.
Althaus and Mareschal (2010) demonstrated that infants
attended to the commonalities between category exemplars
more when objects were labeled than when presented in
silence. However, this research examined infants’ looking to
category relevant features only in the first second of each
familiarization trial (i.e., prior to hearing the label). In a
different study, Best, Robinson, and Sloutsky (2010) found
that common labels did not direct infants’ attention to
common features more than a silent control condition.
Rather, they found attentional differences only when objects
were paired with varying labels such that unique labels
directed infants’ attention to unique features more than
infants in a silent control condition. Finally, Robinson and
Sloutsky (2010) found that compared to a silent control
condition, labels often attenuated learning of visual
categories: When images were labeled, infants exhibited
attenuated looking to category relevant features and
attenuated preference for a novel category in a subsequent
testing phase.
The primary goals of the current study were to examine
how labels influenced visual attention over the course of
category learning and to examine whether infants, like
adults, optimize attention to category relevant features over
time. If labels facilitate category learning, then infants
should be more likely to learn the category in the label
condition. If labels initially interfere with learning, then
infants should be more likely to learn the category in the
silent condition. Furthermore, if labels direct attention to
commonalities, then infants should optimize attention to the
relevant features over time. To investigate the effect of
labels on infants’ attention to category relevant features
during a category learning task, half of the infants were
familiarized to category members with labels and half were
familiarized to category members presented in silence.
Critically, half of the visual features on each category
member were shared among the category members (i.e.,
category relevant information); whereas, the other half of
the features were not predictive of category membership
(i.e., category irrelevant information).

contained consistent colored shapes across category
members (i.e., category relevant features), while two
locations contained colored shapes that were unique to each
category exemplar (i.e., category irrelevant features).
Objects were presented in pairs subtending an approximate
horizontal and vertical visual angle of 3.8°.
A female experimenter, using infant directed speech,
recorded the audio stimuli for the label condition. The
speech component was recorded using Cool Edit 2000 at
44.10 kHz, 16 Bit, in stereo. The speech was presented at
approximately 68-72 dB.

Figure 1. Example stimulus pairs from category 1 (top
panel) and category 2 (bottom panel). Note. Category
relevant features included the trapezoid in the top right
corner and the crescent in the bottom left corner for
category 1 and the arrow in the top left corner and the
teardrop in the bottom right corner for category 2.

Method
Participants
Forty infants (20 boys, 20 girls) ranging in age from 6 to 8
months (M = 6.85 months, SD = 0.95 months) were tested,
with 20 infants in the label condition and 20 infants in the
silent condition. Infants were recruited from local birth
records. All infants were healthy, and no parents reported
any infant to have vision or hearing problems.

Stimuli
Visual stimuli included two categories of objects, each with
10 exemplars. A category member consisted of a large X
with four colorful shapes affixed to each end point (see
object pairs in Figure 1). For each exemplar, two locations

Apparatus
A non-invasive Tobii T60 eye tracker measured eye gaze by
computing the pupil-corneal reflection at a sampling rate of
60 Hz (i.e., 60 gaze data points collected per second for
each eye). The eye-tracking device, which is integrated into
the base of a high-resolution 17-inch computer monitor, was
located on a table inside a darkened testing booth, enclosed
by curtains. A trained experimenter monitored the
experiment on a 19-inch Dell OptiPlex 755 computer
located outside of the testing booth. A Sony Network
camera was located inside the testing booth to the side of the
eye tracker displaying a live feed view of the participant that

2752

remaining duration consisted of silence. Infants’ looking
time data were recorded using E-prime software version 2.0.

an experimenter monitored on a 9-inch black and white
Sony SSM-930/930 CE television. Two Dell computer
speakers were positioned behind a curtain and out of view
on either side of the eye tracker.

Results
Unfiltered gaze data were used to calculate looking
time proportions. A point of gaze was recorded if a
participant spent at least 16.67ms looking to any of the predetermined areas of interests (AOIs). The AOIs were
defined as a square surrounding the location of the four
main parts of each object. Using looking time measures, test
data were analyzed first to establish whether infants learned
the categories. Training data were then analyzed to identify
infants’ attention to relevant versus irrelevant features
during the course of learning and if there were differential
attention patterns between infants in the silent and label
conditions.

Design
The experiment had a between-subjects design with
participants randomly assigned to one of two experimental
conditions (i.e., label or silent). Visual input was identical
for both conditions and was presented in a random
sequence. The presence of auditory input differed between
conditions and when included, it varied randomly.

Procedure
Infants sat on a caregiver’s lap and were positioned in front
of the eye tracker within an approximate viewing distance of
60cm. Prior to the experiment, infants completed a 5-point
calibration sequence lasting less than one minute. The
calibration points consisted of a dynamic kitten image
appearing on the screen with a corresponding “bounce”
sound.
Training and test trials were presented in blocks. All
participants completed four blocks, with each block having
six training trials and one test trial, for a total of 28 trials.
Infants were familiarized to one category and tested with a
contrasting category. Objects were always presented in
pairs. However, during training trials, the object pairs
consisted of members of the same category; whereas, during
test trials, object pairs included a novel category member
and a novel non-category member.
For infants in the label condition, the following six
speech phrases were randomly paired with visual images on
each trial:
Look at the feps!
Wow, these are feps!
Hey, these are feps!
Do you see the feps?
Can you see the feps?
Look at these!
To minimize differences between training and test trials,
infants in the label condition heard “Look at these” on all
test trials in addition to hearing “Look at these” once in each
training block. This programming detail made the learning
and test trials identical apart from the change in visual
stimuli. Only infants in the label condition heard auditory
input during the trials. Infants in the silent condition never
heard speech during the experiment. To maintain
engagement, a dynamic bouncing ball was centrally
presented as an attention-grabbing fixation between every
trial for both conditions.
On each trial, visual images lasted for a total duration
of 5000ms for both conditions. In the label condition, the
audio occurred with the onset of the image and lasted
between 890ms and 1700ms, depending on the phrase. The

Test Data
To examine how labels influenced infants’ learning of the
categories, a traditional measure of categorization was used.
Infants’ novelty preference (i.e., looking time to the novel
category in relation to looking time to the novel and familiar
categories combined) was calculated for each trial, and then
averaged across all four test trials. Infants’ mean novelty
preferences in the silent condition (M = .53, SE = .03) and in
the label condition (M = .52, SE = .03) did not differ from
chance (.50).
To further examine dynamics of infants’ novelty
preferences within test trials, a novelty preference score was
calculated every 500ms, and then averaged across the four
test trials at each point in time for the total duration of
5000ms. Infants in the silent condition showed a reliable
novelty preference for the first 2000ms after stimulus onset,
t’s > 1.85, p’s < .05; whereas, looking to the novel category
was never reliably greater than looking to the familiar
category for infants in the label condition (see Figure 2).

Figure 2. Mean novelty preference scores within test trials.
Note. The * indicates a reliable difference from .50, p < .05.

2753

Furthermore, by looking at individual infants’ novelty
preferences, it was apparent that the group means were not
different from chance because for those infants who
discriminated the categories at test, some showed a
familiarity preference rather than a novelty preference. To
tease this apart, we conservatively classified infants as
learners if they demonstrated above chance preferences for
the novel category (i.e., ≥ 60%) or if they demonstrated
above chance preference for the familiar category (i.e., ≥
60%). In the silent condition, 65% of the infants were
classified as learners; whereas, only 45% of infants in the
label condition were classified as learners. Although a larger
proportion of infants in the silent condition were classified
as learners than in the label condition, this group difference
was not statistically significant.

Training Data
To determine how labels influenced infants’ visual attention
during learning, the proportion of time infants looked at the
category relevant features within each training trial (i.e.,
every 500ms) in relation to the total looking time to
category relevant and category irrelevant features combined
was calculated. As can be seen in Figure 3, the proportion of
looking to category relevant features never exceeded .50 for
infants in either the silent or label condition, providing no
evidence that labels directed infants’ attention to category
relevant features compared to the silent condition.

Figure 3. Proportion of looking to category relevant features
within training trials.
Infants did not optimize attention to relevant features.
Instead, they were less likely to look to category relevant
features than to category irrelevant features. Additionally,
infants’ mean looking to category relevant features
collapsed across all fixations was significantly less than .50
in the label condition (M = .40, SE = .02) and in the silent
condition (M = .39, SE = .03), t’s > 3.73, p’s < .01, and at no
within trial time point did the infants’ mean proportion of

looking to relevant features in the label condition exceed
infants’ mean proportion of looking to relevant features in
the silent condition.

Discussion
The current study examined how labels affect categorization
by assessing categorization in a traditional preferential
looking paradigm during test trials and examining infants’
attention to category relevant features in the course of
learning during training trials. Several important findings
were revealed by the current results. First, there was little
evidence that labels have facilitative effects on category
learning. Infants in the label condition did not learn the
target category. In contrast, infants in the silent condition
demonstrated some evidence of category learning with
greater initial looking at each test trial to the novel noncategory object early in the trials. Second, the current
experiment also found no effect of labels directing attention
to commonalities during learning. Even in the silent
condition where the majority of infants learned the target
category, there was no evidence of attention optimization to
category relevant features. Infants, unlike adults, did not
shift their attention to category relevant features as a
strategy for learning to categorize novel objects in the given
task. Therefore the current results suggest that attention to
relevant features may not be a good index of infants’
category learning.
The current study is not without limitations.
Traditional novelty preference scores did not differ from
chance preferences for infants in either the silent or label
condition, suggesting the target category was difficult to
learn. Although this null result could be explained by some
infants demonstrating a reliable familiarity preference and
some infants demonstrating a reliable novelty preference,
the lack of a robust group novelty preference at test may
have been due to the nature of the stimuli. Whereas spatially
separated features provided cleaner eye-tracking analysis of
infants’ looking to individual features, it may have been
more difficult for infants to perceive objects as a whole than
if the features had been less spatially separable. If infants
did not encode whole objects during training trials, it should
be somewhat more difficult to discriminate categories
during test trials. It would be beneficial to replicate the
current study with different classes of stimuli to clarify this
design-related issue.
Although these findings do not support previous
evidence of facilitative effects of labels on infants’
categorization (Balaban & Waxman, 1997; Fulkerson &
Waxman, 2007), they do support previous evidence of
attenuated visual processing due to auditory input (e.g.,
Robinson & Sloutsky, 2007). Studies have shown that
labels interfere with visual processing in pre-linguistic
infants (Robinson & Sloutsky, 2007; Sloutsky & Robinson,
2008). Yet researchers have suggested that a possible
mechanism for labels to facilitate learning is by inviting
infants to focus on commonalities among category objects.

2754

However, the current study found no evidence of infants
increasing their attention to features that were common
between objects in a given object category. Furthermore,
whereas selective attention is an efficient means for adults
to categorize objects, in the current experiment, those
infants who learned the categories did so without optimizing
their attention to the relevant features. Infants in the silent
condition demonstrated a reliable preference for the novel
category within the first two seconds of test trials, yet
attention patterns during learning indicate that they spent
more time looking to category irrelevant features than to
category relevant features. Given that by definition, the
category- relevant features remained constant throughout, it
is highly likely that infants habituated to the unvarying
features and quickly shifted attention to the irrelevant
features that were more novel across training trials. This
provides further evidence that despite having an immature
prefrontal cortex, infants can learn categories through means
other than selectivity, as Sloutsky (2010) has argued. One
possibility is that infants in the current task learned the
pattern of correlations among features. Research has found
that infants can abstract correlated features among objects
when provided with a sufficient number of exemplars (e.g.,
Younger & Cohen, 1986). Given these different learning
mechanisms, it is important for future research on category
learning to consider that signature patterns of attention
during learning may differ developmentally.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported by grants from NSF (BCS0720135), NIH (R01HD056105), and the US Department of
Education (R305H050125 and R305B070407) to V. M.
Sloutsky and from NIH (RO3HD055527) to C. W.
Robinson.

References
Althaus, N., & Mareschal, D. (2010). Speech facilitates
categorization but only novel labels direct infants’
attention to commonalities. Poster presented at the
biennial meeting of International Conference on Infant
Studies, Baltimore, MD.
Balaban, M. T., & Waxman, S. R. (1997). Do words
facilitate object categorization in 9-month-old infants?
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 64, 3 – 26.
Best, C. A., Robinson, C. W., & Slousky, V. M. (2010) The
effect of labels on visual attention: An eye tracking
study. In S. Ohlsson & R. Catrambone (Eds.),
Proceedings of the XXXII Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society.
Dixon, M. L., Ruppel, J., Pratt, J., & De Rosa, E. (2009).
Learning to ignore: Acquisition of sustained
attentional suppression. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 16, 418-423.
Ferry, A. L., Hespos, S. J., & Waxman, S. R. (2010).
Language facilitates category formation in 3-month-old
infants. Child Development, 81, 472-479.

Fulkerson, A. L., & Waxman, S. R. (2007). Words (but not
tones) facilitate object categorization: evidence from 6and 12-month-olds. Cognition, 105, 218–228.
Hoffman, A. B., & Rehder B. (2010). The cost of
supervised classification: The effect of learning task on
conceptual flexibility. Journal of Experimental
Psychology-General, 139, 319-340.
Mackintosh, N. J. (1965). Selective attention in animal
discrimination learning. Psychological Bulletin, 64,124150.
Posner, M. L., & Petersen, S. E. (1990). The attention
system of the human brain.
Annual Review of
Neuroscience, 13, 25-42.
Robinson, C.W., & Sloutsky, V.M. (2007). Linguistic labels
and categorization in infancy: Do labels facilitate or
hinder? Infancy, 11, 233–253.
Robinson, C. W. & Sloutsky, V. M. (2010). Attention and
cross-model processing: Evidence from heart rate
analyses. In S. Ohlsson & R. Catrambone (Eds.),
Proceedings of the XXXII Annual Conference of the
Cognitive
Science
Society
(pp.
2639-2643).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Sloutsky, V. M. (2010). From perceptual categories to
concepts: What develops? Cognitive Science, 34, 1244–
1286.
Sloutsky, V.M., & Robinson, C.W. (2008). The role of
words and sounds in visual processing: from
overshadowing to attentional tuning. Cognitive Science,
32, 342–365.
Waxman, S. R. (2003). Links between object categorization
and naming: Origins and emergence in human infants. In
D. H. Rakison & L. M. Oakes (Eds.), Early category and
concept development: Making sense of the blooming,
buzzing confusion (pp. 213–241). London: Oxford
University Press.
Waxman, S. R. (2004). Everything had a name, and each
name gave birth to a new thought: Links between early
word-learning and conceptual organization. In D. G. Hall
& S. R. Waxman (Eds.), From many strands: Weaving a
lexicon (pp. 295-335). Cambridge: MIT Press.
Younger, B. A., & Cohen, L. B. (1986). Developmental
change in infant's perception of correlations among
attributes. Child Development, 57, 803-815.

2755

