UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Number, Type, and Configuration of Landmarks Distort Distance Estimates

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8970w3d9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Roberts, Michael E.
Bonebright, Terri L.
Wischmeier, Dillen

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Number, Type, and Configuration of Landmarks Distort Distance Estimates
Michael E. Roberts (michaelroberts@depauw.edu)
Department of Psychology, 7 E. Larabee Street
Greencastle, IN 46135 USA

Terri L. Bonebright (tbone@depauw.edu)
Department of Psychology, 7 E. Larabee Street
Greencastle, IN 46135 USA

Dillen Wischmeier (dillenwischmeier@depauw.edu)
Department of Psychology, 7 E. Larabee Street
Greencastle, IN 46135 USA
Abstract
In phase 1, participants memorized two two-dimensional
maps consisting of routes with concrete landmark features
and two maps consisting of routes with abstract landmark
features and then made distance estimates and mental walks
for the routes on each map.
Participants estimated
significantly longer lengths for routes with concrete features
versus abstract features, for routes with four versus two
features, and for routes with linear sequences of features
versus clustered features. In phase 2, a feature recognition
task indicated that participants had significantly greater
accuracy and faster response times for concrete features
versus abstract features and for features that had appeared in
linear arrangements versus clustered arrangements. Our
results suggest that the number, type, and configuration of
landmark features can distort humans’ memories of path
lengths, even when the paths are originally viewed on a
simple two-dimensional map rather than encountered through
embodied experience.
Keywords: Cognitive maps, survey knowledge, visual
landmarks

Introduction
When we walk down a bustling city street, we are likely to
notice an assortment of sights and sounds, and this variety
may lead us to remember the street as being longer than a
walk of equal distance through a barren or monotonous
landscape. Byrne (1979) showed that participants who were
familiar with the local environment overestimated lengths
for routes that were near the local town center and routes
that included more major bends. In both cases, an increase
in the number or saliency of features apparently led to
distance overestimations.
Thorndyke (1981) conducted a series of experiments to
test his “clutter hypothesis” that participants would
remember paths on a map as longer if there were more
intervening cities. His results showed that participants
overestimate distances for cluttered paths from maps of
fictitious regions as well as from maps of familiar regions in
the United States. Moreover, participants still exaggerated
these distances, albeit to a lesser extent, when the maps
were in front of them while making the perceptual
estimates. In order to explain these results, Thorndyke

proposed an analog timing model in which participants
initiate an internal timer as they scan the route (whether the
scanning is perceptual or from memory), and intervening
cities cause participants to temporarily stop scanning and
retrieve relevant information before continuing to scan the
route towards the destination.
Other studies have found distance distortions that suggest
the hierarchical arrangement of cognitive maps. For
instance, participants distort spatial relationships to conform
to superordinate organization, (Stevens & Coupe, 1978),
e.g. Reno is incorrectly believed to be east of San Diego
because participants focus on the geographical arrangement
of the respective states, Nevada and California, and
participants use a heuristic with this superordinate structure.
Similarly, participants underestimate the distance between
related landmarks and overestimate the distance between
unrelated landmarks or organizations (Hirtle & Jonides,
1985).
The current study tests distance distortion for memorized
maps as a function of the number, type, and configuration of
landmark features. We hypothesized that more features on a
path memorized from a map would lead to longer distance
estimates, and this result would essentially replicate
Thorndyke’s (1981) findings. In addition to those previous
findings, we hypothesized that the configuration of those
features would also be critical, with a linear, sequential
arrangement of features drawing additional attention and
therefore promoting longer path estimates than a path with
features clustered together in one location. Similarly, we
hypothesized that the type of features is also key and that
representations of concrete, real world features would lead
to longer path estimates than representations of abstract
features, because participants would treat each concrete
feature distinctly but may group together the abstract
features. The latter hypotheses would not be explained by
Thorndyke’s analog timing model (1981), because that
model would suggest that each additional feature
temporarily stops the scanner regardless of the feature type
or how the features are configured. However, such results
could be accommodated by a combination of Thorndyke’s
model and the categorical considerations of Stevens and
Coupe (1978) and Hirtle and Jonides (1985).

1121

route intersections so particular routes could later be
referenced, e.g. “route A-E.” Four route lengths (3, 4, 5,
and 6 inches) were used for each map. Two of the routes
contained two and four features, respectively, arranged in a
linear sequence along the entire route (so a traveler using
the map would expect to encounter the first feature, then the
second, etc.). On a given map, these route lengths were
either 3 and 5 inches, or 4 and 6 inches. The other two
lengths were used for two routes with two and four features,
respectively, that were clustered together in the middle of
the routes (so a traveler would encounter a group of features
in an area). The remaining two routes duplicated two of the
route lengths (either 3 and 5 inches or 4 and 6 inches), and
these routes did not contain features. The route lengths for
the respective conditions were balanced across maps for
each participant so that all four lengths were used for zerofeature routes, linear routes, and clustered routes for each
map type. Thus, we could assess distortion caused by the
number of features and the arrangement of features without
a confound of actual path length.
Features were also constructed using Macromedia
Fireworks software and arranged on the maps as detailed
above. Four of the maps contained concrete features (e.g.
drawings of flowers, trees, stop signs, buildings, etc.) along
the routes, and four maps contained abstract features (e.g.
Cyrillic, Greek, and Arabic letters). The four-feature routes
contained two unique features that did not occur elsewhere
on the map, along with two features that occurred on one of
the two-feature routes. The concrete and abstract features
were balanced across the eight maps (which, in turn, were
balanced across participants) so that each feature appeared
in each route condition. Each map was surrounded by an
outline in order to provide a boundary. Figure 1 shows an
example of one concrete feature map and one abstract
feature map.

Figure 1: Concrete feature map (top) and abstract (bottom)

Methods

Procedure

Participants
Sixty-nine undergraduate students at DePauw University
chose course credit or a $10 gift certificate for
approximately two hours of participation. Data from 19
students were excluded from the behavioral analyses. Of
these, nine were excluded due to experimental failure, and
ten were excluded due to missing or extreme values
(described in the results section) for specific conditions.
The phase 2 results included 31 participants (38 were
excluded due to missing or extreme values from phase 1,
technical errors with the ERP equipment, and due to not
being right-handed.

Materials
Eight two-dimensional 792 X 612 pixel maps were
constructed as bitmap images using Macromedia Fireworks
software, and each map consisted of seven destinations
connected by six lines (routes) in a non-cyclical
arrangement. An alphabetical letter designated each of the

The experiment consisted of two phases. For phase 1,
participants memorized the maps and then provided distance
estimates and mental walk response times by using a mental
image of the routes. For phase 2, participants completed a
feature recognition task during which we recorded brain
activity for an ERP study. The details of the ERP methods,
analyses, and results are quite extensive and beyond the
scope of this paper, so we are only presenting the behavioral
results from the two phases of the experiment here.
In phase 1, each participant was sequentially presented
with four maps on a computer monitor. The maps alternated
between concrete features and abstract features, with order
balanced across participants. For each map, participants
were instructed to memorize the map so they would be
capable of redrawing the map from memory.
The
participants were told that no particular beginning or end
point was necessary for memorizing the map, but they
should try to memorize the letter that designated each point,
the features that were encountered along each route in the
map, and the scale of the map so route lengths could be

1122

of a fixation point (+) that varied randomly from 1000ms to
2000ms, followed by a feature image that was shown for up
to 2500ms or until the participant responded. Participants
were instructed to press one button on a response pad to
indicate they had seen a feature during phase 1 of the
experiment and another button if they had not seen the
feature. The button associated with the response type was
counterbalanced across participants. For each of the four
memorized maps, a participant was tested on the two unique
and two duplicate features from four-feature linear paths,
the two unique and two duplicate features from four-feature
cluster paths, and four foils that had not been seen on the
maps.
The unique and duplicate features were
counterbalanced across participants during the learning in
phase 1, and the foils were counter-balanced across
participants in phase 2. Participants completed a total of
480 trials for the four maps, with 15 trials per feature in
order to provide sufficient data for ERP analyses.

Results
Phase 1
Figure 2: Mean (and standard error) distance estimate
proportions for routes with concrete features (top) and
abstract features (bottom)
accurately reported. Participants were told that they would
need to memorize four different maps, and for each map,
they would have five minutes for memorization before
subsequently answering questions about the estimated
distance and mental walk times for particular routes.
Finally, participants were told that they would be asked
questions about features on the maps during the second
phase of the experiment.
We used E-Prime experiment design software in phase 1
for accurate timing of stimuli presentation and collection of
response times. After memorizing a specific map, the
participants answered questions about the six routes in a
random order. The map disappeared from the screen, and
for each route, the participant was asked to use a mental
image of the route in order to estimate the route’s length and
perform a mental walk task. For the distance estimate, the
participant was told to give a numeric estimate of the route
length (e.g. route “B-D”) compared to a standard two-inch
line that we labeled as “20 units.” For the mental walk task,
the participant pressed the space bar to begin the walk at one
point and pressed the space bar again to end the walk.
Walks always consisted of a single line, i.e. we did not test
longer routes that incorporated multiple lines.
Phase 2 consisted of a feature recognition task that used
previously seen concrete and abstract features and novel
foils. E-prime was used for stimulus presentation and for
recording responses and reaction time. Each trial consisted

In order to analyze the route length estimates, we divided a
participant’s estimate for a route by the true length of the
route. For example, the two-inch comparison line was
labeled “20 units,” so the participant would make a perfect
estimate if he or she labeled a three-inch route as 30 units.
It is possible that participants remembered the wrong routes
in some trials (e.g. if the trial concerned “A-E” and the
participant mistakenly confused that with a different route).
Therefore, we set arbitrary proportion cut-offs of .5 and 2.0
for each trial, and data for a trial were excluded if the
proportion was outside these extremes. We averaged the
proportions for all of the participants’ trials in each of the
eight respective conditions of map type (real or concrete
features), number of features (two or four), and feature
arrangement (linear or clustered). Thus, an average of .90
for two-feature linear paths may indicate consistent
underestimation of route length, while an average of 1.10
may indicate consistent overestimation. Nine participants
were excluded from the ANOVA analyses because all of
their proportions were outliers for at least one condition.
The final sample consisted of 50 participants (36 women
and 14 men).
Figure 2 shows the mean and standard error for each
condition. A 2 (Map type: concrete features or abstract
features) X 2 (Number of features: 2 or 4) X 2
(Arrangement of features: linear or clustered) repeated
measures ANOVA using the averaged proportions revealed
significant main effects for map type, number of features,
and arrangement of features and one significant interaction
between map type and number of features. Participants
overestimated the lengths for routes with concrete features
(M=1.11) by significantly more than the routes with abstract
features (M=1.06), F(1,49) = 4.23, p < .05, η2p = .08.
Participants overestimated the lengths for routes with four

1123

Table 1: Mean (standard deviation) recognition accuracy

Concrete
Abstract

Linear
.80 (.18)
.71 (.23)

Table 2: Mean (standard deviation) recognition response
times in milliseconds

Cluster
.77 (.23)
.62 (.28)

Concrete
Abstract

features (M=1.10) by significantly more than the routes with
two features (M=1.07), F(1,49) = 4.59, p < .05, η2p = .09.
However, there was a significant interaction between map
type and number of features, F(1,49) = 4.52, p < .05, η2p
=.09, and pairwise comparisons only indicated significant
differences between two and four-feature paths when the
features were concrete. Participants overestimated the
lengths for routes with a linear arrangement of features
(M=1.10) by significantly more than the routes with a
cluster of features (M=1.06), F(1,49) = 4.14, p < .05, η2p =
.08
An additional repeated measures ANOVA with gender as
a between groups factor did not reveal any significant
effects. When examining the individual conditions, only the
concrete, four-feature condition was significantly
overestimated with respect to the true proportion of 1.0,
t(54) = 2.41, p < .05.
For each condition of the mental walk task, we divided the
mental walk time by the same participant’s mental walk
time for a zero-feature route of the same length. Thus, path
length was controlled, and we could comparatively assess
changes in mental walk time based on the map type, number
of features, and arrangement of features. Unfortunately, the
mental walk data showed an enormous amount of
variability. Many of the participants’ data (n=19) were
excluded because the average proportion for at least one
condition was less than .5 or greater than 2.0. Four
additional participants were excluded because their data
revealed them as significant outliers for at least one
condition. A 2 (Map type: concrete features or abstract
features) X 2 (Number of features: 2 or 4) X 2
(Arrangement of features: linear or clustered) repeated
measures ANOVA only showed a significant main effect for
map type, F(1,27) = 5.00, p < .05, η2p = .16, as mental
walks for routes with concrete features (M=1.08) took
significantly longer, in proportion to zero-feature paths, than
routes with abstract features (M=1.00).

Phase 2
We analyzed accuracy and response times according to map
type and arrangement of features for the feature recognition
task in phase 2 of the experiment. For recognition accuracy,
a 2 (Map type: concrete features or abstract features) X 2
(Arrangement of features: linear or clustered) repeated
measures ANOVA showed significant main effects for map
type and feature arrangement with no interaction between
these two variables (see Table 1 for means and standard
deviations).
Participants showed significantly more
accurate recognition for concrete features than abstract
features, F(1,30) = 14.55, p < .01, η2p = .33. Participants

Linear
488.79 (139.68)
672.12 (123.18)

Cluster
669.82 (104.66)
692.08 (117.57)

Table 3: Mean (standard deviation) recognition response
times in milliseconds

Concrete
Abstract

Unique
579.29
(90.64)
682.10
(113.66)

Duplicate
655.28
(124.13)
661.83
(120.78)

Foil
686.61
(176.80)
730.45
(111.03)

showed significantly more accurate recognition for features
that had appeared in a linear arrangement than features that
had appeared in a cluster, F(1,30) = 4.61, p < .05, η2p = .13.
Consistent with these results, a 2 (Map type: concrete
features or abstract features) X 3 (Stimulus type: duplicate,
foil, or unique feature) repeated measures ANOVA showed
a significant main effect for map type, F(1,30) = 5.90, p <
.05, η2p = .16, with significantly more accurate recognition
for concrete features.
For response times, a 2 (Map type: concrete features or
abstract features) X 2 (Arrangement of features: linear or
clustered) repeated measures ANOVA showed significant
main effects for map type and feature arrangement, but the
significant interaction, F(1,30) = 19.76, p < .001, η2p = .40,
was clearly driven by the extremely fast responses to
concrete features that had appeared in a linear arrangement
on the original maps (see Table 2 for means and standard
deviations). Finally, a 2 (Map type: concrete features or
abstract features) X 3 (Stimulus type: duplicate, foil, or
unique feature) repeated measures ANOVA showed
significant main effects for map type, F(1,30) = 9.45, p <
.01, η2p = .24, and stimulus type, F(1,30) = 13.63, p < .001,
η2p = .31, as well as a significant interaction, F(1,30) = 6.37,
p < .01, η2p = .18 (see Table 3 for means and standard
deviations). For abstract stimuli, unique and duplicate
features were significantly faster than foils but not
significantly different from each other. However, for
concrete stimuli, unique features were significantly faster
than duplicate features, which were in turn significantly
faster than foils.

Discussion
Previous research has shown that people distort spatial
lengths when remembering paths with multiple landmark
features (Byrne, 1979), and the distortion even occurs for
paths simply memorized from maps (Thorndyke, 1981).
We hypothesized that the number, arrangement, and type of
features would influence the extent to which participants

1124

distort remembered map distances. The phase 1 results
indicate that each of these factors is important. Participants
overestimated route lengths significantly more when the
route contained more features, a linear arrangement of
features, and concrete, recognizable features. The mental
walk results were limited due to a great deal of variability
across participants, but mental walks were longer for routes
that had concrete features than routes with abstract features.
In regards to the distance estimation results, participants
may treat clustered features as one group and pay less
attention to the individual features. These results seem to be
consistent with previous findings that categorization
influences distance estimates (Stevens and Coupe, 1978;
Hirtle and Jonides, 1985).
Similarly, the statistical
interaction showed that overestimation of four-feature
versus two-feature routes only occurred for concrete
landmark features. Participants may attend to recognizable
features more closely, and, in turn, an increase in these
features leads to increased distance estimates. In contrast,
participants may treat abstract symbols as belonging to one
general category, so the symbols may not be independently
studied in detail. Thornydyke’s (1981) analog timing model
could potentially be adapted to incorporate these categorical
considerations, but without such modifications, the model
would be unable to account for the effects of map type and
arrangement of features.
For the conditions that promote overestimation, it is
unclear whether participants attend more closely to each
feature while learning the map and thereby distort the route
length in memory, or whether participants remember more
features during memory retrieval for the distance estimate,
and these retrieval processes may lead to distorted distance
estimates. Thorndyke (1981) found distance distortions for
both perceived and remembered paths, but the distortions
were significantly smaller for perceived paths. Our phase 2
results suggest that the distortions occur because some
features are recognized better than others. Features that had
appeared in a linear sequence on a route were recognized
more accurately than features that had appeared in a cluster.
Response times indicate that this effect is particularly
pronounced for concrete features that had appeared in a
sequence.
It is possible that the magnitude of our results would
change if the map was scaled or if we emphasized a
particular internal or external reference point to the
participants, as previous research has shown that distances
between landmarks are stretched if the reference point is
nearby rather than distant (Holyoak & Mah, 1982).
Nonetheless, our results clearly demonstrate that the
number, type, and configuration of landmark features lead
humans to distort distance estimates even when simply
viewing a map. Thus, when a person is new to a city (or
any novel location), he or she is likely creating a distorted
cognitive map simply by looking at noteworthy features on
a map. Presumably, once the person begins navigating the
environment, these distortions can be rectified (Thorndyke
& Hayes-Roth, 1982), but previous navigation findings

indicate that the distortions may be sustained or even
enhanced (Byrne, 1979).
Humans clearly rely on simple landmark navigation in
many situations (Foo, Warren, Duchon, & Tarr, 2005), so
the number or saliency of landmarks in real or virtual
worlds may also lead to distance distortion. Previous
research indicates clear differences in cognitive maps
according to how the knowledge was acquired. For
instance, Thorndyke and Hayes-Roth (1982) compared map
learning and navigation learning for routes with multiple
legs and found that map learning led to better Euclidean (i.e.
straight-line, potentially moving through an obstacle to
reach a target destination) estimates of distance, but
navigation learning led to better distance estimates of the
actual routes (i.e. unable to move through an obstacle).
However, Thorndyke and Hayes-Roth did not examine
influences from the number of features along each route.
The current research could be extended to examine route
navigation through multiple legs of a journey for both
survey knowledge and procedural knowledge, with
particular combinations of route legs controlled for number
and configuration of landmark features.
Furthermore, a future direction may compare distance
estimates in real world or virtual world situations in which
people are actively walking to situations in which people are
going to locations with relatively passive movement, such
as driving in a car or taking a subway. In the current
experiment, there was clearly no movement, but recent
studies on embodied perception have shown that
participants overestimate distance in some conditions, such
as when they are carrying a heavy backpack and gauging the
distance to the top of a hill (Proffitt, Stefanucci, Banton, and
Epstein, 2003). Such embodied perception effects could be
independent effects, or they could potentially interact with
the number and configuration of features, e.g. leading to
even greater distance distortions when approaching a
daunting hill in San Francisco with many noteworthy
attractions on both sides of the street. In the much more
constrained context of survey knowledge in the current
experiment, the results could indicate that humans
unconsciously distort distances whenever they view maps,
or the distortion may only occur when humans make
effortful mental walks along the depicted routes.

Acknowledgments
The authors are very grateful to Heng Li and Neil Wright
for their help in collecting data, and to Amber Goode for her
technical assistance with the ERP and computer equipment.

References
Byrne, R. (1979). Memory for urban geography. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 31, 147-154.
Foo, P., Warren, W.H., Duchon, A., & Tarr, M.J. (2005).
Do humans integrate routes into a cognitive map? Mapversus landmark-based navigation of novel shortcuts.

1125

Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 31, 195-215.
Hirtle, S., & Jonides, J. (1985). Evidence of hierarchies in
cognitive maps. Memory and Cognition, 13, 208-217.
Holyoak, K., & Mah, W. (1982). Cognitive reference points
in judgments of symbolic magnitude. Cognitive
Psychology, 14, 328-352.
Proffitt, D. R., Stefanucci, J. K., Banton, T., & Epstein, W.
(2003). The role of effort in distance perception.
Psychological Science, 14, 106-113.
Stevens, A., & Coupe, P. (1978). Distortions in judged
spatial relations. Cognitive Psychology, 10, 422-437.
Thorndyke, P. (1981). Distance estimates from cognitive
maps, Cognitive Psychology, 13, 526-550.
Thorndyke, P., & Hayes-Roth, B. (1982). Differences in
spatial knowledge acquired from maps and navigation.
Cognitive Psychology, 14, 560-589.

1126

