UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Effect of Repeated Cue Exposure on Post-Completion Errors

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/03d43898

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Ament, Maartje
Lai, Anita
Cox, Anna

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Effect of Repeated Cue Exposure on Post-Completion Errors
Maartje G. A. Ament (m.ament@ucl.ac.uk)
Anita Y. T. Lai (anita.y.t.lai@gmail.com)
Anna L. Cox (anna.cox@ucl.ac.uk)
UCL Interaction Centre
University College London
Gower Street
London, WC1E 6BT
United Kingdom
Abstract

investigated the role of motivation in the occurrence of postcompletion errors. They found that motivation to avoid them
does not lead to lower error rates on the post-completion (PC)
step. In a similar study, Byrne and Davis (2006) investigated
the effect of a number of interventions on the PCE, including motivation, retraining and redesign. They found that only
redesigning the interface resulted in the complete elimination
of PCEs, while reprimanding, praising or retraining participants was not more effective than the control condition with
no interventions at all.
Another mitigation strategy that has seen recent investigation is the use of visual cues. Chung and Byrne (2008) studied
the effectiveness of a number of visual cues in reducing postcompletion errors. They found that a red singleton onset appearing just before the PC step was not effective in reducing
the number of PCEs. However, a more aggressive cue with
blinking arrows pointing at the PC button achieved the complete elimination of PCEs. Byrne (2008) further investigated
the properties a cue must possess in order to be effective. He
found that the most important attributes of a successful visual
cue are, in order of importance: appearing just-in-time, being
specific, and being salient.
However, while visual cues can be effective in reducing
slips, they also have their drawbacks. Ratwani, McCurry, and
Trafton (2008), for instance, argued that cues can become less
effective over time, and repeated exposure to them can be annoying. To address these issues, they developed a real-time
system that uses eye movements to predict when an error is
likely to occur. This allowed them to provide a cue only when
needed, reducing some of the concerns associated with visual
cues. Ratwani and Trafton (2009) reported that this system is
very effective in reducing error rates.
Byrne (2008) highlighted another potential drawback of
the use of visual cues. He argued that providing repeated cues
may lead people to become dependent on the cue to remember a particular step. This could be problematic in situations
in which the cue fails, such as when loud traffic noise masks
the ATM beeping sounds upon returning the card, or when a
user uses a different device to perform a task which does not
provide cues for the same steps. It is possible that, if people
learn to rely on repeated cues, they become particularly prone
to errors on the cued step, beyond what is expected of a user

Slip errors in routine procedures are notoriously difficult to
eliminate. They are not the result of a lack of knowledge, so
retraining or increasing motivation is not effective. Recently,
a number of studies have used visual cues in an attempt to reduce post-completion errors. These slip errors occur when the
last step in a task is forgotten after the main goal has been completed. Visual cues have been shown to be effective in reducing post-completion errors if sufficiently aggressive. However,
concerns have been raised over whether repeated exposure to
visual cues may lead people to rely on them, and therefore become more prone to errors should the cue inadvertently be unavailable. Alternatively, people may anticipate the appearance
of the cue, which may have a positive effect on error rates.
We report on an experiment that tests the effect of repeated
exposure to a strong visual cue on the post-completion error
rate. Participants were repeatedly exposed to an aggressive visual cue just before the post-completion step, and this cue was
withdrawn on a number of target trials. Our results show that
error rates on these non-cued target trials are similar to those of
non-cued control participants. Moreover, eye-movement patterns are similar for target and non-target trials. These results
suggest that participants do not become over-reliant on the cue,
while they partially support the hypothesis that participants anticipate the appearance of the cue. As such, visual cues are a
safe and effective way to reduce slip errors.
Keywords: Human error; routine procedural action; visual
cues; post-completion error; eye-tracking; slip errors.

Introduction
Despite having the correct knowledge, people still make errors while executing routine procedures. Often, these slip errors are inconsequential, but in safety-critical domains such
as aviation, medicine and nuclear power plant operations they
can have severe consequences. While slip errors occur only
occasionally, they are nevertheless persistent. They do not
occur as a result of a lack of knowledge, and this makes them
difficult to eliminate, or even reduce (e.g. Byrne & Davis,
2006).
A growing body of empirical work has studied these cognitive slips in the laboratory. For instance, Byrne and Bovair (1997) argued that the post-completion error (PCE), an
error that occurs when the last step in a procedure is forgotten after the main goal has been completed, is a result of a
failure of working memory. They found that a higher working memory load could increase the occurrence of the PCE.
More recent research has focussed on how to reduce these
errors. Back, Cheng, Dann, Curzon, and Blandford (2006)

850

who has never received a cue. Conversely, another possibility
is that people come to anticipate the strong visual cue. In the
absence of the cue, the expectation of seeing it may in itself
act as a reminder to reduce error rates. However, to date no
studies have addressed these effects. Therefore, the current
paper investigates the impact on performance of these failed
or absent cues. It considers both the hypothesis that people
may become over-reliant on the cue, as well as the hypothesis that anticipation for the cue may act as a reminder.
In order to understand how cues work and why people
may learn to rely on them, we turn to a theoretical account
of goal-directed action. The Memory-for-Goals (M-f-G)
model (Altmann & Trafton, 2002, 2007) has previously been
used to explain the effectiveness of cues in preventing postcompletion errors (e.g. Byrne, 2008; Chung & Byrne, 2008).
The M-f-G theory argues that goals in memory have an associated activation level, and the goal with the highest activation level is the one that directs behaviour. This means
that a goal’s activation level must be higher than the interference level, which is equal to the activation level of the next
most active goal in memory. The activation of a goal decays
over time, and therefore a mechanism is needed to regulate
goals’ activation levels. As such, goals must be strengthened
(through frequent and recent use) and primed (from mental
and contextual cues) to gain enough activation. This priming
constraint makes a number of predictions about visual cues:

• Cues should be specific, so that the cue and its target goal
are associatively linked.

executed, such a link between the previous step and the PC
step may be substantially weaker. If the visual cue is then unavailable, the remaining source of activation for the PC step
may not be sufficient for the step to reach the required activation level. An error is thus more likely to occur.
Conversely, because the completion of the pre-PC step and
the appearance of the visual cue happen at the same time, an
associative link may form between them. While the appearance of the cue is not a goal per se, it may become associated
with the response of focussing attention on the visual cue and
therefore the PC step button. If the goal of moving attention
to the visual cue is sufficiently activated through this, it may
come to be associatively primed by the pre-PC step, even in
the absence of the visual cue. This would make it more likely
that the PC step is remembered. Moreover, the repeated reminder for the PC step may reinforce this step in the task
representation. This would also make it more likely that the
step is remembered, even when the cue is absent.
The current paper presents an experiment that addresses
the effect of consistent exposure to a strong visual cue in a
well-known post-completion task. Participants are habituated
to the cue over a period of time, after which it is withdrawn on
three target trials. Performance on these target trials is compared to baseline performance of a control group, who have
received no cues at all. Two hypotheses are tested: if participants become over-reliant on the cue, it is expected that error
rates would increase beyond the baseline error rate on cueabsent trials after repeated exposed to the cue. Alternatively,
if participants anticipate the cue, fewer errors would be made
on these cue-absent trials. Eye movements are used to further
investigate cue anticipation, which can be revealed by prompt
fixation to the cue location even when the cue is not present.

• Cues should be salient, to ensure that the cue will be processed by the cognitive system.

Method

• Cues should be just-in-time, to ensure the cued goal will
not be masked by other goals and lose its activation before
being executed.

Participants

These predictions are in line with Byrne’s (2008) findings
on the essential properties of visual cues. Chung and Byrne
(2008) further argue that cues are effective in reducing PCEs
because they provide a low-effort strategy for remembering
the post-completion step. In line with the law of least mental effort (e.g. Kool, McGuire, Rosen, & Botvinick, 2010),
people will exploit available cues in a task interface to reduce
cognitive effort.
It is not immediately clear what the M-f-G model predicts
about the effect of repeated cues on PCEs. In the absence of
cues, the post-completion error is normally avoided because
the previous step in the procedure provides associative activation for the PC subgoal. These associative links form between
steps in a routine procedure, with each step providing an internal cue for the next one. One way in which repeated cueing
may lead to higher error rates if the cue fails may be through
the loss of these associative links to the PC step. If people
receive a cue for the PC step each time they execute it, it is
likely that they will develop an associative link between the
cue and the PC step. However, since it is this cue that provides the necessary boost in activation for the PC step to be

Forty-five students (25 female) from University College London took part in the experiment. They were aged between
18 and 36 years, and their mean age was 23.7 years. Each
received £6 for their time and effort.

Stimuli
Ament, Cox, Blandford, and Brumby’s (2010) variant of the
Doughnut task (originally developed by Li, Cox, Blandford,
Cairns, and Abeles (2006)) was used. It consists of a routine procedural task that requires participants to make virtual
doughnuts, and a monitoring task, as shown in Figure 1.
A trial starts with receiving and displaying a new doughnut order, which has to be entered into the machine. The
main doughnut task consists of five compartments, or widgets, which need to be operated in the order:
Dough Port → Puncher → Froster → Sprinkler → Fryer.
Before data can be entered, a widget needs to be activated by
clicking the appropriate selector button on the selector panel

851

description would be shown. The monitoring task and primary tasks were carried out simultaneously.
Visual cues consisted of two yellow-and-red flashing arrows, pointed at the post-completion button (see figure 1, bottom right). On cued trials, the cue appeared upon the completion of the previous step (dismissing the pop-up button), and
disappeared again when the post-completion button was successfully clicked.

Design
A between-subjects design was used, with the level of visual
cues as the independent variable. This variable had two conditions. In the cued condition, participants were habituated to
the visual cue during training, and subsequently received the
cue just before the post-completion step on all trials, with the
exception of trials 4, 8 and 11. On these three target trials,
the cue was withdrawn. In the control condition, on the other
hand, participants received no visual cues at all.
The primary dependent measure was the number of postcompletion errors made on the target trials. An error was
defined as any action that deviates from the required action.
Only one error could be counted on the PC step, regardless
of the number of incorrect mouse-clicks made between the
pre-PC and PC steps. Another dependent measure of interest was the eye-movements between the pre-PC and the PC
step. Fixations on the PC step button and the cue could reveal if participants anticipated the appearance of the cue even
when it was withdrawn. Eye movements were recorded using
a Tobii 1750 eye tracker.

Figure 1: The Doughnut Task interface. The banner at the
bottom is the Doughnut Live Feed. The visual cue is shown
in the lower right-hand corner, on both sides of the PC step
button.
on the right-hand side. Clicking the ‘OK’ button then confirms the entry for that widget. Once all widgets have been
completed, the order needs to be processed by clicking the
‘Process/Clean’ button. A pop-up screen then indicates the
completion of the trial, and displays the number of doughnuts
made. This serves as the false completion signal, indicating
that the main goal of the task has been completed. After dismissing the pop-up screen, the machine must be cleaned by
clicking the ‘Process/Clean’ button again. This serves as the
post-completion step. A competing signal is also present: a
flashing telephone indicates that the next order is waiting.
Like Byrne and Bovair (1997), the current experiment used
a secondary monitoring task to increase working memory
load. This task, called the Doughnut Live Feed, ensured that
the error rates were at a measurable level. It requires participants to monitor the number of doughnuts sold in the shops.
The Live feed was shown at the bottom of the screen, and
displayed a description of a doughnut at irregular intervals.
Participants had to monitor and keep track of all doughnuts
with ‘chewy’ dough. Once they had counted twenty chewy
doughnuts, they had to click the ‘20 sold!’ button on the left
of the Live Feed and start counting from zero again. This allowed the experimenter to assess whether a participant was
successfully monitoring the live feed.
To ensure effective monitoring, new items on the live feed
did not capture visual attention. This was achieved by using a
background that changed from grey to white and back in continuous cycles. Each doughnut description faded in on top of
that from white to black, and faded out again after a random
number of cycles. Figure 2 shows the progression through
one cycle. Each cycle took three seconds, and items remained
visible for between 2 and 4 cycles. This randomness made it
impossible for participants to predict when a new doughnut

Procedure
Participants carried out the task individually. They first read
the paper-based instructions, after which they observed the
researcher executing one trial of the task, and were reminded
of the PC step and the importance of the monitoring task.
Participants in the experimental group were briefed about the
cue and its significance.

Figure 2: The Doughnut Live Feed. (a) A cycle starts out
completely white. (b) The background then quickly fades to
grey, while the item fades from white to black. (c) Halfway
through the cycle, the background and the item are at its darkest, and the item is clearly visible. (d) At the end of the cycle,
the background fades to white again while the item may either
stay visible or fade as well.

852

Participants then completed two practice trials in the presence of the researcher. The experimental group received visual cues before each PC step; the control group did not. Any
errors were pointed out using the default Windows XP error
sound, and had to be corrected before the participant was allowed to carry on. At the end of each trial, participants were
asked how many chewy doughnuts they had counted, to encourage effective monitoring of the Live Feed. Once the two
initial practice trials were completed, participants then completed a further 4 practice trials to habituate them to the cue.
Participants in both conditions did this, but as before, only the
experimental participants received cues.
To prevent self-monitoring, participants were not told that
errors were being studied. Moreover, experimental participants were not told that the cue would occasionally be absent. Participants were instructed to work as quickly and as
accurately as possible. All participants completed 11 experimental trials. The total duration of the experiment was approximately one hour.

Condition
Experimental
Control

Target
10 (66)
9 (66)

Trial
Non-Target
4 (176)
18 (176)

Table 1: Number of errors observed on target and non-target
trials, for both experimental and control conditions. The
number of opportunities for error is given in brackets.

Non-Target Trials To test whether the cue worked effectively, error rates on non-target trials were investigated. Figure 3 shows the average error rates on non-target trials for
experimental and control groups. Since the data was not normally distributed, a Mann-Whitney U test was used to compare the groups. This showed a significant difference between experimental (cued) and control (non-cued) groups,
Z = 3.18, p = 0.001. This indicates that the cue was effective in reducing error rates.
Target Trials Figure 4 shows the average error rates on target trials for experimental and control groups. A Mann- Whitney U test showed no significant difference between experimental and control groups, Z = 0.29, p = 0.77. This indicates
that repeated cues did not lead to higher or lower error rates
on cue-absent trials.

Results
Data from 45 participants was recorded. One had to be excluded due to a lost data file, leaving 44 participants for
analysis, 22 in each condition.

Error Rates

Eye Movements

We were primarily interested in the post-completion error
rates on target and non-target trials. Error rates were calculated for each participant. Only one PCE was possible on
each trial, giving a total of 44 x 11 = 484 PCE opportunities. Forty-one post-completion errors were made across all
participants, giving an overall PCE rate of 8.47%. Table 1
shows the numbers of errors observed on the different trials
and conditions.

Eye movement data was only collected for a subset of the participants due to issues with the equipment. This resulted in 15
usable data files. Eye movement data was isolated for the time
period from the pre-PC step (dismissing the pop-up screen)
until the PC-button was clicked. Only correct cases were included, for two reasons. First, eye movements on erroneous
trials tend to be more erratic and may introduce outliers. Sec-

Figure 3: Error rates on non-target trials for experimental and
control groups.

Figure 4: Error rates on target trials for experimental and control groups.

853

Condition
Experimental
Control

Trial
Target
Non-Target
Target
Non-Target

Number of Fixations Prior to Fixating on PC Step
2.5 (1.4)
2.9 (0.9)
3.8 (1.2)
3.9 (0.9)

Table 2: Summary of eye movement data on target and non-target trials, for both experimental and control conditions.

ond, it can be argued that eye movements on erroneous trials
are not an accurate reflection of successful routine procedural
action.
Table 2 shows an overview of the eye movement measures.
The main measure used was the number of fixations prior to
fixating on the PC step. It was argued that the visually salient
cue would capture participants’ attention and therefore reduce
the number of fixations prior to looking at the PC button. If
participants anticipated the appearance of the cue even when
it was not present, it was expected that a similar number of
fixations would be made before fixating on the PC step button
on target and non-target trials.
An independent samples t-test showed that the experimental participants made significantly fewer fixations (M = 2.86, SD = 0.88) than control participants
(M = 3.98, SD = 0.71) before fixating on the PC step,
t(14) = 2.72, p < 0.05. Moreover, there was no significant
difference in the number of fixations before fixating on the
PC step button between target (M = 2.95, SD = 0.91) and
non-target trials (M = 2.52, SD = 1.43) in the experimental
condition, t(7) = 1.13, p = 0.30.

remember the PC step as often as the participants who never
received a cue. If they had become overly reliant on the cue to
remember the step, it would have been expected that participants would not have been able to remember it on their own,
without a cue.
These results are in line with the M-f-G model (Altmann
& Trafton, 2002, 2007). This model accounts for the correct
execution of PC steps using associative links: the pre-PC step
provides associative activation for the PC step. Priming cues
can also come from the external environment: sufficiently aggressive visual cues are very effective in priming the PC step
(Chung & Byrne, 2008). The current results suggest that both
internal primes through associative links and external primes
through visual cues can independently provide activation for
the PC step.
However, what is not immediately clear is how these internal and external cues interact. The current findings suggest
that if an external cue is available, it is likely to be used. This
is signified by the lower error rates on cued trials in experimental participants, compared to non-cued trials in both experimental and control participants. When this external cue
is unavailable, the internal associative links are still in place
and can provide the required activation instead. Indeed, the
current results support this by showing that performance on
non-cued trials is no worse when strong visual cues have been
available than when no such external primes were provided.
The second hypothesis that was investigated is whether
participants anticipated the appearance of the cue. This could
have provided a (weak) reminder for the PC step. This hypothesis was not supported by the error data, as it showed that
experimental participants did not perform better than controls
on non-cued target trials.
We further investigated this cue anticipation using the eye
movement data. On average, control participants made more
fixations prior to fixating on the PC step than those in the experimental condition. This further supports the finding that
the cue successfully captured participants’ attention. If anticipation occurred when the cue was absent, we would expect to see participants focus on the cue location within the
same number of fixations for cued and non-cued trials. The
eye movement data supported this, as it showed no significant
difference in the number of fixations before a fixation on the
PC step took place. Interestingly, this is not consistent with
the corresponding finding in the error data, which showed that
a similar number of PCEs were made on uncued experimental trials and control trials. As such, it is possible that some
anticipation for the cue is taking place, but that this is not

Discussion
The current experiment investigated the effect of repeated exposure to a strong visual cue. Error rates were compared for
target (non-cued) trials when participants had previously been
cued (experimental) or received no cues at all (control). Eye
movements were also recorded to further investigate any possible effects of anticipation.
The results of this study support previous findings that cues
are an effective way to reduce post-completion errors. On
cued trials, participants made significantly fewer errors than
on non-cued trials, although a complete elimination, as found
by Chung and Byrne (2008), was not achieved. Nevertheless,
this finding was important for the validity of the current experiment, as an ineffective cue would have undermined the
ability of the experiment to detect cue reliance.
The results show that cue-trained experimental participants
performed similarly to non-cued controls on trials in which
no cue was present. This has several implications. First, it
indicates that a cue is needed on every trial in order to be
effective. This is in line with previous findings by Chung and
Byrne (2008) and Byrne (2008), who showed that cues must
be just-in-time to be effective.
Second, this finding indicates that cue-trained participants
did not become dependent on the cue to remember the postcompletion step. When the cue was absent, they were able to

854

strong enough to remind participants to execute the PC step.
As such, the current study is inconclusive about whether or
not participants anticipate the appearance of the cue. Future
studies must address this further.
A limitation of the current study is the relatively short duration of the experiment, and the somewhat limited training
participants received. While previous studies have obtained
good results with similar or less training (e.g. Li, Blandford,
Cairns, & Young, 2008; Ament et al., 2010), it can be argued that the more experience participants have with doing
the task, the more their performance represents true routine
procedural performance. It is not known how long it takes
before associative links fully form, or how long it takes for
participants to learn to rely on visual cues. As such, it is possible that it takes much longer than the timescale of the current study for effects to become noticeable. Therefore, future
studies can train participants for much longer on the cued and
un-cued conditions of the task, and test the effects of unavailable cues after a larger number of habituation trials.
A related limitation of the current study is the small number of target trials each participant contributes. Due to experimental constraints and fatigue effects, it was not possible
to include more target trials in the experimental phase, as it
was essential that the disappearance of the cue remained unexpected for experimental participants.
The current study has important practical implications for
the use of visual cues. The findings suggest that despite repeated exposure to a strong visual cue, people do not make
more errors than un-cued controls when the cue is suddenly
unavailable. This means that visual cues are an effective and
safe way to reduce post-completion errors. Nevertheless, the
current experiment also supports previous findings that the effects of visual cues are short-lived. When the cue is absent,
for whatever reason, people revert to ‘baseline’ performance,
and make as many errors as those who have never received visual cues. Therefore, in safety critical situations where errors
could have severe consequences, additional measures should
be in place in case the cue inadvertently fails.

Altmann, E. M., & Trafton, J. G. (2007). Timecourse of
recovery from task interruption: Data and a model. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 14(6), 1079-1084.
Ament, M. G. A., Cox, A. L., Blandford, A., & Brumby, D.
(2010). Working memory load affects device-specific but
not task-specific error rates. In S. Ohlsson & R. Catrambone (Eds.), Proceedings of the cognitive science conference.
Back, J., Cheng, W. L., Dann, R., Curzon, P., & Blandford,
A. (2006). Does being motivated to avoid procedural errors
influence their systematicity? In Proceedings of hci 2006
(Vol. 1, p. 2-9).
Byrne, M. D. (2008). Preventing postcompletion errors: How
much cue is enough? In Proceedings of the thirtieth annual
conference of the cognitive science society. Austin, TX.
Byrne, M. D., & Bovair, S. (1997). A working memory model
of a common procedural error. Cognitive Science, 21(1),
31-61.
Byrne, M. D., & Davis, E. M. (2006). Task structure and
postcompletion error in the execution of a routine procedure. Human Factors, 48(4), 627-638.
Chung, P. H., & Byrne, M. D. (2008). Cue effectiveness
in mitigating postcompletion errors in a routine procedural
task. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies,
66, 217-232.
Kool, W., McGuire, J. T., Rosen, Z. B., & Botvinick, M. M.
(2010). Decision making and the avoidance of cognitive
demand. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
139(4), 665-682.
Li, S. Y.-W., Blandford, A., Cairns, P., & Young, R. M.
(2008). The effect of interruptions on postcompletion
and other procedural errors: An account based on the
activation-based goal memory model. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 14(4), 314-328.
Li, S. Y. W., Cox, A. L., Blandford, A., Cairns, P., & Abeles,
A. (2006). Further investigations into post-completion error: the effects of interruption position and duration. In
Proceedings of cogsci ’06. Vancouver, Canada.
Ratwani, R. M., McCurry, J. M., & Trafton, J. G. (2008).
Predicting postcompletion errors using eye movements. In
Proceedings of chi ’08.
Ratwani, R. M., & Trafton, J. G. (2009). Developing a predictive model of postcompletion errors. In Proceedings of
cogsci ’09.

Conclusion
In short, the current study showed that repeated exposure to
strong visual cues has no reliable negative or positive effects
on performance when the cue is absent. People do not become overly reliant on the cue. Instead, they revert to ‘baseline’ performance. Moreover, there is some evidence that
people learn to anticipate the appearance of the cue, but this
may not be strong enough to mitigate errors.

Acknowledgements
We thank Simon Li for the use of his Doughnut task.

References
Altmann, E. M., & Trafton, J. G. (2002). Memory for goals:
An activation-based model. Cognitive Science, 26, 39-83.

855

