UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Dramatic Effect of Content on Children’s Unless Reasoning: Pragmatic Modulation or
Reconstruction?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8z2637gh

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Schaeken, Walter
Sevenants, Aline
Madruga, Juan Garcia

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Dramatic Effect of Content on Children’s Unless Reasoning:
Pragmatic Modulation or Reconstruction?
Walter Schaeken (walter.schaeken@psy.kuleuven.be)
Department of Psychology, University of Leuven, Tiensestraat 102
B-3000 Leuven, Belgium

Aline Sevenants (aline.sevenants@psy.kuleuven.be)
Department of Psychology, University of Leuven, Tiensestraat 102
B-3000 Leuven, Belgium

Juan Garcia Madruga (jmadruga@psi.uned.es)
Department of Developmental Psychology, UNED
28040 Madrid, Spain

theory (e.g., Johnson-Laird, 1983; Johnson-Laird, Byrne, &
Schaeken, 1992) would explain reasoning with unless, and
this in a developmental perspective. In the remaining parts
of the introduction, we will first illustrate the mental model
theory of propositional reasoning. Next, we propose a
developmental account of reasoning by model which
focuses on unless and the effect of content.

Abstract
Reasoning on the basis of sentences with the connective
unless has only rarely been studied by cognitive scientists.
Our investigation starts from the mental model theory of
reasoning (e.g., Johnson-Laird, 1983). An assertion such as
not-p unless q has the same truth conditions as if p then q, but
we argue that it is represented differently, that is, the initial
mental models for these two connectives are not the same.
The experiment is the first to investigate the role of age (by
testing three age groups: nine-year-old, eleven-year-old and
thirteen-year-old children) on reasoning with unless. Other
investigated factors are type of conditional (if-then vs. unless),
and content (by comparing abstract and concrete problems).
We discuss the results in terms of recent modifications to the
original mental model theory.

Propositional reasoning by model

Introduction
Reasoning about conditionals attracted the interest of
cognitive scientists: linguists (e.g., Horn, 2002), logicist
(e.g., Edgington, 2003), researchers in artificial intelligence
(e.g., Delgrande, 1998), and experimental psychologists
(e.g., Barrouillet & Lecas, 2002; Evans, Handley, & Over,
2003; Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991, 2002; Oaksford,
Chater, & Larkin, 2000; Rips, 1994). Most of this research
focused on reasoning with if-then. In this paper, we present
research on reasoning with unless, a negative conditional
connective rarely studied. To our knowledge, this is the first
study that investigates unless reasoning by children.
Unless is directly related to if-not-then (see Quine, 1972;
Reichenbach, 1947). In fact, from a logical point of view,
an if p then q conditional assertion is equivalent to an if notq then not p conditional, and this could be phrased with
unless as not-p, unless q. However, Geis (1973) holds that
the meaning of unless is more similar to except if than to if
not. In a similar way, Fillenbaum (1976, 1986) proposed
only if as the preferred understanding for unless sentences.
In other words, although unless and if-then are closely
related in terms of their logical meaning, people do not
reason with them in the same way.
In the present paper, we investigate how the dominant
approach in deductive reasoning, that is, the mental model

The mental model theory (Johnson-Laird, 1983; JohnsonLaird & Byrne, 1991) is based on the idea that reasoning
depends on the semantic processes of constructing and
manipulating models of assertions. The difficulty of a
problem is determined by the number of models that have to
be constructed in order to reach a conclusion: The more
models that have to be constructed, the harder a problem is,
hence, the more likely it is that reasoners err and the longer
it takes before they reach a conclusion.
According to the model theory, reasoning consists of
three main stages. First, the premises are understood: A
mental model of the situation they describe is constructed on
the basis of the meaning of the premises and of any relevant
general knowledge. Second, reasoners formulate a
conclusion on the basis of the model. People will only draw
conclusions that convey some information that was not
explicitly asserted by the premises. Third, a search is made
for alternative models of the premises in which the putative
conclusion is false. If there is no such model, then the
conclusion is valid. If there is such a model, then it is
necessary to return to the second stage to determine whether
there is any conclusion that holds for all the models so far
constructed.
We will illustrate the model theory by considering the
representation of a conditional such as:
If there is an ‘A’, then there is a ‘2’.
The initial models of this assertion are as follows:
A
2
...
Reasoners realise that both A and 2 may be present. They
realise also that the assertion is consistent with other

1170

possibilities. However, they defer a detailed representation
of the case where there is not an A. The ellipsis accordingly
signifies an implicit model: that is, one that has no explicit
content. The possibility of this alternative situation rules out
any simple conjunctive interpretation (there is an ‘A’ and a
‘2’).
Given the initial models of the conditional, consider the
following categorical premise:
There is an ‘A’.
It picks out the situation represented in the first model and
eliminates the second model. The remaining model:
A
2
yields the Modus Ponens (MP) conclusion:
There is a ‘2’.
Given the initial models of the same conditional,
consider the following categorical premise:
There is not a ‘2’.
In order to draw the valid deduction Modus Tollens (MT),
reasoners have to flesh out the models, that is, make the
implicit model explicit. In the case of a conditional
interpretation, the models are:
A
2
not-A
2
not-A
not-2
The categorical premise ‘There is not a ‘2’’ calls for the
elimination of the models containing a ‘2’. As a result, only
one model is left behind:
not-A
not-2
which yields the MT conclusion:
There is not an ‘A’.
In the case of a biconditional interpretation (if and only if …
then …), the models are:
A
2
not-A
not-2
After elimination of the models containing a ‘2’, the valid
MT-conclusion can be drawn.
Consider the same major premise, but now with the
following categorical premise:
There is not an ‘A’.
Many reasoners give for this Denial of the Antecedent
problem (DA) the following conclusion:
There is not a ‘2’.
This conditional conclusion is wrong. If the conditional is
interpreted as a true conditional, then it is possible that there
are other alternatives that imply the consequent “there is a
2”. However, if the conditional is interpreted as a
biconditional then the conclusion “there is not a 2” is
correct.
The same line of reasoning can be applied to the
Affirmation of the Consequent problem (AC). For this
problem, one receives the following categorical premise:
There is a ‘2’.
Many reasoners give the following conclusion:
There is an ‘A’.
As for the denial of the antecedent problem, this conditional
answer is only valid if one interprets the conditional as a
biconditional.

Thus far, we described how the mental model theory
explains reasoning with if-then-sentences. How would the
theory explain reasoning with unless sentences? As we
mentioned previously, there is a close resemblance between
the meaning or the interpretation of unless and only if. The
conditional ‘p only if q’ has the same truth table as ‘if p then
q’ in truth functional logic. Both conditionals are false only
when we have p without q. However, experiments
demonstrated differences in reasoning patterns between the
two forms. For example, there are more MP inferences on
if-then conditionals and more MT inferences on only-if
conditionals than on if-then (see Evans et al, 1993, p.46).
Johnson-Laird and Byrne (1991) tried to account for this
difference by proposing that ‘p only if q’ has an initial
representation that makes explicit two models. Consider the
following sentence:
There is an ‘A’ only if there is a ‘2’.
According to Johnson-Laird & Byrne (1991), the initial
representation consists of the following models:
A
2
not-A not-2
…
Although there are some criticisms against this account (see
e.g., Evans, 1993; Evans, Over, & Handley, 2005), we will
use it as our predicted initial representation (cfr., Carriedo,
García-Madruga, Gutiérrez, & Moreno, 1999) for the related
unless sentence:
There is not an ‘A’ unless there is a ‘2’.
Carriedo et al. (1999) did find some support for this claim.
They observed indeed more or less equal MP, AC, DA and
MT acceptance rates for the unless sentence, indicating a
biconditional representation of the unless sentences.
However, they also observed a rather high number of
reversed conclusions: If the biconditional answer was for
example ‘2’, some reasoners concluded ‘not-2’. These
strange reversed conclusions were observed for the four
inference types and the proportion of them was much higher
for unless than for if-then or for only-if. This finding
indicates that not everyone was having a solid initial
representation of unless-sentences.
In the next section, we describe how the mental model
theory could explain developmental effects in propositional
reasoning and we link this with our account of reasoning
with unless.

A developmental account of propositional
reasoning
Johnson-Laird and Byrne did not put their theory explicitly
in a developmental perspective. However, one main factor
in explaining variation in conditional reasoning has been the
number of models: The more models are required, the
harder the task is, because more models means more load on
working memory. Recent research clearly indicated the role
of working memory in conditional reasoning (e.g., De Neys,
Schaeken, & d’Ydewalle, 2005; Verschueren, Schaeken, &
d’Ydewalle, 2005).

1171

Since working memory constraints are larger with
younger reasoners (e.g., Kail, 1992), the model theory could
predict that younger reasoners would tend to reason with the
initial representation in conditional reasoning problems. In
the case of problems with if-then, this would lead them to
accept MP and AC and to not give any conclusions to either
DA or MT. Older children might be able to manipulate two
models, which would allow fleshing out as a biconditional
(e.g., Barouillet & Lecas, 1998). This would lead older
children to accept all four inferences.
However, as Markovits (2000; Markovits & Barrouillet,
2002) pointed out, this simple interpretation of the theory is
not completely consistent with data on children’s
conditional reasoning. Markovits (2000) showed that young
children’s reasoning with meaningful if-then conditionals
can be explained by the mental model theory if two
suppositions are made. First, most children as young as six
or seven years of age can reason with two models (Andrews
& Halford, 1998). Second, the fleshing out process involves
on-line activation of relevant information that uses the
minor premise as a retrieval cue.
The latter supposition of Markovits (2000) can be easily
linked with Johnson-Laird and Byrne’s (2002) extension of
the mental models theory of conditionals. In addition to the
original theory of mental models, they propose five
principles on which the theory rests. Besides the principle of
core meanings, of subjunctive meaning, of implicit models
and of semantic modulation, there is the principle of
pragmatic modulation.
The principle of pragmatic modulation states that the
context of a conditional depends on general knowledge in
long-term memory and knowledge of the specific
circumstances of its utterance. This context is normally
represented in explicit models. These models can modulate
the representation of a conditional, taking precedence over
contradictory models, and they can add information to
models, prevent the construction of otherwise feasible
models, and aid the process of constructing fully explicit
models (see also e.g., Dieussaert, Schaeken, & d’Ydewalle,
2002; Verbrugge, Dieussaert, Schaeken, & Van Belle,
2004).
What can be inferred from this account about the
development of reasoning with unless? We proposed that
the initial representation of unless contains two explicit
models. If indeed most children as young as six or seven
years of age can reason with two models, they should also
be able to reason with abstract unless problems. Moreover,
if general knowledge can aid the process of constructing
fully explicit models, children should be better in reasoning
with concrete unless problems than with abstract unless
problems. Nevertheless, given the importance of working
memory capacity, one can predict that with increasing age,
reasoning with both abstract and concrete unless problems
should become easier. These predictions are tested in the
experiment.

Experiment
The experiment is the first to investigate whether children
can reason with unless, by comparing three age groups:
children of nine years old, children of eleven years old and
children of thirteen years old. The three groups of children
were given MP, AC, DA, and MT problems for both
abstract and concrete unless problems. In his account of
unless, Fillenbaum (1976, 1986) strongly advocated that the
semantic content is important. In daily life, assertions with
unless would be better understandable when they express a
conditional threat. Therefore, we opted for conditional
threats as our concrete problems (see also Carriedo et al.,
1999, who showed a positive effect of the use of conditional
threats as content on reasoning with unless by adults). In
order to be able to evaluate the effect of the number of
models in the initial representation, we gave the participants
similar problems, now phrased with if-then.

Method
Participants A total of 106 children participated in the
experiment. Of these, 34 were nine-year-old children
(average age: 109 months; 19 girls, 15 boys), 30 were
eleven-year old children (average age: 136 months, 19 girls,
11 boys) and 42 were thirteen-year-old children (average
age: 148 months; 20 girls, 22 boys).
Design Within each of the three age- groups, the
participants acted as their own controls. Each participant
had to solve 16 problems in which there were 2 types of
conditional statements (if p then q and q unless not-p), 2
types of content (abstract vs. threat) and 4 types of
inferences (MP, i.e., p is the case; AC, i.e., q is the case;
DA, i.e., not-p is the case; and MT, i.e., not-q is the case).
Material The lexical contents of the abstract problems
concerned the locations of letters on one side of a card and
numbers on the other side of the card, for example:
- If there is an ‘A’, then there is a '2'.
-There is a ‘2’, unless there is not an ‘A’.
The threats referred to situations in which the fact of
carrying out an action was followed by a negative action:
-If you make more mistakes in your homework,
then you will have to go to bed early.
-You will have to go to bed early, unless you make
no more mistakes.
Procedure Data collection was done in 6 groups of about
15 children (always from the same age group). The
instructions were on the first page of a booklet given to each
participant. They explained that the task was to indicate what
followed from each set of statements. They had to choose
between three options: the conditional response, the reversal of
the conditional and “you can’t know what follows”. The
experimenter read the instructions to the participants and
explained on the blackboard the answer procedure.
Each page in the booklet contained a conditional statement,
followed by the four inferences (MP, AC, DA, and MT) in a
random order. The eight different conditional statements (2
abstract and 2 concrete if-then sentences, and 2 abstract and 2
concrete unless sentences) were presented in a random order.

1172

Results
Each participant evaluated inferences based on two different
conditional statements within each cell of the 2 (conditional:
if-then vs. unless) x 2 (content: abstract vs. concrete) x 4
(inference type: MP, AC, DA, MT) design.
Analysis of the biconditional responses First we evaluated
the number of biconditional responses. The means of these
observations were calculated. These means were subjected
to a 3 (age group) x 2 (conditional) x 2 (content) x 4
(inference type) mixed model ANOVA with age group as
between-subjects factor and type of conditional, content,
and inference type as within-subjects factors. Table 1 shows
the number of biconditional responses to each of the different
problems.
The ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of age, F(2,
103) = 4.1808, p < .05. The nine-year-old children gave less
biconditional responses (60%) than the other two age groups
(eleven-year-old: 66%; thirteen-year-old: 71%). Planned
comparisons revealed that only the difference between the
nine-year-old children and the thirteen-year-old children was
significant (p < .005).
Moreover, there was a significant main effect of type of
conditional, F(1, 103) = 18.971, p < .00005: Participants
gave less often biconditional responses to problems with
unless than to problems with if-then (63% vs. 68%).
There was also a significant main effect of content, F(1,
103) = 132.63, p < .00001: Participants gave less often
biconditional responses to the abstract problems than to the
concrete problems (51% vs. 80%).
Table 1: Percentage biconditional responses to the four
inference types, for the three age groups, the two types of
conditionals and the two types of content.
Age
9

11

13

Conditional
If-then

Abstract
54

Concrete
75

Unless

35

74

If-then

52

80

Unless

49

81

If-then

61

84

Unless

53

85

problems with unless and problems with if-then was
significant for an abstract content (46% vs. 56%; p < .0005),
but not for a concrete content (both 80%).
Finally, there was a significant three-way interaction
between content, conditional, and age: F(3, 309) = 5.9533, p
< .001. This boils down to the observation that the nineyear-old children give less biconditional responses to
abstract problems with unless than to problems with if-then
(35% vs. 54%; p < .0001); for the other age-groups,
however, this difference is not significant (eleven-year-old:
49% vs. 52%; thirteen-year-old: 53% vs. 61%).
Additionally, this difference is not significant for the
concrete problems (nine-year-old: 74% vs. 75%, elevenyear-old: 81% vs. 80%; thirteen-year-old: 85% vs. 84%).
Analysis of the reversed conclusions The reversed
conclusions are the opposites of the biconditional responses.
Previous research showed that this sort of conclusion was
given on a regular basis for unless, but not for if-then. The
mean number of reversed conclusions was subjected to a 3
(age group) x 2 (conditional) x 2 (content) x 4 (inference
type) mixed model ANOVA with age group as betweensubjects factor and type of conditional, content, and
inference type as within-subjects factors. Table 2 shows the
number of reversed responses to each of the different
problems.
First of all, there was a significant main effect of age, F(2,
103) = 6,5275, p < .005. The nine-year-old children gave
more reversed responses (31%) than the other two age groups
(eleven-year-old: 24%, p < .05; thirteen-year-old: 21%, p <
.0005).
Next, there was a significant main effect of type of
conditional, F(1, 103) = 51.363, p < .00001: Participants
gave more often reversed responses to problems with unless
than to problems with if-then (32% vs. 25%).
There was also a significant main effect of content, F(1,
103) = 97.761, p < .00001: Participants gave more often
reversed responses to the abstract problems than to the
concrete problems (40% vs. 16%).
Finally, there was a significant interaction between
conditional and content, F(1, 103) = 41.989. Planned
comparisons learned us that the difference between
problems with unless and problems with if-then was
significant for an abstract content (47% vs. 23%; p < .0005),
but not for a concrete content (17% vs. 11%).

The ANOVA also revealed a significant interaction
between conditional and age, F(2, 103) = 5.3441, p < .01.
The planned comparisons learned us that at the age of nine
unless led to significantly less biconditional responses (55%
vs. 64%, p < .00005), but not at the other ages (eleven: 65%
vs. 66%; thirteen: 69% vs. 72%).
There was a significant interaction between conditional
and content, F(1, 103) = 28,410, p < .00001. Planned
comparisons learned us that the difference between

1173

Table 2: Percentage reversed responses to the four inference
types, for the three age groups, the two types of conditionals
and the two types of content.
Age
9

11

13

Conditional
If-then

Abstract
30

Concrete
16

Unless

55

23

If-then

24

11

Unless

44

16

If-then

18

8

Unless

42

13

Discussion
The experimental evidence clearly supports our starting
hypothesis: Although unless is directly related to if-then
from a logical point of view, children do not reason with
these two connectives in the same way. In the experiment,
participants gave less biconditional responses and more
reversed responses to problems with unless than to problems
with if-then. It is, however, important to mention that this
difference was only significant for the abstract problems.
For the concrete problems, no difference between unless and
if-then was observed.
Other aspects of the data are also straightforward. There
was a clear developmental trend: The youngest children
were having more difficulty (i.e., less biconditional
responses and more reversed conclusions) with the task than
the oldest. This was mainly the case for the problems with
unless.
In addition, there was a clear effect of content: Abstract
problems were much more difficult (i.e., less biconditional
responses and more reversed conclusions) than concrete
problems.
What are the consequences of these data for our
predictions? First of all, the data of the concrete problems,
for both types of conditionals, clearly support the claim that
young children (in our experiment children of the age of
nine) can reason with two models. Indeed, there was a very
high acceptance of all inferences on the concrete problems.
Second, we proposed that the initial representation of
unless contains two explicit models. Because some authors
argue that most children as young as six or seven of age can
reason with two models, we expected them to be able to
reason with abstract unless-problems. However, overall
performance on abstract unless-problems was bad (about
50%), and especially the youngest participants performed
poorly. Their amount of biconditional responses did not
differ from chance level, and we observed a very large
number of reversed responses. This clearly indicates that
they did not understand an abstract unless-sentence.

Third, as we hypothesized, children were much better in
reasoning with concrete unless-problems than with abstract
unless-problems. One way to interpret this observation is in
terms of pragmatic modulation: The specific content of the
problem aided the process of constructing fully explicit
models. However, we doubt this interpretation is correct,
given our previous point. Indeed, performance of the
children (especially the nine-year-old children) on abstract
unless-problems was so bad, that it seems that they did not
understand what unless means. If there is no understanding
at all of the meaning of a connective, then pragmatic
modulation cannot play its role of aiding. Therefore, we
prefer the following way of interpreting the effect of
content: With concrete premises, the children were able to
link the two propositions in the unless-sentence in a
meaningful way, independent of the presence of the
connective unless. In other words, we believe that in the
case of unless, there was no pragmatic modulation, but
pragmatic reconstruction: The content enabled the children
to construct a stable and meaningful representation of the
premises with concrete conditionals, whereas this was
impossible with the abstract conditionals?-.
Does this mean that we do not believe in pragmatic
modulation in general? Definitely not. The if-then data
clearly support the idea of pragmatic modulation. Concrete
problems with if-then are primarily interpreted in a
biconditional way (high acceptance of all four inferences).
Abstract problems with if-then, however, are very often
interpreted in terms of the initial single model: The
acceptance of MP and AC inferences was higher than the
acceptance of DA and MT (which require fleshing out). In
other words, the concrete content aided construction of the
fully explicit models in the case of if-then-sentences.
How strong is this distinction between pragmatic
modulation and pragmatic reconstruction? Are these two
different phenomena or two levels of the same
phenomenon? Pragmatics refers to the effects on
interpretation of the linguistic context of an utterance, its
social and physical situation, and the conventions of
discourse (Levinson, 1983). These factors, which are
referred to as the context of an utterance, can play a part in
determining the particular proposition that is expressed by
the use of the sentence; and they are mediated by the
knowledge and beliefs of speakers and hearers. According
to Johnson-Laird and Byrne (2002) conditionals are
notoriously influenced by their context. We believe that the
role of pragmatics after the construction of the initial
representation is what Johnson-Laird and Byrne (2002)
called pragmatic modulation. The role of pragmatics before
the construction of the initial representation is pragmatic
reconstruction.
In sum, this study presented a first developmental study of
how children reason with unless and how they are
influenced by content. The results suggest that children are
not able to reason with unless, unless unless is embedded in
a meaningful content. With such a content, children are able
to reconstruct the meaning of the sentence on the basis of

1174

the two propositions. The if-then data clearly support the
idea of pragmatic modulation and the ability of very young
children to reason with two explicit models.

Acknowledgments
This research was carried out with the financial support of
the National Council for Scientific Research – Flanders,
Belgium (FWO grant G.0634.09)

References
Andrews, G. and Halford, G. S. (1998). Children’s ability to
make transitive inferences: The importance of premise
integration and structural complexity, Cognitive
Development, 13, 479-513.
Barrouillet, P., & Lecas, J.-F. (2002). Content and context
effects in children's and adult's conditional reasoning.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 55A(3),
839-854.
Carriedo, N., García-Madruga, J.A., Moreno, S. y and
Gutiérrez, F. (1999). How does content affect “unless”
conditional reasoning. Proceedings of European
Conference on Cognitive Science. Rome: Instituto di
Psicologia. Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche. pp. 271277.
Delgrande, J. P. (1998). On first-order conditional logics.
Artificial Intelligence, 105, 105-137.
De Neys, W., Schaeken, W., & d'Ydewalle, G. (2005).
Working memory and everyday conditional reasoning:
Retrieval and inhibition of stored counterexamples.
Thinking and Reasoning, 11, 349-381.
Dieussaert, K., Schaeken, W., & d’Ydewalle, G. (2002).
The relative contribution of content and context factors on
the interpretation of conditionals. Experimental
Psychology, 49 (3), 181-195.
Edgington, D. (2003). What if? Questions about
conditionals. Mind & Language, 18(4), 380-401.
Evans, J. St. B. T. (1993). The mental model theory of
conditional reasoning: Critical appraisal and revision.
Cognition, 48, 1-20.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Handley, S. J., & Over, D. (2003).
Conditionals and conditional probability. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 29(2), 321-335.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Over, D. E., Handley, S. J. (2005).
Suppositions, extensionality, and conditionals: a critique
of the mental model theory of Johnson-Laird & Byrne
(2002). Psychological Review, 112, 1040–1052.
Fillenbaum, S. (1976). Inducements: On phrasing and logic
of conditional promises, threats and warnings.
Psychological Research, 38, 231-250.
Fillenbaum, S. (1986). The use of conditionals in
inducements and deterrents. In E. C. Traugott, A. ter
Meulen, J. S. Reilly, & C. A. Ferguson (Eds.), On
conditionals (pp. 179-195). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Geis, M. L. (1973). If and unless. In B. B. Kachru, R. B.
Lees, Y. Malkiel, A. Pietrangeli, & S. Saporta (Eds.),
Issues in linguistics (pp. 231-253). Urbana Chicago:
University of Illinois Press.

Horn, L. R. (2000). From if to iff: Conditional perfection as
pragmatic strengthening. Journal of Pragmatics, 32, 289326.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1983). Mental models: Towards a
cognitive science of language, inference, and
consciousness. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (1991). Deduction.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (2002).
Conditionals: A theory of meaning, pragmatics, and
inference. Psychological Review, 109(4), 646-678.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., Byrne, R. M. J., & Schaeken, W.
(1992). Propositional reasoning by model. Psychological
Review, 99, 418-439.
Kail, R. (1992). Processing speed, speech rate, and memory.
Developmental Psychology, 28, 899-904.
Markovits, H. (2000). A mental model analysis of young
children's conditional reasoning with meaningful
premises. Thinking & Reasoning, 6(4), 335-347.
Markovits, H., & Barrouillet, P. (2002). The development of
conditional reasoning: A mental model account.
Developmental Review, 22, 3-36.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (1998). Rationality in an
uncertain world. Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Quine, W. V. (1972). Methods of logic (3rd ed.). New York:
Holt, Rinehart, & Winston.
Reichenbach, H. (1947). Elements of symbolic logic. New
York: Free Press.
Rips, L. J. (1994). The Psychology of Proof: Deductive
reasoning in human thinking. Cambridge, MA.: MIT
Press.
Verschueren, N. Schaeken, W., & d'Ydewalle, G. (2005).
Everyday conditional reasoning: A working-memory
dependent trade-off between counterexample and
likelihood use. Memory and Cognition, 33, 107-119.
Verbrugge, S., Dieussaert, K., Schaeken, W. & Van Belle,
W. (2004). Promise is debt, threat another matter. The
effect of credibility on the interpretation of conditional
promises and threats. Canadian Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 58 (2), 106-112.

1175

