UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Effects of Peer Communication with Diagrams on Students’ Math Word Problem Solving
Processes and Outcomes

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/94h4b64x

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Uesaka, Yuri
Manalo, Emmanuel

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Effects of Peer Communication with Diagrams on Students’ Math Word
Problem Solving Processes and Outcomes
Yuri Uesaka (y_uesaka@p.u-tokyo.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Education, The University of Tokyo
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Emmanuel Manalo (emmanuel.manalo@aoni.waseda.jp)
Center for English Language Education in Science and Engineering
Waseda University, 3-4-1 Okubo, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 169-8555, Japan
Abstract

practice have pointed out that students are not as effective in
using diagrams as teachers and researchers might expect.
The problems they manifest include lack of spontaneous
use, inappropriate choice of diagrams to use, and failure to
make appropriate inferences when using diagrams (see, e.g.,
Cox, 1996; Uesaka & Manalo, 2006; Uesaka, Manalo, &
Ichikawa, 2007). The most serious of these problems is the
lack of spontaneity: students do not use diagrams
spontaneously during problem solving even when their
teachers have used plenty of diagrams in teaching them
(Uesaka et al., 2007). If they fail to use diagrams off their
own volition, they fail to benefit from the research-proven
efficacies that diagram use brings to problem solving.
Although the problems in student diagram use have not
been adequately addressed in the research literature, several
studies have focused specifically on such problems. For
example, Uesaka et al. (2007) suggested that a crucial
reason behind the low use of diagrams is many students’
perception that diagrams are tools for teachers’ instruction
rather than tools for their own problem solving use. In
addition, Uesaka, Manalo, and Ichikawa (2010), through the
conduct of experimental classes, developed a teaching
method for enhancing the spontaneous use of diagrams:
their findings suggest that enhancing both students’
perceptions about the efficacy of diagram use and
developing their skills in constructing diagrams are critical
factors in resolving the lack of spontaneity problem.
However, the number of the previous studies that have
examined influencing factors and teaching methods relating
to student diagram use is limited. Notably, the effects of
proposed teaching methods on other variables such as
problem solving processes and outcomes have not been
sufficiently examined. Investigating these aspects are
important as findings could potentially be used directly in
real educational settings to promote more successful student
learning outcomes.

This study investigated how providing students with
opportunities to use diagrams in interactive communication
with peers might affect their diagram use and problem solving
processes. The participants were 42 junior high school
students who were assigned to a condition with peer
instruction opportunities (experimental) or without (control).
The peer instruction opportunities were designed to facilitate
students’ diagram use in communication. The results revealed
that, in post-instruction assessments, the experimental
participants spontaneously used more diagrams and were
more successful in problem solving. No differences were
found in the timing with which participants started using
diagrams. However, the experimental participants used more
appropriate types of diagrams that also incorporated more
relevant information. The findings therefore indicate that
opportunities for peer communication with diagrams facilitate
not only enhanced spontaneity in diagram use but also the
construction of more appropriate, detailed diagrams, and these
in turn likely contribute to better problem solving
performance outcomes.
Keywords: Diagram use; communication development; peer
instruction; math problem solving.

Introduction
Student Problems in Using Diagrams
Diagrams are effective tools for problem solving. Following
Larkin and Simon’s (1978) demonstration that reasoning
with diagrams is computationally more efficient than
reasoning with sentences, the effectiveness of diagrams in
facilitating understanding and problem solving has been
demonstrated in a wide variety of tasks. For example,
Bucher (2006) showed that using diagrams promote the
construction of rich mental models when students learn
about the human circulation system. Hembree’s (1992)
meta-analysis of studies relating to math word problem
solving revealed that constructing diagrams is the most
effective heuristic among those proposed by Polya (1945).
The main concern in most previous diagrams research has
been to show the effectiveness of using diagrams in many
fields and the mechanisms that underlie that effectiveness
(see, e.g., Ainsworth & Th Loizou, 2003; Cheng, 2002;
Stern, Aprea, & Ebner, 2003). However, it is equally
important to address in research the problems that students
manifest in using diagrams in authentic learning situations.
This is because some studies in the context of educational

Diagrams as Communication Tools
Although previous diagrams research in psychology has
tended to focus on their efficacy as tools for problem
solving, diagrams are also effective tools for
communication. This quality has been demonstrated in
studies with patients who have problems in communication.
For example, Lyon (1995) reported that diagrams facilitated
communication with adults who, because of aphasia, found

312

communication through verbal means difficult (see also
review by Sacchett, 2002). Also, in the context of education,
Dufour-Janvier, Bednarz, and Belanger (1987) reported that
math teachers use a lot of diagrams in explaining how to
solve problems in class, and this practice contributes to the
promotion of students’ understanding of the processes
involved. Thus, diagrams appear to work equally well as
tools of explanation and as tools for problem solving.
Although these two aspects of diagrams – tools for
problem solving and tools for communication – have been
examined independently in different research areas, they are
in fact related. Uesaka and Manalo (2007) reported that
students’ spontaneous use of diagrams in test situations was
higher when they had previously been provided with
opportunities to teach and communicate with other students
in small group, peer instruction sessions. This finding
suggests that, as a consequence of the peer teaching
experience – which provided opportunities for the use of
diagrams as communication tools – students internalized
diagrams as tools for problem solving. Based on their
analysis of protocol data taken during the instruction
sessions, Uesaka and Manalo explained that, for the students
who took part in peer instruction, appreciation of the
efficacy of diagram use was enhanced as diagram
construction and use directly assisted in their efforts to
demonstrate how to solve the assigned problems to their
peers – when, often, words on their own proved inadequate.
Moreover, the practice they obtained in drawing diagrams
during the peer instruction sessions likely contributed to
enhancing their diagram construction skills. These
explanations are congruent with the findings of Uesaka et al.
(2010), in which interventions that promoted appreciation of
the value of diagram use and provided practice for the
development of diagram drawing skills were found to be
effective in enhancing students’ spontaneity in diagram use.
The strategy of providing students peer instruction and
communication experiences to promote their spontaneous
use of diagrams in problem solving is potentially very
useful in educational settings. However, a few questions
remain, the most important of which is whether the
increased spontaneity in diagram use results in improved
performance in problem solving (i.e., whether, as a result,
students not only use more diagrams but actually solve more
problems correctly). If such an outcome can be empirically
demonstrated, it would enhance the potential educational
value of this strategy. A second important question is how
peer instruction might affect students’ subsequent problem
solving processes (i.e., how, as a result, they might approach
problem solving differently). This question also remains
unanswered, and addressing it would help toward better
understanding the mechanisms that underlie this strategy.

experimental classes provided to 8th-grade students who
were assigned to experimental or control conditions. Math
problem solving instructions provided to the conditions
were equivalent, except that those in the experimental
condition were provided opportunities for interactive, small
group peer instruction. To facilitate this, Aronson’s (1978)
“jigsaw method” was used so that students initially worked
on solving an assigned problem on their own, and then
moved on to explaining how they solved their problem to
students who were initially assigned a different problem. As
in the Uesaka and Manalo (2007) study, the assumption was
that the peer instruction sessions would place experimental
students in situations where they have to interactively
communicate with the use of diagrams. In contrast, those in
the control conditions were required only to explain how
they solved their problem to a group, in a one-way, noninteractive communicative process.
Following the instruction sessions, whether the students in
the experimental group actually spontaneously used more
diagrams in subsequent problem solving was first assessed.
After this, three hypotheses were tested. The first was that
the students in the experimental condition would evidence
better problem solving performance compared to those in
the control condition.
The second hypothesis concerned the timing with which
students would use appropriate diagrams in their problem
solving efforts: here the prediction was that those in the
experimental condition would start using appropriate types
of diagrams sooner compared to those in the control
condition. This hypothesis was derived from an assumption
that, as a consequence of experiencing the effectiveness of
diagram use during the peer instruction sessions, those
students would subsequently use diagrams in problem
solving in a more active and timely manner.
The third hypothesis was that students from the
experimental condition would include more relevant
information in the diagrams they construct in their
subsequent problem solving efforts. This hypothesis was
derived from an assumption that through their experiences
in peer communication, experimental participants would
develop a better appreciation of the usefulness of including
more relevant details from the problem description into the
diagrams they construct – to make those diagrams easier to
understand and effective in clarifying the problem structure
and associated method of solution.

Method
The experimental study that was carried out comprised of
several investigations about the effects of interactive, peer
communication on students’ diagram use and problem
solving performance. However, due to space constraints,
only the investigations focusing on the impact of the
interventions used on participants’ problem solving
performance, and the processes they used in problem
solving (to understand the source of any observed
differences), will be reported here.

Overview and Hypotheses of This Study
In line with the preceding discussion, the purpose of the
present study was to examine the effects of providing peer
instruction experiences on students’ problem solving
processes and performance outcomes. The study utilized

313

Participants

Procedure

The participants who voluntarily took part in this study were
8th-grade students (13–14 years of age). They were assigned
to one of the two conditions (experimental and control) by
using a randomized block design in which the students’
school achievement scores were controlled. Only data from
participants who attended all sessions were included in the
analyses reported here: a total of 42 students (experimental,
n = 21; control, n = 21). A basic skills assessment confirmed
the equivalence of experimental and control participants’
skills in table and graph construction at pre-instruction.

Data collection and instruction sessions were conducted
over 6 days at the University of Tokyo. Pre-instruction
assessment was carried out on the first day, and postinstruction assessment on the final two days. As noted
earlier, the instruction sessions were provided on the second
to fourth days, with each session lasting approximately 50
minutes. Participants assigned to the same condition took
the classes together. Instructions for both experimental and
control conditions were provided by the same teacher.
During the instruction sessions, the teacher presented two
math word problems each day and employed a consistent
teaching procedure across both groups. Firstly, the teacher
encouraged the students to carefully read and think about
the problems given so that they would understand the nature
of those problems. During this time, the teacher asked the
students in the small group (of usually 4) to split into two
smaller groups and assigned one of the two problems to
each. Secondly, the teacher asked the students to solve on
their own the problem they had been assigned. However,
prior to letting the students attempt solving the problem, the
teacher explicitly encouraged them to use diagrams –
pointing out their usefulness for solving problems. The
teacher also provided as much help as the students needed.
For example, the teacher encouraged students who wanted
to receive hints to gather in front of the board where the
teacher then provided hints, as well as demonstrated steps
that would lead to the correct solution of the problem and
the use of appropriate diagrams.
During the instruction sessions, participants in the
experimental condition were also later asked to explain to
other students in their group how to solve the problem they
were assigned. In doing so, they were encouraged to use
diagrams. The experimental condition differed from the
control condition on this particular point: the experimental
participants were provided opportunities to communicate in
more interactive circumstances with communication flow
going both ways between explainer and the peer(s) he or she
was explaining to. As noted by Uesaka and Manalo (2007),
under such circumstances, diagram use becomes almost
indispensable as students find it difficult to use only spoken
words to explain the nature of the problem they are dealing
with and the way to approach its solution.
In the control condition, some of the participants were
asked to present their ideas about how to solve the problem
they were assigned in front of the class. This kind of
presentation of one’s ideas about how a problem might be
solved is quite common in typical Japanese classrooms.
Thus, although they also explained, the control participants
did so to a bigger group in less interactive circumstances,
with communication flow going almost exclusively from
explainer to listeners.
On the final two days, post-tests were administered and
students’ spontaneous use of diagrams and problem solving
performance were evaluated. Only on the last day were the
processes that participants used in attempting to solve the

Materials
Math Word Problems Used in Instruction Sessions The
study was carried out over six days, three of which – the
second to the fourth days – were devoted to instruction. In
each of the instruction days, two math word problems, with
similar story contexts and requiring similar types of
diagrams for their correct solution, were used. ‘Arrangement
problems’, for which using a table and drawings to represent
the situations described in the problems was deemed
helpful, were used on the second day. ‘Mobile phone
problems’, for which the construction of graphs was deemed
effective, were used on the third day. ‘Area problems’, for
which the use of tables was considered helpful, were used
on the fourth day. As an example, one of the mobile phone
problems is shown in Appendix 1.
Math Word Problem Solving Assessments Math word
problem solving assessments were administered on the fifth
and sixth days to examine the quantity and quality of the
diagrams spontaneously produced by the participants. There
were two types of math word problems (the water and
pentagon problems) administered on the sixth day and used
in the analysis carried out in this paper.
The water problem would have been facilitated by the use
of graphs, and the pentagon problem would have been
facilitated by the use of tables. Four university colleagues,
including a qualified math teacher, independently
considered the most effective kinds of diagrams to use in
attempting to solve these problems, and all concurred on the
kinds of diagrams noted above. Examples of the problems
used are shown in Appendix 2. Examples of diagrams
constructed by participants for two of the problems given
are shown in Fig. 1.

(A) Water Problem

(B) Pentagon Problem

Fig. 1: Example of diagrams participants produced during
the math word problem solving assessment.

314

math word problems video recorded. The data analyzed in
this paper comes from this session during the sixth day.

and finally C were cheapest, respectively, according to
increasing amounts of water consumed – even if they did
not provide the exact numerical quantities of water (50 and
150 liters) that distinguished between the countries. For the
pentagon problem, a response was coded correct if
participants provided the correct circumferences for at least
up to 10 sheets.
A t-test was used to compare the number of problems in
which the participants in the two conditions obtained correct
answers. The dependent variable was the number of correct
answers and the experimental conditions comprised the
independent variable. The result indicates that participants
in the experimental condition obtained correct answers in
more problems than participants in the control condition:
t(40) = 2.49, p < .5; experimental group M = 1.19, SD = 0.67;
control group M = .62, SD = .81. This finding clearly
suggests that when students are provided experiences that
predispose them to use diagrams as communication tools
(e.g., the peer teaching situation used in this study), both
their subsequent spontaneity in diagram use and their actual
problem solving performance are enhanced. The first
hypothesis is therefore supported.

Results
Spontaneous Use of Diagrams in Solving Problems
Spontaneity of Diagram Use Before conducting the
statistical analyses, participants’ responses to the two math
word problems administered on the sixth day were firstly
coded according to whether they constructed a diagram. A
diagram was defined as any representation of the problem
other than words (on their own), sentences, or numerical
formulas. Tables were also counted as diagrams for the
purposes of this study and defined as a depiction of at least a
pair of values arrayed to represent two related variables. If a
participant constructed at least one diagram when solving a
problem, the participant’s response to that problem was
coded as “used diagrams (1)”. Otherwise, the response was
coded as “no diagram (0)”.
A t-test was used to compare the average numbers of
problems in which participants “used diagrams” in the two
conditions. The result indicates that participants in the
experimental condition spontaneously used diagrams in
more problems than the participants in the control group
(t(40) = 3.32, p < .01; experimental group M = 1.67, SD =
0.48; control group M = 1.10, SD = .62).
Appropriateness of Diagrams Used Secondly, diagram
types used by the participants were coded to confirm
whether participants in the experimental condition
constructed more of the types of diagrams deemed
appropriate. As noted in the Method section, four university
teachers determined the most appropriate types of diagrams
to use in solving the problems given, these being a Cartesian
graph for the water problem and a table for the pentagon
problem. Thus, the appropriateness of the types of diagrams
used by the participants was coded according to these views.
If a participant constructed an appropriate type of diagram
when solving a problem, the participant’s response to that
problem was coded as “used an appropriate diagram (1)”.
Otherwise, the response was coded as “did not use an
appropriate diagram (0)”.
Again, a t-test was used to compare the average numbers
of problems in which participants “used an appropriate
diagram” in the two conditions. The result indicates that
participants in the experimental condition constructed more
appropriate diagrams than the participants in the control
condition (t(40) = 2.89, p < .01; experimental group M = .90,
SD = 0.77; control group M = .33, SD = .48).

Processes of Solving Math Word Problems
Timing to Start Using Diagrams in Problem Solving To
examine the second hypothesis, that the timing in using
appropriate diagrams would differ between the two
conditions, the post-instruction videotape recordings were
analyzed from the viewpoint of when the participants started
using appropriate diagrams and when they finished (or gave
up) solving problems. (The video recording of three
participants somehow failed, so their performances were
excluded from the analysis.)
T-tests were used to compare how quickly participants in
each condition started using appropriate diagrams. The
dependent variable in this analysis was the product of the
participants’ starting times to use appropriate diagrams
divided by the total amounts of time they spent engaged in
solving each of the problems (i.e., how quickly they started
using an appropriate diagram as a proportion of the total
amount of time they spent in attempting to solve the
problem), and the experimental conditions comprised the
independent variable. The results indicate that the effect of
the difference of the conditions was not significant in both
problems (water problem: t(21) = .14, n.s.; pentagon problem
t(28) = 1.70, n.s.). Participants who drew an appropriate
diagram started to use it at an early stage in both conditions
(water problem: experimental group M = .17, SD = .15;
control group M = .15, SD = .27; pentagon problem:
experimental group M = .17, SD = .30; control group M =
.05, SD = .06). These results therefore lend no support to the
second hypothesis.
Information Included in Participants’ Diagrams To
examine the third hypothesis, the information that
participants put in their diagrams was analyzed. Before
conducting the analysis, several details that were deemed
important for each problem were determined. These details

Performance Outcomes in Problem Solving
To examine the first hypothesis, the students’ performance
outcomes in solving the two problems were analyzed.
Before conducting the analysis, participants’ responses to
the problems were coded “correct (1)” or “incorrect (0)”
according to a criterion set for each problem. For the water
problem, a response was coded correct if participants’
clearly indicated their understanding that Country B, then A,

315

were either directly obtainable from the text of the problem
or they could easily be inferred from the information
provided in that text. For the water problem, five ‘relevant’
points were set (e.g., whether 2400 yen which was provided
in the text of the problem as the basic fee of country C was
included), and for the pentagon problem three ‘relevant’
points were set (e.g., whether 8 cm as the circumference of
two connected pentagons was included). The participants’
diagrams were scored according to the number of ‘relevant’
information they included.
T-tests were used to compare the number of information
included in participants’ diagrams in the two conditions.
Although the result in the pentagon problem was only
marginally significant, the results in both problems indicate
that the amounts of relevant information (means shown in
Table 1, with SD in brackets) that experimental participants
included their diagrams were greater compared to those in
the control condition (water problem: t(31) = 2.58, p < .05;
pentagon problem: t(35) = 1.71, p < .10).

The present study, however, additionally demonstrated
that the students in the experimental condition were
subsequently more successful also in solving the problems.
The connection that this finding establishes between
facilitation of greater spontaneity in diagram use and
improved problem solving performance outcomes had not
been established in previous research. It provides strong
support for the argument that promoting spontaneous
diagram use in students is beneficial (see, e.g., Uesaka et al.,
2007), and it points to peer instruction as an effective
strategy for promoting such use. Trying to understand the
effect of this strategy on students’ problem solving
processes would therefore be helpful, particularly for
educators and researchers.
As previously noted, and contrary to one of the
hypotheses posited in this study, the experimental
participants did not employ diagrams in their problem
solving any sooner than the control participants. In fact,
when participants from both conditions employed any
diagrams at all, they did so very early in the problem
solving period. This suggests that the common instruction
and encouragement provided by the teacher to participants
in both conditions was adequate to instill in the participants
the understanding that, when they do use a diagram for
problem solving, they should do so from the beginning so
that the diagram would be helpful not only in finding a
solution to the problem but also in understanding the
structure of the problem in the first instance.
Where the experimental and control participants differed
was in their use of appropriate types of diagrams and the
amount of relevant information they included in the
diagrams. These two points of difference are probably
sufficient in explaining the difference in performance
outcomes between these two groups. Using inappropriate
types of diagrams would less likely lead to the correct
solution to a problem; likewise, lack of adequate relevant
details would likely render a diagram less useful toward
working out the correct solution to a problem.
So, how did the communicative experiences that
experimental participants gained through peer instruction
predispose them to use more appropriate types of diagrams
and incorporate more relevant details in the diagrams they
constructed? A possible answer is that, through explaining
how to solve the assigned problems and answering other
students’ questions about how to solve those problems, the
experimental participants developed a better understanding
of the qualities of different types of diagrams that determine
their suitability for different kinds of problems. (Note that
the structures of problems used in the post-instruction
assessments were the same as those used in the instruction
sessions.) In the process of using diagrams to explain and
communicate their ideas to the other students, the
experimental participants would also likely have gained a
better appreciation of the value of incorporating sufficient
relevant details in diagrams – not only to make them easier
to understand, but also to more usefully represent the
relationships between different components of the

Table 1: Mean amounts of detail included in diagrams
Problem \ Condition
Experimental
Control
Water Problem
2.94 (1.47)
1.67 (1.35)
Pentagon Problem
1.47 (1.12)
.83 (1.15)

Discussion
The findings of this study indicate that the use of peer
instruction as a way of facilitating students’ use of diagrams
as communication tools is effective in enhancing not only
the spontaneity with which they use diagrams in problem
solving, but also their actual performance outcomes in
problem solving. In other words, as a consequence of the
peer instruction experience, students appear not only to use
diagrams more spontaneously, but also to be able to more
successfully solve math word problems. The findings also
suggest that the better problem solving performance stems
not from using diagrams in a more timely manner, but from
using more appropriate types of diagrams that contain more
relevant details. The relevance of these findings to diagrams
research and to education will be considered here.
The finding that participants in the experimental condition
evidenced greater spontaneity in diagram use at postinstruction confirms Uesaka and Manalo’s (2007) report of
similar results. Essentially, this finding assumes that the
peer instruction sessions would make it more likely that
participants would need to use diagrams in communicating
with other students. In fact, this increased likelihood –
although not verified in the present study – was confirmed
through a protocol analysis carried out by Uesaka and
Manalo (2007). The experience of using diagrams in
communicative situations then provided participants not
only with more practice in constructing diagrams, but also
direct experience of the efficacies that diagram use brings to
problem solving. As Uesaka and Manalo (2010) reported,
both practice in diagram construction and appreciation of
the benefits of diagram use are crucial components in
promoting students’ spontaneity in diagram use.

316

problem’s structure. This process of change can also be
understood from the Vygotskian perspective that interaction
and communication with other people promotes the
internalization and development of new skills and
knowledge.
Perhaps the most valuable contribution of the present
study is that it puts forward a method of instruction for
promoting students’ spontaneous diagram use that has
genuine viability for application in most classroom settings.
The peer instruction strategy utilized in this study appears to
have considerable potential in the development of students’
skills in using diagrams for communication and problem
solving purposes.

representation and inference (Lecture Notes in Artificial
Intelligence 4045) (pp. 181–195). Heidelberg, Germany:
Springer-Verlag.
Uesaka, Y., & Manalo, E. (2007). Peer instruction as a way
of promoting spontaneous use of diagrams when solving
math word problems. In D. S. McNamara & J. G. Trafton
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 29th Annual Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 677–682). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Uesaka, Y., Manalo, E., & Ichikawa, S. (2007). What kinds
of perceptions and daily learning behaviors promote
students’ use of diagrams in mathematics problem
solving? Learning and Instruction, 17, 322–335.
Uesaka, Y., Manalo, E., & Ichikawa, S. (2010). The effects
of perception of efficacy and diagram construction skills
on students' spontaneous use of diagrams when solving
math word problems. In A. K. Goel, M. Jamnik, & N. H.
Narayanan (Eds.), Diagrams 2010, Lecture Notes in
Artificial Intelligence 6170 (pp. 197–211). Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag.
Vygotskian, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development
of higher psychological processes. London: Harvard
University Press.

References
Aronson, E. (Ed.). (1978). The jigsaw classroom. Calif:
Sage.
Ainsworth, S., & Th Loizou, A. (2003). The effects of selfexplaining when learning with text or diagrams. Cognitive
Science, 27, 669–681.
Butcher, K. R. (2006). Learning from text with diagrams:
Promoting mental model development and inference
generation. Journal of Educational Psychology, 98, 182–
197.
Cheng, P. C. H. (2002). Electrifying diagrams for learning:
Principles for complex representational systems.
Cognitive Science, 26, 685–736.
Cox, R. (1996). Analytical reasoning with multiple external
representations. Unpublished PhD thesis. The University
of Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
Dufour-Janvier, B., Bednarz, N., & Belanger, M. (1987).
Pedagogical considerations concerning the problem of
representation. In C. Janvier (Ed.), Problems of
representation in the teaching and learning of
mathematics (pp. 110–120). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hembree, R. (1992). Experiments and relational studies in
problem-solving: A metaanalysis. Journal for Research in
Mathematics Education, 23, 242–273.
Larkin, J. H., & Simon, H. A. (1987). Why a diagram is
(sometimes) worth ten thousand words. Cognitive
Science, 11, 65–99.
Lyon, J. (1995). Drawing: Its value as a communication aid
for adults with aphasia. Aphasiology, 9, 33–94.
Polya, G. (1945). How to solve it: A new aspect of
mathematical method. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Sacchett, C. (2002) Drawing in aphasia: moving towards the
interactive. Human-Computer Studies, 57, 263–277.
Stern, E., Aprea, C., & Ebner, H. G. (2003). Improving
cross-content transfer in text processing by means of
active graphical representation. Learning and Instruction,
13, 191–203.
Uesaka, Y., & Manalo, E. (2006). Active comparison as a
means of promoting the development of abstract
conditional knowledge and appropriate choice of
diagrams in math word problem solving. In D. BarkerPlummer, R. Cox, & N. Swoboda (Eds.), Diagrammatic

Appendix 1: Example of a Math Problem Used
in the Instruction Sessions
In a mobile phone shop, two different types of plans are sold.
When a customer asks your advice, which plan would you
recommend as being cheaper according to amount of phone use?
Plan A: There is no basic fee, and no free calling time. The cost
of calls is 30 yen per minute.
Plan B: The basic fee is 1500 yen including 100 minutes of free
calling time, with 80 yen per minute charged thereafter.

Appendix 2: Examples of Math Problems
Administered at Post-Instruction Assessment
Water Problem
The head of a company asked Taro to find out which of three
countries – A, B, or C – would be best for establishing a factory
which uses water. The different charging methods of each country
are described below. Please imagine you are Taro, and come up
with an explanation for the head of the company.
Country A: 1000 yen is charged as a basic fee, but you can use
water without additional charge up to 100 liters. After 100 liters,
40 yen/liter is charged.
Country B: There is no basic fee. Water cost is 20 yen/liter.
Country C: In addition to 2400 yen as a basic fee, there is a
charge of 4 yen/liter of water used.

Pentagon Problem
There are many sheets of paper in the shape of a regular pentagon,
with each side being 1 cm. These sheets are arranged one by one
with the rule that a new sheet shares only one side with already
arranged sheets. Find the circumference when arranging 1, 5, 10
and 20 sheets.
*This study was supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research
(20.9717) from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.

317

