UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The evolution of irrational decision-making: insights from non-human primates

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/25d2d5x7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Lakshminarayan, Venkat
Santos, Laurie

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The evolution of irrational decision-making: insights from non-human primates
Venkat R. Lakshminarayanan (venkat.lakshminarayanan@yale.edu)
Department of Psychology, 2 Hillhouse Avenue
New Haven, CT 06520 USA

Laurie R. Santos (laurie.santos@yale.edu)
Department of Psychology, 2 Hillhouse Avenue
New Haven, CT 06520 USA
Abstract

opportunity to exchange it for a second object of equal
value (e.g. a mug).
Surprisingly, participants
consistently refused the opportunity to swap an
endowed object for an equal valuable one and instead
elected to hold on to the mug (or box of pens) that they
were initially assigned. Moreover, they demanded
nearly twice as much money to give up this object as
buyers were willing to pay in order to acquire it.
(Kahneman et al., 1990; Kahneman et al., 1991).
Similarly, loss-aversion also creates inconsistencies
in when people are willing to take risks. When an
outcome is framed as an opportunity to avoid a loss
people are risk-seeking but, in contrast, people become
risk-averse when the same outcome is phrased to
emphasize gains rather than losses (Kahneman &
Tversky, 1979). A simple demonstration of this
phenomena (termed “the reflection effect”) is that
subjects reverse their preference to take a risk based on
whether they’re asked to make decisions about gains or
losses, even though each case is simply an alternate
formulation of the same outcome (since the gain and
loss questions essentially present the same pair of
choices: choosing between $1500, or a lottery with an
expected value of $1500, Kahneman & Tversky 1979):

Despite our species’ impressive cognitive sophistication,
adult humans are nevertheless notoriously bad at making
normatively rational economic decisions. Much work has
examined the nature of biased decisions such as framing
effects, the endowment effect, and the peak-end principle
in adult humans; however, research examining the
origins of these biases is still in its infancy. This paper
examines existing work on origins of economic biases –
that is, whether these biases are shared with non-human
primates. We survey recent work using a comparative
approach to address the evolutionary origins of several
classic biases, such as loss aversion, referencedependence, the endowment effect and the peak-end
principle. Novel evidence is provided that the peak-end
principle – a bias involved in retrospective evaluations –
is also found in capuchin monkeys. These studies
suggest that such biases emerged long ago in our
evolutionary history, and shed light on the psychological
mechanisms behind biased decision-making.
Keywords: decision making, evolutionary psychology,
experimental research with animals.

Introduction
In a variety of laboratory and real-world settings,
people make decisions that conflict with what would
maximize economic well-being. Although economists
classically assume that we make decisions like rational
optimizers – that is, by maximizing our utility in a
mathematically axiomatic fashion -- social scientists
have extensively documented that humans often make
decisions that are at odds with this view.
Rather than treat consequentially-identical outcomes
the same (i.e., exhibiting context invariance), decisionmakers’ choices depend heavily on the way outcomes
are presented or framed and not on the absolute
consequences of their decisions (a phenomenon termed
reference dependence) (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979;
Tversky & Kahneman, 1982, Tversky & Kahneman,
1992). Furthermore, people view losses as more
consequential than equally-sized gains (Kahneman &
Tversky, 1979).
Consequently, people require more resources to give
up an object in their possession than they would spend
to newly acquire that same object. Kahneman, Knetsch,
and Thaler (1990) presented each participant with a
new object (e.g. a box of pens) and then gave them the

“Scenario 1: Gains
You have been given $1000. You are now asked to
choose between:
(A) 50% chance to receive another $1000 and 50%
chance to receive nothing [16%]
(B) receiving $500 with certainty [84%]
Scenario 2: Losses
You have been given $2000. You are now asked to
choose between:
(A) 50% chance to lose $1000 and 50% chance to
lose nothing [69%]
(B) losing $500 with certainty [31%]”
(Kahneman & Tversky, 1979, p. 273)
Finally, similar framing effects also have been found
to impact peoples’ subjective experiences of an past
event. Kahneman and colleagues also observed that
memories of pleasurable (and painful) experiences are
also susceptible to systematic framing effects, which
subsequently affect the choices people make.

1286

Specifically, the remembered happiness of an entire
episode is strongly influenced by its end point. In one
study, patients receiving a colonoscopy were randomly
assigned to one of two treatment groups: one group had
a mildly painful procedure following the moderately
painful colonoscopy, whereas the second group only
received the colonoscopy. A prediction consistent with
economic rationality would be that people would
structure their choices to minimize the duration of pain.
In contrast, subjects rated the sequence ending with
mild pain as a less unpleasant episode than the
colonoscopy alone (despite being in pain over a greater
time span), and those receiving the compounded pain of
the colonoscopy plus the mildly painful top-off
procedure were actually more likely to return for a
second colonoscopy (Redelmeier, Katz, and Kahneman,
2003). Crucially, these framing effects influence
choices even when using pleasurable stimuli: when
asked to judge the remembered pleasure of watching a
sequence of (pleasant) movies of penguins at play,
participants neglected the duration (that is, the overall
amount of pleasant footage) and instead judged a
shorter clip as more pleasurable (provided it was
sequenced with the most pleasurable portion at the end)
(Fredrickson and Kahneman 1993).
Thus, human behavior in a variety of contexts – from
irrational reversals of risk preferences, sudden increases
in an object’s subjective value after becoming its
owner, or paradoxically selecting more painful episodes
over less painful ones – are puzzling from any
perspective which assumes that decision makers have
completely stable preferences and rationally ignore
framing to concentrate on mathematical consistencies
across contexts.
One possibility is that economic biases such as lossaversion or the endowment effect are artifacts of the
specific populations and cultures typically used as
subjects. For example, researchers have suggested that
the endowment effect is due to a rich sense of self –
something that would only be found in human
populations (Gawronski, Bodenhausen, & Becker,
2007). Alternatively, these biases might simply arise
from the particular experimental procedures designed to
elicit them – for example by verbal surveys,
participants might be influenced by task demands or
linguistic pragmatics.
However, another possibility is that these biases are
fundamental aspects of decision-making. If this were
the case, then we would expect biases such as framing
effects or the endowment effect to exist in subjects who
completely lack experience with humanlike educational
or cultural contexts, and that these biases would exist
even when nonverbal methods were employed. Under
this view, even other species would exhibit the same
decision-making biases previously thought to be unique
to ours.

One way to test this final possibility is to determine
whether these decision-making biases do, in fact, exist
in non-human primates. Addressing this possibility,
there is some evidence that certain biases emerge even
without extensive experience or cultural learning and
are shared with our closest living evolutionary relatives
– non-human primates (for a review, please see Santos
& Lakshminarayanan, 2008). The next section will
survey previous work investigating economic biases
present in capuchin monkeys (Cebus apella), an
ancestrally-related New World monkey species (Santos
& Lakshminarayanan, 2008; Chen, Lakshminarayanan,
& Santos, 2006).

Evidence for Economic Biases in Monkeys
Here, we present prior research investigating
whether capuchin monkeys’ decision strategies were
similar to those of humans in economic contexts. To
design a monkey marketplace analogous to situations in
which humans receive monetary payoffs, we developed
a ‘fiat currency’ that our monkeys could spend on food
(or, depending on the study, on gambles involving
food). Essentially, we taught our capuchin monkey
subjects that they could exchange small metal tokens
with human experimenters for food rewards (e.g.
Westergaard et al., 1998; Brosnan & de Waal 2003).
Our monkeys developed this token-trading ability with
relatively little training.
Once they had acquired the necessary trading skills,
we then placed our capuchins in an economic market in
which subjects could choose between different
experimenters providing different goods at different
prices. Each monkey subject began each session with a
small ‘wallet’ of tokens and entered the market where
two different experimenters offered different goods at
different prices. The monkey could then choose to trade
with whomever it most desired. We could then measure
each monkey’s preferences in terms of the percentage
of tokens they traded with each of the experimenters
(Santos
&
Lakshminarayanan,
2008;
Chen,
Lakshminarayanan, & Santos, 2006).
To ensure that the monkeys could understand which
trader delivered each food reward, we distinguished the
traders based on their clothing (e.g. a trader in blue
scrubs versus one in red scrubs). Additionally, we gave
each capuchin subject several training trials in which
they were required to trade an equal number of times
with each trader individually so they could learn the
available choices. Finally, each test session began with
two familiarization trades with each trader individually
before both choices became simultaneously available to
the subject. Therefore, the capuchin subjects were
making an informed choice between the two traders.
We first used this token-trading set-up to explore
whether capuchins exhibit the rudimentary principles of
rational utility-maximization in this new economic
market. To do this, we presented monkeys with a

1287

choice between traders who offered two different kinds
of food that the monkeys liked equally, e.g. apple slices
and grapes. When presented with this choice, our
capuchins subjects spent about half of their tokens on
apples and half on grapes. We then introduced a
compensated price shift, basically putting one of the
goods -- say apples -- on sale by providing double the
quantity provided for a single token (thus cutting the
price of apples in half). Our monkeys bought more of
the cheaper (half-priced) food when it went on sale,
behaving rationally as a human consumer would to this
shift in the prices (Chen et al. 2006).
We then examined whether the capuchins prefer a
trading option that weakly dominates, or more
specifically, one that provides the most food overall.
We presented the monkeys with a choice between one
experimenter who always offered (and gave) one piece
of apple, and a second experimenter who always
offered two pieces of apple but half the time gave one
piece, and half the time gave two. When faced with this
choice, the capuchins preferred to trade with the second
experimenter, again choosing the option that allowed
them to make the most of their token budget (Chen et
al. 2006).
These results demonstrate a few important features of
our capuchin market. First and most importantly, the
capuchins seem to use the market we have created for
them to select more desirable options over less
desirable ones; with little training, our capuchins were
able to pick up information about each trader’s past
behavior and use that information to make informed
choices in the market. Second, our monkeys appear to
behave rationally in the market, selectively trading with
experimenters who offer them a better deal (Chen et al.
2006).
Having established that capuchins behave broadly
rationally in some aspects of this market, we then
examined whether capuchins display the heuristics that
humans do—namely, reference dependence and loss
aversion. In our first study, capuchins were presented
with a choice between two traders who gave the same
amount of food, either one or two pieces of apple. The
first trader, however, gave food by way of a perceived
gain. This trader started out by showing the monkey
only one piece of apple but when paid gave an
additional second piece of apple half the time. The
second trader offered the same amount of food by way
of a perceived loss. This second trader started out by
displaying two pieces of apple but when paid took one
of the pieces of apple away half the time. Although the
two traders offered the same amount of food on
average, our capuchin subjects did not treat them
equally. Note that both experimenters stochastically
altered their payoffs, thus any preference between the
two would be due to framing (rather than a preference
for consistency over risk). Furthermore, since both
traders offered (on average) the same reward, if

subjects associatively learned to choose the larger
reward option then they would fail to exhibit a
preference between the two traders. In contrast, the
monkeys significantly preferred to trade with the trader
who gave a perceived gain over the one who gave a
perceived loss (Chen et al. 2006).
To rule out the possibility that these results were
based on a lack of knowledge about the outcomes
available to the subject, we once again ran each subject
in a thorough familiarization and shaping procedure
which required them to gain extensive experience with
the food rewards available from each trader.
Additionally, in this experiment the traders were
different individuals than those used in previous
experiments and were also clothed in different color
scrubs that were novel to the subjects. We thus
eliminated the possibility that their choices were based
on previous associations between experimenter or scrub
color with “good” outcomes.
To summarize, monkeys behaved much like human
participants in classic studies (e.g. Tversky &
Kahneman, 1992)—they evaluate their choices in terms
of an arbitrary reference point, namely the initial
amount of food that they were shown. We then went
on to examine whether capuchins showed this pattern
because they were seeking out perceived gains or
whether they were instead avoiding perceived losses.
Monkeys were given a choice between one trader who
always showed one piece of apple and delivered that
piece and second trader who always showed two pieces
of apple but delivered only a single piece. Again, even
though both experimenters gave the same pay-off
(making it impossible to account for their preferences
with a simple association between an experimenter and
a greater reward) capuchins reliably avoided the
experimenter who gave less than what he initially
offered, suggesting that capuchins, like humans, are
averse to losses (Chen et al. 2006).
In addition to loss-aversion and referencedependence, we explored whether capuchins also
exhibit a reflection effect – namely, whether they are
risk-seeking over choices framed as losses but riskaverse when the same choices are framed as gains.
Using a similar token-trading task, we gave capuchins a
choice to trade with an experimenter who initially
offered three chunks of apple but only delivered two
chunks of apple (thus representing a certain loss) – or,
instead, an experimenter who offered three chunks but
either delivered one or three (thus representing a risky
loss). In this experiment capuchins were risk seeking
over losses; however, in the next experiment we
observed that the same outcomes were treated very
differently when framed as opportunities to secure
gains. We modified our market so that now the
capuchin subjects chose between one experimenter who
initially offered one chunk of apple but always added a
second chunk (thus promising a sure gain) – or instead,

1288

an experimenter who offered one chunk but either
added two chunks or nothing (thus representing a risky
gain). Note that the outcomes were identical to the
prior experiment involving risky choice (in which they
chose between a safe and risky loss). However, when
the same outcomes were framed as gains, capuchins
were risk-averse and chose to trade for the sure gain.
Thus they exhibited an analogous reversal of riskpreferences depending on whether outcomes were
framed as gains or losses (Lakshminarayanan, Chen, &
Santos, in press). Crucially, the expected value was
identical across all four traders. Since all four traders
offered (on average) equal rewards, if subjects simply
associatively learned to choose the more rewarding
option then they would fail to exhibit a preference
between any pair of traders. In contrast they exhibited
the humanlike pattern of being risk seeking when
outcomes were framed as losses and risk averse when
the same outcomes were framed as gains.
Finally, we investigated whether capuchin monkeys
exhibit an analogous tendency to overvalue what they
possess.
That is, do they exhibit a humanlike
unwillingness to trade away possessions for
equivalently valued items in much the same way that
humans do in demonstrations of the endowment effect?
To do this, we found treats (fruit discs versus cereal
pieces) that the capuchins preferred equally. However,
when endowed with one of these types of food and
given the opportunity to trade it away in exchange for
the equivalent treat, they chose instead to retain their
endowed food. We established that this result was not
due to issues related to trading food (since they were
willing to trade for food of much greater value) and
additionally show that these effects were not due to
temporal
or
physical
transaction
costs
(Lakshminarayanan, Chen, & Santos 2008).
Although prior research, as published in Chen et al.
(2006), provides some evidence for decision-making
biases in capuchin monkeys, the existing literature
leaves open several important unanswered questions.
Namely, do capuchins share other decision-making bias
beyond reference-dependence and loss aversion, such
as framing effects in their remembered happiness of
previously experienced events – in which case they
should be especially sensitive to the peak intensity and
end-points of remembered events?

with highly pleasurable events rather than episodes that
begin with the equally pleasurable events.
Furthermore, the peak intensity of past experiences also
influences how subjects remember the pleasure
associated with those episodes. A pleasurable event
spread out over a long duration is rated as less
appealing than a comparable episode that is half as long
but twice as pleasurable.
In our final two experiments, we show that capuchin
monkeys make economic decisions (i.e., which
experimenter to trade with) based on this “peak-end”
principle.
Much like in previous studies, capuchin subjects are
each given a budget of tradable tokens. Subjects then
have a choice of two experimenters who each provide a
reward for a token.
These experimenters each
displayed rewards that they would provide in exchange
for tokens. When the monkey handed an experimenter
a token, they then provided this food by holding it
steady near the subject as the subject ate it. In the first
experiment the choices provided the capuchin the
chance to choose between a high end-point versus a low
end-point, whereas in the second experiment they chose
between a high peak versus a low peak.
Much like in previous experiments, we first began
with a familiarization phase to allow the subjects to
learn the consequences of trading with each
experimenter.
The experimenters wore different
colored scrubs so that the capuchin subject would know
which one delivered each reward (i.e., high versus low
peak and high versus low end-point). Thus, we ensured
that the capuchin was making an informed choice
between the two experimenters. Just as in each
previous experiment, the experimenters available to
trade with the capuchin subject had not been involved
in any other trading studies and were clothed in scrub
colors that were distinct from previously used ones.
However, in contrast to all of our previous trading
studies, in these two experiments the traders concealed
the food rewards until it was time to feed it to the
capuchin subject. This ensured that the exchanges were
conducted on the basis of the remembered pleasure
from eating a food reward provided by a particular
experimenter – therefore the experimenters held the
rewards such that they were not visible to the subject.
Therefore the basis of selection was not due to any
visual differences between the two rewards but instead
the remembered pleasure associated with trading with
an experimenter for a high end-point (or high peak)
reward versus the same reward re-sequenced for a low
end-point (or low peak).
In our first experiment, the experimenters differed in
that one of them treat with a high end-point whereas an
alternative experimenter provided the same treat but
sequenced so that it concluded with a low end-point.
Specifically, the food reward in this study was a biscuit
stick that was halfway coated with frosting resulting in

Retrospective Evaluation in Monkeys
People’s memory of pleasurable and painful events
are subject to framing effects in that they are not strictly
related to the overall quality of an episode, but instead
depend on the end-point and peak intensity of that
experience.
Human participants surprisingly rate
highly painful experiences as more tolerable than less
severe ones, simply based on whether the more painful
experience concludes with a better end-point.
Similarly, they choose to repeat episodes that conclude

1289

a reward with a highly-valued (frosted) half and a lowvalue (unfrosted) half.
Thus, the high end-peak
experimenter fed the food reward with the frosted half
at the end whereas the low end-point experimenter fed
the reward in the opposite configuration. In this
experiment, capuchin monkeys preferred to trade
tokens to receive a sequence of food rewards that
provided the high point at the end of the feeding
sequence rather than the beginning.
That is, they
preferred to trade with experimenter who sequenced the
reward such that it started with the unfrosted half and
concluded with the frosted half rather than vice versa.
This preference was significant when pooled across
subjects (63%, N=240, p = 0.00002, one-tailed
binomial probability test).
The results therefore
supported the directional prediction that the capuchins
preferred the reward with the high end-point.
In our second study, capuchins preferred to trade
tokens for a food reward with a brief but high-quality
peak rather than for an alternative food reward with a
longer but lower-quality peak. The food reward, just as
in the previous study, was a biscuit stick that was
partially covered in high-value frosting. However, the
biscuit sticks were modified by partially shaving off the
frosting: the frosting was shaved off of the food
rewards such that the subjects had a choice between a
short but highly enjoyable reward or a longer but less
enjoyable one. Specifically, an experimenter offering a
food reward with a short but fully frosted section
(followed by an unfrosted section) was preferred to an
experimenter offering an alternative that was twice as
long but only halfway frosted (ending in a much shorter
unfrosted section).
The amount of frosting was
identical across both experimenters, however, one
provided the frosted portion in a short high peak
whereas the other provided a low peak. This preference
was significant when pooled across subjects (59%,
N=480, p = 0.00003, one-tailed binomial probability
test).
Critically, just as in previous studies, a subject who
merely forms an association between a trading partner
and a greater quantity of food would not express a
preference in either of the last two experiments. In the
experiment concerning end-point sensitivity both
experimenters delivered exactly the same food object
(except rotated so that the frosting would come either
first or last).
In the second experiment both
experimenters offered identical amounts of frosting
except spread over a long or a short biscuit section. In
contrast the capuchin subjects expressed a preference
for a high end point and for a high peak – a preference
that could not be explained by a mere association
between a trading partner and a greater reward.
These results therefore suggest that monkeys, like
humans, exhibit both end-point and peak sensitivity
when evaluating the quality of remembered
experiences. Accordingly, humans and capuchins may

both judge past experiences similarly and prefer events
with high peaks and end points. This suggests that this
bias, much like other framing effects, did not
necessarily emerge as a result of specific economic
experiences and market disciplining. Instead, evaluating
past experiences using a peak-end rule might be the
result of cognitive strategies which evolved long ago in
the primate lineage.

Conclusions and Discussion
The data presented here suggest that economic biases
are present in an ancestrally-related species. Monkeys,
like us, take into account subjective features of
prospects that are irrelevant to the consequences of their
choices, as well as exhibit classic framing effects such
as reference dependence, loss aversion, and the
endowment effect. Therefore these biases might rely
on cognitive systems that are more evolutionarily
ancient than previously thought.
These data support the claim that the cognitive (and
possibly neural) architecture giving rise to economic
biases and framing effects was present in an
evolutionarily-ancient relative of both humans and
capuchin monkeys. In addition to showing that these
biases are not uniquely human, these results results
eliminate the possibility that these heuristics are
artifacts of the particular methods (such as verbal
questionnaires) or subject pools used in human studies.
Additionally, these results support the claim that
behavioral biases do not necessarily emerge as a result
of specific economic experiences —instead, our human
systematic biases might be the result of evolved
cognitive strategies, ones present in our primate lineage
for considerable phylogenetic time. This work provides
further constraints on the cognitive and neural
mechanisms that may underlie these biases in the
human species. Specifically, our findings suggest that
these heuristics cannot rely on language or linguistic
processing. In addition, our result hint that these biases
cannot be due to complex or uniquely human cognitive
capacities, such culture, learning, or market
disciplining.
Second, and perhaps more importantly, these results
provide the first demonstration that framing effects, the
endowment effect, and reward sequencing elicit
preference-reversals in a nonhuman animal. Therefore,
these behavioral results provide a new avenue for
neurophysiological investigations of subjective and
contextual aspects of decision-making. Non-human
primates are frequently used as neural models for
exploring the anatomical basis of decision-making
under uncertainty (Glimcher, 2003; Platt & Glimcher
1999) but much of this work has focused on simpler
types of decisions (such as determining the direction of
a saccade). Accordingly, a sharp disconnect exists in
the methodologies employed in these studies and those

1290

used in neuroimaging work concerning complex
decisions undertaken by humans (see Camerer,
Lowenstein & Prelec, 2004) for review). The proposed
work provides novel behavioral evidence that measures
of preference, such as purchasing behavior when
provided with a scarce budget of tokens, can also be
used to test the predictions of prospect theory in a nonhuman primate model.
To summarize, finding these biased tendencies in
capuchin monkeys impacts our understanding of human
decision-making in three key ways. First, the fact that
seemingly “irrational” tendencies may actually have
been around for over 35 million years would suggest
that classical economic decision-making biases may
possibly be well-adapted to ancient rather than modern
decision-making environments.
Second, the
observation that capuchins and humans reason about
economic decisions in the same way would suggest that
decisions involving framing and risk-taking operate in a
fast-and-frugal way, meaning that they don’t require
computationally-intensive, uniquely human processing.
Finally, the hypothesized findings would also the point
that throughout evolutionary history, strategies like
framing effects may have played a role in our economic
decision-making, thus allowing these traits to be passed
along
from
ancestral
species
to
humans
(Lakshminarayanan, Santos, & Chen, in press).

preferred to less: Adding a better end. Psychological
Science, 4, 401-405.
Westergaard, G., Liv, C., Chavanne, T., & Suomi, S.
(1998). Token-mediated tool-use by a tufted capuchin
monkey (Cebus apella). Animal Cognition, 1(2), 101106.
Platt M., & Glimcher P. (1999) Neural correlates of
decision variables in parietal cortex. Nature, 400,
233-238.
Schreiber, C., Kahneman, D. (2000) Determinants of
the Remembered Utility of Aversive Sounds. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 129, 27-42.
Redelmeier, D., Katz, J., and Kahneman, D. (2003)
Memories of colonoscopy: a randomized trial. Pain,
104, 187-194.
Gawronski, B., Bodenhausen, G. V. & Becker, A. P.
(2007) I like it, because I like myself: Associative
self-anchoring and post-decisional change of explicit
evaluations. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 43, 221-232.
Glimcher P. (2003) The Neurobiology of VisualSaccadic Decision Making. Annual Review of
Neuroscience, 26, 133-179.
Brosnan, S. & de Waal, F. (2003) Monkeys reject
unequal pay. Nature, 425, 297-299.
Camerer, C., Loewenstein, G., & Prelec, D. (2004)
Neuroeconomics: Why Economics Needs Brains.
Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 106 (3), 55-579.
Chen, M., Lakshminarayanan, V., & Santos, L. (2006)
How Basic are Behavioral Biases? Evidence from
Capuchin Monkey Trading Behavior. Journal of
Political Economy, 114, 512-537.
Santos, L. R. & Lakshminarayanan, V. (2008) Innate
constraints on judgment and decision-making?
Insights from children and non-human primates. In
The innate mind: foundations and the future (eds P.
Carruthers, S. Laurence & S. Stich), 293–310.
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Lakshminarayanan, V. R., Chen, M. K., and Santos, L.
R. (2008) Endowment effect in capuchin monkeys.
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2008), 363, 3837–3844
Lakshminarayanan, V. R., Santos, L. R., and Chen, M.
K. (in press) The Evolution of Decision-Making
Under Risk: Framing Effects in Monkey Risk
Preferences. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology.

Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank the Comparative Cognition
Laboratory at Yale University along with NSF for
providing financial support.

References
Kahneman, D. & Tversky, A. (1979) Prospect theory:
An analysis of decisions under risk. Econometrica,
47, 313-327.
Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D. (1982). Judgment Under
Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases. Cambridge
University Press: Cambridge.
Kahneman, D., Knetsch, J. & Thaler, R. (1990)
Experimental tests of the endowment effect and the
Coase theorem. Journal of Political Economy 98,
1325-1348.
Kahneman, D., Knetsch, J. & Thaler, R. (1991)
Anomalies:
the
endowment
effect,
loss
aversion,andstatus quo bias. J. Econ. Perspect, 5,
193–206.
Tversky A., & Kahneman, D. (1992). Advances in
prospect theory: Cumulative representation of
uncertainty. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 5, 297323.
Fredrickson B., Kahneman D. (1993) Duration neglect
in retrospective evaluations of affective episodes. J
Pers Soc Psychol, 65, 45 – 55.
Kahneman, D., Fredrickson, B., Schreiber, C., &
Redelmeier, D. A. (1993). When more pain is

1291

