UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Theory of Mind brain regions are sensitive to the content, not the structural complexity, of
belief attributions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3233p70c

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Koster-Hale, Jorie
Saxe, Rebecca

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Theory of Mind brain regions are sensitive to the content, not the structural
complexity, of belief attributions
Jorie Koster-Hale (jorie@mit.edu) and Rebecca R. Saxe (saxe@mit.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
Abstract
A distinct group of brain regions, the ‘Theory of Mind (ToM)
network’, is implicated in representing other people’s mental
states, yet we currently know little about which aspects of
mental state attribution are represented or processed in these
regions. Using fMRI, we investigated whether ToM regions,
compared to language-processing regions, are sensitive to two
dimensions along which mental state attributions vary: (1)
structural complexity and (2) social content of the attributed
thought. In short vignettes describing a character's belief, the
belief structure was either first-order or higher-order, and the
content was mundane or socially-relevant. All ToM regions
showed sensitivity to distinctions in content; no ToM region
showed sensitivity to structural manipulation. By contrast,
language regions were sensitive to both manipulations. We
conclude that while increased structural complexity of belief
attributions modulates language processing, this type of
complexity is not part of the representational space of the
ToM-network.
Keywords: Theory of Mind; False Belief, Language, fMRI

Introduction
Mental state attribution exists in a very rich conceptual space
– without much effort, we can ascribe a variety of mental
states to other people, and make quick and subtle judgments
about them. Moreover, we can easily characterize a mental
state along a number of dimensions, such as who holds it,
what kind of mental state it is (e.g. a belief, desire, or doubt),
what the belief is about, how reasonable we find it, whether
the content is relevant to our own lives, and how probable it
is that it will be believed next week.
Yet despite the range and flexibility of these inferences,
mental state attribution gives rise to a surprisingly uniform
neural response. A specific set of regions, often called the
Theory of Mind network, consisting canonically of the
bilateral temporo-parietal junction (TPJ), right superior
temporal sulcus (rSTS), medial precunius (PC), and medial
prefrontal cortex (MPFC), shows robust and systematic
response to a variety of stimuli that invoke a mental state
attribution, including stories and cartoons (Fletcher et al.
1995; Goel et al. 1995; Gallagher et al. 2000, 2002; Mitchell
et al. 2002; Saxe and Kanwisher 2003; Perner, Aichhorn,
Kronbichler, Wolfgang, & Laddurner, 2006; Gobbini,
Koralek, Bryan, Montgomery, & Haxby, 2007; Van
Overwalle 2009, Walter et al 2010).
This combination of cognitive flexibility coupled with a
robust and seemingly invariant neural response provides
chance to examine the mapping between the neural response
and final cognitive product: though we currently know very
little about which aspects of mental state attribution are
represented or processed in theory of mind regions, or what
that representation looks like, we have the means to

manipulate the cognitive representation at a fairly high level,
and a precise place to look for changes in the neural
representation.
Thus, to begin answering these questions, we investigated
the extent to which brain regions involved in theory of mind
processing show sensitivity to features that vary within the
space of mental state attribution. We asked whether ToM
regions are sensitive to two broad dimensions along which
mental state attributions can vary: (1) the structural (or
syntactic) complexity and (2) the content of the attributed
belief. We manipulated structural complexity by
manipulating the first versus higher-order status of the belief
– a manipulation that has often been employed to increase
the difficulty of ToM tasks. We manipulated the content of
the belief by varying its the social relevance.
As well as varying features within the space of belief
attribution, these manipulations vary along linguistic
dimensions – saliency and syntactic complexity. Thus, to
serve as a comparison, we asked whether high-level
(sentence-level) language processing regions show
sensitivity to these manipulations, and if so, whether the
response profile in the ToM regions differed from the
response profile in the language regions.
We tested each of these possibilities in two steps. First, we
used a functional localizer to identify language processing
and Theory of Mind regions within the same set of
individuals (Experiment 1). Second, we examined the effect
that our manipulations of the structure and content of belief
attributions had on the brain regions implicated in language
and ToM (Experiment 2).

Methods
Participants:
Twenty naïve right-handed adults (aged 21-44, mean 27; 15
females) participated in the study for payment. All
participants were native English speakers, had normal or
corrected-to-normal vision, and gave written informed
consent in accordance with the requirements of the internal
review board at MIT. All 20 participants did both
Experiment 1 and Experiment 2 in a single scan session. Two
participants’ data were excluded due to excessive movement.

Stimuli and Design:
Experiment 1: ToM and Language Localizer
The stimuli consisted of 24 short stories and 12 lists of nonwords. Twelve of the stories were described a situation in
which someone held a false belief, e.g.:
After going to the gym, Kevin returned to his new apartment, which
he had just recently moved into. He got upstairs and threw off his
sweaty clothes, ready for a hot, steaming shower. Regrettably,

3356

Kevin's roommate had thrown out an important note from the
plumber, so Kevin didn't know that the pipes had broken and were
currently full of cold pond water.

The remaining 12 stories were false photograph stories,
describing a situation in which there was a false physical
representation of the world, such as an out-of-date
photograph or advertisement, e.g.:
Last week, many fliers and signs were posted, advertising the open
house of an apartment building that had just been built downtown.
The ads had pictures of the granite counters, the balconies, the
huge swimming pool, the art gallery, and the gym. Regrettably,
before the open house, the building caught fire, and today's paper
reported that most of the building was destroyed.

Both of these kinds of story require the reader to deal with
incorrect or outdated representations of the world, and so are
similar in their meta-representational and logical complexity;
however, they differ crucially in whether the reader is
building a representation of someone else’s mental state, and
thus comparing them serves to localize those regions
recruited particularly for processing mental states. See Saxe
and Kanwisher (2003) and Dodell-Feder et al (2010) for
further discussion.
To control for low-level linguistic properties and possible
processing confounds, the conditions were additionally
matched for number of words, number of syllables per word,
Flesch reading ease, number of noun-phrases per sentence,
lexical frequency, log-transformed lexical frequency, number
of negations, and general syntactic form (e.g. number of
relative clauses), all p >> 0.1
From each matched pair of stories, a word-list was created,
consisting of a random subset of the unique words from each
story. A matched non-word list was created by selecting
legal bigram combinations that were matched to each word
on length, number of syllables, and bigram frequency.
Processing pronounceable non-words engages many of the
low-level processes required for (visual) language
processing, such as visual processing, phonological
recognition and composition, and working memory, without
recruiting higher-level processes, such as lexical access,
word and sentence level composition, syntactic structure
building, or semantic computation. Processing sentences, on
the other hand, engages both low-level visual and
phonological processing and also higher-level linguistic
processes.
Thus, comparing sentences to lists of
pronounceable non-words serves to localize those regions
specifically recruited for language processing on the word
and sentence level (Fedorenko et al 2010, Cutting et al. 2006;
Friederici et al. 2000; Hagoort et al. 1999; Heim et al. 2005;
Humphries et al. 2006, 2007; Indefrey et al. 2001; Mazoyer
et al. 1993; Petersen et al. 1990; Vandenberghe et al. 2002).
All stimuli were presented one word at a time (screen
center) for 350 ms each, following the procedure of
Fedorenko et al (2010). At the end of each story/list of nonwords, a probe word was presented for a 2s answer period.
Participants were asked whether the probe word appeared in
the preceding story/list (a match-to-sample task): 50% of the
probes were matches and 50% were novel, drawn from an
unseen stimulus in the same condition. Participants were also
told to read the stories for content, and asked to think about
and visualize the scene. Trials were separated by 12-18

seconds of fixation. The text of each story was presented in a
white 40-point font on a black background, using Matlab
7.10 running on an Apple MacBook Pro, and the order of
conditions was counterbalanced across runs and participants.
Experiment 2: Structure and Content
The stimuli consisted of 40 short vignettes, which introduced
two people and a context, and then described a belief that one
of the characters held. The content of the belief itself was
either mundane (thoughts about e.g. housework, haircuts,
paint colors) or socially relevant (e.g. scandal, drugs, sexual
relations). The form the belief description was either firstorder (‘John thinks that …’) or higher-order (‘John thinks
that Mary suspects that he knows that…’). Each vignette
appeared in all four conditions, counter-balanced across
participants; each participant saw one of the four versions of
each vignette for a total of 40 stories, e.g.:
Jessica was just hired as the new program director at a local nonprofit that works on [1st: raising money and recruiting volunteers
for] special needs education.
When, Steve, the on-site manager, met her, he was very
impressed, mostly because he thinks that [higher: Jessica suspects
that he believes that] …
[mundane: as a trained negotiator and long-time networker,
Jessica will be successful at bringing in new grant money.]
[social: as a very attractive and large-chested woman, Jessica
will be successful at bringing in new grant money.]

Each condition was matched for word count, number of
syllables per word, Flesch reading ease score, number of
noun-phrases), lexical frequency, log-transformed lexical
frequency, and general syntactic form (e.g. number of
relative clauses), such that there was no significant difference
between mundane and socially-relevant stories or between
first-order and higher-order ones (all p >> 0.1).
Stories were presented in a pseudo-randomized order, with
the order of conditions counterbalanced across runs and
participants. Full stories were presented all at once for 20
seconds, followed by 12 s of fixation on a black screen. 10
stories were presented during each of four runs for a total run
time of 22 min and 56 seconds. Each story was presented in a
white 40-point font on a black background, using Matlab
7.10 running on an Apple MacBook Pro. Participants were
asked to press a button when they were done reading.
Participants were informed that after the scan there would
be a memory task; they were told to not try to memorize the
details of the stories, but to read the stories as fully and
deeply as possible, as if they were reading a novel.
After scanning, participants were presented with a selfpaced memory task in which they saw the same 40 stories
that they saw in the scanner, presented in a pseudorandomized order. Half of the stories (distributed evenly
across conditions) were slightly modified, with a change to
e.g. one of the main character descriptions, the location of
the story, or the belief content. Participants were asked to
determine whether this version of the story was the same
version that they saw in the scanner.

fMRI Data Acquisition
fMRI data were collected in a 3T Siemens scanner at the
Athinoula A. Martinos Imaging Center at the McGovern
Institute for Brain Research at MIT, using a 12-channel head

3357

coil. Using standard echoplanar imaging procedures, we
acquired blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) data in 30
near axial slices, using 3 x 3 x 4 mm voxels (TR = 2 s, TE =
30, flip angle = 90◦). To allow for steady state magnetization,
the first four seconds of each run were excluded.
Data processing and analysis was performed using SPM8
(http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm) and custom software. The
data were realigned, normalized onto a common brain space
(Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) template), spatially
smoothed using a Gaussian filter (5 mm kernel) and
subjected to a high-pass filter (128 Hz).

from presentation time to account for hemodynamic lag – to
get a single PSC for each condition, in each ROI, in each
participant (Poldrack, 2006). These values were then
averaged across subjects to get a PSC value for each
condition for each ROI.
Exp. 2: Structure and Content
In each of the individual regions of interest (ROIs) defined
using the localizer, we calculated the average percent signal
change (PSC) as in Experiment 1, to get a PSC value for
each condition for each ROI.

Results and Discussion

fMRI Analysis:
Both experiments were modeled using a boxcar regressor,
convolved with a standard hemodynamic response function
(HRF). The general linear model was used to analyze the
BOLD data from each subject, as a function of condition.
The model included nuisance covariates for run effects,
global mean signal, and an intercept term.
Exp. 1: ToM and Language Localizer
A second-level random effects analysis was performed on the
contrast images generated for each individual to identify
brain regions showing reliable differences between belief and
photo stories (‘Theory of Mind’ regions) and between photo
stories and nonwords (‘Language’ regions; thresholded at
p<0.001, uncorrected, k>10). Based on the results of the
whole-brain analysis, functional regions of interest (ROIs)
were defined for each individual, as a set of at least 10
contiguous voxels that showed a significant difference
between conditions (thresholded at p<0.001, uncorrected).
To measure the response of these ROIs to the localizer
stimuli without the bias of non-independent data, we used a
cross-validation technique. Individual subject ROIs were
defined using two runs of data, and the response was
extracted from the excluded, independent run. This process
was iterated over all three runs, allowing us to calculate, in
each of the individual regions of interest (ROIs) defined
using the localizer, the average percent signal change (PSC)
relative to baseline for each time point in each condition,
averaging across all voxels in the ROI and across all blocks
in the condition, where PSC(t) = 100 × (average BOLD
magnitude for condition (t) – average BOLD magnitude for
fixation) / average BOLD magnitude for fixation. We
averaged the PSC across the entire presentation – offset 6s

Experiment 1: ToM and Language Localizer
Theory of Mind regions:
A whole brain random effects analysis revealed five main
regions that showed greater activation for false belief stories
compared to false photograph stories (uncorrected, p <
0.001, k > 10): right and left temporo-parietal junction, right
superior temporal sulcus, medial precuneus, and dorsal
medial prefrontal cortex. Identifying the set of brain regions
that are considered a core part of the Theory of Mind
network, these results replicate a number of studies using a
similar functional localizer task (e.g. Saxe & Kanwisher,
2003). These ROIs were then identified in each individual,
using the same threshold: RTPJ (identified in 18/18
individuals), LTPJ (15/18), RSTS (14/18), PC (15/18), and
DMPFC (12/18), (Figure 1a).
The results from the cross-validation were analyzed using
pair-wise comparisons of the response to false belief stories,
false photograph stories, and non-word lists. Paired-sample
t-tests revealed that all of the individually localized ToM
regions show a significant difference between false belief and
false photograph (all p<.05), and between false belief and
non-words (all p<.05), but no difference between false
photos and non-words (all p>.05), (Figure 2).
Language regions:
A whole brain random effects analysis revealed eleven
cortical regions that showed greater activation for false
photograph stories compared to non-words (uncorrected,
p<0.001, k>10); these same regions were then identified in
individual subjects’ data as ROIs using the same threshold:
left angular gyrus (identified in 18 out of 18 individuals), left
0.6	  
0.5	  

PSC	  	  

0.4	  

False	  Belief	  

0.3	  
0.2	  

False	  Photo	  

0.1	  

Non-­‐Words	  

0	  
-­‐0.1	  
-­‐0.2	  

ToM	  Regions	  
Figure 1a,b: Functional localizer results – ToM (left) and Language
(right). Brain regions in which the bold signal was higher for stories
about mental representations compared to stories about physical
representations; and for physical representation compared to non-words
(N = 18, random effects analysis, p < 0.001, uncorrected.)

3358

Language	  Regions	  

Figure 2: Functional localizer – Cross-Validation results.
Average percent signal change in ToM and Language regions
for stories about false beliefs, stories about false physical
representations, and non-word lists.

lobe (mPTL), and left and right posterior temporal lobe
(PTL) (uncorrected, p < 0.001, k > 10). None of the voxels in
this analysis overlapped with ToM regions. Additionally, we
see activation in the area in left IFG located between the left
IFG region and left IFG orbital region, as well as in the right
counterpart – areas argued to be implicated in response
inhibition and working memory (e.g. Aron et al, 2004;
Bunge et al 2003, Chikazoe, et al, 2007), the frontal eye
fields, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, and the dorsal anterior
cingulate area.
ROI Percent Signal Change Analysis: Supporting the
results of the whole brain analysis, a 2x2 repeated measures
ANOVA (Content by Structure) revealed that most of the
individually-defined language ROIs were sensitive to the
structure of belief stories. Higher-order beliefs elicited a
significantly higher response than first-order beliefs in left
IFG, left IFG-orbital, left MFG, left mPTL, and left PTL (all
F>5, p<0.01, η2>0.25). The left ATL and right mPTL
showed marginal effects in the same direction (both F>3,
p<0.1). One language ROI showed the opposite profile: firstExperiment 2: Structure and Content
order beliefs elicited a higher response than second-order
ones: the left angular gyrus (F>5 p<0.05, η2>0.25)
Structure:
By contrast, none of the ToM regions showed a differential
Whole brain analysis: A whole brain random effects
response
to second-order compared to first-order belief
analysis, contrasting higher-order with first-order beliefs,
attributions
(all p >> 0.1).
revealed activity in eight of the eleven previously identified
These
analyses
together clearly indicate that the structure
language regions: the left inferior gyrus (IFG) left inferior
of
a
belief
attribution
– as encoded by varying the number of
orbital gyrus (IFGorb), left middle frontal gyrus (MFG), left
embeddings
–
is
not
an aspect of belief attribution that
anterior temporal lobe (ATL), left middle posterior temporal
affects ToM brain regions. Unlike the ToM regions, most of
the language regions show some differentiation between
0.5	  
ﬁrst-­‐order,	  
first-order and higher-order stimuli. Moreover, we see that
0.4	  
mundane	  
four of the eleven regions show robustly stronger responses
0.3	  
to higher-order beliefs, revealed in both ROI and whole brain
ﬁrst-­‐order,	  
social	  
analyses: left inferior orbital gyrus, left middle frontal gyrus,
0.2	  
higher-­‐order,	   left anterior lobe, and left medial posterior lobe. This
0.1	  
mundane	  
suggests that this type of structure is an aspect of linguistic
0	  
higher-­‐order,	   stimuli that is represented or processed in a portion of the
language processing network, but not the Theory of Mind
social	  
-­‐0.1	  
network.
ToM	  Regions	  
Language	  Regions	  	  

PSC	  

inferior frontal gyrus (18/18), left inferior orbital gyrus
(18/18), left medial gyrus (18/18), left superior gyrus
(18/18), left anterior lobe (18/18), left middle anterior lobe
(18/18), left middle posterior lobe (18/18), left posterior
temporal lobe (18/18), right middle anterior lobe (18/18), and
right middle posterior lobe (17/18). These regions are those
also implicated in a series of previous studies contrasting
activation for sentence processing compared to nonsense
word processing and to backward speech (Fedorenko et al
2010) (Figure 1b).
As in the ToM regions, the results from the crossvalidation were analyzed using pair-wise comparisons of the
response to false belief stories, false photograph stories, and
non-word lists. Paired-sample two-tail t-tests revealed that all
of the individually localized language regions show a
significant difference between false belief and non-words (all
p<.05), and between false photograph (all p<.05), and nonwords, but no difference between false belief and false
photograph (all p>.05) (Figure 2).

Figure 1 (top): Structure and Content ROI analysis. Average percent
signal change in ToM and Language regions for stories varying in
their Structure (first-order and second-order) and their Content
(mundane and socially relevant)
Figure 2a,b (bottom): Structure and Content whole brain analyses –
Embedding (left) and Social Relevance (right). Brain regions in
which the bold signal was higher for stories with embedded structure
compared to matched stories with first-order structure; and with
socially relevant compared to mundane content (N = 18, random
effects analysis, p < 0.001, uncorrected.)

Content:
Whole brain analysis: A whole brain random effects
analysis, contrasting socially relevant with mundane beliefs,
revealed activations that overlapped with four of the five
previously identified ToM regions (uncorrected, p < 0.001, k
> 10): left temporo-parietal junction, right superior temporal
sulcus, precuneus, and dorsal-medial prefrontal cortex. In
addition, there was also activation overlapping with one
language region, left inferior frontal gyrus, as well as in the
thalamus.
ROI Percent Signal Change Analysis: A 2x2 repeated
measures ANOVA (Content by Structure) revealed that all
five of the ToM regions identified in the functional localizer
showed a main effect of Content, with a significantly higher
response to beliefs with socially-relevant content, compared
to beliefs with mundane content. These regions included the
right and left TPJ, RSTS, precuneus, and DMPFC (all F>4,
p<0.05, η2>0.25).
Nearly all of the language regions also showed a higher
response to socially-relevant beliefs compared to mundane

3359

ones (all F>4, p<0.05, η2>0.25); none of the ROIs showed an
interaction between Content and Structure.

General Discussion
We functionally localized both Theory of Mind and higherlevel language processing regions in the same individual
subjects, and then asked whether changing two distinct
aspects of stories describing beliefs modulated the neural
response of these two networks. We found that the ToM
network is sensitive to the content, but not structural
complexity, of stories about beliefs. By contrast, brain
regions involved in language processing respond to both the
structural complexity and, to some extent, the social
relevance of the stories.
In Experiment 1, we presented a new functional localizer
for language and Theory of Mind regions, using false belief
stories, false photograph stories, and lists of non-words.
Following previous work in the Theory of Mind literature,
(e.g. Saxe and Kanwisher 2003), we used the contrast of
false belief stories over false photograph stories to localize
the Theory of Mind network. In the current localizer, unlike
previous ToM localizers, we controlled for a variety of lowlevel linguistic features, matching the false belief and false
photograph stories on qualities that affect language
processing difficulty and linguistic complexity. Despite this,
we found all of the classic Theory of Mind regions, including
bilateral TPJ, RSTS, PC, and DMPFC, suggesting that these
results, and previous results using this type of contrast, are
not driven by confounding low-level language features, but
rather by the genuine contrast in content – other people's
(outdated) mental states versus (outdated) physical
representations of the world.
Similarly, following previous work in the neurolinguistics
literature (e.g. Fedorenko et al, 2010), we localized regions
sensitive to word- and sentence-level processing by doing a
sentences to non-words contrast, using only the false
photograph stories for the sentences. By matching the false
photograph stories and non-words lists on additional lowlevel features (bigram frequency and length) and excluding
false belief stories, we ensured that the localizer was (a) not
showing a contrast due simply to increased difficulty in
linguistic processing, and (b) not picking out regions that
specifically process belief/social information. Using this
contrast, we identified eleven cortical regions previously
implicated in high-level language processing, including the
left IFG, MFG, and SFG, left and right ATL, left PTL, and
left angular gyrus.
Finally, by localizing the ToM and language networks in
the same participants, we found that the ToM network and
language-processing network are both spatially and
functionally distinct: ToM regions show a strong BOLD
response to false belief stimuli, but not to either false
photograph or non-word stimuli; the language regions show
an equally strong response to both false belief and false
photograph stories, but not to non-word lists.
In Experiment 2, we find that these regions also show
different profiles of response to manipulations of the
structure and content of stories about belief. We identified
two principle dimensions along which descriptions of

someone’s thoughts can differ, affecting both the mental
state itself, and the associated linguistic representation. The
first dimension was the content of the thought; here, we
manipulated the social relevance of the mental states and
events being considered. The second dimension was the
structural complexity of the attribution; in this study, we
manipulated the number of levels of embedding of the target
thought.
We asked whether either (or both) of these dimensions are
represented in, and would therefore modulate, the activity of
brain regions previously implicated in Theory of Mind and
high-level language processing. We found that while both
sets of regions were modulated by content, only language
regions were affected by the story structure.
Specifically, both whole brain and regions of interest
analyses indicated that there was greater activation in Theory
of Mind brain regions (temporo-parietal junction, superior
temporal sulcus, medial precuneus and dorsal-medial
prefrontal cortex) for socially relevant mental states than for
mundane mental states, suggesting that the ToM network
appears to be particularly sensitive to the socially relevant
stimuli. However, this result must be interpreted with
caution, given the similar (if weaker) pattern observed in the
language regions in the ROI analysis. The socially-relevant
stories in the current experiment were both more arousing
and more surprising than the mundane stimuli. Moreover,
socially relevant (and in fact, scandalous) information is
likely to be more informative, both in making judgments
about the belief-holder, and about the world. As a
consequence, generally higher responses to the socially
relevant stimuli might reflect overall higher arousal or
attention, and/or specific representations of the belief
content. We are currently doing further work to tease apart
the effect of content manipulations in ToM and language
regions, and ask what features of "social relevance" might be
driving this effect.
In contrast, both whole brain and regions of interest
analyses indicated that nearly all of the language regions
show sensitivity to the manipulation of structure – left IFG
and left orbital IFG, left MFG, left ATL, left and left middle
PTL, and right middle PTL. Seeing this effect spread across
the extended language network is not very surprising, as the
manipulation likely affected a number of different languagerelated processes, including working memory, syntactic
complexity, and semantic complexity. Our results largely
converge with Shetreet et al. (2009), who contrasted
constructions with no embedding to those will full sentential
embedding, and found increased activity in left IFG, bilateral
STG (mPTL), bilateral SMG (PTL), left SFG, and left MFG.
In light of this large and general response in the language
regions, and the cross-network response to content
manipulation, the most interesting result of this paper is the
absence of sensitivity to belief structure in the ToM regions.
Neither whole brain nor regions of interest analyses found
evidence that Theory of Mind brain regions’ responses are
differentially affected by the structural complexity of
attributed beliefs.
The fact that language regions, but not ToM regions, show
sensitivity to multiple embeddings is particularly surprising
given a common assumption that higher-order belief

3360

attributions should invoke more ToM processing – higherorder beliefs require additional meta-representation (the
representation of Steve's representation of Jessica's mental
state), the representation of more individual thoughts (both
Steve and Jessica's), and successful processing of a more
complex thought (Steve's) – all things that seem crucially
related to ToM representation. Second-order false belief
tasks are significantly harder for children than first-order
false belief tasks (and are often successfully passed 2-3 years
later than first-order false belief tasks) (Apperly et al, 2007;
Hollebrandse et al, 2007), have been shown invoke less ToM
activation in children (Kobayashi et al., 2007) and been
shown to be significantly more difficult for patients with
brain damage (Fine, Lumsden, & Blair, 2001) and for
individuals with autism or schizophrenia (Baron-Cohen,
1989; Pickup & Frith, 2001).
Thus, given the ToM network’s selective response to
mental state attributions, we would expect that, if the
difference between first-order and higher-order ToM
attributions is due to increased complexity of mental state
representation, the Theory of Mind network would respond
to exactly that sort of complexity. However, while there is
clear evidence that an increase in embedding does increase
overall processing difficulty and here modulates a variety of
language processing regions, we do not see this increased
difficulty reflected in the activation of Theory of Mind
network.
The fact that an increased number of embeddings does not
lead to additional activity in the Theory of Mind regions
suggests that the differences between these two types of
stimuli, including differences in syntactic complexity, the
number of mental states, and meta-representational
complexity do not directly drive ToM activity. Rather, we
see these differences between first-order and higher-order
mental state attribution reflected in increased activation in
the areas associated with language and domain general
processing. This finding converges with results from patient
populations showing that failure to pass second-order false
belief tasks may in fact be due to domain-general
impairment, rather than diminished theory of mind
processing (e.g. Zaitchik, Koff, Brownell, Winner, And
Albert, 2006).
This dissociation between mental state embedding and
Theory of Mind activation raises questions both cognitively
and neurally – are there dimensions of mental state
attribution do directly modulate theory of mind processing,
do tasks using second-order ToM invoke more theory of
mind processing, what parts of belief representation are
crucially represented in the ToM network, and what does that
suggest about the cognitive architecture of ToM attribution?
Together, our results have started to define and narrow the
possible space of Theory of Mind representation. In
Experiment 1, we've shown that the neural regions
underlying belief attribution are distinct from general
language processing regions. In Experiment 2, we show that
two dimensions relevant to both belief attribution and
language processing affect Theory of Mind and language
regions differently. While on one hand, the results suggest
that the theory of mind network shows sensitivity to content
within the belief attributions, they also clearly show that,

despite the obvious link between embedding and mental state
attribution, this type of structural complexity does not seem
to be part of the representational space of the ToM network.

Acknowledgements
This material is based upon work supported by the National
Science Foundation under Grant 095518, a John Merck
Scholars Grant, and a National Science Foundation Graduate
Research Fellowship, Grant 0645960.

References
Apperly, I. A., Samson, D., Chiavarino, C., Bickerton, W. -L., &
Humphreys, G. W. (2007). Testing the domain-specificity of a
theory of mind deficit in brain-injured patients. Cognition,
103(2), 300-321.
Baron-Cohen, S. (1989). The autistic child's theory of mind: A case
of specific developmental delay. Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry, 30(2), 285-297.
Brunet, E., Sarfati, Y., Hardy-Bayle, M. C., & Decety, J. (2000). A
PET investigation of the attribution of intentions with a nonverbal
task. Neuroimage, 11(2), 157-66.
Dodell-Feder, D., Koster-Hale, J., Bedny, M., Saxe, R. (In Press).
fMRI item analysis in a theory of mind task. NeuroimageM.
Fedorenko, E., Hsieh, P.-J., Nieto-Castañon, A., Whitfield-Gabrieli,
S. & Kanwisher, N. (2010). A new method for fMRI
investigations of language: Defining ROIs functionally in
individual subjects. Journal of Neurophysiology, 104, 1177-1194.
Fletcher, P. C., Happe, F., Frith, U., Baker, S. C., Dolan, R. J.,
Frackowiak, R. S., et al. (1995). Other minds in the brain: A
functional imaging study of "theory of mind" in story
comprehension. Cognition, 57(2), 109-28.
Gallagher, H. L., Happe, F., Brunswick, N., Fletcher, P. C., Frith,
U., & Frith, C. D. (2000). Reading the mind in cartoons and
stories: An fmri study of 'theory of mind' in verbal and nonverbal
tasks. Neuropsychologia, 38(1), 11-21.
Gallagher, H.L., Jack, A.I., Roepstorff, A., Frith, C.D., 2002.
Imaging the intentional stance in a competitive game.
NeuroImage 16, 814–821.
Gobbini, M. I., Koralek, A. C., Bryan, R. E., Montgomery, K. J., &
Haxby, J. V. (2007). Two takes on the social brain: A comparison
of theory of mind tasks. J Cogn Neurosci, 19(11), 1803- 14.
Goel, V., Grafman, J., Sadato, N., & Hallett, M. (1995). Modeling
other minds. Neuroreport, 6(13), 1741-6.
Haxby, J. V., Gobbini, M. I., Furey, M. L., Ishai, A., Schouten, J.
L., & Pietrini, P. (2001). Distributed and overlapping
representations of faces and objects in ventral temporal cortex.
Science, 293(5539), 2425-30.
Perner, J., Aichhorn, M., Kronbichler, M., Staffen, W., & Ladurner,
G. (2006). Thinking of mental and other representations: The
roles of left and right temporo-parietal junction. Soc Neurosci,
1(3-4), 245-58.
Poldrack, R. (2006). Can cognitive processes be inferred from
neuroimaging data? . Trends Cogn Sci, 10, 59‐63.
Saxe, R., & Kanwisher, N. (2003). People thinking about thinking
people. The role of the temporo-parietal junction in "theory of
mind". Neuroimage, 19(4), 1835-42.
Shetreet, E., Friedmann, N., & Hadar, U. (2009). An fMRI study of
syntactic layers: Sentential and lexical aspects of embedding.
NeuroImage, 48(4), 707-716.
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.07.001
Uttich, K., & Lombrozo, T. (2010). Norms inform mental state
ascriptions: A rational explanation for the side-effect effect.
Cognition, 116(1), 87-100. Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.cognition.2010.04.003
Zaitchik, D., Koff, E., Brownell, H., Winner, E., Albert, M. (2006).
Inference of beliefs and emotions in patients with Alzheimer.
Neuropsychology, 20, 11–20.

3361

