UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Time-interval statistics adaptively modulate decision makers' willingness to wait for delayed
outcomes

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1jq7x458

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
McGuire, Joseph
Kable, Joseph

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Time-interval statistics adaptively modulate decision makers’ willingness to wait
for delayed outcomes
Joseph T. McGuire (mcguirej@psych.upenn.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania
3720 Walnut Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA

Joseph W. Kable (kable@psych.upenn.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania
3720 Walnut Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA
Abstract
The present work examines persistence in situations where delays are open-ended. From a normative standpoint, appropriate
behavior in such situations depends on the statistical distribution of possible delay lengths. Depending on this distribution
it may be appropriate either to persist indefinitely or to give
up after a short period of time. In a behavioral experiment,
human participants experienced reward timing statistics that
implied it was productive to adopt either a high or low level of
persistence. Human decision makers were highly responsive
to these statistical cues. In a condition where timing statistics implied patience was productive, participants performed
exceptionally well, and had little difficulty in waiting for delayed outcomes. In contrast, participants showed substantially
lower willingness to wait when temporal statistics implied patience was an inappropriate strategy. The results demonstrate
that seemingly impatient behavior can arise as an adaptive response to the perceived statistics of the environment.
Keywords: decision making; intertemporal choice; delay
of gratification; dynamic inconsistency

Introduction
Persistence in pursuing delayed rewards is widely regarded
as an important self-control skill (Ainslie, 1975; Mischel,
Shoda, & Rodriguez, 1989). Likewise, the inability to tolerate delay of gratification has been viewed as a source of
maladaptive inconsistencies in choice.
Theoretical analyses of intertemporal choice have focused
primarily on situations where decision makers know in advance how long a delay is scheduled to last (e.g., Ainslie,
1975). However, real-life decision makers routinely find
themselves waiting through uncertain, open-ended delay intervals. When decision makers do not know how soon a reward will arrive, they face a nontrivial task of deciding how
long to continue waiting.
Open-ended delays occur when commuters wait for buses,
when job-seekers wait for offers, and when sit-and-wait
predators wait for prey. In each of these cases, a decision
maker must continuously choose whether to keep waiting
or move on to new opportunities. Several of the most famous and compelling empirical examinations of delay-ofgratification behavior have involved delays that were openended from the decision maker’s point of view (Mischel &
Ebbesen, 1970; Mischel, Ebbesen, & Zeiss, 1972; Mischel et
al., 1989).
Little is known about how decision makers cope with timing uncertainty during intertemporal choice. From a normative standpoint, as we show in detail below, the appropriate

behavior depends on the statistical distribution of possible delay durations. The shape of this distribution determines how
a decision maker’s expectation should change as time passes.
For some distributions the anticipated delay grows steadily
shorter over time, presumably increasing the reward’s present
subjective value. For others, however, time-passage can actually increase the expected remaining delay time. In this case
a delayed outcome loses value over time. Giving up on the
delayed outcome would be inappropriate in the former case,
but is potentially justified in the latter.
Here we present a behavioral experiment in which decision
makers had the opportunity to wait for rewards in environments that differed in terms of their timing statistics. Results
suggest that individuals successfully learned about these timing statistics through experience, and responded by making
appropriate adjustments in their willingness to tolerate delay.
Impulsivity and inability to tolerate delay often have a
detrimental influence on human decision making. Nevertheless, a potentially productive route to understanding these aspects of behavior is to examine situations in which they are
adaptive. It may turn out that mechanisms that support appropriate responding in some situations are also responsible for
maladaptive delay-of-gratification failure in others. As a general point, it is important to recognize that a decision maker’s
computational-level objective is to calibrate behavioral persistence, not merely to maximize persistence in all cases.
The present work relies on the assumption that an individual’s temporal expectations take the form of a probability distribution, not merely a point estimate. We therefore begin by
reviewing evidence that supports this contention.

Experience-based learning of time-interval
distributions
Considerable evidence suggests that decision-making organisms can encode and use information about full distributions
of time intervals.
A first category of evidence involves instrumental behavior under interval schedules of reinforcement. Fluctuations in
response frequency are highly sensitive to the specific reward
schedule in effect. If rewards are made available at fixed temporal intervals, response rates show a “fixed-interval scallop”
(Gibbon, 1977), rising and falling as if to reflect subjective
reward probability. Catania and Reynolds (1968) observed
that pigeons’ response rates tracked reward hazard rates that

2860

Time-interval distributions

were increasing, constant, or decreasing as a function of time.
More recent work confirms that when animals experience bimodal interval schedules, response rates show a corresponding non-monotonic pattern (Bateson & Kacelnik, 1995).
Other evidence comes from “variable foreperiod”
paradigms (Nickerson, 1965). Here, a preparatory cue
precedes an imperative stimulus by a random “foreperiod”
interval. The hazard rate for the imperative stimulus rises
within the foreperiod. Reaction times are faster if the
stimulus appears later, suggesting preparation is based on
veridical instantaneous expectancy.
Distribution knowledge can influence the perceived duration of individual time intervals (Jazayeri & Shadlen, 2010).
Distribution knowledge can also support explicit inferences.
Griffiths and Tenenbaum (2006) asked survey respondents
to estimate total durations for familiar types of events given
given that the duration had already exceeded some minimum
(for example, predicting the total length of a movie that has
played for 110 min already). Participants’ responses were
largely consistent with valid inference based on objectively
accurate prior distributions.

Cumul. probability

A

1

0.5

Return ($)

B

0
0

We developed a behavioral task in which participants acquired experience with a statistical distribution of time intervals and decided how long they were willing to wait for delayed rewards. Participants’ objective was to maximize their
total monetary reward in a fixed 10-min period. In essence
they faced a rate-based optimization task, similar to a foraging problem. Participants could wait for one reward at a time,
with each reward being delivered at the end of a random delay. At any time (and as often as they wished), participants
could give up waiting, receive a much smaller immediate reward, and begin a new trial.
Two participant groups each experienced a different distribution of delay intervals. The two distributions were selected
so that they implied qualitatively different optimal strategies.
Delays in one condition were drawn from a uniform distribution spanning (0,12) sec (UD group). Delays in the second
condition were drawn from a truncated heavy-tailed distribution with quartile upper boundaries at 0.8, 3.6, 15.9, and 90
sec (HTD group). Figure 1A shows the two distributions.
Timing statistics in the UD group were such that waiting was productive. The hazard rate for reward increased
as a function of time already waited. Subjective reward expectancy should increase over time, and the expected remaining delay should correspondingly decrease. As a result, the
rate-maximizing strategy was always to continue waiting. Intuitively, it would be unwise to quit after waiting 8 sec, because at that point a reward in next 4 sec is guaranteed (a
better prospect than starting a new trial).
For the HTD group, conversely, waiting was counterproductive. This distribution was characterized by a falling hazard rate, meaning that reward became less likely in successive temporal intervals, and the passage of time increased the
expected length of the remaining delay. A rate-maximizing

4

8

12

16

4

8

12

16

Delay length (sec)

20

10
8
6
4
2
0
0

A willingness-to-wait task

UD group
HTD group

Waiting policy (sec)

20

Figure 1: Panel A shows the distribution of delay intervals
in each condition. Delays in the UD group were drawn
from a uniform distribution (a = 0, b = 12). Delays in the
HTD group were drawn from a generalized Pareto distribution (k = 8, σ = 3.4, θ = 0) truncated at a maximum value
of 90 sec. Panel B shows the total monetary return expected
under a range of waiting policies (see text for details).

strategy would at some point call for giving up and moving on
to a new trial. The heavy-tailed distribution can be intuitively
understood as involving a mixture of short and long delays.
As more time passes it becomes more likely that the current
trial falls in the long tail of the distribution and is best abandoned. (See Griffiths & Tenenbaum, 2006 for further discussion of prediction updating as a function of elapsed time.)
These two distributions were selected because they broadly
represent two categories of situations that real-world decision
makers are likely to encounter. The UD condition reflects a
simple form of uncertainty: the delay’s precise length is unknown, but the decision maker expects it will lie within a delimited range of values. A Gaussian probability distribution
over delay lengths would have the same essential properties
as the uniform distribution: estimates of the time remaining
would decrease monotonically (though not linearly) as time
passed. This form of uncertainty could arise not just from
variability in external events, but also from internal noise associated with time-interval estimation (Gibbon, 1977).
The HTD condition, in contrast, was designed to represent
situations where delays are open-ended. There is growing
evidence that time intervals associated with many human activities are well characterized by a heavy-tailed form (e.g., a
power-function distribution). Such distributions characterize
activities such as email reply latencies, where most delays are
short but some are very long (Barabási, 2005). Heavy-tailed
distributions tend to arise when fast and slow processes are in-

2861

termixed. From a decision maker’s point of view, such mixing
implies that a given event’s past duration is a direct predictor
of its duration in the future (for an application of the same
principle to the longevity of memory traces, see Anderson,
2001). In addition, when specific predictive information is
unavailable, a heavy-tailed distribution may be a reasonable
uninformative prior (Gott, 1993). As such, this type of distribution might characterize individuals’ expectations in uncertain situations such as waiting on hold (Griffiths & Tenenbaum, 2006) or waiting for unreliable buses (Rachlin, 2000).
In principle, an exponential distribution occupies a middle ground between these two categories, implying a constant
probability of reward arrival per unit time. Waiting would
be neither productive nor counterproductive. However, uncertainty about the value of the exponential rate parameter
would produce, in effect, a mixture of exponentials, which
would take on a heavy-tailed form (Sozou, 1998).
It would clearly be beneficial for decision makers to be capable of distinguishing situations where waiting is productive
from those where it is not. We predicted that decision makers would adaptively calibrate their level of behavioral persistence on the basis of the timing statistics they experienced.

nonetheless possible that participants will be capable of responding adaptively to the timing statistics they experience
over the course of the task. If this is the case, individuals in
the UD condition may come to show greater persistence than
those in the HTD condition.
A result of this kind would indicate that decision makers
are capable of calibrating persistence in an adaptive manner
through temporal learning. This finding would open the way
for an examination of the specific information-processing
steps that enable time-interval experience to impact subsequent behavioral persistence.

Empirical investigation
Participants in a behavioral experiment were given opportunities to wait for delayed outcomes under temporal uncertainty.
We tested whether the form of uncertainty—specifically, the
statistical distribution of delay lengths—would impact participants’ willingness to wait.

Methods

Normative analysis
We will define a decision maker’s waiting policy as the time
at which he or she would quit a trial if the reward had not yet
arrived. Figure 1B shows the total earnings expected under
a range of policies in each condition (if each policy were applied consistently over the course of the entire experiment).
These curves are based on the following parameters: a 10minute session, a 15¢ reward, a 1¢ gain upon quitting, a 2
sec inter-trial interval (ITI), and the delay-length distributions
shown in Figure 1A.
Expected total earnings were calculated in the following
way. Suppose a given policy calls for quitting at time t. Let pt
be the proportion of trials that will be rewarded because they
have a delay shorter than t (i.e., the cumulative probability at
t). Let τt be the mean duration of these rewarded trials. The
expected return for a single trial, in dollars, is Rt = 0.15(pt )+
0.01(1 − pt ). One trial’s expected cost, in seconds, is Ct =
τt (pt ) + t(1 − pt ) + 2, including the 2-sec ITI. The expected
return over the 600-sec experiment is 600 × Rt /Ct . This is the
quantity that participants should seek to maximize.
At one extreme, quitting immediately on every trial would
yield 1¢ every 2 sec, or $3.00 total. At the opposite extreme,
a perfectly patient participant in the UD condition could obtain a 15¢ reward every 8 sec on average, for $11.25 total.
The maximum possible rate of return in the HTD condition
is comparable, but is achieved under a very different waiting
policy. Here, a return of $11.25 or greater could be obtained
with waiting policies between 1.4 sec and 3.4 sec. Persistence
beyond this point would be counterproductive.
Of course, individual decision makers enter the task with
no advance knowledge. Lacking direct access to the distributional information in Figure 1A, they are not equipped to
undertake a complete optimality analysis at the outset. It is

Participants The experiment was run in a New Jersey
shopping mall. There were n = 40 participants, 23 female,
ranging in age from 18–64 (mean = 32). Years of education
ranged from 11–20 (mean = 15). Each participant was randomly assigned to one of two conditions (n = 20 each).

Take 1¢

Wait for 15¢

Time left: 09:51
Amount won: $0.15

Figure 2: Behavioral task interface.
Materials and procedure Participants were tested individually at a laptop computer. The waiting task was programmed using the Psychophysics Toolbox extensions for
Matlab (Brainard, 1997; Pelli, 1997); the interface is shown
in Figure 2. The task proceeded as follows. A yellow light
appeared near the top of the screen. Instructions stated that
the light would remain illuminated for a random length of
time, eventually going out and delivering a 15¢ reward. Below the light were two boxes representing possible responses.
The right-hand box was labeled, “Wait for 15¢.” Participants
could wait for the reward by leaving the cursor in this box.
The left-hand box was labeled, “Take 1¢.” By moving the
cursor to this box, participants could extinguish the light, receive 1¢ immediately, and move on to a new trial. If participants did not wish to wait at all, they could simply leave the
cursor in the left-hand box across multiple trials.

2862

Survival analysis

Each monetary outcome (either 15¢ or 1¢) involved a 2sec ITI before a new trial began. The bottom of the screen
displayed the participant’s total earnings so far, as well as the
amount of time left in the 10-min session.
A delay duration was selected on each trial according to the
relevant distribution (see Figure 1A). The reward was delivered at the end of this delay if the participant did not choose
to end the trial earlier.
We wished to ensure that even short spans of experience
would reflect the statistics of the underlying distribution. To
accomplish this, delays were not drawn fully randomly. Instead, successive samples were balanced over the four quartiles of the distribution (i.e., a sample was drawn from all
quartiles in random order before a quartile was repeated).
While this approach has the disadvantage of introducing subtle sequential structure, it has the important advantage of
reducing within-condition variability in the timing statistics
participants experienced.

0.4

Monetary earnings Total monetary earnings serve as a
rough gauge of task success. The maximum possible return was approximately $11.25 for each group. The median
amounts actually earned were $10.69 in the UD group and
$7.29 in the HTD group (see Figure 3). These values differed
significantly (rank-sum p < 0.001). Performance was strikingly successful in the UD group, with 12 of 20 participants
obtaining an amount within $1 of the theoretical optimum.

Monetary outcomes
10
5

UD
HTD
Group

Figure 3: Total monetary earnings in each group. Each point
represents a participant. The dashed line shows the approximate earnings expected under the best waiting policy (see
Fig. 1B for details).
Survival analysis Each group’s willingness to wait was
summarized by plotting a conditional survival curve (see Figure 4A). For each time t, the survival curve considers only
trials that were experimentally scheduled to last longer than t.
It plots the proportion of these trials that were still in progress
at t (i.e., that went on either to be rewarded or to be quit at a

UD group
HTD group

0.2
0

1

3

5

Local AUC
UD

HTD

7

9

Delay (sec)

C

Group

We hypothesized that both groups would shift toward a waiting policy that was productive given the timing statistics in
place. Willingness to wait should increase in the UD group
and decrease in the HTD group.

Total earnings ($)

0.6

5

0

Results

0

1
0.8

10

AUC

B

Willingness to wait

A

11

10

5

0
0

2

4

6

8

Elapsed time (min)

10

Figure 4: Survival analysis results. Panel A shows the mean
conditional survival curve in each group (with standard error).
These curves represent participants’ proportional willingness
to wait a given length delay. Panel B summarizes the survival
curves by showing each participant’s area under the curve
(AUC). Panel C shows the mean local AUC in each group
(shaded region shows standard error) for a sliding Gaussianweighted epoch across the testing session.
later time). The survival curve is more informative than a plot
of raw frequencies because it is not directly influenced by the
experimentally imposed pattern of delay lengths. Instead, it
depicts participants’ willingness to wait various durations.
It is important to note that individual trials reveal different
amounts of information about participants’ waiting policies.
Quit trials are maximally informative, as they provide a point
estimate for the longest time a participant is willing to wait. In
contrast, rewarded trials only signify a willingness to wait at
least the length of the trial.1 Rewards that follow short delays
are relatively uninformative, whereas a reward after a long
delay conveys considerable information about an individual’s
willingness to wait.2
In general, the survival curves in Figure 4A suggest that
for any given delay from 1 to 11 sec, UD participants showed
greater willingness to wait than HTD participants. The area
under the curve (AUC) is a useful summary statistic. The
AUC values in Figure 4B were obtained by summing the 11
points in each participant’s survival curve. The AUC represents an individual’s average willingness to wait during the
1 In the terminology of survival analysis, these observations are
“right-censored,” analogous to a patient in a clinical trial who was
still alive at the end of data collection.
2 A participant in the task faces an inverted version of the same
problem. For an individual trying to estimate the typical duration
of delays, a rewarded trial is the most informative because it reveals
the delay’s exact length. In contrast, quit trial reveals only a lower
bound on the delay’s duration.

2863

11-sec interval evaluated. An individual who always waited
at least 11 sec would have an AUC of 11, whereas someone
who was willing to wait 4 sec but not 5 sec would have an
AUC of 4.
A comparison of the AUC values in Figure 4B supports
the study’s central prediction. Individuals in the UD group
(median AUC= 9.73) showed greater willingness to wait than
individuals in the HTD group (median AUC = 3.34; ranksum p = 0.002).
The results in Figure 4A–B aggregate across the entire 10min experiment. However, participants initially knew nothing
about the relevant timing statistics, so performance is unlikely
to have been stable over time. Rather, we would expect group
differences to emerge progressively with experience.
To assess change over time, AUC values were calculated in
a sliding window over the 10-minute testing period. For each
plotted point, an AUC value was computed based on trials
weighted according to a Gaussian function of their distance
from that point (µ = 0, σ = 60 sec). The window was centered at points ranging from 0.5 min to 9.5 min. The resulting
timecourses, shown in Figure 4C, depict the gradual development of differences in the two groups’ behavior. The results
also suggest differences began to appear as early as the first
minute or so of testing.
Choice reversals A phenomenon of particular interest to
decision-making researchers is the reversal of intertemporal
choices. That is, instances where decision makers do not
merely forego a delayed reward outright, but reverse their
own initial decision to pursue the same reward.

A

1
0.8
0.6
0.4

UD group
HTD group

0.2
0

1

5

UD

HTD

Group

Discussion
7

9

11

2

4

Delay (sec)

Local AUC

5

0

3

C

10

AUC

B

Willingness to wait

Survival analysis, trials exceeding 1 sec

In some situations, choice reversals are viewed as reflecting
non-rational dynamic inconsistency, potentially arising from
a failure of self control (Ainslie, 1975; Mischel & Ebbesen,
1970). In contrast, the present task (in the HTD condition)
required such behavior for optimal performance: the bestperforming strategy is initially to wait for the delayed outcome but to quit if it fails to arrive after about 2 sec. Reversals
in this context do not signify dynamic inconsistency (i.e., they
do not signal a violation of stationarity) because time passage
is a source of new, predictive information about the timing of
the awaited reward.
We ran a secondary analysis focusing specifically on dynamic reversals. This analysis excluded trials where participants opted for the small, immediate reward immediately (an
unproductive strategy in either condition). Focusing only on
trials where the participant waited at least 1 sec, this analysis
evaluated willingness to continue waiting beyond that point.
Figure 5A shows survival curves restricted to these trials.
Because trials quit in the first 1 sec are excluded, the first
point in each survival curve is fixed at 1 while the other points
remain free to vary. The curves reveal that even after participants had begun to wait, they gave up waiting earlier in the
HTD condition than in the UD condition. Figure 5B shows
AUC values summarizing these curves for individual participants. The minimum possible AUC is 1. All but 3 individuals in the UD condition showed high willingness to continue
waiting; that is, dynamic reversals were virtually absent. Reversals occurred far more frequently in the HTD condition.
The median AUC in the UD group (10.74) significantly exceeded that in the HTD group (7.38; rank-sum p < 0.001).
Consistent with findings shown previously, this effect developed progressively over time (see Figure 5C).
This analysis shows that group differences do not depend
on HTD-group participants becoming categorically unwilling
to pursue the delayed outcome, but instead reveal the gradual
development of a less patient waiting policy.

10

5

0
0

6

8

Elapsed time (min)

10

Figure 5: Survival analysis restricted to trials in which participants waited at least 1 sec. The first point in the survival
curve is therefore fixed at 1. This analysis reflects participants willingness to continue waiting for a delayed outcome
after having begun to wait. Panels A–C correspond to the
panels in Fig. 5.

We have shown evidence that decision makers adaptively
modulate their willingness to wait for delayed outcomes in
response to the timing statistics of their environment. The adjustments occurred after a short period of relevant experience.
Two aspects of the results deserve special emphasis.
The first is that participants in the UD condition were remarkably successful at waiting patiently for delayed rewards.
Tasks that require patience or delay tolerance are often assumed to present a challenge to human decision makers. In
contrast to this assumption, the present results suggest such
demands posed little difficulty when the value of persistence
was supported by direct experience with timing statistics.
The second key point is that participants in the HTD group
tended to develop significantly less patient waiting policies,
which constituted an adaptive response the timing statistics
in effect. The observed behavior was isomorphic to behavior
usually interpreted as reflecting self-control failure: partici-

2864

pants chose to begin waiting for a delayed outcome, but reversed their choice before the outcome was obtained. We created a situation where such reversals, far from being anomalous, were optimal by objective criteria. Without introducing
any direct element of temptation, we have shown impatiencelike behavior arising as a result of valid statistical learning.
Our results agree well with the idea that intertemporal
decision-making mechanisms tend to be effective at maximizing reward rate over time (Kacelnik, 2003). There is a
natural connection between the present work and topics in the
optimal foraging literature such as patch-departure decisions
(Brunner, Kacelnik, & Gibbon, 1996).
Several factors might contribute to participants’ overall superior performance in the UD condition, which called for
high persistence, compared to the HTD condition. The
reward-maximizing strategy in the HTD condition is arguably
more complex: decision makers can err by quitting either too
soon or too late (whereas in the UD condition the only error
is to quit too soon). Individuals in the HTD condition might
therefore require more experience to reach equivalent performance. A related idea is that the relevant properties of the
uniform distribution might be easier to learn; followup work
should introduce additional measures of temporal beliefs to
track how beliefs evolve with experience in each condition. A
further possibility is that individuals may hold an initial bias
toward patient strategies in the context of this task. Several individuals remained highly patient even in the HTD condition
(see Figure 4B). Such a bias could stem from high valuation
of individual delayed rewards, from a motive to seek information, from prior beliefs about the time-interval distribution, or
perhaps from a motive to appear outwardly consistent.
The present work has addressed the topic of dynamically
inconsistent decision behavior by examining circumstances
under which such behavior would be appropriate. An account
of dynamic inconsistency based on statistical learning and inference (even in cases where errors may occur) is a potential
alternative to accounts positing competition among multiple
internal systems or objective functions. To the extent that the
failure to tolerate delay involves an aversive affective experience such as frustration (Mischel et al., 1972), the present results highlight that affective processing may promote adaptive
responses in some contexts (cf. Bechara, Damasio, Tranel, &
Damasio, 1997) and should not be seen solely as an impediment to advantageous decision making.

Acknowledgments
This work is supported by NIH grants DA029149 to JWK and
DA030870 to JTM.

References
Ainslie, G. (1975). Specious reward: A behavioral theory of
impulsiveness and impulse control. Psychological Bulletin,
82, 463–496.
Anderson, R. B. (2001). The power law as an emergent property. Memory & Cognition, 29, 1061–1068.

Barabási, A.-L. (2005). The origin of bursts and heavy tails
in human dynamics. Nature, 435, 207–211.
Bateson, M., & Kacelnik, A. (1995). Preferences for fixed
and variable food sources: Variability in amount and delay.
Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 63, 313–
329.
Bechara, A., Damasio, H., Tranel, D., & Damasio, A. R.
(1997). Deciding advantageously before knowing the advantageous strategy. Science, 275, 1293–1295.
Brainard, D. H. (1997). The psychophysics toolbox. Spatial
Vision, 10, 433–436.
Brunner, D., Kacelnik, A., & Gibbon, J. (1996). Memory
for inter-reinforcement interval variability and patch departure decisions in the starling, Sturnus vulgaris. Animal Behaviour, 51, 1025–1045.
Catania, A. C., & Reynolds, G. S. (1968). A quantitative
analysis of the responding maintained by interval schedules
of reinforcement. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of
Behavior, 3, 327–383.
Gibbon, J. (1977). Scalar expectancy theory and Weber’s law
in animal timing. Psychological Review, 84, 279–325.
Gott, J. R. (1993). Implications of the Copernican principle
for our future prospects. Nature, 363, 315–319.
Griffiths, T. L., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2006). Optimal predictions in everyday cognition. Psychological Science, 17,
767–773.
Jazayeri, M., & Shadlen, M. N. (2010). Temporal context
calibrates interval timing. Nature Neuroscience, 13, 1020–
1026.
Kacelnik, A. (2003). The evolution of patience. In
G. Loewenstein, D. Read, & R. F. Baumeister (Eds.), Time
and decision: Economic and psychological perspectives on
intertemporal choice (pp. 115–138). New York: Russell
Sage Foundation.
Mischel, W., & Ebbesen, E. B. (1970). Attention in delay of
gratification. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
16, 329–337.
Mischel, W., Ebbesen, E. B., & Zeiss, A. R. (1972). Cognitive
and attentional mechanisms in delay of gratification. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 21, 204–218.
Mischel, W., Shoda, Y., & Rodriguez, M. L. (1989). Delay
of gratification in children. Science, 244, 933–938.
Nickerson, R. S. (1965). Response time to the second of two
successive signals as a function of absolute and relative duration of intersignal interval. Perceptual and Motor Skills,
21, 3–10.
Pelli, D. G. (1997). The VideoToolbox software for visual
psychophysics: Transforming numbers into movies. Spatial Vision, 10, 437–442.
Rachlin, H. (2000). The science of self-control. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Sozou, P. D. (1998). On hyperbolic discounting and uncertain hazard rates. Proceedings of the Royal Society B:
Biological Sciences, 265, 2015–2020.

2865

