UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Top-down Planning and Bottom-up Perception in a Problem-solving Task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7573d15j

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Nyamsuren, Enkhbold
Taatgen, Niels

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Top-down Planning and Bottom-up Perception in a Problem-solving Task
Enkhbold Nyamsuren (e.nyamsuren@rug.nl)
Niels A. Taatgen (n.a.taatgen@rug.nl)
Department of Artificial Intelligence, University of Groningen,
Nijenborgh 9, 9747 AG Groningen, Netherlands

Color, Number, Shape and Shading. Each attribute can have
one of three distinct values: Red, Green and Blue for the
Color attribute; Open, Solid and Textured for the Shading
attribute; One, Two and Three for the Number attribute;
Oval, Rectangle and Wiggle for the Shape attribute.
The gameplay for SET is relatively simple. At any
moment in the game, 12 cards are dealt open (Figure 1).
Players should find any combination of three cards, further
referred to as a set, satisfying the main rule stating that in
the three cards the values for a particular attribute should be
all the same or all different. The number of different
attributes in set cards is further referred as a level of the set.
As such, the set, in which only one attribute is different, is
level 1 set. Correspondingly, there can be levels of 2, 3 or 4.
Figure 1 shows examples of level 1 (different shape) and
level 4 sets (all attributes are different). In the regular game,
if a player finds a set, he or she picks up the three cards that
form a set, and replaces them with new cards from the deck.
After the deck runs out the player with most cards wins.

Abstract
In this paper we study the roles of top-down planning
and the bottom-up elements in problem-solving tasks.
We investigate how factors, such as conceptual
understanding, perceptual representation and previous
experience with the task, influence the action selection.
The cognitive and perceptual aspects of problemsolving task are studied within the environment of card
game SET. The discussion is provided on cognitive and
perceptual demands on the game, and the difference
between novice and expert players is analyzed with
respect to two types of processes. The hypotheses
proposed in this paper are tested on data obtained
through an eye tracking experiment. Based on findings
the ACT-R model of human player is implemented and
compared to human performance.
Keywords: cognitive architecture; visual attention; cognitive
control; games; ACT-R, problem solving.

Introduction
Human performance in complex tasks is often a
combination of internal planning and responding
appropriately to the environment. Nevertheless, cognitive
models of complex tasks typically focus on the mental
planning aspects, and fail to consider possible influence of
an external world on the control of behavior. The role of the
environment was first recognized in robotics (Brooks, 1991)
but was later extended to human cognition in the embodied
cognition approach (e.g., Clark, 1997; Kirsh & Maglio,
1994). The challenge is to understand how control is shared
between goal-driven planning and processes that are driven
by perceptual input. The approach we will take is to assume
two parallel processes: a bottom-up visual process that scans
the visual field on the basis of saliency and similarity, and a
top-down planning process that tries to achieve the goal, but
also biases the bottom-up process.
Finding an appropriate task to study the cognitive aspects
of human behavior in real-life situation is not easy.
However, games provide environments that often require
the same type of complex processes that are usually
involved in real-world situations. This has the advantage
that behavior of a player can be studied in a controlled
environment. These qualities make games on a computer an
ideal tool for studying complex cognitive processes. One
such game is the card game SET1.
The SET card deck consists of 81 cards. Each card differs
from other cards by a unique combination of four attributes:
1

Figure 1: An example array of 12 cards. The cards with the
solid highlight form level 4 set (all attributes are different),
and cards with dashed highlight form level 1 set (Shape is
different).
There are several advantages of choosing SET as a target
game of study. SET has very simple rules to follow and
relatively static game environment. Despite the simplicity,
SET requires complex cognitive processes including pattern
recognition, visuospatial processing and decision making. It
is our hypothesis that in SET both cognitive and perceptual
processes are equally important to play the game. As such,
SET provides an excellent opportunity to study the
dynamics of such processes in a relatively simple game

SET is a game by Set Enterprises (www.setgame.com)

2685

environment. Finally, the game is unpredictable requiring
dynamic and real-time decision making. There are 7*1013
possible combinations of 12 cards and 220 possible choices
of three cards out of the array of 12 cards. It makes the
detailed strategy planning impossible. With this regard SET
is quite similar to Tetris (Kirsh & Maglio, 1994). In Tetris a
player’s behavior is not determined by specific strategy, but
the player reacts to the next available block. Similarly, in
SET the players cannot really decide the strategy unless all
the cards are seen. The players have to come up with the
strategy on the fly after viewing the cards. Furthermore, the
need to find the sets of different levels forces the players to
change the strategy as the game progresses. Such dynamic
and unpredictable nature of the game makes SET an
interesting target of a study.

gradual transition from the declarative knowledge to
procedural knowledge resulting in a faster comparison of
the cards. The Taatgen et al. model was able to learn
through proceduralization and make a transition from the
novice player to the expert player.

Related Works on SET

Cognitive and Perceptual Processes

A study by Jacob and Hochstein (2008) argued that the
players prefer to look at perceptually similar cards, and, for
comparison step, they mainly rely on processes at the
perceptual level. According to the authors, bias to
perceptual similarity and bottom-up processes explains why
the players need less time to find lower level sets than
higher level sets. Taatgen et al. (2003) also reached the
conclusion that the perceptual elements play a greater role in
finding lower level sets. They suggested a strategy where a
player looks at an arbitrary first card then at a second card
that shares an attribute value. Next, the player predicts the
third card and determines whether that card is one of the
remaining ten cards. Taatgen et al. also hypothesized that
the choice of the first card might not be arbitrary in some
cases. They proposed that the players try to find the set
among the cards that have attribute value occurring in more
than half of 12 cards (if there are many red cards, it is
attractive to search for a set among those cards). Taatgen et
al. implemented this strategy in an ACT-R model. However,
the data they collected did not have enough detail to
determine whether subjects use such a strategy.
Jacob and Hochstein (2008) proposed a generalization of
Taatgen’s strategy based on notions of the most abundant
value (MAV) and the most abundant value group (MAVG).
The former refers to an attribute value that occurs most, and
the latter refers to the group of cards that have the MAV.
They found that the sets belonging to the MAVG are
preferred to the sets outside of the MAVG. In addition, the
time required to find the set in the MAVG decreased as the
size of the MAVG increased. MAVG was preferred to any
other value group independently of the attribute type. Jacob
and Hochstein suggested dimension reduction strategy
where players try to reduce the four dimensional search
space into three by choosing to look at the cards that have
one attribute value in common. As authors claimed, the
dimension reduction primarily occurs with MAV.
There is very little discussion on aspects that result in
difference between novice and expert players. Taatgen et al.
(2003) argued that the experts have optimized comparison
process of cards. Such optimization happens through the

Even though earlier studies suggest similarity plays an
important role in the game, we aim to provide more direct
evidence of such by studying the sequence of eye
movements people make.
Despite the importance of the similarity-based perceptual
processes, as it was shown by Jacob and Hochstein (2008),
it is still unclear how the higher level set are found. The
players cannot rely on the perceptual similarity and have to
deliberately search for the dissimilar cards. This is where we
should see evidence of how a top-down process can
influence the bottom-up visual scanning process.
Another objective is to study in greater detail the
differences between the novice and the expert players. We
will investigate what aspects at the cognitive and the
perceptual levels result in differences between two groups
of players. It might be the case that the novice players rely
more on perceptual processes for decision-making, while
the expert players rely more on conceptual aspects of the
game. For the novice players the choice of the cards to look
at might be driven by perceptual similarity, in contrast, the
expert player might be driven more by a top-down process,
such as a specific strategy.

Research Objectives
Taatgen et al. (2003) used questionnaires and reaction times
to gain understanding about player’s behavior, while Jacob
and Hochstein (2008) used combinatorial analysis of
reaction time. We hope to gain more insight in the
underlying cognitive and perceptual processes through an
eye tracking experiment. Other studies have shown that eye
movement protocols at least indirectly reflect cognitive
processes and amount of cognitive load (Rayner, 1995).

Improved ACT-R model
The ACT-R model created by Taatgen et al. (2003) was able
to closely approximate the human player’s reaction times. It
is, however, uncertain whether the model can also predict
eye-movement patterns, because it has a purely top-down
strategy. It also does not incorporate the recent finding by
Jacob and Hochstein demonstrating the importance of
bottom-up elements of the game. Our aim is to test whether
more complex model with greater emphasis on perceptual
elements of the game can explain the human data.

Experiment
Design and Procedure
In total, 14 subjects have participated in the experiment. The
age of the subjects ranged from 20 to 30 years. All subjects

2686

were either students or staff members of University of
Groningen. The subjects’ previous experience with SET
varied greatly: from few played games to several years of
experience. Hence, the reaction times were chosen as an
indicator of subject’s overall experience.
Every subject was asked to do 60 trials. The group of 60
trials was same for all subjects. Each trial consisted of 12
cards shown on a computer screen and arranged to an array
similar to one show in Figure 1. Each trial had exactly one
combination of three cards that formed the set.
All 60 trials were randomly generated with constraint that
all four levels of difficulty were equally represented in the
experiment. In 30 trials one of the set cards was highlighted
with the red border. The highlighted card belonged to the set
and served as a clue for the subject to find the other two
cards. The summary of the trials is shown in Table 1.
Table 1: The summary of the trials.

Trial
type

With highlighted card
No highlighted card
Total

Level
1
7
8
15

Trial level
Level
Level
2
3
8
8
7
7
15
15

Level
4
7
8
15

to find a level 3 set. The MAV is Oval value with the
MAVG size of eight cards. It should be noted that the Oval
is the only value which is the same among the cards that
make up the set. Figure 3.a shows subject’s fixation
sequence diagram for the trial. Within the diagram, the
subject’s fixation sequence is represented four times (four
separate lanes), each time from the perspective of one of
four attribute types. One unit on x-axis represents fixation
on one particular card, while the corresponding bars on four
lanes represent the attribute values of that card. The
consecutive fixations on the cards with the same attribute
value are shaded with solid color if the probability of such
fixation subsequence occurring by chance is equal to or
below 0.01. The probability is calculated as
where k is the length of the block, and nij is a
number of cards that have a value i for an attribute j.

Total
30
30
60

In each trial, the subject was asked to find the cards
forming the set and select them with the mouse. After
successful selection of all set cards or expiration of a time
limit of 180 s, the next trial was automatically shown to the
subject. In case of failure to find the set, the reaction time
for that trial was recorded as 180 s. The sequence of trials
was determined randomly for every subject.
The subjects’ eye movement data was collected using an
EyeLink 1000 eye. It is a desktop-mounted remote eye
tracker with monocular sampling rate of 500Hz and spatial
resolution of < 0.01○ RMS. The card images were shown on
monitor with screen size of 1024×768 pixels. The card
images had size of 124×184 pixels with 80 and 70 pixels of
horizontal and vertical distances in between. The average
viewing distance is 70 centimeters. The calibrations of the
eye tracker were performed at the start and during the
experiment, if necessary, with average accuracy of 0.8○
being considered as an acceptable measure.

(a)

(b)

Figure 2: The graph (a) depicts the mean reaction times
averaged over all trials for each subject. The graph (b)
shows the mean RT in ordinary and highlighted trials
clustered by the levels and averaged over all subjects.

Results
Reaction Times Subjects differed significantly in terms of
RT, reflecting their different levels of expertise in SET as it
is shown in Figure 2.a. All subjects were categorized into
groups of expert, intermediate and beginner players based
on their mean reaction times (Figure 2.a).It can be seen from
Figure 2.b that having a highlighted card as a clue decreases
the RT by more than twice. This effect can be observed in
all three groups of subjects and in all levels. Secondly, it is
clear that RT is largely dependent on the level.
Grouping by Attribute Value To demonstrate how
subjects use the dimension reduction strategy we first look
at a particular example. In the example trial the subject had

(a)

(b)

Figure 3: (a) the fixation sequence diagram for trial lvl3_15
and subject gprl007; (b) mean proportions of attribute types
used in dimension reduction strategy (overall for all subjects
and trials with no highlighted card).
The figure shows that the subject used the dimension
reduction strategy at least three times and each time with
respect to the different attribute value: Green, One and Oval
consecutively. It is a nice example of players using values

2687

other than the MAV for dimension reduction. The example
shown in Figure 3.a is not an isolated case. In fact, in 75%
of all the fixation sequences the dimension reduction
strategy is used. Figure 3.b shows how 75% distributes over
the four attribute types.
The fact that the first attribute used for the dimension
reduction is the Green color contradicts with Jacob and
Hochstein’s claim that the choice of the value depends only
on the group size and not on the attribute type. Studies
found that people prefer to operate on colors rather than on
shapes (Kim & Cave, 1995; Pomplun et al., 2001).
Likewise, Figure 3.b indicates that for the dimension
reduction the SET players prefer to use Color twice as much
as the other attributes.

highlighted card. This is in conformance with the Jacob and
Hochstein’s results. However, the graph shows that, over the
time, the subjects tend to look at the cards that are less
similar to highlighted card. There is a gradual transition
from the search among the cards that are similar to the
search among the cards that are dissimilar. In addition,
novice players are more biased to the search based on the
perceptual similarity than expert players.
Analysis with Linear Mixed-Effect Regression Model We
analyzed this effect and several other factors of interest with
a mixed-effect regression analysis (Baayen, Davidson &
Bates, 2008).
Table 2: The fixed effects’ coefficients, t and p values.

Search Subsequences Subjects use a dimension reduction
strategy to reduce the complexity of finding a set. However,
it is not yet clear how a similarity-based approach can
eventually find sets with many different attribute values. We
will therefore now analyze the trials in which one of the
cards in the solution was already highlighted. Inspection of
the data revealed that subjects look back to that card
approximately every five card fixations, presumably to
refresh their memory and to restart a new search
subsequence. Breaking down a trial in separate
subsequences allows us to analyze the similarity between
the highlighted card and the currently fixated card based on
which subsequence it is, and the position within that
subsequence.

(a)

Fixed Effects Coefficients
Intercept
0.329
Fixation
-0.100
Subsequence
-0.319
Experience
0.063
ColorCount
0.134
FillCount
0.096
NumberCount
0.113
ShapeCount
0.071

(b)

Figure 4: (a) The mean perceptual similarity of each fixation
in a subsequence to a highlighted card (b) The mean
perceptual similarity of cards in a particular subsequence to
a highlighted card.
Figure 4.b shows that with each subsequence (i.e., each
attempt to find a set with a highlighted card) the similarity
(measured in the number of equal attribute values) between
fixated cards and the highlighted card decreases. The same
tendency can be observed for the fixations within a
subsequence itself (Figure 4.a) although not so obvious.
In the beginning of a trial the subjects clearly prefer to
look at the cards that are perceptually similar to the

Standard Errors
0.139
0.029
0.035
0.022
0.021
0.015
0.019
0.018

t values p values
2.359
0.01
-3.441
0
-9.131
0
2.827
0
6.272
0
3.779
0
6.126
0
5.659
0

The dependent variable in the regression model is the
value of the perceptual similarity (the number of same
attribute values) of the next fixated card to the
corresponding highlighted card. Predictors that significantly
contributed to this similarity are shown in Table 2.
Subsequence is position of a subsequence in a fixation
sequence (values of x axis in Figure 4.b), and Fixation is the
position of a fixation within a subsequence (values of x axis
in Figure 4.a). Both predictors have negative coefficients.
This supports our postulate that there is a transition from
tendency to look at the cards that are perceptually similar to
the highlighted card to tendency to look at the cards that are
dissimilar. The fact that Fixation also has significant
negative coefficient indicates that transition occurs not only
within fixation sequence as whole, but also within
individual subsequences.
The variable Experience represents the subject’s level of
expertise in playing SET (1 for expert group; 2 for
intermediate group; 3 for novice group). The predictor’s
positive coefficient indicates that less experienced players
rely more on similarity-based strategy than more
experienced ones.
The variables ColorCount, FillCount, NumberCount and
ShapeCount indicate the number of cards in trial that have
same Color, Shade, Number and Shape values as the
highlighted card. The positive coefficients for those
variables indicate that a bigger group of cards, that are
perceptually similar to highlighted card, encourages more to
use perceptual similarity-based search than a smaller group
of cards. This is consistent with our analysis in the previous
section and claims by Jacob and Hochstein. The fact that
ColorCount has the highest coefficient value is also

2688

consistent with our theory that Color dominates the other
attribute types.

Discussion
Both the descriptive and mixed-effect regression analysis of
the fixation sequences indicate that the subjects’ basic
strategy of playing SET is similarity based. Subjects prefer
to look for a set among the cards that are similar to each
other. One specific instance of similarity-based strategy is a
dimension reduction strategy. The dimension reduction
strategy can be used more than once (Figure 3) within the
same trial and each time with different attribute value. The
player chooses one attribute value, the guiding attribute
value or GAV, and starts looking for a set among the cards
that share the GAV. If the player fails to find a set with the
current GAV, then another GAV is chosen, and the new
group of cards is defined as the next search space. This part
of the strategy is top-down, but the choice of the GAV is
heavily influenced by two bottom-up elements: (1) the size
of the group of cards that share the value and (2) its attribute
type. The importance of group size (Table 2) was also found
by Jacob and Hochstein. However, contrary to their
conclusion, we have found that the attribute type also plays
an important role (Figure 3.b & Table 2) in choosing the
value for the dimension reduction. Particularly, Color is
preferred to any other attribute type.
Another interesting finding is the gradual reduction in
reliance on similarity (Figure 4 & Table 2). This gradual
reduction explains the positive correlation between level of
the set and time required to find it. At the beginning of the
game the subjects prefer to use similarity based search, such
as dimension reduction. However, as the game progresses,
the players increasingly look at more dissimilar cards more
suitable for finding higher level sets.
Consistent with this, we found that the expert players are
less dependent on similarity than the novice players (Figure
4 & Table 2). This result implies that the expert players
exercise more top-down control than the novice players.
The strategy of reducing the search space with one value
can also be used to find higher level sets. Let’s assume that
player fails to find a set among cards that share the same
Color. In this case the player might choose, for example,
one red card and look for the second and third cards among
blue and green cards. Here the search space is again reduced
since all but one card with a red value are ignored. Players
may choose to use this only when dimension reduction
strategy fails to find a set. The alternation between the
dimension reduction and this strategy, with initial
preference on former, can explain the gradual transition
from similarity to dissimilarity.
Finding the dissimilar attributes requires an explicit
understanding of specific SET rules such as “Given
Rectangle and Wiggle the third value should be Oval”. Such
rule-based cognitive processes are costlier than similaritybased perceptual processes. Most likely this is the reason the
novice players prefer to rely on similarity-based perceptual
processes. However, the need to find higher level sets forces

players to use top-down cognitive processes. Eventually,
through training-induced learning the cost of cognitive
processes can be reduced (rules get rehearsed and better
understood). The expert players rely more on cognitive
processes and less on perceptual elements. As a result,
expert players are less biased to similarity-based search than
novice players.

An ACT-R Model of a SET Player
Model Design Decisions
We have implemented the model in the ACT-R cognitive
architecture (Anderson, 2007). In each trial, the model is
presented with 12 cards. One card is always highlighted
indicating that it belongs to a set. The model has to find the
other two cards forming a set. The trials from the
experiment were used to test the model. Although the model
can be generalized to play with trials without highlighted
cards, we only provide a broad outline of the more specific
model, given the space limitations, and the strategy it uses.
The model largely follows the strategies that we have
found in the data. At first, the model attends a highlighted
card. Next, it chooses a GAV and scans through the cards
satisfying the GAV criteria. While scanning, the model
chooses the second card from the ones that have already
been fixated with cards fixated earlier being preferred to
ones fixated latter on. When the second card is selected, the
search criterion for the third card is determined. The
specificity of the criterion depends on the experience of the
model. Given all three cards, the model verifies if the cards
make a set. If there is no set then the model goes back to
visual scanning. Model considers every card satisfying the
GAV criteria at least once as a possible member of set. If set
is still not found then model interrupts the scanning and
refixates on the highlighted card to choose another GAV.
The attribute value which is most salient at the time is
chosen as the GAV. The saliency of an attribute value
depends on its attribute type (fitted parameters for Color and
Number are more salient than for Shape and Shading), the
number of cards with that particular value (positive
correlation modeled with a logarithmic equation with fitted
coefficients) and whether it belongs to a highlighted card
(fitted parameter for ACT-R spreading activation). The
saliency of a value is temporarily suppressed after it has
been selected in order to make sure different values are tried
in future attempts.
The model consists of two parallel processes (threads; see
Salvucci & Taatgen, 2008) reflecting the top-down and
bottom-up nature of the task. The bottom-up thread is
responsible for visual processes such as deciding the visual
scanpath or shifting attention from one card to another. The
top-down thread is responsible for the higher-level
processes such as deciding the GAV and comparing cards.
Both threads can influence each other’s processes indirectly.
For example, the top-down thread chooses a GAV based on
what has already been tried earlier in the trial. However, the
choice is also influenced by the bottom-up features such as

2689

what cards are visible or which card is being fixated.
The model is implemented with novice and expert modes.
The experience of the model defines how the model
performs visual search and comparison (checking if three
cards form a set). In the novice model, once the top-down
thread chooses the GAV, the visual scanpath is defined by
the bottom-up thread only. As a consequence, the selection
of the third card is dominated by similarity, making it harder
for this model to find higher level sets. The expert model on
the other hand has rules in the top-down thread that
influence the selection of the third card, directing it to cards
with an attribute value that is different from the first two
when appropriate (e.g., a rule that biases it towards green
cards if the first two cards are blue and red). Although in
this case the rules are hard-coded into the expert model, it is
in principle possible for it to learn these rules in the same
way as the Taatgen et al. (2003) model did.

Results
In both novice and expert modes the model had to play
through 10 blocks. Each block consisted of 30 trials with
highlighted cards. The trials were taken from the experiment
with the human subjects. The model’s mean reaction times
are presented in Figure 5.a. In the figure, the model’s
reaction times (dashed lines) are compared to corresponding
mean reaction times of human subjects (solid lines). The
model closely reproduces the RT of both novice and expert
human players. The model also shows the tendency to have
increasing RT with increasing difficulty of a set. As a
whole, the model is very good at reproducing human RT.

(a)

(b)

Figure 5: (a) RT of the novice and expert models comparing
to the RT of the human players; (b) The mean of perceptual
similarity of subsequences to highlighted card.
To test whether the model exhibits the same pattern of
behavior as the human players, the similarity between the
highlighted card and cards within a certain subsequences is
shown in Figure 5.b (compare to Figure 4.b). It shows the
transitions from a similarity-based search to a dissimilaritybased search for both expert and novice models. The model
fixates first on a highlighted card and then decides the GAV.
The attribute values that belong to highlighted card have
more chance to be chosen as GAV than attribute values that
do not. However, over time the attribute values belonging to
highlighted card get inhibited due to high frequency of use,

and other values get a chance to become GAV. In this case,
the model starts searching for a set with dissimilar values of
the chosen attribute. This effect results in gradual decrease
in similarity observed in Figure 5.b.

Conclusion
In this paper we have studied the importance of perceptual
and cognitive processes in complex tasks requiring both
internal planning and reaction to perceptual stimulus from
environment. Our experiment and cognitive model show
that both types of processes are involved in decisionmaking, and there is a complex interaction between them. In
our model a major improvement in performance comes not
from the optimization of one or another process, but from
learning at the top-down level and finding an optimal
balance between bottom-up and top-down processes.
Indeed, it is very likely that the same processes are
happening in human subjects.

References
Anderson, J. R. (2007). How Can the Human Mind Occur in
the Physical Universe? New York: Oxford University
Press.
Baayen, R.H., Davidson, D.J., & Bates, D.M. (2008).
Mixed-Effects Modeling With Crossed Random Effects
for Subjects and Items. Journal of Memory and
Language, 59, 390–412.
Brooks, R.A. (1991). Intelligence without representation.
Artificial Intelligence, 47, 139–159.
Clark, A. (1997). Being There: Putting Brain, Body and
World Together Again. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Jacob, M., & Hochstein, S. (2008). Set Recognition as a
Window to Perceptual and Cognitive Processes.
Perception & Psychophysics, 70 (7), 1165-1184.
Kim, M., & Cave, K. R. (1995). Spatial Attention in Visual
Search for Features and Feature Conjunctions.
Psychological Science, 6 (6), 376 - 380.
Kirsh, D., & Maglio, P. (1994). On Distinguishing
Epistemic from Pragmatic Action. Cognitive Science, 18,
513-549.
Pomplun, M., Sichelschmidt, L., Wagner, K., Clermont,
T., Rickheit, G., & Ritter, H. (2001). Comparative Visual
Search: A Difference That Makes a Difference. Cognitive
Science, 25 (1), 3-36.
Rayner, K. (1995). Eye Movements and Cognitive
Processes in Reading, Visual Search, and Scene
Perception. In J. M. Findlay, R. Walker, & R.W.
Kentridge (Eds.), Eye Movement Research: Mechanisms,
processes and applications. Amsterdam: North Holland.
Salvucci, D. D. & Taatgen, N. A. (2008). Threaded
Cognition: An Integrated Theory of Concurrent
Multitasking. Psychological Review, 115(1), 101-130.
Taatgen, N. A., van Oploo, M., Braaksma, J., &
Niemantsverdriet, J. (2003).
How to Construct a
Believable Opponent Using Cognitive Modeling in the
Game of Set. In Proceedings of the Fifth International
Conference on Cognitive Modeling (pp. 201-206).

2690

