UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Two ways of grounding the discussion on extended cognition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4vw9x7rn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Dahlback, Nils
Stjernberg, Fredrik
Kristiansson, Mattias
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Two ways of grounding the discussion on extended cognition
Nils Dahlbäck (nils.dahlback@liu.se)
Department of Computer and Information Science, Linköping University
SE-581 83 Linköping, Sweden

Fredrik Stjernberg (fredrik.stjernberg@liu.se)
Department of Culture and Communication, Linköping University
SE-581 83 Linköping, Sweden

Mattias Kristiansson (matkr657@student.liu.se)
Department of Computer and Information Science, Linköping University
SE-581 83 Linköping, Sweden

Kenny Skagerlund (kensk904@student.liu.se)
Department of Computer and Information Science, Linköping University
SE-581 83 Linköping, Sweden

Abstract
We question two of the basic foundations of the Extended
Mind hypothesis originally formulated by Clark and
Chalmers, i.e. that all cognition is organism centered and that
the important theoretical issues that the debate surrounding
the Extended Mind hypothesis can fruitfully be resolved by to
a large extent rely on invented examples of cognitive
activities as the empirical foundation. We suggest that one
way to proceed is to frame the hypothesis within the larger
theoretical framework of activity theory, and another is to
conduct extensive field studies of extended cognitive
processes. We illustrate our position with examples of how
these can be used to reformulate some of the aspects of the
Extended Mind hypothesis.
Keywords: Extended mind; Activity Theory; Cognitive
Ethnography.

Is the mind also in the world?
“Where does the mind stop and the rest of the world begin?”
That is the opening question in Clark & Chalmers (1998)
seminal article “The Extended Mind”. The central thesis that
they put forward is that human cognitive processing literally
extends into portions of our environment, thereby moving
the traditional boundaries of cognitive processing from
neural tissue to encompass non-neural components of the
human environment as well. They do not only argue for an
extension of cognitive processing into the environment, but
take the argument one step further by claiming that beliefs
can be constituted partly by features of the environment, and
that hence, it can be argued that in fact mind extends into
the world.
As an illustration, they describe two fictitious characters,
Inga and Otto, who are both interested in art and live in New
York City. In fact, they are in all interesting aspects similar
except for one thing. While Inga has a normal functioning
brain, Otto suffers from Alzheimer‟s disease. So when they
both (in different places and on different occasions,

presumably) hear about an interesting exhibition at the
Museum of Modern Art, and decides that they want to go
there to see it, they act a little bit differently. Inga recalls
that the museum is on 53rd street, and walks there to the
exhibition.
Otto, however, suffers like other Alzheimer patients from
problems of retrieving facts such as the address of a
museum, and is forced to rely on external aids. So we are
told that Otto carries a notebook around with him
everywhere he goes. When he learns new information he
makes a note of it in the notebook. And when he needs any
of this information, he looks it up in it. So Clark and
Chalmers claim that “his notebook plays the role usually
played by a biological memory”. So, in this case, when he
hears about the exhibition, we are told that “[he] consults
the notebook, which says that the museum is on 53 rd street,
so he walks to 53rd street and goes into the museum”.
The central thesis of the Clark and Chalmers paper has
since its publication sparked a discussion almost as intense
as the one that followed upon Searle‟s well known “Chinese
room” thought experiment (Searle, 1980), and in our
opinion this for a good reason. Just like Searle 30 years ago,
the Clark and Chalmers paper cuts right into a central
theoretical issue in cognitive science, and illustrates the
central thesis with a vivid concrete illustration which at the
same time is easy to grasp the basic features of, while at the
same time open up for a vast range of theoretical
interpretations and arguments for and against them.
It is, however, our impression, that while the discussion
on the extended mind (EM) hypothesis has helped clarify
the positions of those engaged in it, it is perhaps not all too
unfair to say that there has been limited theoretical progress
towards an accepted resolution of the issues brought out by
the original paper. It is our belief that this, at least to a large
part, can be accounted for by the fact that most of the
discussion has accepted two basic assumptions of the
original Clark and Chalmers‟ paper. First the definition, or

2347

lack thereof, of the central theoretical terms, second the
empirical foundation for the argument. The aim of the
present paper is to first substantiate this claim, and second to
sketch alternatives to both of these.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. First we
review the theoretical discussion on extended mind, and
conclude that that in order to defend Extended Mind
hypothesis, we need to further develop a definition of what
cognitive processes are and how to analyze cognitive
systems in a more fruitful manner. Furthermore, we offer an
alternative perspective on cognition, namely Activity
Theory (AT), and illustrate how that framework, in our
opinion, can be fruitfully used to put the various positions
put forth into a larger framework. Second, we question the
correctness, and hence usefulness, of the Inga and Otto
example, by comparing the fictitious data of Clark and
Chalmers with observations from a field study of the use of
environmental memory support in elderly people. In the
final section we summarize our arguments for why we
believe that to move the discussion on extended mind
forward, we need to put our arguments into a larger
theoretical cognitive framework, and also need to place our
theoretical discussion on a firmer empirical ground.

An outline of the Extended Mind debate
In the original article Clark and Chalmers wrote ”If, as we
confront some task, a part of the world functions as a
process which, were it done in the head, we would have no
hesitation in recognizing as part of the cognitive process,
then that part of the world is (so we claim) part of the
cognitive process.” (Clark & Chalmers, 1998, p. 3). This
was later referred to as the Parity Principle (PP), which has
been heavily debated by both proponents and critics of EM.
The PP is explicitly illustrated in Clark and Chalmers
(1998) original paper where one is encouraged to ponder
upon three different scenarios. In the first scenario, one is
told to imagine a problem solving situation where an
individual is sitting in front of a computer screen and doing
mental rotation on a figure represented on the screen to see
whether it fits into a hole also presented on the monitor. The
second scenario is almost identical, but with one crucial
element that differs. In this second scenario, the individual
can manually rotate the represented figure by pushing a
button thereby making it possible to visually see whether
the figure matches the hole, much as in Kirsh and Maglio‟s
(1994) experiment. The third scenario is somewhat more
controversial, where one is asked to imagine a distant future
where a human has implanted an artificial neural component
that allows the human to rotate a visual figure in an inner
screen as in the second scenario. In this scenario, the human
can choose to consult this high-tech feature or simply do
traditional mental rotation as in the first case.
Clark and Chalmers are confident that cognitive
processes are present in all three aforementioned cases, and
that they are functionally the same. The difference is simply
that they contain different couplings between agent and
artifact. If one accepts that scenario 1 and 3 are functionally

equivalent, then it is dogmatic to insist that scenario 2 is not
equivalent as well. Hence, the authors purport that all three
scenarios are manifestations of genuine cognition (Clark &
Chalmers, 1998).
Criticism of EM has arisen most prominently from, on the
one hand, Adams and Aizawa, who published a seminal
paper in 2001 (Adams and Aizawa, 2001); and on the other,
Robert Rupert, who published a similarly influential article
in 2004 (Rupert, 2004). Nevertheless, Adams, Aizawa and
Rupert actually all claim sympathy for the Parity Principle.
“To us, [the Parity Principle] means that the skull does not
constitute a theoretically significant boundary for cognitive
science. More specifically, it means that being inside the
brain cannot be the mark of the cognitive. This seems to us
true and obvious” (Adams and Aizawa, 2001, p. 46). In
addition, Rupert writes “I sympathize with the motivation
behind the Parity Principle. After all, why should it matter
where a process takes place? If that process instantiates
cognitive or mental properties when it is over here, why
should things change simply because it is now over there?”
(Rupert, 2009, p. 30).
An argument that was formed by Adams and Aizawa
(2001) that illuminated the fact that there might be a crucial
difference between a genuine extended cognitive process –
where some external artifact in the world is part of a
genuine cognitive process – and process that enables some
process. Consider pencil and paper. By using them while
conducting arithmetic one is partaking in a cognitive
process – the process of deduction. Now, imagine that the
current arithmetic is quite complex and you would not be
able to calculate the problem using only your head and that
you need to offload some information onto the paper.
Adams and Aizawa (2001) claim that the pen and paper
only enabled some cognitive process that otherwise would
be impossible. You still conduct the actual cognitive process
in your head, while simply offloading some information
onto the paper and hence simplifying the problem and
offloading your working memory
Rupert (2004) has coined the terms HEC (Hypothesis of
extended cognition) and HEMC (Hypothesis of embedded
cognition), which are two different takes on cognitive
systems and their composition and their role in cognitive
processing; HEC would roughly correspond to the
perspective adopted by Clark (2008) where cognitive
processes literally extends into the environment, whereas
the more conservative HEMC still insists that cognition is
organism bound. According to the HEMC the cognitive
processes depend on - rather than being constituted by external components and devices in which cognition takes
place without the external components being a literal part
the cognitive process. Rupert also believes, contra Clark
(2008) that HEMC has more empirical support and
explanatory value than HEC. Rupert argues that the debate
over extended cognition largely boils down to the question
of how to pin down when something is cognitive and how to
properly individuate cognitive systems (Rupert 2010).

2348

The controversy regarding cognitive systems and the
nature of their constituents and properties is questioned by
Wilson (2010) and he suggests that we should focus on
cognitive specifications of certain activities: “The shift is
one from a focus on “things”, such as representations, to a
concern with “activities”, such as the act of representing.
Such activities are often bodily, and are often worldinvolving in their nature. A version of the problem of
intentionality formulated so as to apply to them - “In virtue
of what is activity A the representation of C?” – seems
hardly pressing at all. Rather, what cries out for discussion
is the question of just what forms these activities take, and
just how they bring about the effects they do.” (Wilson,
2010, p.183) Wilson‟s statement deemphasizes the
pertinence of non-derived content and coupling-constitution
as discussed at great length by Adams & Aizawa (2008) and
rather emphasize that it is the activities and practices that
are of importance in cognitive science (Wilson, 2010).
It seems as though the heavy body of literature and
debates are predicated on discrepancies of conceptual
definition, and that discussions regarding cognition vis-à-vis
mind and vis-à-vis cognitive processes all fall back to
individual intuition and subjective conception of these
terms. We are not going to take a stand in these issues, but
we suggest an alternative approach to understand cognition.

Activity theory
It seems to us, that while the positions taken by the work
reviewed here, and also by other workers in the field, vary
on many dimensions, they with one or a few exceptions
share a common assumption, i.e. that cognition is primarily
biological and organism centered. The most clearly
articulated alternative to this is Hutchins, who claimed
already in Hutchins (1995) that cognition is a social and
cultural process.
One problem here is that it seems that different ideas or
conceptions of what is an is not cognitive in part can explain
the different positions taken, and another is that it is
primarily intuitive judgments that are used to decide what is
and is not cognitive, something which is also noted by
Rupert who writes, “After all, it‟s not up to our intuitive
judgments to decide what cognition is; the property of being
cognitive is a scientific construct, validated only by the
causal-explanatory work it does” (Rupert, 2010, p. 20).
We would like to suggest here, that by placing the
Extended Mind hypothesis in the wider theoretical
framework of Activity Theory, it becomes possible to
reconcile these two positions, and it also makes it possible
to go beyond intuitions in deciding what is cognitive.
Activity theory (AT) was developed primarily by
Leontjiev (1978) and is based on Vygotsky and his culturalhistorical psychology (e.g. Vygotsky 1978). It is beyond the
scope of the present paper to present a complete picture of
the theory, instead we will confine ourselves to some parts
which we believe are relevant for the Extended Mind debate
(for an excellent short introduction to Activity Theory, see
chapter three in Kaptelinin and Nardi (2006)).

One key idea in Activity Theory is that the human mind is
intrinsically related to the interaction between the human
being and the world. Moreover, the human mind is an
emergent product that is developed in order to make
successful interaction with the world. Culture, in this view,
is not something wholly external that is influencing the
human mind but, rather, is a generative force that is part of
the very production of mind.
Vygotsky makes an important distinction between
“higher” and “lower” or “natural” psychological functions.
The latter are defined by Kaptelinin and Nardi as “mental
abilities such as memory or perception with which every
animal is born” (ibid, p 41). This is in contrast with the
higher psychological functions, which “emerge as a result of
a restructuring of natural psychological functions in a
cultural environment” (ibid, p 41-42). The natural functions
are obviously organism centered, and fit well within the
basic perspective on cognition of Clark, Chalmers and most
of the participants in the Extended Mind debate. And at first
appearances, this perhaps looks so also for the higher
functions. But the position of Vygotsky and Activity Theory
is very different from this, and in many respects.
In this theory, the human mind is social in nature. This
both in that the individual (the subject) is social; we are
shaped by culture, by the languages we use etc., and also in
the sense that the world we live in is social. It does not
consist of only individual biological agents in a physical
world; we live also in a social and socially construed world.
A consequence of this is that in Activity Theory, the
individual is not the fundamental unit of analysis; that
instead is the activity, which is the purposeful interaction of
the subject with the world (Leontiev, 1978, cited in
Kaptelinin and Nardi, p. 31). Central to these activities are
mediators, i.e. tools that are used and that shape the activity.
These tools can be both physical, like a hammer, and
psychological, like an algebraic notation.
Thus, in essence, higher mental functions are mediated
mental processes. A key notion of AT and Vygotskian
psychology is the phenomenon of internalization.
Internalization is the process whereby an individual does not
need to rely on mediated, external artifacts, which was
hitherto necessary in order to carry out the current activity.
Previous external processes can now take place internally in
the head of the individual and the activity and process is
from here on out mediated by internal resources rather than
by external ditto. In this way, AT highlights how mental
processes are restructured as a result of the development in a
cultural environment.
The relation between mind and environment is
intrinsically related and the relation is symmetrical, which
means that the restructuring works both ways in the
interaction between mind and world. The internalization
does not necessarily involve physical tools that together
with the individual constitute a traditional cognitive system,
but might also involve social others and internalization
through participation in joint social activities such as
communication in general and learning in particular.

2349

Framing the Extended mind debate in a AT
Framework

provide a firmer empirical base than what has hitherto been
used. It is to this we turn in the next section.

This condensed and incomplete description of Activity
Theory is probably rather difficult to understand for readers
not previously familiar with it, while at the same time we
fear that readers that are familiar with it will shake their
heads in despair over our rough and simple exposition of an
elaborate theoretical framework. But our ambition is not to
present the theory in its entirety, but only to use it as an
illustration of the benefits that we suggest can be gained by
placing different positions regarding the Extended Mind
hypothesis in a unifying framework.
A first observation is that by distinguishing between a set
of basic or “normal” psychological functions and a set of
“higher” psychological functions, we can place different
examples used in the debate in different categories. We can
also within the same framework find some cognitive
functions that indeed are primarily biological and organism
centered, as was assumed in the original Clark and
Chalmers paper. But a problem encountered by Clark and
Chalmers when assuming that all cognition has these
characteristics, was how to avoid reaching the counter
intuitive conclusion that e.g. “my cognitive state is
somehow spread over the Internet” (Clark and Chalmers,
1998). Their solution was to develop a set of criteria for
stopping the mind from encapsulating the entire universe, a
solution which few have found convincing.
The solution suggested by the Activity Theory framework
is very different. Here higher cognitive or psychological
processes are from the beginning outside the isolated
individual. He or she is born into a world which has
developed and accumulated a wealth of cognitive mediators,
both physical and psychological. These are then during the
developmental process gradually appropriated and
internalized. So the answer to the question, “how are (the
higher) cognitive functions extended into the world” is that
they are not. On the contrary, they exist first and foremost in
the world, and are to a larger or lesser extent internalized
and perhaps one even could say organism centered.
We are of course by no means suggesting that Activity
Theory is a panacea which solves every issue touched upon
in the Extended Mind debate. We see many unsolved
problems here, as well as parts of the theory‟s formulation
that can be questioned. To take one example of the latter,
the characterization of the “natural” psychological functions
as those that we share with other animals as if these were
unaffected by the knowledge we have acquired, does not
seem to fit well with an abundance of data showing how
also basic perceptual processes can be influenced by such
knowledge. But we do believe in the fruitfulness of using a
wider theoretical framework to contextualize theoretical
positions taken in discussions such as the Extended Mind
debate.
Using a wider theoretical framework is one way we
suggest can be used to clear up some of the issues in the
Extended Mind debate. Another way, we suggest, is to

In the introduction we compared the Extended mind paper
of Clark and Chalmers with the Chinese Room paper of
Searle, claiming that both these papers, not the least by
using a vivid imagined example, have sparked a theoretical
discussion. But in our view, there is an important difference
between the ways the imagined example is used in the two
papers. Searle use his thought experiment to illustrate the
theoretical consequences, in his view absurd ones, of the
theoretical position he argues against. There is never any
claim that the depicted situation is a realistic one that could
ever occur. Clark and Chalmers, on the other hand, use an
imagined example as the empirical foundation of their
theoretical position. In some way one might even claim that
they base their theoretical analysis on fictitious data, as if
Otto‟s behavior is something that actually has, or at least
could, occur, and which is in need of an explanation.
We have no arguments against thought experiments in
general – on the contrary we believe that they are important
tools for science when they are used to illustrate the
consequences of a theoretical position. But then the
argument goes from a theoretical position to an imagined
and often unrealistic empirical illustration which not is
taken to actually exist in the real world, as in Searle‟s
(1980) Chinese Room or in Putnam‟s (1975) Twin Earth, to
mention two examples from Cognitive Science. But in the
case of the Clark and Chalmers paper, the argument goes in
the other direction; from an imagined empirical observation,
which the reader is supposed to be taken as something that
might actually exist, to a theoretical conclusion. We claim
that we need some evidence that the situation depicted
actually could occur. If not, we risk building our theories on
a too unstable empirical foundation.
What is important to observe here is that the only
difference between Otto and Inga is how they retrieve where
the Museum of Modern Art is located. (c.f. the quotation in
the introduction). In all other respects they behave and act in
identical manner. The reason that we consider this important
is that this is a central and necessary feature of the Clark and
Chalmers‟ argument; if this does not hold, then the so called
Parity Principle cannot be used. Remember that a central
part of the argument for the Parity Principle is an identity
between the two tasks; the only difference is that in one case
part of it is done in the external world instead of in the head.
And, so the argument goes, since these are identical in all
respects but this little one, we cannot escape the conclusion
that they must be functionally and cognitively equivalent.
But what if it never is the case that if afflicted by
Alzheimer‟s disease, the only difference is that memory
retrieval is performed differently? Can we still claim that
Inga and Otto are functionally and cognitively equivalent?
And if we can‟t, where is the ground for claiming that mind
is extended into the world?

Extended mind in the wild

2350

We believe that before proceeding further, we need to
learn more about how the external world is used as memory
support in people which are diagnosed with memory
problems, i.e. whose memory in the head has reduced
capacity.

A field study of external memory in elderly
To find out how external memory support is actually
used, we conducted a field study to explore how elderly act
in order to remember in their everyday life. The field work
was done by one of the authors (M.K.) in the home
healthcare service of a small Swedish town during the
summer 2010. The study lasted for five weeks, with
approximately 25 participating health care receivers.
Both participatory observations and interviews were
conducted. We will below present some illustrative
examples of external support for their memory from four of
the participants, aged from 72 to 91, all with mild memory
impairments. Two of these (A and B below) were diagnosed
with Alzheimer‟s disease or some other form of dementia,
whereas the rest only showed loss of cognitive functions
normal for an elderly population.
During one of the visits it is noticed that one elder woman
keeps the disposed plastic envelope for the medicine
1
(“ApoDos” ) even after its contents has been used. On
every envelope there is information about the patient and the
medicine: date, time it should be taken, what tablets it
contains, social security number and name of patient. The
woman has memory problems; therefore she receives help
with assuring that she takes the medicine three times daily.
On a kitchen table she keeps all the used plastic envelops in
a clip. She says that the envelope is a way of helping her to
assure herself of that the home healthcare been there,
because she will not remember.
Clark and Chalmers argue that the cognitive functions are
extended in the world through active externalism, i.e.
through for instance making a note in a notebook for later
use. In this case, however, how the plastic envelope
becomes a part of her memory system is through an active
internal process. So, instead of creating a material artefact
to enhance a deficient internal function, in this case an
already existing material artefact is put to a new and
creative use to enhance her memory.
B has a note on the inside of her door in order to remind
herself that she shouldn‟t open the door for strangers. The
note has been put there and signed by her daughter. If the
doorbell rings, and she stands by the door, reading the note,
it can be argued that this note is an “extension”, with the
same function as Otto‟s notebook. But the note works here
only because it is pinned to the door – it would probably
1 “ApoDos is the name of the multi-dose system which has been
used in Sweden for 30 years. It is used for delivering medicines to
persons requiring regular medication. ApoDos is a method for
ensuring quality-assured medication supply both today and in the
future.”
http://www.apoteket.se/privatpersoner/om/sidor/OmApoteketConte
nts_Internationellt_ApoDos_ApoDos.aspx (retrieved 2010-12-13)

have been useless if it had been somewhere in her notebook,
where she was supposed to look every time the doorbell
rings. We believe that Clark probably would argue that this
is not an example of extended mind, since B does not carry
the note with her all the times, which is a criterion Clark and
Chalmers use to delimit the degree to which mind can be
extended into the world. We would, however, suggest that
this example can be used to question the criterion that Clark
and Chalmers use, since to us this example is in many
respects a prime example of extending memory into the
world. And it even shares an important feature with memory
“in the head”, that remembering is facilitated by contextual
priming.
C uses a shopping list when going shopping. This person
has other medical problems in addition to her memory
problems, and it is important for her that she finds
paracetamol, and the importance of attaining this goal
makes her drop the other goals for a while. When she has
found out that paracetamol is to be found after the checkout, she gets calmer, but she wants her follower to remind
her, even though paracetamol is on the list. After the checkout she had indeed forgotten that she were to buy
paracetamol after the check out. This is an illustration of
something emphasized in Activity Theory and in general in
the sociocultural approach to cognition, i.e. that the
cognitive processes are not only include the physical
environment but also the social environment (Vygotsky,
1978, Sutton et al 2010). We suggest that this is an
interesting and important potential extension of the extended
cognition approach as formulated by Clark and Chalmers.
This example can also be contrasted with the Otto
example. Once Otto has from his notebook retrieved the
location of the Museum of Modern Art, he is able to
proceed there just like Inga with no further problems. For C,
on the other hand, it is not enough to have a note with the
required important information. Even if she has it in her
hand all the time, she forgets what she should use the
information on it for. With this example in mind, it is not
clear to us to which extent there are cases where two
processes are functionally and cognitively identical, with the
only difference being that a part of it in one case depends on
an external artifact.
F has an appointment at the podiatrist. She had a note
with the appointment, which she had posted on her fridge.
But she had turned the note around and written the date
again, though bigger this time. For some unknown reason,
the dates had gotten mixed up, and the wrong date had been
transferred to her calendar.
An external memory support is in this case as much a
question of how information finds its way into the external
memory support as it functions as a memory support. It is
not as simple as Clark & Chalmers‟ picture, where Otto
simply notes every new piece of information in his
notebook. Memory problems do not present an isolated
cognitive problem. The picture of Otto‟s way to execute the
action – to note new information in the book, read the

2351

information, and then walk to the museum – is a much too
simple description of something complex.

Discussion of the field study
The examples here are a small subset of observations just
from one study. To draw any far reaching conclusions
regarding how the Extended Mind hypothesis should be reformulated from this would obviously be premature. But it
is our belief that already these short examples illustrate an
important point, namely that by looking at real existing
cases of extending cognitive processes into the material
world, many details in the Extended Mind hypothesis can be
questioned, and other obviously are in need of reformulation.
Already in this small empirical study we on the one hand
found reasons to question the validity of the Inga and Otto
example, and on the other hand found examples of real
existing use of extended cognition which as far as we can
tell not have been addressed in the discussion following the
publication of the Clark and Chalmers paper.
We want to stress that we are not against the hypothesis
of extended cognition. We only want to claim that to build a
theoretical framework for extended cognition we need to
base it on a foundation of observations of real existing
situations.

Summing up
We have suggested that one problem with the important
theoretical debate initiated by Clark and Chalmers
introduction of the Extended Mind hypothesis, is that these
cognitive phenomena have been discussed in isolation, i.e.
without being framed within a wider theoretical framework
encompassing all kinds of cognition. We have also
suggested that the empirical base for the debate has not only
been narrow by being confined to only a few examples, but
has also been of questionable quality by relying too much
on construed examples.
For both of these, we have outlined potential solutions. In
the case of a theoretical framework we have suggested that
Activity Theory potentially can be used to clarify some of
the issues brought up in the debate. And as an alternative to
invented examples, we have suggested that field studies of
extended cognitive processes should be used instead. We
also tried to show with a few examples how such real cases
makes it necessary to reformulate some of the positions
taken. We want to stress that this does not imply
abandoning the Extended Mind hypothesis in its most
general form. But we are convinced that it will require
reformulations, both of the specific questions asked, and the
answers given to them.
In the beginning of the paper we argued that we need to
further develop the central theoretical terms used here. We
have presented one example of this; to use Activity
Theory‟s distinction between two kinds of cognition to
differentiate between different cases in need of different
kinds of theoretical explanations. Another theoretical or
conceptual issue that we believe is in need of further

development is the relation between „cognition‟ and „mind‟.
We have been careful in this paper to only talk about
extended cognition and not extended mind, except when
reviewing the work of others. It seems to us that for most, if
not all, working on issues of extended cognition has taken
for granted that if there are good reasons for seeing
cognition as something existing outside the skull of the
individual agent, then this is also good reasons for
concluding that mind extends into the world. We are not
convinced of this. There is of course another possible
solution, namely that cognitive processes are not seen only
as processes in the mind. Then the answer to the question
stated in the beginning of this paper “Is the mind also in the
world” would be, “no, but cognition is”.

Acknowledgments
We thank the participants in the Cognitive Science seminar
at Linköping University for interesting, discussions on the
topics in this paper. We also thank our reviewers for
constructive comments on the first version of the paper.

References
Adams, A., & Aizawa, K. (2001). The bounds of cognition.
Philosophical Psychology, 14:1, 43-64
Adams, A., & Aizawa, K. (2008). The Bounds of Cognition.
Wiley-Blackwell, West Sussex, UK.
Clark, A., & Chalmers, D. (1998). The extended mind.
Analysis, 58, 7–19.
Clark, A. (2008). Supersizing the Mind. Oxford University
Press, USA.
Kaptelinin, V., & Nardi, B. A. (2006). Acting with
technology: activity theory and interaction design.
Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Kirsh, D., & Maglio. P. (1994). On Distinguishing
Epistemic from Pragmatic Actions. Cognitive Science, 18,
513-549
Putnam, H. (1975) The Meaning of Meaning, in K.
Gundersen (ed.) Language, Mind, and Knowledge
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota press.
Rupert, R. (2004). Challenges to the hypothesis of extended
cognition. Journal of Philosophy, 101, 389-428.
Rupert, R. (2009). Cognitive Systems and the Extended
Mind.Oxford University Press, USA.
Rupert, R. (2010). Cognitive systems and the supersized
mind. Philosophical Studies, in press.
Searle, J. (1980) Minds, Brains, and Programs. The
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 3: 417-57.
Sutton, J., Harris, C. B., Keil, P. G., & Barnier, A. J. (2010).
The Psychology of Memory, Extended Cognition, and
Socially Distributed Remembering. Phenomenology and
Cognitive Sciences , 521-560.
Vygotsky, L.S. (1978) Mind in Society: The Development of
Higher Psychological Processes Cambridge, Mass.
Harvard University Press.
Wilson, R.A., (2010). Meaning Making and the Mind of the
Externalist. In R. Menary (Ed.) The Extended Mind. MITPress.

2352

