UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Types of Cognitive Content and the Role of Relational Processing in the Illusion of
Explanatory Depth

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/582378mf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Silk-Eglit, Graham
Kurtz, Kenneth J

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Types of Cognitive Content and the Role of Relational Processing in the Illusion of
Explanatory Depth
Graham Silk-Eglit (gsilkeg1@binghamton.edu)
Kenneth J. Kurtz (kkurtz@binghamton.edu)
Department of Psychology, Binghamton University,
Binghamton, New York 13902

occurred as a result of participants misconstruing the initial
rating prompt as pertaining to a cognitively different set of
content than was relevant to their proceeding explanatory
task. Second, we sought to show that people had more
explanatory knowledge than they demonstrated – causing
them to underestimate their post-explanation knowledge.
Specifically, we expected that participants would be able to
articulate more causal knowledge if they were encouraged
to draw comparisons between the stimuli and a relevantly
similar second domain.

Abstract
Rozenblit and Keil (2002) claim that people are subject to an
illusion of explanatory depth (IOED) whereby they believe
they understand the world in greater detail, coherence and
depth than they actually do. In the present research, we
questioned Rozenblit and Keil’s conclusions in two ways.
First, we tested whether people might overestimate their
explanatory knowledge as a result of misconstruing how to
initially rate their understanding of stimuli. We found that
when directed to consider the physical-mechanical processes
of stimuli instead of their functional affordances, participants
did in fact offer more accurate estimates of understanding
relative to their explanatory performance. Second, we tested
whether the explanations participants proffer are misleadingly
shallow. We predicted that by encouraging a more relational
encoding of stimuli, participants would be able to produce
better explanations. However, the results showed that
participants’ explanations remained shallow after relationally
encoding stimuli.

Types of cognitive content
One of the features that distinguishes knowledge of complex
causal systems from other forms of knowledge is that
complex causal systems are composed of distinct types of
cognitive content. A device, for instance, can be described
in terms of its functions, consequences and global
appearance, or in terms of its components and the causal
relations among them. Accordingly, while people may
understand a given device’s functional properties well, they
may be less knowledgeable about its physical-mechanical
processes. As such, judgments of understanding that
confuse these two types of cognitive content are potentially
susceptible to metacognitive miscalibrations. In this manner,
an illusion of explanatory depth might arise from a
discrepancy in the type of cognitive content that people use
in order to make their judgments of understanding before
and after proffering an explanation.
This, we claim, is precisely what occurs in Rozenblit and
Keil’s (2002) study (see also Alter, Oppenheimer & Zemla,
2010). In order to describe how a given object works,
Rozenblit and Keil require participants to explain that object
physical-mechanically in terms of its components and the
causal relations among them. As such, post-explanation
ratings, made in light of performance on this causal
explanatory task, index participants’ knowledge of physicalmechanical processes. However, Rozenblit and Keil fail to
explicitly specify which sort of cognitive content their
participants should estimate their initial, pre-explanation
understandings of stimuli on – making their instructions
potentially ambiguous. Rozenblit and Keil merely instruct
participants “to rate on a 7-point scale how well you feel
you understand each one” (p. 39). Consequently, the
metacognitive miscalibration of the IOED may be an artifact
of these ambiguous instructions. Specifically, Rozenblit and

Keywords: illusion of explanatory depth; analogical
reasoning; modes of explanation; concepts and categories.

Introduction
Recent research has suggested that people often
overestimate their ability to explain causally complex
systems. In a recent study, Rozenblit and Keil (2002) asked
participants to rate their understanding of devices both
before and after proffering explanations of how those
devices work. They found that people consistently overrated
their understanding – displaying a significant drop between
their pre-explanation and post-explanation ratings. Further
analyses revealed that this overestimation was not a result of
general overconfidence but was specific to causally complex
systems; when tested with other, non-explanatory forms of
knowledge—i.e., knowledge of facts, procedures, and
narratives—this illusion of knowing was either absent (for
procedures) or greatly diminished (for facts and narratives).
Thus, Rozenblit and Keil argued that people are subject to
an illusion of explanatory depth (IOED) wherein they have
inflated metacognitive beliefs of their ability to explain
causal phenomena yet possess only shallow understandings
of the causal workings of those phenomena.
In the current study, we set out to question Rozenblit and
Keil’s (2002) argument in two ways. First, we intended to
show that people were biased to overestimate their preexplanation ratings of understanding. We believe this

643

Keil’s instructions may mislead participants to construe the
pre-explanation rating prompt as pertaining to the functional
properties of a device when the relevant metacognitive
assessment centers on that device’s physical-mechanical
processes.
Thus, in the current study, we asked one group of
participants to make their pre-expalantion ratings based on
their general understanding of stimuli, following Rozenblit
and Keil’s (2002) procedure, and instructed another group to
make their pre-explanation ratings based on their knowledge
of the physical-mechanical workings of stimuli. We
predicted that the latter group would exhibit better
calibrated estimates of understanding as the content upon
which they based their pre-explanation and post-explanation
ratings was consistent.

principle, which states that a system of relations that is
connected by higher-order constraining relations (such as
causal relations) is preferred over an equal number of
independent matches (Gentner & Colhoun, in press).
Moreover, according to the relational focus assumption,
relational matches are considered more important than
object/attribute matches in the evaluation of analogical
relatedness (Markman & Gentner, 2000; Gentner & Kurtz,
2006).
However, numerous studies have demonstrated that such
deep systems of relations are seldom utilized by novices.
Chi, Feltovich, & Glaser (1981), for instance, showed that
novice representations tend to be weakly structured and
primarily focused on surface features (i.e., the objects and
attributes of representations); lacking in the structural
relations and abstractions characteristic of the
representations of experts. Moreover, Gentner, Ratterman,
and Forbus (1993) demonstrated that people typically
retrieve instances from memory on the basis of surface
similarity, not the relational similarity required for deeper
comprehension. Taken together, one might reasonably
expect that the sort of information retrieved and represented
by novices for the construction of explanations would
similarly consist of mere surface features, lacking many of
the deeper causal relations required for a sophisticated
account.
In order to overcome these superficial retrieval and
representation processes, researchers have utilized
comparisons. Previous research has demonstrated that
carrying out comparisons between two domains with
differing surface features can promote relational
highlighting, the bringing to light of common relational
structure between two domains. Comparisons have been to
found to aid in overcoming difficulties in analogical transfer
(Gick & Holyoak, 1983), and can lead to the development
of deeper and more structural understandings of problems
(Cummins, 1982) and causal systems (Kurtz, Miao, and
Gentner, 2001).
In the current study, we sought to encourage the process of
relational highlighting in order to increase the depth of
participants’ explanations. To do so, we proposed a novel
means of inducing comparisons to motivate relational
encodings. Specifically, we asked participants to generate a
list of near category members, where a near category was
defined as a category that shares a good deal in common
with a specific object, but lacks some crucial feature(s). It
was hoped that by carrying out this task, the core relational
features of the stimulus would be highlighted. To help
participants elaborate on this core content, they were also
asked to place their near category members in a sentence
frame that was intended to induce an alignment of both the
similar and different relations between the near category and
the stimulus. As we believe this sort of relational encoding
facilitates access to and articulation of explanatory content,
we predicted that carrying out this near category comparison

Relational processing
Research on concepts and categorization has become
increasingly interested in the role of explanatory knowledge
in categorization. Previous research has documented the
influence of explanatory knowledge on a number of
categorization phenomena including: helping to define the
features of new categories (Wisniewski and Medin, 1994),
facilitating the acquisition of new categories (Pazzani,
1991), influencing categorization decisions (Lin & Murphy,
1997; Murphy & Medin, 1985), and guiding inductions
generated about a given category (Ross & Murphy, 1999).
These findings are linked to the theory view of conceptual
representations which suggests that concepts are structured
by intuitive theories that explain the appearance, function,
and other aspects of exemplars. This approach stands in
stark contrast to prototype and exemplar models of concepts
that characterize conceptual representations as consisting of
feature listings. Instead, the theory approach holds that
intuitive theories relate (often causally) the features of
concepts within structured representations. However, Keil
(2005) has taken the illusion of explanatory depth as
evidence that these intuitive theories are relatively sparse,
which suggests that concepts may only be weakly
structured.
Research on analogical reasoning has similarly placed
great emphasis on the importance of relational structure in
representations, but also emphasizes the role of structural
alignment as a basis for knowledge change (Gentner, 1983).
According to structure mapping theory, the theoretical
inspiration for this manipulation, comparisons proceed by
establishing
structural
alignments
between
two
representations. This occurs through a mapping of the
objects, attributes, and relations of the two representations
in which correspondences between the two domains are
established. People prefer structurally consistent mappings
in which there is a one-to-one correspondence between the
elements in the two representations and in which the
arguments of corresponding predicates also correspond
(parallel connectivity). Selection of possible interpretations
of an analogy is further guided by the systematicity

644

treatment prior to proffering an explanation would result in
more structured and causally deeper explanations.

In phase 2 of the study, participants read a list of devices
and rated their understanding of each one on the 7-point
scale described during the training. Depending on their
condition, some participants were told to rate how well they
felt they generally understood each object in question as in
Rozenblit and Keil’s (2002) study (designated “O” in the
condition acronyms). In contrast to Rozenblit and Keil’s
study, others were instructed to rate their understanding
specifically on how deeply they understood the physicalmechanical workings of the devices (designated “P” in the
condition acronyms).
In phase 3 of the study, a two stimulus subset was
selected from the initial 15 stimuli and participants were
asked to consider one of two questions – neither of which
were included in Rozenblit and Keil’s (2002) study. In the
control encoding task condition, participants were asked to
describe the appearance of a single instance of the stimulus
category (designated “C” in the condition acronyms). In the
relational encoding condition, participants were asked
generate a list of near neighbor categories and then to place
those near categories into a sentence frame that ensured
explicit consideration of the relational similarities and
differences between the two domains (designated “R” in the
condition acronyms).
The rest of the procedure followed Rozenblit and Keil’s
(2002) study. In phase 4, participants were asked to write a
detailed, step-by-step causal explanation of the two test
stimuli. After participants provided an explanation, they
were asked to re-rate their understanding of the two stimuli.
In phase 5 of the study, participants answered a diagnostic
question for each stimulus that required critical knowledge
about the mechanism. For example, participants were asked
to explain how pulling the handle of a manual air pump
caused air to enter the chamber. After participants answered
the diagnostic question, they were again asked to rate how
well they understood the phenomena.
In phase 6 of the study, participants read a brief expert
explanation of the two stimuli and then re-rated their prior
understanding of the stimuli in light of that description.
In phase 7 of the study, participants rated how well they
understood the two stimuli after having read the expert
explanation.

Outline of the present study
In the present study, we implemented a 2 X 2 factorial
design with specificity of instructions and pre-explanation
encoding prompt as between-subjects factors. Subjective
judgments of understanding were recorded at various times
throughout the experiment both before and after
explanations were proffered. We predicted that preexplanation ratings of understanding would be better
calibrated when participants were instructed to base those
ratings specifically on their knowledge of the physicalmechanical workings of stimuli rather than on their general
knowledge of those stimuli. Additionally, we predicted that
the post-explanation ratings would reflect greater depth of
understanding for the relational encoding condition than for
the control condition.

Method
Participants
Eighty-three undergraduate students from Binghamton
University participated for course credit.

Materials and Design
Fifteen stimuli were used, all of which were names of object
concepts. Thirteen stimuli served as distractors during the
initial rating phase and two stimuli served as test stimuli to
be explained by participants at a later phase in the
experiment. Of the two test stimuli, one was selected from
Rozenblit and Keil’s (2002) set of test stimuli—i.e., a
zipper—and the other was developed for the purposes of
this study—i.e., a manual air pump.
All materials were presented to participants in packets.
Participants received packets with different instructions
depending on their condition. In all, there were four
different conditions: Rozenblit and Keil’s Original
Instructions and the Control Encoding Task (OC), New
Physical-Mechanical Instructions and the Control Encoding
Task (PC), Original Instructions and the Relational
Encoding Task (OR), and New Physical-Mechanical
Instructions and the Relational Encoding Task (PR).

Results
Analyses focused on the difference in pre-explanation
subjective ratings of understanding compared to postexplanation ratings. Based on Rozenblit and Keil’s (2002)
study, it was pre-decided that the rating following the
diagnostic question—i.e., rating 3—most accurately
reflected
participants
post-explanation
explanatory
knowledge self-estimate. As such, a 2 (instructions: original
vs. physical-mechanical) X 2 (encoding: control vs.
relational) factorial ANOVA on the difference scores
between rating 3 and rating 1 was implemented for the
zipper, the manual air pump, and both stimuli combined.

Procedure
Following Rozenblit and Keil’s (2002) procedure, the full
study consisted of seven phases. In phase 1, participants
learned how to use a 7-point rating scale to indicate their
understanding of stimuli by considering two training
examples. The scale ranged from “1,” which indicated a
shallow understanding, to “7,” which indicated a deep,
expert understanding. Participants considered the same two
training examples that were used in Rozenblit and Keil’s
study.

645

When analyses collapsed across both stimuli, a main effect
of instructions was found, F(1,127) = 13.032, p = .000, d =
.60, suggesting that the physical-mechanical instructions
significantly reduced the magnitude of the IOED. Follow-up
simple effects showed that the physical-mechanical
instructions significantly reduced the IOED between both
the OC and PC conditions, F(1,68) = 6.380, p = .014, d = .61, and the OR and PR conditions, F(1,59) = 6.501, p =
.013, d = -.65, demonstrating the robustness of the physicalmechanical instructions manipulation. Additionally, a main
effect of encoding was found, F(1,127) = 8.178, p = .005, d
= .45, indicating that, contrary to our prediction, the
relational encoding manipulation increased the magnitude of
the IOED. Follow-up simple effects revealed that the
relational encoding manipulation significantly increased the
magnitude of the IOED between the OC and OR conditions,
F(1,56) = 4.511, p = .038, d = .55. Additionally, the
increase in the magnitude of the IOED between the PC and
PR conditions approached significance, F(1,71) = 3.465, p =
.067, d = .43.

the OC condition, t(1,26) =2.369, p = .026, d = .90;
however, the difference scores of the PC condition relative
to the PR condition were not significant, t(1,35) = 1.523, p =
.137, d = .50.
Zipper
7

5
4
3
2
1
0

OC

PC

OR

PR

Figure 2: Mean pre- and post-explanation self-ratings of
knowing in Rozenblit and Keil’s Original Instructions and
the Control Encoding Task (OC), New Physical-Mechanical
Instructions and the Control Encoding Task (PC), Original
Instructions and the Relational Encoding Task (OR), and
New Physical-Mechanical Instructions and the Relational
Encoding Task (PR) conditions for the zipper.

Both Stimuli
7

Pre-explanation
Post-explanation

6

Pre-explanation
Post-explanation

6

5

Analyses on the manual air pump again revealed a
significant main effect of instructions, F(1,62) = 9.191, p =
..004, d = -.73, suggesting that the physical-mechanical
instructions significantly reduced the magnitude of the
IOED. Follow-up simple effects demonstrated a significant
reduction of the magnitude of IOEDs between the OC and
PC conditions, F(1,33) = 5.581, p = .024, d = .80.
Additionally, the reduction of the magnitude of IOEDs
between the OR and PR conditions approached significance,
F(1,29) = 3.880, p = .058, d = .69. However, a significant
main effect of encoding was not found, F(1,62) = 2.309, p =
.134, d = .35, indicating that the relational encoding task did
not appear to increase the magnitude of the IOED for the
manual air pump.

4
3
2
1
0

OC

PC

OR

PR

Figure 1: Mean pre- and post-explanation self-ratings of
knowing in Rozenblit and Keil’s Original Instructions and
the Control Encoding Task (OC), New Physical-Mechanical
Instructions and the Control Encoding Task (PC), Original
Instructions and the Relational Encoding Task (OR), and
New Physical-Mechanical Instructions and the Relational
Encoding Task (PR) conditions for both stimuli.

Manual Air Pump
7

For the zipper, analyses revealed a main effect of
instructions, F(1,61) = 5.728, p = .020, d = -.52, suggesting
that the physical-mechanical instructions significantly
reduced the IOED. Follow-up simple effects demonstrated
that although the difference scores for the OR condition
compared to the difference scores for the PR condition
approached significance, t(1, 28) = -1/994, p = .056, d = .75, the difference scores for the OC compared to the PC
condition did not, t(1, 33) = -1.303. p = .202, d = -.44.
Additionally, a main effect of encoding was found, F(1,61)
= 7.627, p = .008, d = .61. Again contrary to our prediction,
this main effect suggested that the relational encoding
manipulation increased the magnitude of the IOED. Followup simple effects showed that the participants in the OR
condition exhibited a significantly larger IOED than those in

Pre-explanation
Post-explanation

6
5
4
3
2
1
0

OC

PC

OR

PR

Figure 3: Mean pre- and post-explanation self-ratings of
understanding in Rozenblit and Keil’s Original Instructions
and the Control Encoding Task (OC), New PhysicalMechanical Instructions and the Control Encoding Task

646

(PC), Original Instructions and the Relational Encoding
Task (OR), and New Physical-Mechanical Instructions and
the Relational Encoding Task (PR) conditions for the
manual air pump.

predict what direction and at what speed the second billiard
ball will travel, a physical-mechanical mode of explanation
will do well. In contrast, to explain the rationale behind the
configuration of keys on a computer’s keyboard, a
functional mode of explanation will do better. Importantly,
Keil (1994), Atran (1995), and Kelemen (1999) have tied
these modes of explanation to specific domains with
functional modes of explanation applied to entities that
exhibit actual or apparent design, especially artifacts.
According to this account, an illusion of explanatory depth
for physical-mechanical knowledge might arise from the
assumption of a functional mode of explanation that
misleads participants to base their level of understanding on
certain relations and properties that are irrelevant to their
self-evaluation of their physical-mechanical explanatory
knowledge.
In contrast, the relational encoding manipulation failed to
yield higher self-ratings of explanatory depth. This may
have occurred for two reasons. First, the subjective basis of
the post-explanation self-ratings may have been altered as a
result of the relational encoding manipulation. This, in turn,
could have happened for two reasons. On the one hand, by
carrying out the relational encoding manipulation,
participants may have realized the depth of the device being
explained and may have judged their own explanation as
more shallow as a result of that realization. In this sense,
although the participants’ explanations in the relational
encoding conditions may have been deeper than those of
their counterparts in the control encoding conditions, they
may have rated them as more shallow as a result of having a
greater understanding of the explanatory depth that they
were not achieving. On the other hand, participants may
have unwittingly made their post-explanation ratings based
on the combination of the relational encoding/control
encoding task and their actual explanation rather than
simply on the basis of their explanatory performance alone.
Given that the relational encoding task was intended to be
more probing and therefore more difficult than the control
encoding task, this may have led to lower self-ratings of
understanding.
Secondly, the relational encoding task may have simply
failed to elicit greater explanatory depth. This may have
occurred because of participants’ tendency to redundantly,
and often time exclusively, offer lower-order relations in the
relational encoding task. For example, for the zipper
stimulus, participants frequently offered near neighbor
categories that “hold things together,” such as a button,
Velcro, and a staple. However, very seldom did they expand
on this lower-order relation to include the higher-order,
causal relations that would explain how “holding things
together” is achieved. It may be the case that these higherorder relations and the systematicity of the relations offered
by participants are more important for eliciting greater
causal explanatory knowledge than the amount of lowerorder relations offered. A further study intended to elicit
more higher-order, systematic relational encodings and to

Thus, our results confirmed our first prediction that
specifying to participants that they base their preexplanation ratings on their knowledge of the physicalmechanical workings of stimuli would reduce the magnitude
of the IOED. Contrary to our second prediction, the
relational encoding task appeared to increase the magnitude
of the IOED especially for the zipper stimulus.

Discussion
The results of our experiment suggest that a confusion of
relevant cognitive content on the initial, pre-explanation
rating plays a significant role in the IOED. Specifically, our
results show that when participants were explicitly
encouraged to base their pre-explanation ratings of
understanding on the physical-mechanical workings of
stimulus devices, the IOED was eliminated for one stimuli
(i.e., the manual air pump), significantly reduced for another
(i.e., the zipper) and when both stimuli were combined the
IOED was significantly reduced. In fact, the IOED was
quite small when analyses collapsed across both stimuli.
Consequently, we argue that Rozenblit and Keil’s (2002)
instructions permit participants to base their initial, preexplanation ratings on a range of different types of cognitive
content. Given the central role of functional features in
artifact concepts (Bloom, 1996; Kelemen & Carey, 2007), it
seems natural that participants would gauge their
understanding of artifact concepts through a functional
framework. The illusion of explanatory depth then appears
in large part to index a discrepancy in the type of cognitive
content used to determine one’s depth of understanding,
with pre-explanation ratings being based on knowledge of
functional features and post-explanation ratings based on
knowledge of physical-mechanical processes. As this study
demonstrates, when this discrepancy in cognitive content is
removed by specifying that pre-explanation ratings should
be based exclusively on knowledge of physical-mechanical
processes, the IOED is substantially reduced, if not
eliminated.
Recent research on modes of explanation may offer some
insight into this finding (Keil, 1994; Lombrozo, 2009).
According to this research, people can adopt distinct modes
of explanation when considering a given entity, including a
physical-mechanical mode and a functional, or teleological,
mode. While a physical-mechanical mode focuses on simple
physical objects and their interactions, a functional mode
centers on the goals or purposes of features and objects
within an overall design. As such, modes of explanation
posit different kinds of relations and properties as central
and support different types of generalizations and
predictions. For instance, to explain why a moving billiard
ball stops on impact with a second billiard ball and to

647

incorporate objective, independent ratings of explanations is
currently underway.

Gick, M.L., & Holyoak, K.J. (1983). Schema induction and
analogical transfer. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 306-355.
Keil, F.C. (1994). The birth and nurturance of concepts by
domains: The origins of concepts of living things. In L.
Hirschfield and S. Gelman (Eds.), Mapping the Mind:
domain specificity in cognition and culture. Cambridge
University Press, New York.
Keil, F.C. (2005). Knowledge, categorization, and the bliss
of ignorance. In L. Gershkoff-Stowe, and D. Rakison
(Eds.), Building object categories in developmental time.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Kelemen, D. (1999). The scope of teleological thinking in
preschool children. Cognition, 70, 241-272.
Kelemen, D. & Carey, S. (2007).The essence of artifacts:
Developing the design stance. In Laurence, S. &
Margolis, E. (Eds.), Creations of the mind: Artifacts and
their representation. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Kurtz, K.J., Miao, C.H., & Gentner, D. (2001). Learning by
analogical bootstrapping. Journal of Learning Sciences,
10(4), 417-446.
Lin, E.L., & Murphy, G.L. (1997). Effects of background
knowledge on object categorization and part detection.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 23(4), 1153-1169.
Lombrozo, T. (2009). Explanation and categorization: How
“why?” informs “what?” Cognition, 110, 248-253.
Markman, A.B., Gentner, D. (2000). Structure-mapping in
the comparison process. American Journal of Psychology,
113(4), 501-538.
Murphy, G.L., & Medin, D.L. (1985). The role of theories
in conceptual coherence. Psychological Review, 92, 289316.
Pazzani, M.J. (1991). Influence of prior knowledge on
concept acquisition: Experimental and computational
results. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 17, 416-432.
Ross, B.H., & Murphy, G.L. (1999). Food for thought:
Cross-classification and category organization in a
complex real-world domain. Cognitive Psychology, 38,
495-553.
Rozenblit and Keil (2002). The misunderstood limits of folk
science: An illusion of explanatory depth. Cognitive
Science, 92, 1-42.
Wisniewski, E.J., & Medin, D.L. (1994). On the interaction
of theory and data in concept learning. Cognitive Science,
18, 221-281.

Limitations
One concern with the present study is that due to the small
sample sizes in each condition, significant results were often
found only when analyses collapsed across conditions or
across stimuli. As such, many of our simple effect measures
only approached significance. While the general pattern of
findings was evident, our results may have been
strengthened by a larger sample.
A second concern of the study, briefly addressed above,
was the lack of inclusion of independent raters to
objectively determine the depth of explanations. This leaves
open the possibility that our relational encoding
manipulation may have altered the subjective basis of
participants’ post-explanation self-ratings of understanding.
Nonetheless, this possibility would not have affected our
finding that specifying the type of content that participants
should use to rate their pre-explanation understanding of
stimuli effectively reduces, if not eliminates, the IOED.
Lastly, the findings of the present study—especially the
reduction of the IOED resulting from the physicalmechanical pre-explanation instructions—should be
replicated with additional stimuli. It would be best to
replicate these findings not only with technological devices,
but with other complex causal systems as well.

References
Alter, A.L., Oppenheimer, D.M., & Zemla, J.C. (2010).
Missing the trees for the forest: A construal level account
of the illusion of explanatory depth.
Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 99(3), 436-451.
Atran, S. (1995). Classifying nature across cultures. In D.
Osherson and E. Smith (Eds.), Invitation to Cognitive
Science: Thinking vol. 3, 2nd ed. MIT Press, Cambridge.
Bloom, P. (1996). Intention, history, and artifact concepts.
Cognition, 60, 1-29.
Chi, M.T., Feltovich, P.J., & Glaser, R. (1981).
Categorization and representation of physics problems by
experts and novices. Cognitive Science, 5, 121-152.
Cummins, D.D. (1992). Role of analogical reasoning in the
induction of problem categories. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 18, 11031124.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gentner, D., & Kurtz, K. (2006). Relations, objects, and
the composition of analogies. Cognitive Science, 30, 609642.
Gentner, D., & Colhoun, J. (in press). Analogical processes
in human thinking and learning. In A. von Müller & E.
Pöppel Series Eds.) & B. Glatzeder, V. Goel, & A. von
Müller (Vol. Eds.), On Thinking: Vol. 2. Towards a
Theory of Thinking. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.

648

