UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
When Lighting a Candle Becomes a Superstition: Analogical Recategorization through the
Application of Relational Categories

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9135g0bc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Oberholzer, Nicolas
Trench, Maximo
Minervino, Ricardo

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

When Lighting a Candle Becomes a Superstition: Analogical Recategorization
through the Application of Relational Categories
Nicolás Oberholzer (Noberholzer@)Psi.Uba.Ar)
Facultad de Psicología, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Independencia 3065,
Buenos Aires, Argentina

Máximo Trench (Mtrench@Psi.Uba.Ar)
Facultad de Psicología, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Independencia 3065,
Buenos Aires, Argentina

Ricardo A. Minervino (Minervinor@Jetband.Com.Ar)
Facultad de Ciencias de la Educación, Universidad Nacional del Comahue, Irigoyen 2000,
Cipolletti, Río Negro, Argentina
Abstract

classification and postulate three new mechanisms of representational change. First, we propose a general distinction
between two kinds of mechanisms: 1) re-representational
mechanisms: processes that make the mapping possible but
do not produce a substantial change in the representation of
the analogs, and 2) conceptual change mechanisms: processes
that change the perception of the analogs as an effect of the
comparison. Within the first kind, we include Gentner and
Wolff´s (2000) re-representation of propositional elements,
and propose a new mechanism: re-representation of events.
Within the second kind, we include Gentner and Wolff´s
highlighting, inference generation and restructuring, and
propose two further mechanisms: recategorization of propositional elements and recategorization of events (see Figure
1). We present the results of two experiments that gather
evidence for the mechanism of recategorization of events.

In this paper we proposed a new classification of analogical
mechanisms of representational change and gathered evidence
of the operation of one of the new ones that we proposed:
recategorization of events. We carried out two experiments to
assess whether an analogy can trigger the recategorization of
a target analog (TA). More specifically, the experiments were
designed to test whether a TA not initially regarded as a
member of a schema relational category can be perceived as
belonging to such category as a result of being paired with a
base analog (BA) consisting of a typical exemplar of that
category. Results in both experiments showed that having
paired an atypical TA with a typical BA favored the use of the
base category to describe the TA. Implications for traditional
and future proposals of mechanisms of analogical
representation change are discussed.
Keywords: analogy; mapping; re-representation, relational
category

Mechanisms of
representational cha nge

Introduction
Analogy serves several and diverse cognitive functions,
such as problem solving, explanation, persuasion, decision
making and learning (Holyoak, Gentner, & Kokinov, 2001).
Two situations are analogous if they share a common pattern
of relations among their constituent entities, even though the
objects themselves may differ across situations. Through a
mapping between the elements of a known situation (base
analog: BA) and their corresponding elements in a less
understood situation (target analog: TA), inferences can be
drawn to enhance the representation of the latter. Hofstadter
and FARG (1995) have argued that mapping and
representational change run in an intrinsically related way,
and can not be studied separately. During the past decade
some experimental research has been done that focused on
this interaction (see, e.g., Gentner & Kurtz, 2006; Kokinov,
Bliznashki, Kosev, & Hristova, 2007; Kurtz, 2005).
Gentner and Wolff (2000) distinguished several kinds of
representational change produced by metaphor and analogy.
In the present paper we introduce some adjustments to their

Re-representation

Conceptual cha nge

Of propositional Of events
elements
(propositions
considered as wholes)
Recategorization
of propositional
elements

Highlighting
Inference
generation
Reestructuring

Recategorization of
events (propositions
considered as wholes)

Figure 1. Analogical mechanisms of representational
change.

568

In order to gather experimental evidence for the existence
of re-representation at the level of propositional elements,
Gentner and Kurtz (2006) used both online and offline
measures to assess if participants re-represented non
identical relations when asked to give judgments of
analogical relatedness. In this study, participants were asked
to give timed answers to whether a BA (e.g., John bought
the candy) was analogous to TAs in which the base relation
was substituted with other relations of varying degrees of
semantic similarity with the base relation. Sticking to the
above BA, whereas in the synonymous verb condition the
TA was John purchased the candy, in the near verb
condition the TA was John took the candy. Finally, in the far
condition the TA was John stepped on the candy. Processing
times for synonymous pairs were shorter than those for near
pairs. With regards to ratings of analogical acceptance,
analogs with synonymous verbs were nearly always
considered analogous. At the level of semantically similar
but distinct predicates, in more than half of the trials the
compared facts were judged as analogous, providing striking
evidence of human flexibility in re-representing predicates in
order to place two situations in correspondence. In their
second experiment, Gentner and Kurtz introduced an
analogical acceptance justification task aimed at assessing
whether participants would mention an underlying semantic
commonality that could provide supporting evidence for a rerepresentation process. Their results showed that participants
effectively used novel language redescriptions to refer to the
analogical relations, especially for near and far substitutions.
An interesting result was that when participants had to
justify the analogical relation between far objects they did
not only redescribe the noun but also the verb, which was
the same across the BA and the TA. This data is not
consistent with approaches that conceive re-representation
processes as operating via the identification of similarities
between propositional elements considered in isolation.
Minervino, Oberholzer and Trench (2008) have argued
that a limitation of all available accounts of the role played
by semantic similarity on analogical mapping resides in
confining its treatment to the level of propositional elements
(i.e., objects, object properties and relations), and argued for
the need of broader construals in the treatment of similarity.
In the present paper, we propose an alternative rerepresentation mechanism that operates on propositions as
wholes and not at the level of propositional elements. Such
mechanism consists of searching for a schema relational
category (Markman & Stilwell, 2000) for which the
compared facts constitute instances. We refer to this
mechanism as recategorization of events.
Instead of sharing a set of probabilistic features and feature
correlations, members of relational categories such as
assassination share a relational structure like, say, KILL
(murder, means, victim), which can be instantiated by many
apparently different exemplars, such as Fred thrust a knife
into Gina’s heart, Mary had Bob drink poison, or The
surgeon disconnected the patient’s oxygen supply (Gentner
& Kurtz, 2005). Let’s consider the following analogs:

Re-representation mechanisms
Dominant theoretical accounts of the mapping process rely
heavily on the existence of semantic similarity between the
propositional elements to be mapped (e.g., Gentner &
Markman, 2006; Hofstadter & FARG, 1995; Holyoak &
Thagard, 1989; Hummel & Holyoak, 1997). Even though
there is agreement regarding the fact that two dissimilar
predicates or entities can be put in correspondence in order
to improve an ongoing global mapping if they can be rerepresented as similar, there is still debate as to the exact
mechanisms through which this re-representational process
takes place. Falkenhainer’s (1990) method of minimal
ascension could re-represent initially dissimilar concepts
such as buy and take via identification of a common
superordinate (e.g., obtain). In a similar way, the first
version of the multiconstraint theory allowed alignments
between non identical elements by providing the mapping
engine (ACME) with similarity scores among the elements
being compared (Holyoak & Thagard, 1989). The criterion
underlying such similarity scores reflected intuitive
taxonomic IS-A criteria (see Holyoak & Thagard, 1995). In
this way, as cat and dog are encompassed by the immediate
superordinate mammal, they are assigned a higher similarity
score than would be assigned to the pair cat and tuna, since
the common superordinate of these last concepts (i.e.,
animal) occupies a higher position in the hierarchy. A more
recent proposal for re-representing similar but not identical
relations, advanced by the structure-mapping theory as an
extension of SME (Falkenhainer, Forbus, & Gentner, 1989),
is semantic decomposition. This mechanism consists of
identifying the subcomponents that encode the meaning of
dissimilar relations, so as to reveal identity matches among
these subcomponents (Yan, Forbus, & Gentner, 2003). If a
means of finding an identity between initially dissimilar
predicates like UNLOCK (house) and UNCORK (bottle)
were needed, applying decomposition to the above predicates
could eventually lead to re-represent them as CAUSE
[UNLOCK (house), OPEN (house)] and CAUSE [UNCORK
(bottle), OPEN (bottle)], respectively. In this way, the
decomposition mechanism reveals that unlock and uncork
share the common subcomponent open. In a similar vein,
the last computational implementation of the multiconstraint
theory (i.e., LISA; Hummel & Holyoak, 1997, 2003) achieves
a sort of decomposition by resorting to distributed
representations of meaning. LISA operates on conceptual
units that are permanently linked to a collection of primitives
that represent their semantics. Within LISA’s architecture,
two non-identical elements can be put in correspondence as
a result of sharing semantic primitives–a mechanism akin to
semantic decomposition (Gentner & Kurtz, 2006).
The processes described so far constitute re-representation
mechanisms, to the extent to which they do not imply
substantial changes in the perception of one or both analogs
as an effect of the comparison, being their main function to
complete an ongoing mapping. On the other hand, they
operate computing the similarity between pairs of
propositional elements considered in isolation.

569

Conceptual change mechanisms

BA: Dolores hung garlic on the door
TA: Mary brought a rabbit leg to the stadium

It is possible that in some cases one of the analogs (e.g., the
BA) constitutes a typical exemplar of a schema relational
category but the other (the TA) one does not, admitting the
application of more accessible alternative categories. If the
typical BA promotes a relatively improbable categorization
of the TA, that categorization could be taken as a case of
conceptual change rather than a case of re-representation.
Consider the following analogs:

If participants in an experiment had to decide if these
situations are analogous and try to find superordinates for
the pairs hang-bring, garlic-rabbit leg and door-stadium,
they would only find very abstract ones, giving place to a
trivial superordinate description like “Someone takes an
object to a place”, probably leading participants to decide
that the compared facts are not analogous. A similar result
would be obtained when attempting to discover latent
identities via decomposition:

BA: Dolores hung garlic on the door.
TA: Mary lighted a candle in the basement
In cases like this, people are likely to categorize the BA as
an exemplar of a superstitious behavior (since it is a typical
example of that relational category), and then evaluate if the
TA could be considered an instance of such category. This
kind of representational change is likely to occur for schema
relational categories, since the exemplars of these categories
usually receive many and diverse categorizations (some of
them not mutually exclusive), as compared to exemplars of
entity categories (Gentner & Kurtz, 2005) (e.g., Mary
lighted the candle in the basement could be categorized as
an act of illumination, an attempt to improve the smell of
the basement, etc.). If the BA represents a typical exemplar
of a schema relational category, it may favor the application
of such category to the TA in order to reveal the similarity
between the base and the target. We refer to this kind of
conceptual change as recategorization of events.
Kurtz (2005) carried out two experiments in which the
primary question was whether comparing a pen with a bottle
(a typical exemplar of container) could influence the
recategorization of a pen (an atypical case of container) as
an instance of that category. This was evaluated directly
using a yes/no question: “Can a pen be a container?” Kurtz
(2005, Experiment 1) included two control conditions: while
in one of them the critical question was not preceded by a
comparison task, in the other one participants had to
compare a pen to a base object (key) that was not an
exemplar of container (this second group is necessary to
confirm that the causal factor is the comparison with the
bottle and not just any process of comparison). The
bottle/pen condition but not the key/pen condition gave
more “yes” answers than the pen/only condition.
The Kurtz's (2005) study was aimed at investigating
analogical recategorization of objects. We developed a first
experiment to determine whether presenting a typical
exemplar of a schema relational category can trigger the
recategorization of a TA describing an event that is less
representative of the same relational category. Let's suppose
that a group of people read Dolores hung garlic on the door.
If they were asked how they would categorize that situation,
they might answer that Dolores is carrying out a
superstitious action. Now, if they read that Dolores lighted a
candle in the basement, most of them would probably say
that Dolores is trying to illuminate the basement, and may
be that only a few would say that she is being superstitious.

BA: Dolores hung garlic on the door →
CAUSE [HANG (dolores, garlic, door), MOVE (dolores,
garlic, door)]
TA: Mary brought a rabbit leg to the stadium →
CAUSE [BRING (mary, rabbit leg, stadium), MOVE (mary,
rabbit leg, stadium)]
In cases like the described above, where element-toelement re-representational mechanisms fail to reveal an
identity between the compared situations, we postulate a rerepresentational mechanism, consisting of a search for a
schema relational category (in this case, superstition) for
which the to-be-mapped situations could be considered
instances. According to our proposed classification, this last
process should be included among re-representation
mechanisms, on the grounds that the perception of the
situations does not change as an effect of the analogical
comparison.
Minervino et al. (2008) conducted two experiments to
show that sometimes people disregard element-to-element
similarities and favor similarity between events described by
whole propositions in their judgments of analogical
relatedness. Participants had to choose between two TAs
(e.g., TA1: John offered a deodorant to Mary; TA2: John
wrote a poem to Mary) for a certain BA (e.g., John gave a
perfume to Mary)–all the analogs being structurally identical.
The only difference was that whereas the elements of the
TA1 were semantically close to the elements of the BA, the
elements of the TA2 were semantically more distant. Results
showed that participants frequently passed over element-toelement similarities between the BA and the TA1 and chose
instead the TA2, which shared a common schema relational
category with the BA (e.g., act of seduction).
As we have said, re-representation mechanisms do not
imply substantial changes in the perception of the analogs.
In the case of the two considered mechanisms this can be
explained as follows: since the base and target elements or
events constitute typical instances of the superordinate
category evoked to place them in correspondence, the
analogy does not induce a categorization different from the
one each analog would have received by it itself.

570

But how would people describe the TA when paired with the
BA in the context of an analogy? In this case we ventured that
many of them would describe lighting a candle in the
basement as a case of superstition. If this actually happened,
we would count with some evidence concerning the fact that
analogies could favor the recategorization of events.

analogy group from discovering the logic of the
recategorization of the TA in terms of the BA. In the noanalogy condition participants read six critical non analogies
(i.e., NA plus an atypical TA), and six filler non analogies
(i.e., NA plus a typical TA). In this way, participants in both
groups had to categorize and rate typical and atypical cases.
The order of presentation of the sets was counterbalanced in
both conditions. See Table 1 for examples of the sets
employed in Experiment 1.

Experiment 1
Participants in the analogy group read a typical BA and an
atypical TA (e.g., Peter gave a bottle of perfume to Mary
and Peter played a joke on Mary) and were asked to
categorize the situation described in the TA considering that
it was analogous to the one described in the BA (e.g., “How
would you describe Peter's second behavior considering that
it is analogous to his first action?”). Participants in the noanalogy group read the TA after reading a non analog (i.e., a
case that doesn’t belong to the critical category; e.g., Peter
lodged a complaint against Mary). Then they were asked to
categorize the second situation (e.g., “How would you
categorize Peter's second behavior?”). The categorizations
of the TAs were compared between the analogy and noanalogy groups.

Procedure Participants in the analogy group read a
definition of analogy and four examples of analogies and
non analogies. They also received an explanation and
examples of the categorization task. Then they had to
perform four training tasks. After that, they read six critical
analogies and six filler analogies, and they were asked to
categorize the TA of each of them on the supposition that it
was analogous to the BA. In this categorization task, they
were allowed to provide one or more descriptions of the TA.
Participants in the no-analogy group read the same
instructions as participants in the analogy condition, except
for the fact that the explanation about analogy was removed.
After that, they read six critical non analogies and six filler
non analogies, and they performed the categorization task.
The experiment was individually administrated in
computers and each session lasted approximately 30 min.
On one screen appeared the pair of situations and the
categorization task.

Method
Participants Fifty three undergraduate students from the
University of Buenos Aires participated in the experiment
for course credits. Participants were randomly distributed
between the two conditions: the analogy group (26) and the
no-analogy group (27).

Table 1: Examples of sets

Materials. Twelve sets of materials were used. Each set
consisted of a typical analog, an atypical analog and a non
analog (NA). All of the analogs and NAs consisted of
simple daily life situations (e.g., Peter played a joke on
Mary or Dolores lighted a candle in the basement). We
made a preliminary study to produce our materials.
Participants (27) in an independent group had to categorize
and rate on a 7-point Likert scale the analogs and non
analogs of 33 sets, considered as isolated cases and
presented in a random order. To choose the sets we adopted
the following criteria: 1) the typical analogs were cases in
which more than 60% of the participants used the critical
category to classify the situation, and on the Likert scale
their median value was 6 or more (e.g., Hang garlic on the
door, a typical example of superstition); 2) the atypical
analogs were cases in which less than 15% of the
participants selected the critical category to classify the
situation, and on the Likert scale their median value was 3
or less (e.g., Light a candle in the basement, a non-typical
example of superstition); 3) the NAs were cases where
nobody applied the critical category and their median value
was 1 (e.g., Forget a coat in the garden, not a case of
superstition). In the analogy condition participants read six
critical analogies (i.e., a typical case as the BA and an
atypical case as the TA) and six filler analogies (i.e., an
atypical case as the BA and a typical case as the TA). The
aim of the filler analogies was to prevent participants in the

Category Typicality

Situation

Seduction Typical

Juan gave a perfume to María

Atypical

Juan played a joke on María

Non analog Juan lodged a complaint to María
Marital
Typical
infidelity
Atypical

Ariel closed the chat when his
wife arrived
Ariel arranged the bed when his
wife arrived

Non analog Ariel blew his nose when his wife
arrived
Teaching

Typical

Martín explained an equation to
his brother

Atypical

Martín made the bed of his brother

Non analog Martín asked for a refreshment to
his brother

Results and Discussion
Two independent judges evaluated if the participants used
the critical category to describe the TA. They were
instructed to consider as hits only those cases in which the
exact critical concept or a very close synonym was

571

employed (e.g., witchcraft or ritual instead of superstition).
Judges agreed in 87% of the trials. Cases of disagreement
were solved by open discussion. Participants in the noanalogy group used the critical category in 7% of the TAs'
descriptions. In contrast, in the analogy-group participants
used the critical category to refer to the TAs in 48% of the
trials, χ²(1, 318) = 66.58, p < .0001. Results showed that
when paired with a typical BA, there was an increased
probability of describing the TA as an instance of the
schema relational category that corresponds to the BA. This
evidence suggests that the presence of a typical BA can have
an influence on the recategorization of the atypical TA.

three critical non analogies, three filler analogies and three
filler non analogies. In each of them they were asked to
determine if the two situations were analogous. Following
that task, they had to categorize the TA, being allowed to
produce one or more descriptions.

Results and Discussion
Two independent judges evaluated, following the same
criteria applied in Experiment 1, if the participants used the
critical category to describe the TA. Judges agreed in 89%
of the trials. Cases of disagreement were solved by open
discussion. When participants read the critical non analogies
they used the critical category in 3% of the TAs'
descriptions. In contrast, within those trials in which
participants were confronted with critical analogies and
accepted the analogy (82 cases), they evoked the critical
category in 41% of the cases, χ²(1, 192) = 42.86, p < .0001.
Although in this experiment we gave participants the
possibility of evaluating if the two situations were
analogous or not, results replicated those obtained in
Experiment 1. The data showed that when the analogical
relation with the typical BA was identified, there was a
higher probability of applying the critical category to the
atypical TA than when it was paired with a NA. To sum up,
the data support the idea that analogical mapping triggered a
recategorization of the TA as an instance of the critical base
category.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 1 participants in the analogy group were not
given the chance to judge if the compared situations were
analogous or not. Instead, they were prompted to categorize
the TA on the supposition that it was analogous to the BA.
This may have determined the relative high number of times
that the critical category was employed. In Experiment 2 we
introduced a variation that allowed us to evaluate a
spontaneous categorization instead of a forced one. To that
end, we introduced a yes/no answer question about the
analogical relation prior to the categorization task.
Participants read two situations and then they where asked if
they were analogous (“Do you consider that these two
situations are analogous?”). Since, as we will see, all
participants were confronted not only with analogies but
also with non analogies, the chances of “no” and “yes”
answers were balanced. After that, they had to categorize the
second situation (e.g., “Then, how would you categorize the
second situation?”). We compared the number of times the
critical category was selected between the analogy sets and
the no-analogy sets.

General Discussion
In this paper we presented a new classification of
mechanisms of representational change. We propose a
distinction between mechanisms that make the mapping
possible but do not lead to a substantial change in the
perception of the analogs (i.e., mechanisms of rerepresentation) and mechanisms that lead to a substantial
change in the representations as an effect of the analogical
comparison (i.e., mechanisms of conceptual change). Three
new mechanisms are proposed and two of them have a
couple of differences with the mechanisms previously
proposed in the field. First, in some situations the rerepresentation and the conceptual change operate
considering the propositions (i.e., the events that they
describe) as wholes and not the propositional elements in
isolation. Second, they contemplate the use of relational
categories (Gentner & Kurtz 2005) that have not received
enough attention by theories of analogical mapping.
Most theories of analogical mapping accept that two
situations can be considered analogous even when their
corresponding elements are not initially represented as
having identical meaning (Gentner & Kurtz, 2006). They
require, however, that some kind of identity between
initially similar (but non-identical) propositional elements
could be identified, and they propose several mechanisms of
re-representation to find those identities, like searching for
superordinates in IS-A networks (Falkenhainer, 1990;
Holyoak & Thagard, 1989) or decomposition (Hummel &

Method
Participants Forty undergraduate students from the
University of Buenos Aires participated in the experiment
for course credits.
Materials We used the same materials as in Experiment 1.
As all participants were confronted with analogies and non
analogies, we were able to implement an intrasubject
manipulation of the independent variable (presence or
absence of a typical BA followed by an atypical TA). Thus,
participants were confronted with both critical and filler
analogies and critical and filler non analogies. The order of
presentation of the sets was counterbalanced. In this way,
for each participant that received the critical analogy version
of, say, Set 1, another participant received the critical non
analogy version of the same set.
Procedure Participants read a definition of analogy, four
examples of analogies and non analogies, and an
explanation and examples of the categorization task. After
completing four practice trials, they read twelve pairs of
situations. Each participant received three critical analogies,

572

Holyoak, 1997; Yan, Gentner & Forbus, 2003). Sometimes,
these propositional element comparisons may lead to
disregard similarities that can be captured using alternative
re-representation mechanisms. In this study we proposed that
the employment of schema relational categories (Markman &
Stilwell, 2000) could be a means of considering similarities
between propositions considered as wholes. The members of
relational categories share a relational structure that can be
instantiated by many and diverse exemplars (Gentner &
Kurtz, 2005). For example, aggression could be instantiated
by insulting someone, pointing defects to someone, making
an ironic comment about someone, etc. In these cases, the
activation of an appropriate relational category could lead to
discover the analogical relations between the exemplars. If
the base and target situations constituted typical exemplars
of the schema relational category, it would be a case of rerepresentation of events, since the representational change
does not imply viewing one of the analogs in a novel
manner as an effect of the comparison with the other one. In
contrast, if a typical BA promoted an improbable
categorization of the TA, it would be a case that we
classified as recategorization of events. In this study we
carried out two experiments to gather evidence for the use
of this last mechanism.
The results of Experiment 1 showed that a relational
category triggered by a typical BA influenced the
categorization of an atypical TA in terms of the base
category. This finding was replicated in situations where
participants spontaneously identified the analogical relation
between the base and target analogs. A common
shortcoming of the new mechanisms proposed and the
traditional ones is that they all assume the existence of
taxonomic hierarchies such as IS-A networks. We consider
that in many cases the identification of analogical relations
supposes the creation of ad hoc categories that are not
available in conceptual networks of general purpose. It
would be interesting that future studies investigated the role
that ad hoc schema relational categories play in the
analogical mapping.

Categorization inside and outside the laboratory.
Washington, DC: APA.
Gentner, D., & Kurtz, K. (2006). Relations, objects, and the
composition of analogies. Cognitive Science, 30, 609-642.
Gentner, D., Holyoak, K. J., & Kokinov, B. N. (Eds.)
(2001). The analogical mind: Perspectives from cognitive
science. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gentner, D., & Markman, A. B. (2006). Defining structural
similarity. The Journal of Cognitive Science, 6, 1-20.
Gentner, D., & Wolff, P. (2000). Metaphor and knowledge
change. In E. Dietrich & A. B. Markman (Eds.),
Cognitive dynamics: Conceptual and representational
change in humans and machines . Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hofstadter D. R., & FARG (1995). Fluid concepts and
creative analogies: Computer models of the fundamental
mechanisms of thought. New York: Basic Books.
Holyoak, K. J., & Thagard, P. R. (1989). Analogical
mapping by constraint satisfaction. Cognitive Science, 13,
295-355.
Holyoak, K. J., & Thagard, P. R. (1995). Mental leaps:
Analogy in creative thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (1997). Distributed
representations of structure: A theory of analogical access
and mapping. Psychological Review, 104, 427-466.
Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (2003). A symbolicconnectionist theory of relational inference and
generalization. Psychological Review, 110, 220-264.
Kokinov, B., Bliznashki, S., Kosev, S., & Hristova, P.
(2007). Analogical mapping and perception: Can mapping
Cause a re-Representation of the target stimulus?
Proceedings of the 29th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1175-1180). Erlbaum,
Hillsdale, NJ.
Kurtz, K. J. (2005). Re-representation in comparison:
Building an empirical case. Journal of Experimental &
Theoretical Artificial Intelligence, 17, 447-459.
Markman, A. B., & Stilwell, C. H. (2001). Role-governed
categories. Journal of Experimental and Theoretical
Intelligence, 13, 329-358.
Minervino, R. A., Oberholzer, N. &, Trench, M. (2008).
Similarity between propositional elements does not
always determine judgments of analogical relatedness.
Proceedings of the 30th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 91-96). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Yan, J., Forbus, K., & Gentner, D. (2003). A theory of
rerepresentation in analogical matching. Proceedings of
the Twenty-Fifth Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 1265–1270). Boston, MA: Cognitive
Science Society.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Grant PICT 1461 from the
ANCyT, Argentina, by Grant C076 from the Universidad
Nacional del Comahue, Argentina, and by Grant PIP 0266
from CONICET, Argentina.

References
Falkenhainer, B. (1990) Analogical interpretation in context.
Proceedings of the Twelfth Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 69-76). Hillsdale, NJ:
LEA.
Falkenhainer, B., Forbus, K. D., & Gentner, D. (1989). The
structure-mapping engine: Algorithm and examples.
Artificial Intelligence, 41, 1-63.
Gentner, D., & Kurtz, K. (2005). Learning and using
relational categories. In W. K. Ahn, R. L. Goldstone, B. C.
Love, A. B. Markman & P. W. Wolff (Eds.),

573

