UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
When More Evidence Makes Word Learning Less Suspicious

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2gm3s80v

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Jenkins, Gavin
Smith, Jodi
Spencer, John
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

When More Evidence Makes Word Learning Less Suspicious
Gavin W. Jenkins (gavin-jenkins@uiowa.edu)
Jodi R. Smith (jodi-r-smith@uiowa.edu)
John P. Spencer (john-spencer@uiowa.edu)
Larissa K. Samuelson (larissa-samuelson@uiowa.edu)
Department of Psychology and Delta Center, E11 Seashore Hall
Iowa City, IA 52240 USA
Abstract
One challenging problem that children overcome in learning
new words is recognizing the hierarchical category of a label.
For instance, one object could be called a Dalmatian, a dog, or
an animal. Xu and Tenenbaum (2007) proposed a Bayesian
model to explain how 3.5 to 5-year-olds solve this ambiguity.
They emphasized children's appreciation for “suspicious
coincidences:” a label applied to three identical toys is
interpreted more narrowly than a label applied to one toy. Xu
and Tenenbaum did not investigate children’s prior category
knowledge, however. We replicated their “suspicious
coincidence” effect and measured this
knowledge.
Unexpectedly, children with more category knowledge
appreciated “suspicious coincidences” less. In a second
experiment, repeatedly emphasizing novel labels caused all
children to stop recognizing the “suspicious coincidence.”
These data are inconsistent with the Bayesian account and
suggest the phenomenon is influenced by subtler aspects of
prior knowledge and by task-specific details.
Keywords: Word Learning, Categorization, Bayesian Model

Introduction
A central issue in the study of word learning is how children
acquire names for hierarchically nested categories.
“Animal,” “mammal,” “dog,” “Black Labrador,” and
“Rover” can all apply to the same referent. This presents a
challenge to a young word learner, because when a child
hears a label applied to a novel object, the correct
interpretation is ambiguous in a hierarchically labeled
system: does a novel label “fep” combined with an animal
refer to the species, to the breed, or is it a proper name?
Additionally, some of the tools children usually use to
decipher novel word-object mappings become less helpful
in the case of hierarchically nested categories. Mutual
exclusivity (Markman, 1989) is counterproductive in cases
where two words both refer to the same object, but at
different hierarchical levels (e.g., “animal” and a novel word
for the same thing, like “Dachshund”). Any child relying on
mutual exclusivity would fail to learn more than one
hierarchical label for an object at a time. Golinkoff, et al.'s
(1992) N3C constraint would be counterproductive for the
same reasons: it rejects such overlapping labels by design.
To approach this problem, Xu and Tenenbaum (2007)
recently suggested a Bayesian approach children might use
to succeed at learning names for objects at multiple levels in
a hierarchy. Specifically, Xu and Tenenbaum suggest that
children recognize so-called “suspicious coincidences”

when a label is applied to multiple, distinct exemplars that
look very similar. For example, a child might hear the word
“fep” applied to a Black Labrador dog. After just one
labeling event, the word “fep” is ambiguous. Imagine that a
few minutes later, however, the child again hears “fep”
applied to a different Black Labrador. Now, the child can
use Bayesian inference to suppress some possible
interpretations: if “fep” refers to all animals, it would be a
“suspicious coincidence” for the first two random examples
that the child saw to both be examples of the same breed of
dog. For the same reason, the evidence would also be
suspicious if “fep” refers to only “dogs.” It would not be
suspicious at all, however, to see “fep” applied to two Black
Labradors in a row if “fep” meant only “Black Labrador.”
Xu and Tenenbaum suggest that children can recognize
when a label is applied to a “suspiciously” small subset of
the possible objects it could refer to, and use this to infer the
label carries a narrow meaning. If the child hears “fep”
applied to Black Labradors a third and fourth time, the
child's narrow interpretation becomes exponentially
stronger, and any other interpretation is de-emphasized (see
the “size principle,” introduced on page 252 of Xu &
Tenenbaum, 2007).
Xu and Tenenbaum (2007) experimentally tested
children's ability to infer narrow meanings in “suspicious
coincidence” situations. Participants (42-60 months of age)
who were shown one stuffed toy Dalmatian labeled “fep”
later generalized the label to a variety of toys at different
levels of hierarchy: other Dalmatians, different breeds of
dogs, and even a few other species of animals, like seals.
However, when participants were shown three separate
Dalmatians, all labeled “fep,” they almost never generalized
the label to anything but other Dalmatians. In this
experiment, separate toys were all presented simultaneously,
so there was no ambiguity about whether the toys were
unique or whether they were the same toy. Xu and
Tenenbaum explain this “suspicious coincidence” behavior
as a natural extension of a Bayesian model of word learning.
The suspicious coincidence is a conceptually important
phenomenon because it is not predicted by other models of
word learning. Nevertheless, relatively little is known about
how this phenomenon is related to the dramatic changes in
word learning that take place in early development. Thus,
the goal of the present study was to examine how this
phenomenon is related to children's emerging category
knowledge. Prior knowledge and the similarity structure

2556

children bring to the task play a central role in Bayesian
accounts, yet these aspects of knowledge are rarely
measured directly (Jones & Love, in press). It is possible
that the exact details of category knowledge play a critical
role in the suspicious coincidence. Individual children may
have highly variable and difficult to predict histories of
exposure that could influence their behavior under a
Bayesian perspective.
Thus, in Experiment 1, we measured children’s prior
category knowledge and its relation to their noun
generalization behavior in Xu and Tenenbaum’s task.
Experiment 1 was an exact replication of Xu and
Tenenbaum's (2007) Experiment 3, investigating the effects
of the “suspicious coincidence” on children's novel noun
generalization. Our only modification was that parents of
participants
completed
an
additional
vocabulary
questionnaire during the experiment. We compared the
strength of children's “suspicious coincidence” effect with
their prior knowledge of the categories used in the task. The
Bayesian account predicts that children who know more
about these categories should have shown a stronger
“suspicious coincidence.”

8 were placed in a test array as generalization targets. Figure
1 shows an example of each possible combination of
familiarization exemplars a child could be shown (only the
animal set possibilities are depicted). Figure 2 shows the
array of test objects that every child saw.
A vocabulary survey was developed to examine children’s
knowledge of the labels for the stimuli at each level in the
taxonomic hierarchy. The survey was filled out by parents
during the study and included an entry for each unique
stimulus item used in the experiment. Each entry of the
survey included a photograph of a toy, a line on which
parents were instructed to write down what the child would
spontaneously call the toy, and check boxes with different
category labels for that toy that children might recognize
(but not necessarily produce).

Experiment 1
Methods
Participants were 54 monolingual children from a
Midwestern town, between the ages of 42 and 60 months.
13 participants were excluded from analysis: 7 for choosing
distractor items, 1 for fussiness, 2 due to experimenter error,
and 3 for extreme, reversed generalization behavior from
adults. Therefore, 41 participants were included in analyses
(mean age = 4 years, 3 months; range from 3 years, 6
months to 5 years, 0 months). Parents of participants were
contacted via mail and a follow-up phone call. Parents
provided informed consent prior to the study. Each
participant received a small toy for participation.
The stimuli were chosen based on the set used by Xu and
Tenenbaum (2007). Most toys used were of the exact same
adult subordinate categories as those in Xu and
Tenenbaum's experiments, and all toys conformed to the
same basic level categories. The set of 45 toys was divided
into three superordinate categories (referred to as “sets”): 15
animals, 15 vehicles, and 15 vegetables. Each set was
further divided into basic level categories: 6 toys from
different basic level categories and 9 toys from the same
basic level category. Each basic level category of 9 toys was
further divided into subordinate level categories: 4 toys
from the same subordinate level category and 5 toys from
different subordinate level categories. Using the animal set
as an example, the category structure of the 15 animals was
as follows: 6 “superordinate matches” from unique basic
level categories (penguin, pig, cat, bear, seal, bee) and 9
“basic matches” from the same basic level category, 5 of
which were also “subordinate matches” (Husky, Sheepdog,
Pug, Terrier, and 5 examples of Black Labradors). Seven
toys from each set were reserved as possible exemplars, and

Figure 1: Possible familiarization conditions. Each child
participated in only one condition over three trials.

Aside from parents filling out the vocabulary survey
described above, the design of our first experiment was
exactly the same as that of Experiment 3 of Xu &
Tenenbaum (2007). It was divided into three trials, each
with a familiarization phase and a test (generalization)
phase. Every child was randomly assigned to either a “oneexemplar” condition or a “three-exemplar” condition.
The familiarization phase was performed first. In the oneexemplar condition, the experimenter pulled out one
subordinate match toy, placed it on the exemplar mat, and
labeled it three times in a row. In one trial of the threeexemplar condition, the experimenter pulled out one
subordinate match toy and two other identical toys, and each
of the three toys was labeled once (trials with three different
basic level toys and three different superordinate level toys
were also run, but are less direct as a test of the “suspicious
coincidence”). Novel labels were used in both conditions,
such as “fep.” Participants in both conditions heard the
same number of object-word pairings overall, either one
object three times or three objects once each.

2557

Figure 2: The toys in the test array, by category. These were placed on the floor in a random order.
Next, the test phase of the experiment began. The test
phase involved a series of Yes/No generalization questions
(e.g., “is this a fep?”) about a subset of the toys in the test
array. The stimuli presented in the test array are pictured in
Figure 2. Note, however, that the test objects were randomly
positioned for the experiment, rather than grouped as in the
figure. Of the 24 objects in the test array, ten were used as
the test set for a given trial. The test set included the two
available subordinate matches, the two basic matches, the
four superordinate matches, and any two distractors from
the other two sets.

Results
Replication As Experiment 1 was procedurally a
replication of Xu and Tenenbaum's third experiment, we
first examined whether the "suspicious coincidence" effect
was, in fact, replicated in ours. Figure 3 summarizes Xu and
Tenenbaum's results from the relevant experiment,
compared with our replication results. The data in all of our
graphs are based on the proportion of “Yes” responses to
different hierarchical levels of matching in the test phase.
The most direct test of Xu and Tenenbaum's “suspicious
coincidence” is the difference between the basic level
(middle) bars in the one-exemplar versus 3-exemplarsubordinate conditions. The "suspicious coincidence" is
seen as a drop in the proportion of basic match
generalizations (e.g., “Yes” responses to the Sheep dog and
Pug) from when one exemplar (Black Labrador) is shown to
when three of that same exemplar are shown. Our
replication of the effect was a success. Basic match
generalization decreased significantly when three
subordinate match exemplars were used, both in Xu and
Tenenbaum's study and in ours (From 25% to 13% in our
results, p < 0.05; and from 40% to 6% in Xu &
Tenenbaum's results in their 2007 study).

Results by vocabulary knowledge The main motivation
for Experiment 1 was to look more carefully at the effect of
prior category knowledge on word generalization,
specifically the “suspicious coincidence” phenomenon. We
will focus only on subordinate level vocabulary knowledge,
because labels at this level are most relevant for evaluating
the “suspicious coincidence” effect.
Vocabulary knowledge for the most specific category for
each toy was summed over the entire survey and recorded as
the child's “specific vocabulary score,” or SVS. The
maximum possible SVS was 30, but no child received this
(mean 16.83, median 16, range 12-23). A median split was
performed on the scores in order to divide children into
“low-SVS” and “high-SVS” groups (with additional
subjects recruited as necessary for statistical power,
included in the methods sections of this paper). We then
analyzed the “suspicious coincidence” for each group. A
dramatic difference was found: low-SVS children showed a
25% drop in basic match generalization from the oneexemplar to the three-exemplar condition (the “suspicious
coincidence” effect. p < 0.0001), while high-SVS children
showed a 2% rise in basic match generalization (the
opposite trend of the “suspicious coincidence”). This data is

Figure 3a: Xu & Tenenbaum's results
2558

presented in Figure 4. The results of our vocabulary survey
are not correlated with age (r < 0.1, p > 0.25).

existing knowledge and were less likely to default to
English labels they didn't have.

Figure 3b: Overall results of Experiment 1. we succeeded
in replicating Xu & Tenenbaum (2007).

Discussion
The goal of Experiment 1 was to examine the effect of
children's prior category knowledge on noun generalization
at multiple hierarchical levels, specifically the “suspicious
coincidence” effect. The vocabulary effect we discovered
was clear: “suspicious coincidence” behavior was highly
inversely correlated with children's vocabulary knowledge,
as measured by our parental survey. Since vocabulary was
not a manipulated variable, the direction of the relationship
is unclear. However, either causal direction is difficult to
explain from a Bayesian perspective. In the Bayesian
account, children with the most detailed knowledge about
subordinate-level categories like “Black Labradors” and
other breeds of dogs should be able to most easily determine
which sets of stimuli are statistically “suspicious” when
given the same novel label. After all, if a child only knows
about two breeds of dog, seeing three of one kind at once is
not very “suspicious.” Alternatively, if the “suspicious
coincidence” drives vocabulary learning, then those most
skilled at it should have acquired greater vocabulary
knowledge. Our findings in Experiment 1 run counter to
both of these possibilities, and thus suggest that children are
not learning words according to Bayesian principles.
Before accepting this conclusion, however, we ran an
additional experiment to rule out two alternate expanations
for our vocabulary effect. Firstly, children who knew more
of the correct English names for the subordinate categories
tested may have had trouble learning a second set of labels
for the exact same set of referents (even though mutual
exclusivity is unhelpful for partially overlapping labels, it is
useful for ruling out exactly overlapping labels). Secondly,
even if the novel label was learned and accepted, if these
children were temporarily distracted from the goal of the
task, then they could have forgotten the new label and
played the game based entirely on their English labels for
the toys. Low-SVS children, on the other hand, were less
likely to have their learning of novel labels blocked by

Figure 4: Results of Experiment 1 by prior vocabulary
knowledge. Low vocabulary participants are driving the
“suspicious coincidence” effect seen in the overall data.
Thus, in Experiment 2, we increased the number of times
we recited Mr. Frog's labels to children. This should have
helped overcome high-SVS children's strongly learned
English names for the objects. We also spread this repeated
reinforcement throughout the test phase of the task. This
distribution of reminders was designed to prevent children
from getting distracted. If high-SVS children in Experiment
1 were indeed distracted or not learning novel labels at all,
then they should have begun to show a stronger “suspicious
coincidence” in Experiment 2.
Importantly, our altered methodology should not affect
(or if anything, should magnify) the predictions of Xu and
Tenenbaum's formal Bayesian account of the “suspicious
coincidence.” The only evidence for a child that is relevant
to their model is new evidence. No parameters exist in their
(2007) equations that can model the effects of repeated
exposure to old information.

2559

Experiment 2
Methods
45 participants (again, aged 42-60 months) were recruited in
the same manner as in Experiment 1 (a different number of
participants was required due to not screening vocabulary
knowledge before children entered the laboratory). 5
participants were excluded from analysis, all for choosing
distractor items. The stimuli were also the same as in
Experiment 1.
The procedure was also identical to that of Experiment 1,
except for one modification: instead of a familiarization
phase and then a test phase, the familiarization phase was
expanded and intermixed with test questions. After each of
the first nine test questions, the labeling of exemplar(s) was
repeated. Remember that in Experiment 1, there was a
single round of labeling, followed by all test questions
without any familiarization reminders. In Experiment 2,
labeling was also repeated in between every single test
question. Instead of three object-label pairings per trial as in
Experiment 1, this new procedure resulted in thirty objectlabel pairings per trial, or 16.5 object-label pairings heard by
the child prior to each test question on average.

Results
Results for Experiment 2 are presented in Figure 5, in the
same format used previously. Experiment 2 was designed to
manipulate “suspicious coincidence” behavior in high-SVS
children. We expected that by reinforcing our novel
vocabulary words repeatedly, we would either cause no
change to “suspicious coincidence” behavior, or (as hoped)
we would help to keep high-SVS children focused and open
to the novel word generalization task and thus cause
stronger “suspicious coincidence” behavior. What we found
instead was that high-SVS children still show the reverse of
the “suspicious coincidence,” as in Experiment 1. Thus, no
benefit was gained by providing extra novel label exposure.
Surprisingly, however, low-SVS children now also fail to
show any “suspicious coincidence.” Rather than helping to
guide children toward more “rational” word interpretations,
our attempts to make the task more conducive to
“suspicious coincidence” behavior actually had the very
different effect of reducing this behavior.
Before going any further with theoretical conclusions, we
performed two analyses to confirm that our results were not
due to children becoming bored by the many extra labeling
events. First, we reviewed our video recordings to measure
the length of the familiarization + test phases for the two
experiments. In a sample of 30 participants' videos, the
length of Experiment 2 was not found to be significantly
different from the length of Experiment 1 in either condition
(p > 0.5 for each condition) Thus, the time spent playing the
game could not have been a source of boredom in
Experiment 2. Second, we compared children's
generalization behavior for objects in the first half of each
trial versus the last half of each trial, in Experiment 2 only.
If repetitive labeling events are a source of behavior-

changing boredom for children, then their responses in the
last half of each trial should be different than in the first
half, as boredom accumulates. We found no differences in
“Yes” responding between the two halves of each trial in
chi-square tests, either for all toys (p > 0.25) or for basiclevel toys only (p > 0.25). Together, these results suggest
that boredom does not appear to play a role in causing our
Experiment 2 results.

Figure 5: Results, Experiment 2. The suspicious coincidence
effect has been eliminated, both overall and in the low-SVS
group (not shown). High-SVS children continue to not show
a suspicious coincidence effect (also not shown).

Discussion
Experiment 2 was designed to provide high-SVS children
with an ideal environment for potentially demonstrating
“suspicious coincidence” behavior. It was possible that
high-SVS children were not learning or maintaining
representations of our novel labels strongly enough, due to
their more entrenched English labels for the same
categories. Making the novel stimuli more salient/readily
available, however, did not change the results of Experiment
1, as we expected from the above hypothesis. Instead, the
results of Experiment 2 deviated even further from the
predictions of Xu & Tenenbaum's Bayesian account. Not
only did high-SVS children still fail to demonstrate a
“suspicious coincidence”, but the “suspicious coincidence”
effect was eliminated and almost reversed (p = 0.21,
trending in the opposite direction). Even low-SVS children
alone failed to show the predicted effect. Overall, then,
children in Experiment 2 failed to show a rational
interpretation of our novel category labels.
One possible explanation of these results is that
when children repeatedly glance back and forth between
exemplars and the test array, there is less time to observe
and process the entire test array or (in the case of three
exemplars) the entire exemplar set. Instead, children in the
more attentionally demanding Experiment 2 may be
focusing more exclusively on only the current test item or
the current exemplar being held up in front of them,
compared to Experiment 1. This may cause all conditions to
resemble the single exemplar condition to participants,

2560

causing broader generalization. Easier structural alignment
of highly similar objects—like in Experiment 1, where
attention could linger long enough to draw comparisons
amongst exemplar—has been shown to highlight differences
(Gentner, 2001). In our case, this would lead to a stronger
“suspicious coincidence” effect, as observed. Explanations
like this remain to be tested, but one thing that is clear from
the current results is that that any theory behind these results
must take into account specific, task-related details, not high
level accounts of rational inference alone.

General Discussion
In Experiments 1 and 2, children generalized novel labels in
unexpected ways in response to two variables: increased
prior vocabulary knowledge and an increased number of
redundant labeling events. It is not clear how a Bayesian
account alone can explain either of these behaviors, since
children’s behavior clearly departs from the mathematically
optimal solution to this word learning task. Prior category
knowledge as a helpful source of information for word
learning is at the core of the Bayesian theory, and it is not
clear how one would even implement redundant labeling in
Xu and Tenenbaum's model. The closest approximation of
such an implementation would also predict that redundant
labeling should strengthen the “suspicious coincidence”
effect, yet if anything, it weakens the effect.
Non-Bayesian behavior has been found in the adult
version of Xu and Tenenbaum's task as well. In particular,
Spencer et al. (in press) reported that adults failed to show a
suspicious coincidence when items were presented
sequentially (rather than simultaneously). This was the case
even when six subordinate-level examples were presented.1
The experiments reported here and data from Spencer et
al. suggest that word learning is a sensitive and interactive
process that depends largely upon the specific environment
and circumstances under which it occurs. The “suspicious
coincidence” effect relies on details about prior vocabulary
knowledge, the manner in which experimenters ask their
generalization questions, and sequential versus simultaneous
exemplar presentation. Ongoing work also suggests that
children's perceptual similarity judgments change depending
on the statistical structure of sets of toys they observe.
When three Black Labradors are included in a set of toys to
sort based on similarity, children treat them differently in
relation to other toys than when only one Black Labrador is
included in the set (Jenkins & Samuelson, 2011). This
suggests that even for a given child, prior vocabulary, and
stimulus set type, category-relevant feature information is
likely task-dependent as well.
The Bayesian approach does not account for these
idiosyncrasies, because it explicitly lives at a computational
level and does not specify the processes by which task
factors and category knowledge cohere in the moment to
create word learning.
1

Note that this sequential presentation effect could also be
explained from a task-specific, structural alignment standpoint
(Gentner, 2001), similar to that discussed for Experiment 2.

Instead, our current (and Spencer et al.'s) findings
demand explanations of a mechanistic nature. Mechanistic
explanations link behavior to more general processes of
attention, memory, and perception, while allowing for the
influence of particular kinds of tasks and contexts. The
mechanistic perspective is powerful for understanding
processes that change non-linearly based on different
memories, changes to the task context, and so on. As shown
in Experiments 1 and 2 and in Spencer et al. (in press), the
“suspicious coincidence” effect is a variable phenomenon
that comes and goes in different situations based on a host
of factors. Thus, a mechanistic perspective is a natural
choice for making sense of this emerging body of data.
Accordingly, future research must include a mechanisticlevel model of children's word learning. This does not mean
that a rational account is not also useful. After all, Xu and
Tenenbaum’s model predicted the existence of the
“suspicious coincidence” effect and introduced this behavior
to the field. Nevertheless, future work will need to move
beyond the rational view to explain when, why, and how
children show this finicky behavioral pattern and how the
“suspicious coincidence” is linked to emerging category
knowledge and word learning in early development.

Acknowledgments
This project was funded by grant number R01HD045713 to
Larissa Samuelson.

References
Markman, E.M. (1989). Categorization and naming in
children: Problems of induction. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Gentner, D. & Gunn, V. (2001). Structural alignment
facilitates the noticing of differences. Memory and
Cognition, 29(4), 565-577.
Golinkoff, R.M., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Bailey, L., & Wenger, N.
(1992). Young children and adults use lexical principles
to learn new nouns. Developmental Psychology, 28, 99108.
Huttenlocher, J., Newcombe, N., & Sandberg, E. (1994).
The coding of spatial location in young children.
Cognitive Psychology, 27, 115-147.
Jenkins, G.J. & Samuelson, L.K. (2011). Non-featural
influences on child similarity judgments. Submitted for
publication.
Jones, M. & Love, B.C. (in press). Bayesian
Fundamentalism or Enlightenment? On the Explanatory
Status and Theoretical Contributions of Bayesian Models
of Cognition. Behavioral and Brain Sciences (target
article).
Spencer, J.P., Perone, S., Smith, L.B., & Samuelson, L.K.
(in press). The process behind the ‘Suspicious
Coincidence:’ Using space and time to learn words.
Psychological Science.
Xu, F., & Tenenbaum, J. (2007). Word learning as Bayesian
inference. Psychological Review, 114(2), 245-272.

2561

