UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Cognitive Account of Situated Communication

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5zb956gh

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Ardito, Rita B
Bara, Bruno G
Blanzieri, Enrico

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Cognitive Account of Situated Communication
Rita B. Ardito (ardito@psych.unito.it)
Bruno G. Bara (bara@psych.unito.it)
Enrico Blanzieri (blanzier@psych.unito.it)
Centro di Scienza Cognitiva, Universita’ di Torino
via Po 14, 10123 Torino, Italy

Abstract
Communication is situated and it is situated in the
environment, in the perception the participants have of the
environment, and also in the mental representations they
privately retain. This work addresses the problem of
explaining the interaction between state of the physical world
and mental states of actors involved in a communicative
exchange. We have the goal of integrating physical world
representations, such as space representation, physical copresence of the actors and physical nature of the
communication channel, with a cognitive account of
communicative phenomena. We introduce the concepts of
scene, situation and scenery for elaborating a theory for
situated communication and give an account of the interaction
between mental states involved in communication and the
subjective representations of the state of the world.

1. Introduction
Communication and physical action are strictly connected.
Since Austin’s approach to Pragmatics based on speech-acts
(Austin, 1962), the things one does through (not only)
words, comprehension and generation of communication
have been linked to the general framework of action.
Conversely, the actions performed by an actor are better
understood if considered as situated (Suchman, 1987;
Clancey, 1998). Situations involve the physical world as
well as the social world when other actors are present. The
relationship between communication and action is complex.
Actions performed in the physical social world are not
necessarily communicative: in fact, they can either facilitate
or impair communication itself, through a modification of
the situational context. On the other hand, communication
between actors can modify their intentions about performing
actions in the physical world. Finally, the state of the
physical world influences the possibility of performing
actions and communicative acts.
Current theories on communication such as Relevance
Theory (Sperber and Wilson, 1986) and Cognitive
Pragmatics Theory (Airenti, Bara and Colombetti, 1993a;
1993b) deal with accurate descriptions of mental states and
cognitive functions involved in communication. However,
their applications to concrete situations is not
straightforward because they do not give an account of how
these mental states interact with the state of the physical
world in order to produce the observed natural cases. In

particular, Cognitive Pragmatics, developing an intuition of
Wittgenstein (1953), introduces the notion of behaviour
game, namely a shared plan between the actors, but it gives
no accounts of how the behaviour game is played in a
concrete situation.
This work addresses the problem of explaining the
interaction between the state of the physical world and the
mental states of actors involved in a communicative
exchange. We have the goal of integrating physical world
representations, such as space representation, physical copresence of the actors and physical nature of the
communication channel, with a cognitive account of
communicative phenomena. Our work is consistent with the
perspective outlined by Clancey (1998) of shifting from an
abstract and disembodied concept of cognition to a situated
one. In one case, this approach amounts to exploiting the
properties of abstract shared plans in communication, in
order to enrich them with the features of concrete situated
actions.
Our proposal is based on the novel concept of scenery that
we define using the notion of a shared plan, namely a
behaviour game in Cognitive Pragmatics terms. For an
actor, to know the shared behaviour game is crucial in order
to grasp the meaning of a communicative act. The scenery
relates at the representational level context and at the level
of behaviour games in terms of preconditions and possible
actions.
The paper is organised as follows: Section 2 discusses
situated communication in the framework of situated
cognition, situated action and Cognitive Pragmatics Theory;
Section 3 introduces the concepts of scene, situation,
scenery and scenario; Section 4 proposes a cognitive
account of situated communication and in the last Section
we draw some conclusion.

2. Situated communication
Communication is obviously situated and it is situated in the
environment, in the perception the participants have of the
environment, and also in the mental representations they
privately entertain. The Exs. 1-10 report a short fiction story
that describes a long series of interactions between Alice, a
professor, and Bob, a Ph.D student who aims to meet to
discuss the draft of his thesis proposal. Alice and Bob
communicate in a wide range of different physical
environments (roads, corridors, office, elevator, cafeteria)

using different media (phone, e-mail), manipulating
different objects (phones, handles, chairs, buttons, cups of
coffee), meeting different people (maintenance people,
cafeteria staff, a colleague). Moreover, during their
interactions Alice and Bob are affected by the subjective
perception they have of environments, media, objects and
people, by their representations and finally by their
representations of their own representations (metarepresentations).
The process of communication may be theoretically
described in terms of shared plans. This approach is
assumed in the work of Airenti, Bara & Colombetti (1993a;
1993b) while shared plans have been proposed by Grosz &
Kraus (1996). The theory of Cognitive Pragmatics is based
on the idea that co-operation is the key element for the
communicative interaction. It assumes that two people who
communicate co-operate, and their actions are at least partly
shared in order to reach a common goal. The plans by which
two interacting people base their co-operation are called
behaviour games. Plans can be seen as trees of intentions,
where the leaves are specified either as terminal, precise
actions, or as intentions made specific according to the
context.
Behaviour games enable people to select the correct
meanings to be assigned to the linguistic and extra-linguistic
moves of each participant in a communicative exchange.
Therefore, to understand the actor’s meaning it is necessary
to infer the behaviour game the actor is referring to.
Another concept adopted by Cognitive Pragmatics
Theory, and which plays an important role, is shared belief,
namely a belief that a single individual thinks of sharing
with the person he is talking to. In symbols, a shared belief
can be represented as follows:
SHAB p
meaning that agents A and B share the belief p.
It is worth emphasising that shared belief is a subjective
mental state. In other words, it may happen that A believes p
to be shared by B and A, whereas B does not believe p to be
shared by A and B. Shared beliefs are mental states which
allow each actor to take for granted the sharing of a series of
beliefs with his/her interlocutor and to use this background
in order to add new beliefs. Shared belief is considered a
primitive mental state of communication just like a private
belief.
Given two actors, their relationship is defined as the set of
playable games. The theory considers the relationship from
both a static and dynamic point of view: In order to be
playable a game also needs to be valid within the present
state of the world. Validity refers to the whole context:
physical, social and cognitive. However, the theory does not
link directly relationship dynamics, validity conditions and
state of the world.
From a situated perspective, the notion of communication
as plan recognition and shared knowledge was targeted in
the influential book by Suchman (1987). Suchman clarifies
the status of plans as "an artifact of our reasoning about
action, not as the generative mechanism of action"

(Suchman, 1987, p. 39), so plans do not determine actions in
any strong sense. Suchman introduced the concept of
situated action that describes the influence of the situation,
environment included, on actions and communicative acts.
However, adopting the situated cognition paradigm does not
imply to accept that representations of the environment do
not exist:
" Using the terms knowledge and representations synonymously,
early situated cognition publications, including my own, say that
'representations are not stored in the brain'. A better formulation is
that descriptions are not the only form of representation involved in
cognition, and storage is the wrong metaphor for memory "

(Clancey, 1998, p. 221).
The other form of non-descriptive representation, that
Clancey refers to, emerges from the concept of direct
perception (Gibson, 1979) supported by direct coupling
between the agent and the world:
" In this interpretation of Gibson's idea of direct perception,
directness means that the internal structures constitute and sustain
their own space of configurations without mediating 'stuff' such as
symbol strings representing the world. At this level of processing,
outside stuff is neither brought inside directly nor mapped onto
internal codes. Internal structures operate on their own changing
properties. Higher levels of processing may categorise sensory
configurations, but these are again only internal correspondences
or relations between internal structures " (Clancey, 1998, p. 88).
However, the concept of situated communication
introduced by Suchman emphasizes more the role of the
whole set of actions performed by the actors as a situation or
context for the conversational exchange, than the
environment itself:
" When one takes situated language as the subject matter, however,
the definition of the field must necessarily shift to communication
under naturally occurring circumstances. And when one moves
back far enough from the utterances of the speaker to bring the
listener into view as well, it appears that much in the actual
construction of situated language that has been taken to reflect
problems of speaker performance, instead reflects speaker
competence in responding to cues provided by the listener"
(Suchman, 1987, p. 71).
Neither the shared-plan approach to communication
presented above, nor the Suchman's notion of situated
language are completely situated. The shared-plan approach
follows the indications of a situated language provided by
Suchman without considering the actions as situated or
adopting her purely constructive notion of plan. The level of
description is purely representational and, neither the
environment nor the representations the partners have of the
environment, are taken into account. On the other hand,
Suchman takes into account the environment at the situated
level but there is no trace of the environment in her
representational notion of plan. The plan is a representation
of actions that are in some sense unsituated. In other words,

both approaches lack in considering representations and
meta-representations of the environment that are involved in
communication and its interaction with actions.
For a complete theory of situated communication it is
necessary to consider the interaction between environment
and actions at all the levels: objective, directed perceived,
representational and meta-representational. Considering
environment and actions at each level guarantee the
coherence with the situated cognition paradigm. Moreover,
the approach should clarify some of the confusion generated
by using the concept of "context" for all the levels.

5.

The man goes away closing the door. Alice and Bob
continue the discussion.

6.

After a while the man comes back with a colleague
saying that he has probably found the failure. They start
to remove the floor tiles talking and making noise.
Alice says: “Let’s go to the cafeteria”. Bob says: “Ok”.

7.

While they are going downstairs they keep on talking
about the proposal but they get stuck in the elevator.
Alice presses the alarm button. Bob calls security with
the cell phone. While they are waiting they talk about
how to get out of there and how to keep cool.
Eventually the doors open.

8.

They head towards the cafeteria. Alice turns left and
Bob stops in the middle of the sidewalk. Alice says:
“There is a shortcut to the cafeteria. We can pass
through the Maths department”. They keep on talking
about the elevator.

9.

At the cafeteria Alice meets a professor colleague. She
introduces him to Bob. The professor asks Bob what is
his subject and the professor asks a lot of details about
his thesis. Alice says that they are going to work on it
right now. The professor goes on asking questions and
making suggestions. She takes her coffee cup and leads
Bob to a small table with only two chairs. They starts to
discuss again.

Example
Alice is a professor. She is the tutor of Bob, a Ph.D student
who is working on his thesis proposal.
1. >>From: Bob
>>To: Alice
>>Hello Alice,
>>please find enclose the draft of my
>>thesis proposal.
>>Bob
>
>From: Alice
>To: Bob
>Hi Bob,
>the basic ideas are rather good so the
>revision will not take long.
>what about a meeting on Tuesday at my
>office at 10.00?
>Alice
>
From: Bob
To: Alice
Hi Alice,
See you then
Bob

2.

On Tuesday morning Bob is late for the meeting and he
calls from his cell phone.
A: Hello
B: Hello it’s Bob speaking. I’m late. Sorry, the traffic is
heavy today
A: Don’t worry.

3.

Bob arrives and Alice is not in the office. The door is
open. He waits in the corridor. Alice arrives and invites
Bob to enter. They enter and Bob closes the door of the
office. Alice re-opens it. They sit at the desk and they
start to discuss.

4.

After a while a man of the maintenance service knocks
on the door. He enters saying that there is an electric
failure in the building and he has to control the sockets
of the room. While the man checks the room they keep
on discussing.

10. Two cups of coffee later, Alice and Bob agree on the
improvements required by the draft and end the
discussion.

3. Scene, situation, scenery and scenario
We propose four different concepts (scene, situation,
scenery and scenario), in order to reflect the integrate
influences of environment and of actions at objective,
directed-perceived,
representational
and
metarepresentational levels respectively.
The terms we adopted -scene, situation, scenery and
scenario- require a justification with respect to their usual
meaning. We adopted situation ("relative position or
combination of circumstances at a certain moment"
Marriem-Webster) in the sense introduced in the situated
cognition literature (Clancey, 1998). The usual meaning of
scenario refers to an hypothetical, possibly simulated, state
of affairs ("an account or synopsis of a possible course of
action or events" Marriem-Webster) that the reason why we
reserved the word for the meta-representational level. The
common-sense meaning of scene appears more concrete and
real ("the place of an occurrence or action" MarriemWebster) and we reserved it for the more objective level.
Finally and in contrast with scene, we adopted scenery for
giving emphasis to the representational level ("the painted
scenes or hangings and accessories used on a theater stage"
Marriem-Webster).

In particular, scene considers the world and its
affordances. Situation considers the directly perceived world
and the possible actions. Scenery considers the represented
world and the plans, and finally scenario considers the metarepresented scenery and the simulated executions of plans.
The last three levels roughly correspond, using Clancey
terms, to structural coupling, categorical reference and
symbolic interpretation (Clancey, 1998, p. 317).
A scene is a state of the world equipped with a set of
affordances. For example, a scene can be A’s kitchen and its
affordances for cooking, eating, drinking, washing. From an
objective point of view, given the state of the physical
world, the state provides an affordance for an action if there
exists an actor that can execute it in that state.
A situation is the direct perception that an actor has of a
scene. Namely, a situation is the subjective “representation”
produced by an actor A of a state of the physical world and
of the actions that are possible from the point of view of an
actor A. For example: A in A's kitchen perceives the room
and the possibility of drinking from the tap. This means that
the actor has a functional “representation” of the world that
can include mental states. If the world includes mental states
the situation can be perceived as shared. Note that a shared
situation is not a situation in the shared knowledge but a
situation that is directly perceived as shared. For example: A
in A's kitchen perceives B in the room and the possibility for
both of drinking from the tap.
Giving the affordances of a scene the possibility of an
action will be perceived by an actor depending on her own
experience of the physical world. Moreover, the possible
actions from the point of view of an actor can be the result
of complex processes involving, goals, plans, motivations,
self-esteem, self-deceit and, perception of self, of the others
and of self-in-the-world, with the relevant possible
distortions.
A scenery is a subjective representation produced by an
actor A of a state of the world and of a set of plans that it is
possible to execute within the world. Given a state of the
world, a plan is possible if: (i) the represented state of the
world verifies the preconditions of at least one plan, (ii) the
moves of the plan correspond to possible actions in the
scene. The plan is said to be executable within the scenery
and the scenery is said to host the plan.
For example: A retains {KITCHEN} as a scenery for the
private plan [BREWING COFFEE]. An attributed scenery is
a scenery attributed to another actor. For example: A
entertains {KITCHEN} as attributed to B and as a scenery
for the private plan [BREWING COFFE]. A shared scenery
is a scenery within the space of the shared knowledge, and a
shared scenery can host private or shared plans. For
example: A entertains {KITCHEN} as shared between A
and B and as a scenery for the private plan [BREWING
COFFEE]; For example: A entertains {KITCHEN} as
shared by A and B and as a scenery for the plan shared by A
and B [COOKING PASTA TOGETHER]. Finally, a shared
plan can be executable in a non-shared scenery. For
example: If only A knows that there is pasta in his kitchen,
A entertains {A’s KITCHEN} as a scenery for the plan
shared by A and B [COOKING PASTA TOGETHER].

A scenario is a subjective representation produced by an
actor A that, possibly among other things, represents a
scenery. For example: A entertains |B in A's KITCHEN| as a
scenario representing B who entertains {KITCHEN} as a
scenery for the private plan [BREWING COFFEE] and for
the shared plan [COOKING PASTA TOGETHER]. A
scenario can be a rather complex representation, possibly
counterfactual or dynamic. In this sense our definition is
consistent with the usual meaning of a hypothetical
situation.
It is beyond our present goal to show how different
approaches to context fit into this framework, but it is
relevant to show how each concept can be considered a sort
of “context” for actions or communicative acts. Scene can
be considered as the context in an objective sense (e.g. the
room the reader is in and its affordance for reading, writing
etc.). Situation is the perceived context (e.g. the perception
of the room the reader has now, while acting, namely
reading), the here and now. Scenery emphasize the role of
representation (e.g. a representation of the room the reader
have or had and of the fact that there it is possible to read a
paper). Finally scenario is related to context in the sense of
encapsulable representations (e.g. the representation the
reader had while thinking in the previous two examples).
Our approach is consistent with the pragmatic approach to
the relationship between context and relevance proposed by
Ekbia & Maguitman (2001). Earlier cognitive pragmatics
accounts of context (Bara and Bucciarelli, 1998)
concentrated on the role of mental states and shared
knowledge in the comprehension of a communicative act
(Blanzieri and Bucciarelli, 1996a; 1996b).

4. A Theory for Situated Communication
In this section we use the concepts of scene, situation and
scenery for elaborating a theory for situated communication.
The aim of the theory is to give an account of the interaction
between mental states involved in communication and the
subjective representations of the state of the world.
The basic assumption is that from a cognitive point of
view the three levels we hypothesize co-exist and cooperate. We assume that during situated communication the
actors experience a flow of situations and each of these
situations inform their actions. We also assume that
representations like plans and sceneries can be mentally
constructed as private, shared or attributed. Finally, the actor
can entertain complex meta-representations (scenarios)
involving sceneries. From an objective point of view the
actors executes actions on a particular scene that can be
perceived by the actors in different subjective situations and
represented in different subjective sceneries.
What is relevant is the relation of the scenery with the
shared-plans in terms of preconditions and possible moves.
For example, given an actor like Alice in the Ex.1-10, her
representation of her office in a University department
{OFFICE} is a scenery for the plan [TUTORING
SESSION], that has its preconditions verified and its moves
are possible. Both {OFFICE} and [TUTORING SESSION]
are shared between Bob and herself.

The scenery represents a state of the world including the
communication channel. In Ex. 1 Alice and Bob
communicate by e-mail and in Ex. 2 by phone. In both cases
the scenery can include the remote presence of the actors
and, in the case of e-mail, the asynchronous access to the
messages.
It is worth noting that in a situated perspective any
attempt to produce a representation of a situation, produces
a scenery or a scenario. In fact, a situation is a direct
perception, not a representation. In Ex. 2 we can only
suppose the shared situation Alice perceives during the
phone call. It will probably include Bob, the physical world
Alice perceives through the phone and actions such as
talking or listening. But Bob is stuck in the traffic so he has
a private situation that includes himself facing a traffic jam
with waiting or walking as possible actions. In any case in
the attempt of representing the situation of the other agent,
each actor entertains and attributes sceneries.
A situation is subjective, so it can change depending on
whether a change in the scene occurs or not. A change of the
scene produces a change of the situation if the actor
perceives it. In Ex. 7 Alice and Bob realise they are stuck in
the elevator and that changes their situation. A scene can
change for external reasons or by means of an action
performed by the actor or by the partner. In Ex. 7 the
elevator stops for an external reason whereas Alice and Bob
perform two actions (press the alarm button and call
security) that changes the scene.
Scenery are subjective, hence they can be unrelated to the
real scene. For instance, in Ex. 8 Alice attributes to Bob a
scenery of the University that does not include the shortcut
and using-the-shortcut as a possible action. Obviously,
sceneries may also be private representations, permitting
non-standard communication such as irony or deceit. In Ex.
2 Bob could lie about the traffic and have a private scenery
that differs from the supposedly shared scenery he proposes
to Alice. Being a representation, the scenery can also change
by means of a communicative act without any change in the
scene. In Ex. 8 Alice informs Bob that there is a shortcut,
information which changes his scenery {UNIVERSITY}.
Finally, a scenery change can be a goal of a behaviour
game. In Ex. 6 Alice and Bob start to a play a behaviour
game aimed to produce the scenery {THE TABLE AT THE
CAFETERIA}.
A scenery hosts different plans, and conversely a plan is
executable in different sceneries. For example,
[SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION] and [TUTORING SESSION]
are shared plans playable in the scenery {OFFICE}. Other
sceneries like for instance {THE TABLE AT THE
CAFETERIA} can host some of those shared plans. A
shared plan is in principle compatible with more than one
scenery. Thus, a change in the scenery does affect the game,
which normally will develop within the constraints of the
new scenery. In Ex. 6 Alice and Bob consider [TUTORING
SESSION] as playable in both {THE TABLE OF THE
CAFETERIA} and {OFFICE}. A scenery is subjective, so
different actors can consider different games as playable in a
scenery. A more formal professor, for example, can consider

[TUTORING SESSION] not playable at {THE TABLE OF
THE CAFETERIA}.
In some case a game may be played only in a specific
scenery (e.g. trial in court); in other cases a game is
incompatible with a scenery, hence if the scenery is
activated, the game will end (e.g. smoking in a high-school
toilet is interrupted by the presence of the supervisor). A
change of the scenery closes the game only if the new
scenery does not host the game. In Ex. 4 Alice and Bob
continue to play [TUTORING SESSION] after the entrance
of another actor changed the scenery from {OFFICE} to
{OFFICE WITH MAINTANANCE GUY}. The new
scenery hosts the game so the actors can continue to play.
This is the case also in Ex. 5 where the scenery {OFFICE
WITH MAINTANANCE GUYS} has changed the scenery
{OFFICE}. On the contrary, the modification of the scenery
{OFFICE}
to
the
scenery
{OFFICE
WITH
MAINTANANCE GUYS} in the Ex. 6 interrupts
[TUTORING SESSION].
The actors, by modifying the partners’ sceneries, shape
their relationship. To settle the validity conditions of a
behaviour game, is an implicit way of controlling the
relation between agents. Actor A make possible for herself
and B to engage in game [G], by guaranteeing an adequate
scenery. In fact, proposing the scenery for a game amounts
to bidding that game (e.g. driving home a potential sexual
partner). In Ex. 9 Alice chooses a table that modifies the
shared scenery with the annoying professor in a way that
prevents the playability of a game {THREE PEOPLE
DISCUSSION}. The dynamic of the relationship produces
effects in the long term, also affecting the basic relationship.
In Ex. 3 the actions of opening or closing the door change
the scenery dramatically. Actors modify the sceneries by
means of actions that can be communicative acts, as noted
in Section 3.
Given the co-presence of more than two agents, for each
agent the third one can be part of the scenery, or can be
involved in some behaviour game. In Ex. 4 and Ex. 6, the
maintenance people are part of the modification of the
{OFFICE} in a very natural way. In Ex. 9, the annoying
professor tries to play [THREE PEOPLE DISCUSSION] in
the scenery {CAFETERIA}. Alice changes the scenery to
{THE TABLE OF THE CAFETERIA} that does not host
[THREE PEOPLE DISCUSSION] and the game is closed.
The professor does not join Alice and Bob and so he is not
even part of the scenery anymore.
In order to understand the kind of phenomena our theory
accounts for, it is interesting to note that a communication
exchange produces actions that are either moves of the
shared-plan or actions aimed to construct, maintain or
modify the shared scenery. A shared-plan theory such as
Cognitive Pragmatics accounts only for the changes of the
scenery produced by the execution of the shared plan. In this
case it would be possible to assume the existence of a
general shared plan that gives an account of the whole
sequence of actions. For example, the play of [TUTORING
SESSION] in the scenery {THE TABLE AT THE
CAFETERIA} could be considered as the execution of a
more complex behavior game than [GOING TO A TABLE

AT THE CAFETERIA FOR A TUTORING SESSION].
This operation is not plausible, in particular when the
modification of the scenery is a consequence of a private
plan or of an external cause that changed the scene. In fact,
the idea of scenery prevents the explosion of the number of
the behavior games.

5. Conclusions
We have presented a theory based on the concepts of scene,
situation, scenery and scenario that gives an account of the
interaction
between
mental
states
involved
in
communication and representations of a state of the world.
The adoption of a situated cognition paradigm motivates the
introduction of the concepts. Differently from precedent
approaches to situated communication, we emphasize the
role of the environment and of the representations agents
retain of the environment.
The theory presented in this work refers to the cognitive
process of two actors involved in a communicative
exchange. Therefore, we do not consider the effects and
phenomena produced by the interaction of three or more
people. This requires further work in order to bridge the gap
between cognitive processes involved in communication and
phenomena studied by social psychology.

Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank Mauro Adenzato, Monica
Bucciarelli, Lorenzo Pia, David Pickup and Georgia Zara
for reading and the suggestions given. The names of the
authors are in alphabetical order. This work has been
supported by Ministero dell’Università e della Ricerca
Scientifica e Tecnologica of Italy (Cofinanziato 2001:
Strumenti qualitativi e quantitativi per l'analisi della
relazione psicoterapeutica).

References
Airenti, G., Bara, B.G., & Colombetti, M. (1993a).
Conversation and behaviour games in the pragmatics of
dialogue. Cognitive Science, 17, 197-256.
Airenti, G., Bara, B.G., & Colombetti, M. (1993b). Failures,
exploitations and deceits in communication. Journal of
Pragmatics, 20, 303-326.
Austin, J.L. (1962). How to do things with words. London:
Oxford University Press. [2nd ed. revised by Ormson,
J.O., & Sbisà, M. London: Oxford University Press,
1975].
Bara, B.G., & Bucciarelli, M. (1998). Language in context:
The Emergence of Pragmatic Competence. Special Issue
of Analise Psicologica: Cognition in Context. In: Quelhas,
A.C., & Pereira, F. (Eds.). Istituto Superior de Psicologia
Aplicada, Lisbona.
Blanzieri, E., & Bucciarelli, M. (1996a). Reasoning
processes underlying communication: Extracting the rules
of the game from a connectionist network. IX Conference
of the European Society for Cognitive Psychology,
Wurzburg, 101.

Blanzieri, E., & Bucciarelli, M. (1996b). The evaluation of
the communicative effect. Proceedings XVIII Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society, San Diego, 501-506.
Clancey, W.J. (1998). Situated cognition. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Ekbia, H. R. & Maguitman, A. G. (2001). Context and
relevance: a pragmatic approach. In Akman, V., Bouquet,
P., Thomanson, R., & Young, R.A. (eds.) Modeling and
Using
Context
LNAI
2116,
Proceedings
of
CONTEXT2001. Berlin, Springer.
Gibson, J.J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual
perception. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Grosz, B., & Kraus, S. (1996) Collaborative Plans for
Complex Group Action. Artificial Intelligence 86, 2, 269357.
Searle, J.R. (1969). Speech acts: An essay in the philosophy
of language. London: Cambridge University Press.
Searle, J.R. (1975). Indirect speech acts. In Cole, P., &.
Morgan, F.L. (eds.), Speech acts: syntax and semantics,
vol. 3. New York, Academic Press.
Sperber, D., & Wilson, D. (1986). Relevance. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Suchman, L. (1987). Plans and situated action. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Wittgenstein, L. (1953). Philosophical investigations.
Oxford: Blackwell.

