UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Neurocognitive Model for Students and Educators

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1x17m1bc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Author
Atherton, Michael

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Neurocognitive Model for Students and Educators
Michael Atherton (athe0007@umn.edu)
Department of Educational Psychology, 178 Pillsbury Drive SE
Minneapolis, MN 55455 USA
Abstract
Computer metaphors for cognitive processes have
become dated and new models are required to help
college students and classroom teachers interpret
research in the neurosciences as it begins to impact the
fields of education and psychology A model of cognition
using a metaphor of neural activation is presented and
supported by finding in the neurosciences.

Introduction
In 1986, Rumelhart and McClelland published Parallel
Distributed Processing and revolutionized our
conception of memory and thought processes. Their
introduction of neural networks as a model of memory
served as a starting point for the growth of
neurologically based computational models. Today,
cognitive and computational neuroscience research is
continuing to enhance our understanding of cognition.
However, while the neurosciences influence how
researchers comprehend thought processes, there has
been little change in the models we teach students in
introductory psychology and education classes. What is
needed are models that provide students with a
framework for understanding the neural bases of
cognition and are at the same time simple to
communicate and comprehend.

The Need for a New Model
The information processing model of cognition has
provided us with many useful characterizations of
mental functions: sensory registers, short-term memory,
working memory, and long-term memory. Its ultimate
failure has been its inability to integrate these
characterizations with research findings in attention,
imagery, and reasoning to form a comprehensive model
of cognition. This failure is caused in part because
theoretical descriptions of behavior are weakly
constrained and allow multiple valid interpretations of
the same phenomenon. This variability in description
has fractionalized cognitive research into narrow
domains focused on particular aspects of mental
activity. Thus, students study cognitive topics such as
perception, memory, and learning that have little
relation to each other, leaving them without an
associative framework.
Another problem with the information processing
model is that its conceptualizations of thought
processes often clash with research findings in
contemporary neuroscience. It is now clear that

memories are not compartmentalized into boxes or
transferred from location to location as they are in a
computer. Such characterizations can lead students to
inferences that are not always valid, and in education
such inferences can lead to instructional methods that
are not always effective. In the past ten years
technological and methodological advances in the
neurosciences have produced a wealth of research
results that have greatly increased our understanding of
the biological underpinnings of cognition. This research
has already impacted traditional cognitive theories
(Miyake & Shah, 1999), but what is needed are not
models that have been updated to account for the new
data. What is needed are models that are built from the
neuron upwards, rather than from behavior downwards.
Such models stand a better chance of providing an
internally consistent integrative framework for
understanding cognitive research.
This revolution in orientation from top-down to
bottom-up analyses represent a fundamental shift in the
science of cognition and as Kuhn (1962, p. 109) has
pointed out, "...when paradigms change, there are
usually significant shifts in the criteria determining the
legitimacy both of problems and of proposed
solutions." Thus, we see major issues in popular
culture such as the division between mind and body
become irrelevant as old axioms are rejected and new
ones formed (Crick, 1994). This paradigm shift is well
underway in the field of psychology (Gazzaniga, 1998)
and cognitive science, but has been hampered in
education by the dubious application of the
neurobiological research; to wit, "brain-based learning"
has become the phrenology of the new century (Bruer,
1999a).
The
fact
that
such
questionable
conceptualizations of cognitive neuroscience are being
actively marketed to educational practitioners begs for
models that are well grounded by research in the
neurosciences. The purpose of this paper is to present
one such model in the hope that it will inspire
discussion within the educational community. I will
begin by presenting the model as it might be presented
to students and the following section will review the
scientific justification for the model.

The Model
The cognitive model presented below is a synthesis of
the current research in the neurosciences. It is proposed
as a descriptive theory in which the complexity of some
neurological processes has been simplified for

pedagogical advantage. For the most part I have tried
to avoid issues that are the subject of on going debate,
however I do make theoretical assumptions at some
points to create an internally consistent model. Readers
should keep in mind that what follows is a hypothetical
description and that some, or many, aspects of the
model have yet to be verified empirically.

Structure
Neurons The fundamental processing element in the
brain is the neuron. A neuron is a cell that consists of
dendrites, a body, and an axon. Signals are transmitted
between neurons by chemicals called neurotransmitters
at junctions between dendrites and axons called
synapses. When neurotransmitters pass across a
synapse from the axon of one cell to the dendrite of
another they cause chemical changes in the dendrite and
the body of the neuron and have an effect on the
physical structure of the synapse. When a sufficient
number of signals infringe on a neuron, they cause that
neuron to release neurotransmitters at the synapses of
its axons. When a neuron is in such a state, is receiving
signals and releasing neurotransmitters, it is said to be
active. The signals that a neuron sends can have either
an excitatory and inhibitory effect. Excitatory effects
cause other neurons to increase their activity; inhibitory
effects prevent neurons from becoming active, i.e.,
from sending signals to other neurons.
Networks Neurons are highly interconnected; a single
neuron can have thousands of synapses connecting to
thousands of other neurons. Neurons that activate in
common are linked together by synapses into networks.
Networks of neurons can be local to a particular
location in the brain, or they can be global and
distributed across different regions of the brain. Local
networks can be confined to an area a thousandth of an
inch, whereas global networks can extend over
distances of several inches and be comprised of
multiple local networks.
Networks can also be
classified as task networks or control networks. A task
network performs a specialized function such as the
processing of the orientation of a line, of a color, or a
phoneme. Task networks are also involved in more
complex processing, such as the graphical
representation of a word, or a human face. A control
network, on the other hand, regulates the processing of
a task network via connections that inhibit or activate
neurons. This activation or inhibition by control
networks functions to maintain, select, monitor,
sequence, or integrate activity within task networks.
Control networks can be either local or global. Local
control networks regulate task networks and are not
necessarily physically distinct from them, but instead
maybe spatially intertwined. Global control networks
serve to regulate the activation between multiple task

networks. Within the brain local control and task
networks are generally located in regions known as the
occipital, parietal and temporal lobes. Global control
networks are generally located in the frontal lobes
(Figure 1). General cognitive functions, such as
auditory or visual processing that are executed by task
networks are localized to particular areas in the brain
such as the temporal and occipital lobes. While task and
control networks maybe localized to different regions
this does not mean that they are disconnected, rather as
a general rule all classes of networks are highly
interconnected.
Parietal
Lobe
Frontal
Lobe

Occipital
Lobe

Temporal
Lobe
Figure 1: Global control networks are located in the
frontal lobes; local task networks are located in the
occipital lobes, parietal, temporal lobes.

Processes
With the neural and network structure outlined above
traditional cognitive processes can be redefined in
relation to their neurological processes. It is assumed
that since thought processes are a function of brain
activity, all of the concepts in traditional cognitive
psychology can be redefined within such a framework.
This paper covers fundamental topics such as learning,
basic forms of memory, and attention.
Learning Learning is the process of making enduring
changes in the relationships between neurons through
the modification or creation of synapses. Learning is
the intrinsic result of sensation, perception, thought,
physical action, or the result of intention. Since thought
or perception requires the activation of neurons,
activation induces a change in the physical state of the
synapses involved. When these changes are retained
over time they form memories; when ephemeral they,
along with the biochemical and electrical processes that
cause them, form thoughts. Not all neurons exhibit the
same properties; neurons and synapses differ in the rate
at which changes are retained. Thus, long term
physical changes in neurons located in areas that
process sensory stimuli would occur slowly, whereas

changes in neurons storing life experiences would occur
more rapidly.
Memory A memory is a stored pattern of synaptic
connections within local networks or across an
interconnected network of neurons. A single neuron
might contribute to several memories by releasing
varying amounts of neurotransmitters depending on
how it is activated, but the activation of a memory
requires interactions between neurons. That is to say,
no one specific memory is stored in a single neuron,
rather a memory is distributed across a network of
neurons as a pattern of synaptic relations. Additionally,
several memories may be stored in the same network by
different patterns of synaptic connections.
Traditional cognitive models have identified different
functional categorizations of memory. Traditionally,
the major categorizations have been short-term,
working, and long-term memory. Within the current
model each of these can be defined by neurological
processes. Short-term memory represents the dynamic
patterns of activation in networks across the brain.
These patterns of activation arise from transitory
chemical and electrical properties of neurons lasting a
few seconds.
Working memory represents a
combination of short-term memory processes along
with other chemical and transient physical synaptic
changes lasting several minutes. Long-term memory
represents physical synaptic changes lasting from
minutes to days, weeks, or years, thus long-term
memory is viewed as scaled physical changes in
synapses on a continuum across time, rather than as
discrete storage locations.
Physical changes in
synapses may revert to a previous state in some types of
neurons if not reactivated.
Memory Capacity Traditional short-term or working
memory has been shown to have a limit on the number
of items that can be held in consciousness
simultaneously. In the current model memory capacity
is regulated by both the physiological and structural
aspects of neural networks. Physiologically neural
activity is limited by the production and transmission of
neurotransmitters and rate at which cells can produce
signals. While neurophysiology places a limit on what
can be held in neural networks at any single point in
time, working memory capacity can be increased by
adapting the underlying network structure for particular
types of memories. Thus, experts in specialized areas
such as chess have better working memory for
meaningful configurations of pieces than do novices
because they have tailored synaptic patterns to
particular stimuli.
Forgetting In short-term memory forgetting occurs as
cells stop sending signals and the concentration of

neurotransmitters decays and returns to baseline. This
process normally occurs within seconds unless
activation is renewed. In long-term memory forgetting
may occur when physical synaptic changes decay or as
activation overlays new synaptic patterns over existing
ones causing interference.
Attention Attention is the modulation of activation in a
network by a control network. Modulation takes the
form of either a rise or a reduction of activation. This
modulation can occur across widely separated regions
in the brain or locally within a specific part of the brain.
Attention can be focused in different regions when a
global control network or a combination of global
control networks modulates activation within local task
networks. Attention is a process which occurs when
specific stimuli or tasks require specialized processing.
Attentional processing may be required to keep
particular memories active (maintenance), discriminate
between similar stimuli (selection), when anticipating
environmental stimuli (monitoring), when planning a
particular action (sequencing), or when it is necessary
to coordinate multiple responses (integration).
Attentional modulation may be initiated from the
bottom-up by neural signals originating in task
networks that then activate global control networks, or
from the top-down when global control networks
execute a motivational goal.
Attention can also be focused in specific areas in the
brain by local control networks without modulation by
global control networks. This can occur within task
networks when a local control network modulates
activation. Many of the same functions executed by
global control networks (maintenance, selection,
monitoring, and sequencing) can be also be performed
by local control networks. The process of transferring
control from a global control network to a local one is
called automation. Automation occurs by adjusting
synaptic connections within a task network so
modulation of activation is stimulated and responded to
by activity within the task network. This adjustment of
synaptic connections in task networks occurs through
attentional modulation or by sensory activation. This is
generally a slow process and may require both focused
attention and repeated practice.
Retrieval from Memory Memory retrieval in
traditional psychology is divided into two general
classes: recall and recognition. Recall involves the
explicit retrieval of information from memory.
Recognition, on the other hand, only requires knowing
if something has been previously encountered. In the
current model retrieval is defined as the reactivation of
a previously active network. Recall differs from
recognition in that recall requires full activation of a
local network by a global control network in a top-

down process, whereas recognition involves signaling a
control network that some activation occurs in some
local network and can occur as either a bottom-up or a
top-down process.

right side of the brain (Robertson, et. al, 2000; St
George, Kutas, Martinez, & Sereno, 1999).
A

B

C

D

E

F

An Activation Metaphor
Being able to imagine how thought processes occur in
the brain can help teachers plan lessons and can also
help undergraduate students tie together disparate
concepts in psychology. The current model lends itself
to a activation metaphor so that students can picture
thought processes as dynamic intensifying and receding
patterns of activation, much as neural activation is
depicted by differences in blood oxygenation levels in
the brain by functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI; see Figure 2).

Figure 2: The brighter areas identify implied patterns
of neural activation as detected by fMRI.
The processes of reading provides a good example of
how levels of activation can be used to represent
thought processes. When a word is first presented the
visual areas in the rear of the brain become active.
Activation is next seen in the word form area on the
lower left side of the brain (Cohen, et al., 2000). At
about this time there is an interaction between control
networks in the left frontal areas and task networks in
the lateral and posterior regions. There appears to be
separate control networks for different aspects of
reading such as grammar and those relating to
semantics and these different networks appear to
control specific task networks (Bokde, Tagamets,
Friedman, & Horwitz, 2001; Poldrack, et al., 1999).
Reading progresses as an interplay of activation
between the control and task networks performing the
functions of phonics, grammar, and semantics. Levels
of activation in these areas can increase or decrease
depending on the complexity of the task, when
syntactic errors are encountered, or when semantic
anomalies occur. Comprehension of longer passages of
text appears to activate control and task networks on the

Figure 3:
Idealized activation patterns during
reading. (A) Displays the brain at rest. (B) Activation of
visual areas. (C) Activation of the word form area. (D)
Initial activation of frontal control networks. (E)
Additional activation of phonological and semantic
areas. (F) Interplay between control and task networks.
The upper line indicates areas associated with
phonological processing; the lower line with semantic
processing.
While patterns of activation can provide an
understanding of interacting networks, attention, shortterm and working memory it should be kept in mind
that long-term memory is the result by physical changes
and is not necessarily reflected directly in the activation
patterns, i.e., long-term memory is resultant effect of
the activations.

Supporting Evidence
While some aspects of the model have not yet been
verified empirically, most of the concepts are accepted
by at least a portion of the neuroscientific community.
In this section I will outline some of the research
supporting the model.
The view that the changes in synaptic junctions are at
least one of the major components of learning has been
accepted for some time (Collingridge & Bliss, 1995;
Larkman & Jack, 1995) and current research has been
supportive of this hypothesis (Kennedy, 2000; Matus,
2000), however the exact mechanisms underling
learning (Barinaga,1999) and forgetting (Berman &
Dudai, 2001) remain the object of ongoing research.
The assumption that learning occurs through the

formation of new synapses (Klintsova
&
Greenough,1999) is more debatable and has been
questioned by Goldman-Rakic a leading researcher (as
cited in Education Commission of the States, 1996, p.
11). A far more controversial conjecture has been the
formation of memories via the creation of new neurons.
Recent publications have indicated that, contrary to
previous doctrine, new neurons are created after birth
(Gould, Tanapat, Rydel & Hastings, 2000; Shankle,
Rafii, Landing, & Fallon, 1999) and may also be
involved in the formation of memories (Shors, et al.,
2001), but these conclusions have been challenged
(Kornack & Rakic, 2001).
The interpretation of short term memory as dynamic
biochemical and electrophysiological processes is
hypothetical, but research has shown that transmission
between nerve cells is separable into different
chronological processes (Greengard, 2001). The
concept of working memory extending over longer
periods of time was introduced by Ericsson and Kintsch
(1995) and is support by neuroscience research showing
dendritic changes occurring on a continuum ranging
from seconds to days (Antonova, et al., 2001; Wong &
Wong, 2001)
The existence of large scale modularity in the brain
has been recognized since the 1800s when it was
discovered by Broca and Wernicke (Gazzaniga, Ivry &
Mangun, 1998). The high degree of specificity in local
networks has been a more recent finding. Spatially
limited networks, characterized by the current model as
task networks, have been found to subserve functions
such as: the detection and orientation of lines (Hubel &
Wiesel,1968), the motion of patterns (Movshon,
Adelson, Gizzi, & Newsome, 1985), the recognition of
objects (Tanaka, 1997), and the recognition of faces
(O'Craven & Kanwisher, 2000). The existence of
global networks is widely accepted in the neuroscience
and cognitive communities (Stuss & Alexander, 2000;
Varela, Lachaux, Rodriguez, & Martinerie, 2001); as is
the recognition of networks that modulate attention,
although agreement on the specific mechanisms of
modulation may differ (Driver & Frith, 2000; Posner &
Rothbart, 1998; Rogers, Andrews, Grasby, Brooks &
Robbins, 2000). The concept of integrative networks
can be thought of as a reformulation of accepted views
of the functioning of working memory in the frontal
lobes (Duncan & Owen, 2000; Levy & Goldman-Rakic,
2000), but once again, the opinions on the exact
organization and mechanisms differs.

Conclusions
Given the advances in the neurosciences it is now both
necessary and advantageous to formulate cognitive
models based on neurological processes rather than on
metaphors derived from other disciplines. Inevitably,
we will see many new comprehensive models linking

cognition to its neurological foundations. This paper
represents an initial attempt to formulate such a model
in the hope that it can be used as a pedagogical tool for
students and teachers.

Acknowledgements
I would like to express gratitude to Hedy Amiri, Patty
Costello, Laird Edmans, Christine Ng, Maria Sera,
Kelly Snyder, Al Yonas, Jazmin Yomha-Cevasco, the
members of the Text and Discourse Comprehension
Group at the University of Minnesota, and the
reviewers assigned to my paper by the Cognitive
Science Society for their comments, suggestions, and
corrections.

References
Antonova, I., Arancio, O., Trillat, A. C., Wang, H. G.,
Zablow, L., Udo, H., Kandel, E. R., & Hawkins, R. D.
(2001). Rapid increase in clusters of presynaptic
proteins at onset of long-lasting potentiation. Science,
294, 1547-1550.
Atherton, M. & Bart, W. M. (2001, April). Education
and fMRI: Promise and Cautions. Paper presented at
the annual meeting of the American Educational
Research Association, Seattle, WA.
Barinaga, M. (1999). Neurobiology - New clues to how
neurons strengthen their connections. Science, 284,
1755-1757.
Berman, D. E. & Dudai, Y. (2001). Memory extinction,
learning anew, and learning the new: Dissociations in
the molecular machinery of learning in cortex.
Science, 291, 2417-2419.
Bokde, A. L. W., Tagamets, M. A., Friedman, R. B., &
Horwitz, B. (2001). Functional interactions of the
inferior frontal cortex during the processing of words
and word-like stimuli. Neuron, 30, 609-617.
Bruer, J. T. (1998). Let's put brain science on the back
burner. NASSP Bulletin, 82(598), 9-19.
Bruer, J. T. (1999a). In search of...brain-based
education. Phi Delta Kappan, 80, 648-654.
Bruer, J. T. (1999b). The myth of the first three years: A
new understanding of early brain development and
lifelong learning. New York: The Free Press.
Cohen, L., Dehaene, S., Naccache, L., Lehericy, S.,
Dehaene-Lambertz, G., Henaff, M., & Michel, F.
(2000). The visual word form area: Spatial and
temporal characterization of an initial stage of
reading in normal subjects and posterior split-brain
patients. Brain, 123, 291-307.
Collingridge, G. L., & Bliss, T. V. (1995). Memories of
NMDA receptors and LTP. Trends in Neurosciences,
18, 54-56.
Driver, J., & Frith, C. (2000). Shifting baselines in
attention research. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 1,
147-148.

Duncan, J., & Owen, A. M. (2000). Common regions of
the human frontal lobe recruited by diverse cognitive
demands. Trends in Neurosciences, 23, 475-483.
Education Commission of the States. (1996). Bridging
the gap between neuroscience and education. Denver,
CO: Author.
Ericsson, K. A., & Kintsch, W. (1995). Long-term
working memory. Psychological Review, 102, 211245.
Gazzaniga, M. (1998). The mind's past. Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press.
Gazzaniga, M. S., Ivry, R. B., & Mangun, G. R. (1998).
Cognitive neuroscience: The biology of the mind.
New York: W.W. Norton & Company.
Gould, E., Tanapat, P., Rydel T., & Hastings, N.
(2000). Regulation of hippocampal neurogenesis in
adulthood. Biological Psychiatry, 48, 715-720.
Hubel, D. H., & Wiesel, T.N. (1968). Receptive fields
and functional architecture of monkey striate cortex.
Journal of Physiology, 195, 215-243.
Klintsova, A. Y., & Greenough, W. T. (1999). Synaptic
plasticity in cortical systems. Current Opinion in
Neurobiology, 9, 203-208.
Lagemann, E. C. (2000). An elusive science: The
troubling history of educational research. Chicago:
The University of Chicago Press.
Larkman, A. U., & Jack, J. J. (1995). Synaptic
plasticity: hippocampal LTP. Current Opinion in
Neurobiology, 5, 324-334.
Levy, R., & Goldman-Rakic, P. S. (2000). Segregation
of working memory functions within the dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex. Experimental Brain Research, 133,
23-32.
Kennedy, M. B. (2000). Signal-processing machines at
the postsynaptic density. Science, 290, 750-754.
Kornack, D. R., & Rakic, P. (2001). Cell proliferation
without neurogenesis in adult primate neocortex.
Science, 294, 2127-2130.
Matus, A. (2000). Actin-based plasticity in dendritic
spines. Science, 290, 754-757.
Miyake, A., & Shah, P. (1999). Toward unified theories
of working memory: Emerging general consensus,
unresolved theoretical issues, and future research
directions. In A. Miyake & P. Shah (Eds.) Models of
working memory: Mechanisms of active maintenance
and executive control (pp. 442-481). New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Movshon, J. A., Adelson, E. H., Gizzi, M. & Newsome,
W. T. (1985). The analysis of moving visual patterns.
In C. Chagas, R. Gattass & C. G. Gross (Eds.),
Pattern recognition mechanisms (pp. 117-151).
Rome: Vatican Press.
O'Craven, K. M., & Kanwisher, N. (2000). Mental
imagery of faces and places activates corresponding
stimulus-specific brain regions. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 12, 1013-1023.
Poldrack, R. A., Wagner, A. D., Prull, M. W.,
Desmond, J. E., Glover, G. H., & Gabrieli, J. D. E.

(1999). Functional specialization for semantic and
phonological processing in the left inferior prefrontal
cortex. Neuroimage, 10, 15-35.
Posner, M. I., & Rothbart, M. K. (1998). Attention,
self-regulation and consciousness. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London - Series
B: Biological Sciences, 353, 1915-1927, 1998.
Pugh, K. R., Mencl, W. E., Jenner, A. R., Katz, L.,
Frost, S. J., Lee, J. R., Shaywitz, S. E., & Shaywitz,
B. A. (2000). Functional neuroimaging studies of
reading and reading disability (developmental
dyslexia). Mental Retardation and Developmental
Disabilities Research Reviews, 6, 207-213.
Robertson, D. A., Gernsbacher, M. A., Guidotti, S. J.,
Robertson, R. R., Irwin, W., Mock, B. J., &
Campana, M. E. (2000). Functional neuroanatomy of
the cognitive process of mapping during discourse
comprehension. Psychological Science, 11, 255-260.
Rogers, R. D., Andrews, T. C., Grasby, P. M., Brooks,
D. J., & Robbins, T. W. (2000). Contrasting cortical
and subcortical activations produced by attentionalset shifting and reversal learning in humans. Journal
of Cognitive Neuroscience, 12, 142-162.
Rumelhart, D. E., & McClelland, J. L. (Eds.). (1986).
Parallel distributed processing: Exploration in the
microstructure of cognition, Vol. 1. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Shankle, W. R., Rafii, M. S., Landing, B. H., & Fallon,
J. H. (1999). Approximate doubling of numbers of
neurons in postnatal human cerebral cortex and in 35
specific cytoarchitectural areas from birth to 72
months. Pediatric & Developmental Pathology, 2,
244-259.
Shors, T. J., Miesegaes, G., Beylin, A., Zhao, M.,
Rydel, T., & Gould E. (2001). Neurogenesis in the
adult is involved in the formation of trace memories.
Nature, 410, 372-376.
Sternberg, R. J., & Grigorenko, E. L. (2001). Unified
psychology. American Psychologist, 56, 1069-1079.
St George, M., Kutas, M., Martinez, A., & Sereno, M. I.
(1999). Semantic integration in reading: engagement
of the right hemisphere during discourse processing.
Brain, 122, 1317-1325.
Stuss, D. T., & Alexander, M. P. (2000). Executive
functions and the frontal lobes: a conceptual view.
Psychological Research, 63, 289-298.
Varela, F., Lachaux, J. P., Rodriguez ,E. & Martinerie,
J. (2001). The brainweb: phase synchronization and
large-scale
integration.
Nature
Reviews
Neuroscience, 2, 229-239.
Wong, W. T., & Wong, R. O. L. (2001). Changing
specificity of neurotransmitter regulation of rapid
dendritic remodeling during synaptogenesis. Nature
Neuroscience, 4, 351-352.

