UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Vector Model of Causal Meaning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1qm8q0rt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Wolff, Phillip
Zettergren, Matthew

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Vector Model of Causal Meaning
Phillip Wolff (pwolff@memphis.edu)

Department of Psychology, 202 Psychology Bldg.
Memphis, TN 38152 USA

Matthew Zettergren (mzttrgrn@memphis.edu)

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Engineering Bldg.
Memphis, TN 38152 USA

Abstract
This paper proposes a new model of causal meaning, the
Vector Model, which formalizes a model of causation
based on Talmyís notions of force dynamics (Wolff,
Song, & Driscoll, 2002). In the Vector Model, the
concepts of CAUSE, ENABLE and PREVENT are
distinguished from one another in terms of force vectors,
their resultant and the relationship of each force vector to
a target vector. The predictions of the model were tested
in two experiments in which participants saw realistic
3D-animations of an inflatable boat moving through a
pool of water. The boatís movements were completely
determined by the force vectors entered into a physics
simulator. Participantsí linguistic descriptions of the
animations were closely matched by those predicted by
the model given the same force vectors as those used to
produce the animations. Our model may have
implications for the semantics of causal verbs as well as
the perception of causal events.

Introduction
This research investigates peopleís notions of causation
as reflected in their use of causal verbs. We approach
this problem by formulating a model of causal meaning
that defines causal concepts in terms of relationships
between force vectors, their resultant and a target
position vector.
We begin by noting two key problems for models of
causal meaning. First, such models must be able to
distinguish the concept of CAUSE from the concept of
ENABLE. We say, for example, the wave (and not the
keel) caused the sailboat to rock, while the keel (and
not the wave) enabled the sailboat to rock. The precise
way in which these two notions differ has been difficult
to specify. Contributing to this difficulty is the fact that
the two concepts cannot be distinguished in terms of
necessity or sufficiency (Cheng & Novick, 1991;
Goldvarg & Johnson-Laird, 2001). In the above
example, neither the wave nor the keel alone is
sufficient, but both may be necessary for the boatís
rocking to occur. Several solutions to this challenge
have been proposed, but most have not escaped
criticism (see Cheng & Novick, 1991; Goldvarg &
Johnson-Laird, 2001; Wolff, Song, & Driscoll, 2002).

A second key problem for models of causal meaning
concerns how the concept of CAUSE is represented in
expressions that refer to specific instances of causation.
Many models of causation define causation in terms of
probabilities (e.g., Cheng, 1997; Cheng & Novick,
1991; Glymour, 2001). Such models are well suited for
explaining the meaning of generic statements of
causation, that is, statements about what is typically the
case in multiple occurrences of a particular event, as in
Heavy snowmelt causes rivers to flood. What these theories
do not handle well are expressions that refer to a single
instance of causation, as in The heavy snowmelt caused the
Colorado to flood. Sentences describing single instances
express what is definitely true of a particular event, not
what is typically true of many. Moreover, such
sentences are incompatible with the non-occurrence of
the result (e.g., flooding), but if causation is inherently
probabilistic, such non-occurrences cannot be strictly
ruled out (Goldvarg & Johnson-Laird, 2001).
In some theories of causation, the concept of
CAUSE is defined in such a way that it can be used in
descriptions of singular causation. For example,
according to Michotte (1963), causation is inferred
from the perception of a transfer of motion from one
ball to anotherñan ìampliation of motionî (p. 143). A
related proposal is that CAUSE is inherently based on
the idea of force and that the occurrence of CAUSE
involves a mechanism by which this force is transmitted
(Ahn & Kalish, 2000; Shultz, 1982). While these
theories specify properties that could be predicated of a
single event (and are highly related to the proposal we
make in this paper), they do not provide us with a clear
solution to the first problem of causal meaning: how the
notion of CAUSE might be distinguished from the
notion of ENABLE.1 Both CAUSE and ENABLE
presumably involve the transference of force.
In this paper, we propose a model of causal meaning
that addresses these two problems. This model
represents a formalization of the Force Dynamic Model
described in Wolff, Song and Driscoll (2002; also
Wolff & Song, 2001). In the next section, we describe
1

Counterfactual theories of causation face related problems
(see Spellman & Mandel, 1999)

the Force Dynamic Model as well as some of the
empirical evidence in support of it. We then turn to a
description of its formalization.

The Force Dynamic Model of Causation
A theory of force dynamics was first proposed by
Talmy (1988), and has been elaborated by several other
researchers (Jackendoff, 1991; Kemmer & Verhagen,
1994; Pinker, 1989; Robertson & Glenberg, 1998;
Siskind, 2000; Verhagen & Kemmer, 1997). From a
force dynamic perspective, the concept of CAUSE is
one member of a family of concepts that include the
concepts of ENABLE and PREVENT, among others.
With each of these concepts, there are two key players:
an affector and a patient.2 Differences among the
concepts are captured in terms of various patterns of
tendency, relative strength, rest, and motion.
The Force Dynamic Model specified in Wolff, Song
and Driscoll (2002) combines two of Talmyís (1988)
core dimensions (Tendency & Result) with a dimension
suggested by Jackendoff (1991).3

this tendency is opposed and blocked by the affector,
and as a consequence, the result does not occur.
Evidence in support of the Force Dynamic Model
As indicated in Table 1, the Force Dynamic Model
predicts that each concept shares one feature in
common with each other concept: ENABLE and
PREVENT both involve patients with a tendency for
the result; CAUSE and PREVENT both involve
opposition; and CAUSE and ENABLE both lead to
results. The model implies, then, that the three concepts
should be equally similar in meaning. Therefore, if we
were to plot these concepts in a similarity space in
terms of the verbs that encode them, they should reside
roughly equally distant from one another. In fact, this is
exactly what we found when we asked people to sort 48
sentences from the British National Corpus that
contained 23 periphrastic causative verbs (i.e. verbs that
pattern syntactically and semantically like the verb
cause, e.g., make, enable and prevent) and submitted
their sorts to a multidimensional scaling program4
(Wolff et al., 2002).
2

Table 1: The Force Dynamic Modelís representations
of CAUSE, ENABLE, & PREVENT

CAUSE
ENABLE
PREVENT

Patient Tendency
for Result
N
Y
Y

Affector-Patient
Opposition
Y
N
Y

CAUSE
Prevent

Occurrence
of Result
Y
Y
N

As shown in Table 1, this model specifies that the
concepts of CAUSE, ENABLE, and PREVENT can be
captured in terms of 1) the tendency of the patient for
the result, 2) the presence of opposition between the
affector and patient, and 3) the occurrence of the result.
In causing situations (see 1a), for example, the tendency
of the patient, the boat, is not for the result, heeling. But
because the tendency is opposed by the affector, the
result, i.e., heeling, occurs.
(1) a. The blast caused the boat to heel.
b. Vitamin B enables the body to digest food.
c. The rain prevented the tar from bonding.
In enabling situations, as in (1b), the tendency of the
patient, the body, is for the result, to digest food. This
tendency is not opposed by vitamin B. Rather, vitamin
B assists in the realization of this tendency, which leads
to the occurrence of a result. In situations involving
preventing, as in (1c), the tendency of the patient, the
tar, is towards the occurrence of the result, bonding, but

0

FORCE
SET
CAUSE START
STIMULATE
MAKE GET

KEEP
IMPEDE
BLOCK PROTECT
SAVE
PREVENT
HINDER
STOP RESTRAIN
HOLD

HELP
LEAVE
PERMIT
ENABLE
ALLOW LET

Enable
2

Figure 1: MDS solution of periphrastic causative verbs
As Figure 1 shows, the periphrastic causative verbs
in English fall into three categories: a CAUSE category
that includes the verbs cause, force, get, make, set and
stimulate, an ENABLE category that includes the verbs
allow, enable, help, leave, let, and permit, and a
PREVENT category that includes the verbs block,
hinder, hold, impede, keep, prevent, protect, restrain,
stop. Importantly, the clusters associated with these
three concepts reside roughly equally distant from one
another, just as predicted by the Force Dynamic Model.
We have replicated these results for specific and
generic statements of causation. These results, along
with several rating studies, lead us to believe that the
Force Dynamic Model captures the primary semantic
dimensions underlying the periphrastic causative verbs,
and the verb cause in particular.

2

We use the more familiar terms affector and patient instead
of antagonist and agonist as originally used in Talmy (1988).
3
In Talmy (1988) nearly all interactions involve opposition
while in Jackendoff (1991) this parameter is allowed to vary.

4

Multidimensional scaling is a procedure that locates items in
space so that their distances in that space reflect as closely as
possible their measured inter-item (dis)similarities.

The Vector Model of Causation
In the Vector Model, the notions of tendency,
opposition (here, concordance), and result are
represented as force vectors, their resultant and the
relationship of each force vector to a target position
vector. The model is described below for physical
interactions in which the patient has no initial velocity.
However, it is assumed that it could be extended to
situations in which the patient does have an initial
velocity (and, hence, momentum). It is also assumed
that the model could be extended to cover non-physical
kinds of causation (e.g., social, psychological).
In our description, all vectors are typed in boldface
font; P•T denotes the dot product of the vectors P and
T; ||P|| denotes the magnitude of P.
In the case of physical causation, A represents a
vector that specifies the force exerted on the patient by
the affector; P, any force produced by the patient to
move itself, or in the absence of such a force, its weight
(e.g., force pulling it toward the earth) and/or resistance
to motion due to frictional forces; O, the vector
representing the summation of the remaining other
forces acting on the patient 5 and R, the resultant force
acting on the patient based on the vector addition of A,
P and O. An example configuration is shown in Figure
2.
A (affector vector)
Target location

Patient entity

R
(resultant)

O (other forces)

P (patient vector)
Figure 2: Forces associated with the affector, A,
patient, P, and other forces, O, combine to produce
a resultant force, R, in the direction of a target.
The targetís location is specified in terms of a
position vector, T. When the target and patient are
points, T simply begins at the patient and ends at the
target, as shown in Figure 3.
Target

T

Patient

vectors, such that every vector from the patientís
position to a point that could be considered a part of the
target would be an element of that set. 6
For this particular version of the Vector Model, we
assume that all of the forces are constant with respect to
time and space (i.e., ∂/∂t[Z(x,y,t)] = ∂/∂x[Z(x,y,t)] =
∂/∂y[Z(x,y,t)] = 0 where Z is any force in this model),
the patient has no initial velocity, and ||P|| and ||T|| > 0.
The main dimensions of the Vector Model are
defined in Table 2 for patients and targets that can be
construed as points, and where ||A|| > 0.
Table 2: Dimensions underlying the Vector Model

In the more general case in which the target is
represented by an area, the targetís location would be
specified by a set of real 1- or 2-dimensional position
5
The contribution of other forces, O, might include forces
whose entities could serve as affectors or patients in other
interactions, as well as forces that might be used to
distinguish between periphrastic causative verbs within a
subcategory (e.g., help vs. enable vs. allow vs. let).

Formal Definition

Tendency (of patient
for the target)
Concordance
(of affector & patient)
Result

Angle between P and T = 0°
Angle between A and P = 0°
Angle between R and T = 0°

Rationale for the definitions Tendency - If the patient
has a tendency for the target, then the direction of its
force vector will coincide with the direction of the
position vector T. Thus, the angle between the vector P
and T will be 0°. A test for this possibility can stated
with respect to the dot product of P and T. Specifically,
when the patient has a tendency for the target, P•T =
||P||*||T||7, and when it does not, P•T < ||P||*||T||.
Concordance ñ Concordance concerns the similarity
of the force vectors associated with the affector and the
patient. If the affector and patient exert forces (on the
patient) in the same direction, then they are considered
to be in concordance. In a similar fashion to tendency,
concordance can be defined with respect to the dot
product, but this time between P and A. Specifically,
when the affector and patient are in concordance, P•A
= ||P||*||A||, and when they are not, P•A < ||P||*||A||.8
Result ñ As with tendency and concordance,
occurrence of a result can be defined in terms of the
similarity between two vectors, but this time between R
and T. When the angle between R and T is 0°, the
result will occur, assuming all of the forces acting on
6

Figure 3: The targetís location is specified by
a position vector T.

Dimension

In the more general case in which the target is other than a
point, we expect the definition of concordance must be
changed to include a certain level of angular tolerance that
would be based, in part, upon the relative size of the target
and its proximity to the patient.
7
By definition of the dot product, P•T = ||P||*||T||*cos(θ),
where θ is the angle between vectors P and T. In the case
where θ is 0°, the equation becomes P•T = ||P||*||A||*cos(0°),
which reduces to P•T = ||P||*||T||.
8
When concordance is defined in terms of the dot product, it
allows for a special type of concordance in which ||A|| = 0.
When ||A|| = 0, the equality P•A = ||P||*||A|| would hold,
which may be representative of the kinds of situations
referred to by the verbs let, allow, and permit.

the patient are constant with respect to time and space,
as specified formally above. In terms of the dot product,
the result will occur if R•T = ||R||*||T|| and will not
occur if R•T < ||R||*||T||.
As with the Force Dynamic Model, CAUSE,
ENABLE, and PREVENT are defined with respect to
values along three dimensions, specified in Table 3, and
share one feature with each other concept. Thus, both
models predict that the three concepts should be equally
similar to one another.

configurations were instantiated, participants would
choose ìnone of the above.î These predictions were
tested for one- and two-dimensional interactions in
Experiments 1 and 2, respectively.

Table 3: The Vector Modelís representations of
CAUSE, ENABLE, & PREVENT

CAUSE
ENABLE
PREVENT

Tendency of
Patient
for Target
N
Y
Y

Concordance
of Affector
& Patient
N
Y
N

Result
Y
Y
N

Figure 4: Sample frame from an animation used in
Experiment 2 that instantiated a ìcauseî interaction

Experiment 1

Testing the Vector Model of Causation
Beyond similarity, the Vector Model makes predictions
about the vector configurations underlying verbs of
causation. These predictions were tested in two
experiments. Participants viewed 3D animations of an
inflatable boat, the patient, moving across a shallow
pool in relationship to a half-submerged cone, the target
(see Figure 4). Each animation had two main parts. In
the first, the boat moved from the side of the pool to the
center. This part was included to establish the boatís
tendency. In the second part, a bank of fans (i.e., the
affector) started blowing. Thus, in the second part of
every animation, the force produced by the boat itself
was combined with the force exerted on the boat by the
fans to give rise to a resultant force that determined the
boatís direction and speed.
After watching an animation, participants chose
among several possible linguistic descriptions. We
predicted, per the Vector Model (and its computer
implementation), that participants would choose a
description containing the verb cause when the boat
started moving away from the cone (Tendency = N),
but was moved to the cone (Result = Y) by the fans
blowing in a direction different from the direction of
the boat (Concordance = N). We predicted that
participants would choose a description containing the
verb help (a type of ENABLE verb, see Figure 1), when
the boat moved towards the cone (Tendency = Y) and
ultimately reached it (Result = Y) when the fans blew
in the same direction as the boatís direction of motion
(Concordance = Y). We also predicted that participants
would choose a description containing the verb prevent
when the boat started towards the cone (Tendency = Y)
but did not hit it (Result = N) because the fans blew it
back or away from the cone (Concordance = N).
Finally, we predicted that when none of the above

Method
Participants The participants were 18 University of
Memphis undergraduates.
Materials Eight 3D animations were made from an
animation package called Discreet 3ds max 4. The
direction and speed of the boat was calculated by a
physics simulator called Havok Reactor. In each
animation the boat was initially located four boatlengths away from the center of the pool. In the first
half of the animation, the boat moved towards the
center, ostensibly under its own power. Once the boat
reached the center, the fans started blowing. The
animation ended when the boat hit the cone or neared
the side of the pool (~4 seconds total).
The top of Table 4 shows the direction and relative
magnitudes of the force vectors associated with the
affector and patient that were entered into the physics
simulator. The affector, A, and patient, P, vectors were
either in the direction of the target or in the opposite
direction. The magnitude of the other forces vector, O,
was set to 0. In half of the interactions, the affector
vector was 1.7 times stronger than the patient
(configurations 1-4), while in the remaining interactions
the strengths were reversed (configurations 5-8).
Procedure The animations were presented in random
order on Windows-based computers. After each
animation, participants chose a sentence that best
described the occurrence. All of the sentences were the
same (ìThe fans ____ the boat to [from] hit[ting] the
coneî) except for the verb, which was either caused,
helped or prevented. Another option was ìnone of the
above.î Participants indicated their answers by clicking
a radio button next to their choice.

Table 4. The vectors configurations used in Experiment 1, along with associated predictions and results
Configuration
Affector (
)
Patient (
)
Target (T)
Predictions

1

2
T

T

Results

Cause
Help
Prevent

No verb

3

4

5

T

T

6

T

7

8

T

T

T

No verb

No verb

11%
6%
83%

6%
94%

Help

Cause

Prevent

No verb

Help

No verb

11%
89%
-

94%
6%
-

100%
-

100%

6%
94%
-

6%
94%

-

The results strongly support the Vector Model, but
only in the case of interactions occurring within a single
dimension. In Experiment 2 we examine the ability of
the model to handle two-dimensional interactions.

Results and Discussion
The predictions of the Vector Model were fully borne
out by the results. The bottom of Table 4 shows the
percentage of times people chose each of the four
possible options for each of the vector configurations.
Participants chose causeóas opposed to the other
possible optionsófor the animation in which the boat
first moved away from the cone but was later pushed
back against it by the fans (configuration 2), a N-N-Y
type of occurrence in terms of tendency, concordance
and result (see Table 3), χ2(3, N=18) = 62, p < .001.
Participants chose help when the direction of the boat
and the fans was the same (1, 5), a Y-Y-Y type of
occurrence, χ2(3, N=18) = 116, p < .001. Participants
chose prevent when the boat moved towards the cone
but was then kept from hitting it by the fans (3), a Y-NN occurrence, χ2(3, N=18) = 72, p < .001. Finally,
participants chose ìnone of the aboveî when the vector
configurations did not map onto any one of the three
main kinds of configurations, χ2(3, N=18) = 237, p <
.001. Importantly, participants did not choose prevent
whenever the boat missed the cone (4, 6, 8). Instead,
prevent was restricted to those situations in which the
boat had an initial tendency for the target (3). Likewise,
participants did not choose cause or enable when the
boat simply hit the cone (7), but only when the vector
configurations matched those defined by the model.
Thus, the Vector Model is capable of not only
specifying distinct types of causal concepts, but also
distinguishing between causation and non-causation.

Experiment 2
Method
Participants. The participants were 18 University of
Memphis undergraduates.
Materials. Ten 3D animations were made in the
same way as in Experiment 1 except that the affector
and patient force vectors were oriented in several
directions other than directly towards or away from the
target, and the magnitudes of the affector and patient
vectors were always the same. The ten vector
combinations at the top of Table 5 depict five
combinations in which the patient vector is oriented
away from the target by 45° (1-5) and five
combinations in which the patient vector is oriented
towards the target (6-10). The affector vector was
oriented from 180° to 360° at 45° intervals.
Procedure The procedure was as in Experiment 1.

Results
The predictions of the Vector Model were supported
once again. The bottom of Table 5 shows the
percentage of times people chose each of the four
possible options for each of the vector configurations.
Participants chose cause for the animation in which the

Table 5. The vectors configurations used in Experiment 2, along with associated predictions and results
Configuration
Affector (
Patient (
Target (T)
Predictions
Results

Cause
Help
Prevent

No verb

)
)

1
T

2
T

3
T

4
T

5
T

No verb

Cause

No verb

No verb

No verb

100%

89%
11%
-

17%
83%

100%

11%
89%

6
T

Help
11%
83%
6%

7
T

Prevent
94%
6%

8

9
T

T

Prevent
94%
6%

10
T

Prevent
89%
11%

Prevent
89%
11%

boat was not headed for the cone but hit it because of
the fans (2, a N-N-Y occurrence), χ2(3, N=18) = 53, p <
.001. Participants chose help when the boat was headed
for the cone and then was assisted in hitting it by the
fans (6, a Y-Y-Y occurrence), χ2(3, N=18) = 44, p <
.001. Participants chose prevent when the boat was
initially headed toward the cone but was later blown
away from it (7, 8, 9, 10, a Y-N-N occurrence), χ2(3,
N=18) = 229, p < .001. Finally, participants chose
ìnone of the aboveî when the vector configurations did
not map onto any one of the three main kinds of
configurations (1, 3, 4, 5), χ2(3, N=18) = 238, p < .001.

Conclusions
In this research we proposed a new model of causal
meaning. We also provided empirical support for this
model by showing that peopleís linguistic descriptions
of animations are well accounted for by the model and
its computer implementation given the same force
vectors as those used to produce the animations.
According to the Vector Model, each kind of causal
relation is associated with a range of spatial geometries
in addition to a particular temporal organization. As a
consequence, the model is able to handle causal
relations that are highly problematic for probabilistic
models, in particular, those in which the cause and
effect occur simultaneously (The sun’s gravity causes
the earth to revolve around the it). In such situations, it
is difficult to count the causing and resulting events for
the purposes of calculating probabilities. In contrast, for
the Vector Model, such situations are not problematic
since they give rise to readily identifiable vector
configurations.
The model provides a new explanation for why
billiard-ball events, like the ones studied by Michotte
(1963), are construed as causal. Traditionally, this was
explained in terms of the spatial-temporal contiguity of
the causing and resulting events. Clearly, spatialtemporal contiguity is important: without it, there can
be no interaction of (contact-type) forces. But spatialtemporal contiguity is not particular to causal
interactions alone. According to the Vector Model,
what leads people to describe billiard-ball events as
causal is that the patient resists moving (Tendency=N),
the affector opposes this tendency (Concordance=N),
and the patient ends up moving (Result=Y).
In sum, the Vector Model is able to address several
important problems in the causation literature in
addition to the two problems discussed in the
introduction: the distinction between CAUSE and
ENABLE and the expression of singular causation. It
also takes us a step closer towards understanding how
physical interactions may be construed for the purposes
of language.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by grants award to the first
author from The University of Memphis Faculty
Research Fund and ONR (N00014-01-1-0917). The
conclusions of this research do not necessarily reflect
those held by these funding sources. We give special
thanks to Tanya Vassilieva, Bianca Klettke, and Derek
Wong for their help in the research.

References
Ahn, W., & Kalish, C. W. (2000). The role of
mechanism beliefs in causal reasoning. In F. C. Keil
& R. A. Wilson (Eds.) Explanation and Cognition
(pp. 199-225). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cheng, P. W. (1997). From covariation to causation: A
causal power theory. Psych. Review, 104, 367-405.
Cheng, P. W. & Novick, L. R. (1991). Causes versus
enabling conditions. Cognition, 40, 83-120.
Goldvarg, E., & Johnson-Laird, P. (2001). Naive
Causality: a mental model theory of causal meaning
and reasoning. Cognitive Science, 25, 565-610.
Jackendoff, R. (1991). Semantic Structures. Cambridge,
MA: The MIT Press.
Kemmer, S. & Verhagen, A. (1994). The grammar of
causatives and the conceptual structure of events.
Cognitive Linguistics, 5, 115-56.
Michotte, A. (1963). The perception of causality.
London: Methuen. (Originally published 1946.)
Glymour, C. (2001). The mind’s arrows. MIT Press.
Pinker, S. (1989). Learnability and Cognition.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Robertson, D. A., & Glenberg, A. M. (1998). Force
dynamics in language and cognition. Proceedings of
the 20th annual meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Shultz, T. R. (1982). Rules of causal attribution.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development, 47, 1-51.
Siskind, J. M. (2000). Visual event classification via
force dynamics. Proceedings AAAI-2000, 149-55.
Spellman, B. A., & Mandel, D. R. (1999). When
possibility informs reality: Counterfactual thinking as
a cue to causality. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 8, 120-123.
Talmy, L. (1988). Force dynamics in language and
cognition. Cognitive Science, 12, 49-100.
Verhagen, A., & Kemmer, S. (1997). Interaction and
causation: Causative constructions in modern
standard Dutch. Journal of Pragmatics, 27, 61-82.
Wolff, P., Song, G., & Driscoll, D. (2002). Models of
causation and causal verbs. In Papers from the 37th
Meeting of the Chicago Linguistics Society, Main
Session, Vol.1. Chicago: Chicago Linguistics Society.
Wolff, P. & Song, G. (2001). Models of causation and
the semantics of causal verbs. The 42th Annual
Meeting of the Psychonomic Society, Orlando, FL.

