UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Age Differences in Transitory Cognitive Performance

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/31d736nm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Chow, Sy Miin
Nesselroade, John R

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Age Diﬀerences in Transitory Cognitive Performance
Sy Miin Chow (smc9x@virginia.edu)

Department of Psychology; University of Virginia; P.O. Box 400400
Charlottesville, VA 22904-4400 USA

John R. Nesselroade (jrn8z@virginia.edu)

Department of Psychology; University of Virginia; P.O. Box 400400
Charlottesville, VA 22904-4400 USA
Abstract
Short-term performance data from a complex computerized cognitive test called SYNWORK1 were
examined for age diﬀerences in transitory performance fluctuations in samples of 55 older and 57
younger adults. Profile analysis indicated that the
older adults’ performance trajectories were essentially parallel to those of the younger adults’, but
with the older adults performing at a consistently
lower level on all four subtasks of SYNWORK1.
These apparent age diﬀerences in level of performance were reduced substantially when a simple
graphical approach was used to examine the performance trajectories. These results extend our
knowledge concerning the nature of intraindividual variability while illustrating again some of the
methodological inadequacies inherent in research
comparing age diﬀerences in levels of cognitive performance when common statistical assumptions are
even mildly violated. The competence of older
adults can be underestimated based on a single
measure of a group mean, thus leading to further
risk of missing important learning strengths of older
adults.

Selection and selection eﬀects have received a considerable amount of attention from behavioral scientists (Nesselroade, 1988; Nesselroade & Thompson, 1995) and still remain one of the obstacles researchers must somehow overcome. The primary
concerns, however, revolve around selecting a representative sample of participants from the population of interest (e.g. Cronbach, Gleser, Nanda &
Rajaratnam, 1972) and valid indicators to represent the underlying construct under study (e.g. Little, Linderberger & Nesselroade, 1999). These, of
course, capture only two of the ten possible dimensions defining empirical data in Cattell’s data box
(Cattell, 1966; Little et al., 1999), namely, the persons and variables dimensions, among other possible
design configurations. Another relatively familiar dimension of the data box, occasions of measurement,
has also been discussed rather extensively, especially
in comparing the relative merits of cross–sectional
versus longitudinal research design (e.g. Kraemer,
Yesavage, Taylor & Kupfer, 2000). Another kind
of selection eﬀect that is inherent in almost any research designs, but has rarely been addressed, is the
eﬀect of averaging data across participants or oc-

casions of measurement. In a recently published
article, Newell, Liu and Mayer–Kress (2001) question the common practice of averaging data across
participants or occasions, presumably to remove the
transient, noise–like changes from trial–to–trial, or
during the “warm–up” phase at the beginning of a
practice session, with the goal of singling out a global
learning trend that is characteristic of all the participants across all the trials. As suggested by Lamiell
(1981), both idiographic and nomothetic approaches
have their own merits in answering certain research
questions. However, when a group mean is used as
the only index of a group’s performance, the end of
searching for a global trend in learning does not always justify the means of levelling out the individual
diﬀerences in this aspect.

Idiographic and Nomethetic Approaches
to Modeling Change
Over the past few decades, the importance of an
idiographic approach (Allport, 1937; Murray, 1938)
to studying human behavior has gained increased
recognition. Considerable eﬀorts have been devoted to integrate idiographic and nomothetic approaches in psychological research, thus allowing researchers to capture both the intraindividual variability, and the interindividual diﬀerences in various
aspects of human behavior (Baltes & Nesselroade,
1979). Repeated assessments of the same individual
often yield information on intraindividual variability in aspects thought to be relatively stable over
short time-span, such as cognitive abilities and intelligence (see e.g., Horn, 1972; May, Hasher & Stoltzfus, 1993; Stigler, 1994), personality styles and other
belief systems (e.g., Shoda, Mischel & Wright, 1994;
Kim, Nesselroade & Featherman, 1996), as well as
other more transient state-like fluctuations in affective states (e.g., Larsen, 1987; Shifren, Hooker,
Wood & Nesselroade, 1997; Mumma 2001).
While many researchers are moving away from
performing means comparisons at the aggregate
level, the idea of taking a group mean as the unbiased estimator of the group, as well as the population that it represents, is so deeply entrenched in
contemporary data analytic techniques that a majority of the between–group comparisons essentially

involve means. Although it is a well–known fact that
other measures of central tendency, such as the median, might be a better estimator of a group’s performance when certain statistical criteria are not met,
or when there are outliers in the data that could
potentially skew the results of one’s analysis, most
of the available statistical tests, such as ANOVA,
are based on means comparisons. Even in cases
where intraindividual variability is modeled explicitly, such as in growth curve analysis (McArdle &
Epstein, 1987; Francis, Fletcher, Stuebing, Davidson
& Thompson, 1991; Meridith & Tisak, 1990), conclusions on intraindividual changes in levels of performance still derive primarily from means. Adding
to these methodological diﬃculties of capturing representative idiographic information, of course, are
the conceptual diﬃculties of summarizing the interindividual diﬀerences in a way that is helpful for
making empirical decisions. A graphical approach
is a useful supplement to other more rigorous statistical approaches, as it helps to depict a summary
picture of both the intraindividual and interindividual aspects of change.

Transitory Changes in Cognitive
Performance as Meaningful
Intraindividual Changes
Despite increased awareness of the limitations of using an aggregate measure to represent a group, the
same limitations that exist when applied to individual data were not addressed as often. Just as a group
mean does not necessarily represent the group as a
whole, an individual’s mean score is limited in its
own way. The transient fluctuations observed during
the initial phases of an individual’s learning history
should not unthinkingly be regarded as “outliers”
that ought to be levelled out. Unfortunately, most
experimental studies aimed at capturing deterministic dynamics in transitory learning fluctuations as
observed during the “warm-up” phase are limited
to studies in the area of motor development (e.g.
Adams, 1961; Schmidt, 1982; Thelen, 1994). Individuals’ cognitive learning curves as reported by
some researchers (e.g. Salthouse, Hambrick, Lukas
& Dell, 1996) do in general resemble the learning
curve of motor skills. However, very few studies
have focused on examining the patterns of transitory changes in human cognitive performance and
even fewer studies emphasize learning as an ongoing
refinement of errors in the face of external perturbations.

Objectives of This Study
In this paper, we examine transitory changes in individuals’ short-term adaptive responses and compare
these responses among adults of diﬀerent ages. We
also demonstrate some of the inadequacies inherent
in comparing adults of diﬀerent ages on the basis of

their group means when common statistical assumptions are even mildly violated. Finally, we present
a simple graphical approach that serves as a supplement to means comparisons at a group level, and an
alternative to summarizing changes at an individual
level.

Method
Participants
This sample consisted of 55 older adults (36 female
and 19 male), and 57 younger adults (38 female and
19 male). The older adults’ ages ranged from 60 to
93 years (M = 73.73, SD = 7.26), and the younger
adults’ from 17 to 28 years (M = 19.18, SD = 1.75).
The younger adults were recruited from the undergraduate participant pool in a southeastern university and were rewarded with course credits for participation in this study. The older adults were recruited from the Charlottesville community through
newspaper advertisements and direct solicitation at
senior centers . Both age groups rated themselves as
in reasonably good health, with self-ratings of health
averaged between average to good (on a 4-point scale
from 1—excellent to 4—poor, M = 2.27 and SD =
1.00 for older adults; M = 1.91 and SD = 0.87 for
younger adults).

Materials
The cognitive performance of the participants was
assessed using a computer program called SYNWORK1. The SYNWORK1 program is a computerized multi–tasking test environment designed by
Elsmore (1994) to examine an individual’s ability
to perform multiple tasks concurrently. Figure 1
shows the four primary tasks that are measured on
SYNWORK1, including a memory task, a self–paced
arithmetic task that involves using mouse–click to
manipulate the plus and minus panels to adjust the
sum from four zeros (0000) into the correct sum of
two given numbers, a visual monitoring task, and
an auditory discrimination task. Points are given
for correct responses and taken away when a task is
neglected or performed incorrectly. An individual’s
total score is constantly updated and is shown in the
middle of the four task quadrants.

Procedure
Due to the complexity of the SYNWORK1 program,
the participants were first given a short training
session during which they practiced the four SYNWORK1 tasks one at a time, followed by a one–
minute session during which they practiced the four
tasks simultaneously. After the participants were
told to strive for their best possible scores, we began
recording their performance data on SYNWORK1
over nine consecutive trials, with each trial lasting
about one minute.

subject to a MANOVA test, the task scores of individuals exposed to the two sequences of diﬃculty
levels were not statistically diﬀerent from each other.
After confirming that, a profile analysis was used to
evaluate the diﬀerences in level, parallelism, and flatness of the two groups’ responses on the four tasks,
with age group as the independent variable.

Profile Analysis

Figure 1: The SYNWORK1 program designed by
Elsmore (1994) to test human synthetic work performance
To induce some short–term transitory fluctuations
in the participants’ performance, we manipulated
the diﬃculty levels of the SYNWORK1 program
throughout the nine trials by speeding up or slowing
down the timing at which each task appeared. During the more diﬃcult sessions, we also increased the
number of addends for the arithmetic task, and the
number of target letters the participants had to remember for the memory task. This sudden increase
in the diﬃculty levels of the four tasks was expected
to induce a small amount of perturbations in the individuals’ responses and the individuals’ ability to
adapt to these sudden perturbations was taken as
an indication of their adaptive behavioral patterns.
During a particular trial, the SYNWORK1 program
was governed by one of three possible sets of parameters we classified as easy, mid–diﬃculty, and diﬃcult. The participants were exposed to one of two
sequences of altering diﬃculty levels in the order of
{M, E, M, D, M, E, M, D, M}, or {M, D, M, E, M,
D, M, E, M}, where M represents mid–diﬃculty, E
represents easy, and D represents diﬃcult sessions.
The total number of correct memory, arithmetic, visual, and auditory responses for each of the nine
trials were used as the primary dependent variables
in this study to determine if the two age groups had
diﬀerent performance profiles on each of the tasks.

Results
Prior to analysis, the participants’ task scores over
nine trials were screened for outliers and departure
from other statistical assumptions. Several outliers
were detected among younger adults who performed
too poorly on the memory task, older adults who
performed too well on the arithmetic task and the visual task, and among younger adults on the auditory
task due to the restricted range of scores observed
in that age group. These outliers were retained in
subsequent data analysis as they were thought to reflect reasonable range of fluctuations in performance.
No missing values were observed in the data. When

The descriptive statistics of the two age groups are
presented in Table 1. Consistent with findings reported in the aging literature, the younger adults
were found to perform at a significantly higher level
on the memory task, F(1,110) = 132.17, p < .001;
the arithmetic task, F(1,110) = 223.69, p < .001,
and the auditory task, F(1,110) = 106.56, p < .001,
as determined by using Wilk’s criterion. The visual
task was the only task that did not show significant
diﬀerence in levels between the two age groups.
Table 1: Descriptive Statistics of the Older and
Younger Adults.
Mean

Standard
Deviation

Memory
Arithmetic
Visual
Auditory

Old

Young

Old

Young

5.77
0.21
70.80
0.81

9.47
1.84
72.22
1.78

2.92
0.60
22.51
0.83

2.20
1.45
21.49
0.76

When averaged across groups, scores on all four
tasks were found to deviate significantly from flatness by Hotelling’s criterion on all four SYNWORK1
tasks (p < .01 for all). This simply confirmed
that the experimentally imposed perturbations did
lead to some fluctuations in the participants’ performance. There might also be some learning taking
place, as shown by the slight increase in means over
the nine trials. Using Wilk’s criterion, however, the
older and younger adults’ profiles were not found to
deviate significantly from parallelism, except on the
arithmetic task, F(8, 103) = 2.98, p = .005. The
arithmetic task might be too cognitively demanding
for the older adults, thus causing them to avoid the
task altogether. Aside from this, the two age groups
did not react to the experimental perturbations in a
statistically diﬀerent way over the nine trials.

Graphical Representation of
Intraindividual Variability
The conceptual diﬃculties of summarizing information at an individual level can be illustrated using
Figure 2, in which all the individuals’ total scores on

Figure 2: The total scores of all the individuals in
the sample.

SYNWORK1 are shown over the nine trials. Diﬀerent individuals have their own distinct trajectories,
making it hard to summarize the performance of the
group as a whole. The conventional means plot (see
Figure 3) may be helpful in providing a summary
picture, but could also mask important information
in the data. To further examine the performance of
the two age groups as captured by other descriptive
measures, the 10th, 50th and 90th percentiles of the
two groups’ scores on the four tasks were plotted
and compared using S–Plus’ Hmisc library (Harrell
& Alzola, 2001). Due to space limitations, we chose
to include only the means and percentiles plots for
the memory and auditory tasks here.
As shown in the plots in Figure 4, the age differences in performance levels reduced substantially
when the percentiles plots were used to represent
the performance of the two age groups 1 . When
compared to adults from the same age group, older
adults who performed at the 90th percentiles on the
memory and arithmetic tasks (omitted here) were
found to show performance that closely resembled
younger adults whose scores were near the median
levels of their peers2 . Older adults in this category
were observed to make more marked improvements
on the memory and arithmetic tasks toward the end
of the experiment. A similar pattern was observed
on the auditory task, except that the relatively well
performing older adults (i.e., the 90th percentile
group), started out with performance trajectory that
was identical to the trajectory of younger adults
who performed at the median level, but after the
7th trial, caught up to the performance of younger
adults who performed at the 90th percentile level
and performed at exactly the same optimal level after the 7th trial. The younger adults who performed
1
We also plotted the trajectories of younger and older
adults at less extreme percentile levels (e.g. 25th and
75th percentiles). A similar, but smaller magnitude of
reduction in age diﬀerences was observed.
2
The percentile levels were calculated separately for
each task and each age group.

Figure 3: The means and the 95% confidence limits of the older and younger adults’ scores on the
memory and auditory tasks.

at the 90th percentile levels were performing at the
optimal level on the memory, visual and auditory
tasks very early on, achieving the maximum possible scores during almost all of the trials. Their only
source of improvement in scores derived primarily
from the self–paced arithmetic task, on which their
scores continued to improve throughout the course
of this experiment. On the other hand, older adults
at the 90th percentile level were observed to have
rather uniform improvements on all four tasks, and
more trials were required before they could attain
the same level of performance the well performing
younger adults could achieve at an early phase.
Another important source of variability constituted by age stemmed from the lack of clear improvements observed among older adults who performed
at the 10th percentile level. The relatively poor performing younger adults (those at the 10th percentile
level) were able to capitalize on the memory task
and auditory task as time progressed much better
than older adults of comparable performance level.
Nevertheless, older adults at the 10th percentile level
did demonstrate their own learning strengths on the
visual task—they attained a considerable amount of
improvement on the visual task from trial one to trial
two, and maintained a rather persistent level of performance before a sharp decrement in scores was observed during and after the 8th trial, presumably due
to fatigue and decreased attention span. When the

Figure 4: The 10th, 50th and 90th deciles of the
older and younger adults’ memory and auditory
scores.
plots of individuals from less extreme percentile levels (e.g. 25th and 75th percentiles) were examined,
similar fluctuation patterns that diﬀered slightly in
levels were observed, revealing interesting individual diﬀerences in performance fluctuations within,
as well as between diﬀerent age groups.

Discussion
In this study, SYNWORK1 was used as an active
interface for capturing the age diﬀerences in performance fluctuations when individuals were faced with
ongoing external perturbations. As Jones and Conrad’s (1933) quotation of Thorndike’s remark put it,
“...individual diﬀerences amongst those of the same
age...enormously outweigh diﬀerences between ages”
(p. 258–59). The common approach of comparing age diﬀerences in levels of cognitive performance
by using group means inevitably under–represents
the complexity underlying the variability in performance both within and between diﬀerent age groups,
especially when the two age groups have unequal
variances in many respects. Due to the lack of a
clear definition of what constitutes a normative representation of the older adults population, the issue of identifying and eliminating outliers becomes
tricky. Results from our profile analysis showed findings that were consistent with those reported in the
literature (e.g. Erber, 1976). Essentially, adults
of diﬀerent age groups were found to exhibit simi-

lar, significant improvements on cognitive or intelligence tests as practice eﬀects accumulated, but the
younger adults’ level of performance was almost always higher than the older adults’ on all the measurement occasions.
Using group means and the changes in means
as the sole indicators of the performance of these
older and younger adults might be informative in
its own way, as demonstrated by the profile analysis in this study, but fails to acknowledge the differences in performance profiles among individuals
of the same age group. In fact, the younger adults
in this study, who were all recruited from the same
university and were often thought of as representing
a rather homogeneous group, showed diﬀerent dynamics in their performance fluctuations when the
trajectories of individuals from diﬀerent percentiles
were compared. The trajectories plotted using the
percentiles of the younger and older adults also revealed very consistent patterns in performance fluctuations that reflected our experimentally imposed
alterations in task diﬃculty levels very accurately.
More importantly, the age diﬀerences in levels of performance were reduced substantially when the percentile scores of these two age groups were examined,
revealing some of the older adults’ unique strengths
in learning that started surfacing at a relatively more
gradual pace than for the younger adults.
Of course, younger adults of the higher ability
group might be encountering ceiling eﬀects on those
tasks from a very early phase. In addition, with
the data from the present study, there is no way
for us to determine whether the high–performance
younger adults will resemble the high–performance
older adults in any way when they get older. However, by using a simple graphical approach, we
presented some of the inadequacies of using group
means as the only representation of the dynamics of
the group as a whole because a researcher may risk
bypassing some of the interesting dynamics within
the group by not looking at the results oﬀered by
other alternative methods.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the National Institute Aging grant 5 R01 AG18330 awarded to the
second author.

References
Adams, J. A. (1961). The second facet of forgetting:
A review of warm–up decrement. Psychological
Bulletin, 58, 257–273.
Allport, G. W. (1937). Personality: A psychological
interpretation. New York: Holt.
Baltes, P. B., & Nesselroade, J. R. (1979). History
and rationale of longitudinal research. In J. R.
Nesselroade & P. B. Baltes (Eds.), Longitudinal

research in the study of behavior and development. New York: Academic Press.
Cattell, R. B. (1966). The data box: Its ordering of total resources in terms of possible relational systems. In R. B. Cattell (Ed.), Handbook
of Multivariate Experimental Psychology (1st ed.).
Chicago, IL: Rand McNally.
Cronbach, L. J., Gleser, G. C., Nanda, H., & Rajaratnam, N. (1972). The dependability of behavioral measures. New York: Wiley.
Elsmore, T. F. (1994). SYNWORK1: A PC–based
tool for assessment of performance in a simulated
work environment. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, & Computers, 26(4), 421–426.
Erber, J. T. (1976). Age diﬀerences in learning and
memory on a digit–symbol substitution task. Experimental Aging Research, 2(1), 45–53.
Francis, D. J., Fletcher, J. M., Stuebing, K. K.,
Davidson, K. C. & Thompson, N. M.(1991). Analysis of change: Modeling individual growth. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 59(1),
27–37.
Harrell, F. E. & Alzola, C. F. (2001). An introduction to S–Plus and to the Hmisc design libraries.
Unpublished manual.
Horn, J. L. (1972). State, trait and change dimensions of intelligence. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 42, 159–185.
Jones, H.E., & Conrad, H.S. (1933). The growth and
decline of intelligence: A study of a homogeneous
group between the ages of ten and sixty, Genetic
Psychology Monographs, 13.
Kim, J.E., Nesselroade, J. R. & Featherman, D.
L. (1996). The state component in self-reported
worldviews and religious beliefs of older adults:
The MacArthur successful aging studies. Psychology and Aging, 11(3), 396–407.
Kraemer, H. C., Yesavage, J. A., Taylor, J. L. &
Kupfer, D. (2000). How can we learn about developmental processes from cross–sectional studies, or can we? American Journal of Psychiatry,
157, 163–171.
Lamiell, J. T. (1981). Toward an idiothetic psychology of personality. American Psychologist, 36(3),
276–289.
Larsen, R. L. (1987). The stability of mood variability: A spectral analytic approach to daily mood
assessments. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 52(6), 1195–1204.
Little, T. D., Lindenberger, U. & Nesselroade, J. R.
(1999). On selecting indicators for multivariate
measurement and modeling with latent variables:
When “good” indicators are bad and “bad” indicators are good. Psychological Methods, 4(2),
192–211.

May, C. P., Hasher, L. & Stoltzfus, E. R. (1993).
Optimal time of day and the magnitude of age differences in memory. Psychological Science, 4(5),
326–330.
McArdle, J. J. & Epstein, D. B. (1987). Latent
growth curves within developmental structural
equation. Child Development, 58(1), 110–133.
Meridith & Tisak (1990). Latent curve analysis.
Psychometrika, 55, 107–122.
Mumma, G. H. (2001). Increasing accuracy in
clinical decision making: Toward an integration of nomothetic-aggregate and intraindividualidiographic approaches, The Behavior Therapist,
24(4), 77–94.
Murray, H. A. (1938). Explorations in personality.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Nesselroade, J. R. (1988). Some implications of the
trait–state distinction for the study of development over the life span: The case of personality.
In P. B. Baltes, D. L. Featherman & R. M. Lerner
(Eds.), Life–span development and behavior (Vol
8). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Nesselroade, J. R. & Thompson, W. W. (1995).
Selection and related threats to group comparisons: An example comparing factorial structures
of higher and lower ability groups of adult twins.
Psychological Bulletin, 117(2), 271–284.
Newell, K. M., Liu, Y,& Mayer–Kress, G. (2001).
Time scales in motor learning and development.
Psychological Review, 108(1), 57–82.
Salthouse, T. A., Hambrick, D. Z., Lukas, K. E. &
Dell, T. C. (1996). Determinants of adult age differences on synthetic work performance. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 2(4), 305–
329.
Schmidt, R. A. (1982). Motor control and learning.
Champaign, IL: human Kinetics.
Shifren, K., Hooker, K., Wood, P. & Nesselroade,
J. R. (1997). Structure and variation of mood in
individuals with Parkinson’s disease: A dynamic
factor analysis. Psychology and Aging, 12(2), 328–
339.
Shoda, Y., Mischel, W. & Wright, J. C. (1994). Intraindividual in the organization and patterning of
behavior: Incorporating psychological situations
into the idiographic analysis of personality. Journal of Personality and Society Psychology, 67(4),
674–687.
Siegler, R.S. (1994). Cognitive variability: A key
to understanding cognitive development. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 3, 1–5.
Thelen, E. & Smith, L. B. (1994). A dynamic systems approach to the development of cognition and
acion. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

