UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Anthropomorphic Agents as a User Interface Paradigm: Experimental Findings and a
Framework for Research

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4vq9d62j

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Catrambone, Richard
Stasko, John
Xiao, Jun

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Anthropomorphic Agents as a User Interface Paradigm:
Experimental Findings and a Framework for Research
Richard Catrambone (rc7@prism.gatech.edu)
School of Psychology, Georgia Institute of Technology, 274 5th Street
Atlanta, GA 30332-0170 USA

John Stasko (stasko@cc.gatech.edu)
Jun Xiao (junxiao@cc.gatech.edu)
College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332-0280 USA
Abstract
Research on anthropomorphic agent interfaces has produced
widely divergent results. We suggest that this is due to
insufficient consideration of key factors that influence the
perception and effectiveness of agent-based interfaces. We
propose a framework for studying anthropomorphic agents
that can systematize the research. The framework emphasizes
features of the agent, the user, and the task the user is
performing. Our initial experiment within this framework
manipulated the agent’s appearance (lifelike versus iconic)
and the nature of the user’s task (carrying out procedures
versus providing opinions). We found that the perception of
the agent was strongly influenced by the task while features
of the agent that we manipulated had little effect.

Introduction
If you could ask for assistance from a smart, spoken natural
language help system, would that be an improvement over
an on-line reference manual? Presumably the answer, in
most cases, is yes, for two reasons. First, the spoken natural
language aspect would allow you to speak your questions
rather than having to type them. Generally this is a faster
approach for most people. Second, the smart aspect would
improve the chance of the help system finding the
information you want even if you do not state the query
using the correct or most appropriate terms.
The state of the art in this style of interface is a human
user consultant. Does it matter that the user consultant has
a face and that the face can have expressions and convey a
personality? Would a face affect you in terms of your
comfort and satisfaction with the interaction? Would the
presence of a face make the help or advice you receive
more persuasive? The answers to such questions have
implications for the design of training systems, customer
service, information kiosks, and many other applications.
Many people believe that anthropomorphic computer
interfaces have great potential to be beneficial for a number
of reasons. Agents could act as smart assistants, much like
travel agents or investment advisors, helping people
manage the ever-growing amount of information
encountered today (Lyman & Varian, 2002). Further, a
conversational interface appears to be a natural dialog style
in which the user does not have to learn complex command
structure and functionality (Laurel, 1990).

An anthropomorphic interface could use intonation, gaze
patterns, and facial expressions, in addition to words, for
conveying information and affect. The human face seems
to occupy a privileged position for conveying a great deal
of information, including relatively subtle information,
efficiently (Fridlund & Gilbert, 1985). Anthropomorphic
interfaces could make a computer more human-like,
engaging, entertaining, approachable, and understandable
to the user, thus harboring potential to build trust and
establish relationships with users, and make them feel more
comfortable with computers.
These potential advantages are balanced by strong
negatives. Anthropomorphic agent interfaces are viewed by
some researchers as being impractical and inappropriate.
Current speech recognition, natural language
understanding, and learning capabilities of computers still
fall far short of any human assistant.
More specifically, it has been proposed that agent
systems disempower users by clouding issues such as who
is responsible for a system’s actions (Lanier, 1995). Others
feel that user interfaces are more beneficial when they
clearly reflect the commands available to a user and present
the objects that a user can act upon (Shneiderman, 1997).
Furthermore, critics argue that agent interfaces may
mislead both users and designers, increase user anxiety,
reduce user control, undermine user responsibility, and
destroy a user’s sense of accomplishment (Shneiderman &
Maes, 1997). Many current anthropomorphic or personified
interfaces are viewed as being annoying, silly characters
who hinder rather than enhance productivity (e.g., the
Microsoft Paper Clip).
Although strong opinions have been voiced on both sides
of this issue, relatively little careful empirical research on
anthropomorphic interfaces has been conducted, and the
results from this research have been contradictory or
equivocal (Cassell, 2000).
Our goal is to develop a framework to systematically
evaluate and understand the autonomous agent as a user
interface paradigm. The present paper outlines the
framework and an initial study that examines two issues
within this framework. The first is whether the degree to
which an interface agent is anthropomorphic has a
measurable effect on users. Note that anthropomorphism is
not a dichotomy but rather a continuum. One can think of
interfaces with full fidelity video or 3D images of people to

more caricature-style characters to 2D cartoons of people or
personified characters such as dogs or toasters.
The second issue is to what extent the nature of the task
will influence a user’s perception of an agent. Some tasks
might be more likely to induce a user to imbue the agent
with human-like qualities (such as if the user had to engage
the agent in a debate) while other tasks might lead the user
to view the agent simply as a reference tool (e.g., for
providing reminders of keystrokes for a software
application) with no "individuality."

Related Work
A few studies have revealed that anthropomorphic agents
are attention-grabbing and people make natural
assumptions about the intelligence and abilities of those
agents. King and Ohya (1996) found that a dynamic 3D
human form whose eyes blinked was rated more intelligent
than any other form, including non-blinking 3D forms,
caricatures, and geometric shapes.
One common trend discovered in studies is that
anthropomorphic interfaces appear to command people’s
attention, both in positive and negative senses. Takeuchi
and Nagao (1995) created conversational style interaction
systems that allowed corresponding facial displays to be
included or omitted. According to their metrics, the
conversations with a face present were more "successful."
Across two experiments they found that the presence of a
face provided important extra conversational cues, but that
this also required more effort from the human interacting
with the system and sometimes served as a distraction.
Other studies have shown that the attention garnered by
an anthropomorphic interface had a more positive effect.
Walker, Sproull, and Subramani (1994) found that people
who interacted with a talking face spent more time on an
on-line questionnaire, made fewer mistakes, and wrote
more comments than those who answered a text
questionnaire. Koda (1996) created a Web-based poker
game in which a human user could compete with other
personified computer characters including a realistic image,
cartoon male and female characters, a smiley face, no face,
and a dog. She gathered data on people’s subjective
impressions of the characters and found that people’s
impressions of a character were different in a task context
than in isolation and were strongly influenced by perceived
agent competence.
An influential body of related work is that of Nass and
his colleagues. Their efforts focus on the study of
"Computers as Social Actors." They have conducted a
number of experiments that examined how people react to
computer systems and applications that have certain
personified characteristics (Nass, Isbister, & Lee, 2000;
Nass, Steuer, & Tauber, 1994; Rickenberg & Reeves,
2000). Their chief finding is that people interact with and
characterize computer systems in a social manner, much as
they do with other people. Furthermore, they suggest that
findings in the social psychology literature (e.g.,
individuals with similar personalities tend to get along

better than do those with different personalities) apply even
when one of the two participants is a machine.
The studies cited above, and others, suggest that people
are inclined to attribute human-like characteristics to agents
and that a variety of factors might influence how positively
the agents are viewed. Dehn and van Mulken (2000)
provide a more extensive review of this literature.

A Framework for Research on
Anthropomorphic Interface Agents
To effectively and systematically investigate the use of
anthropomorphic interface agents, one needs to consider
the key factors that will affect the usefulness of such
interfaces. We propose an investigative framework
composed of three key components: characteristics of the
user, attributes of the agent, and the task being performed.
We believe that serious empirical study in this area must
systematically address each of these factors and understand
how it affects human users. Below, we provide examples of
individual variables within each factor that could
potentially influence user performance and impressions.

Factor 1: Features of the User
Potential users vary, of course, in many ways. However,
there are certain features that may be quite likely to affect
how useful a user finds an agent. These features include:
Personality: Researchers have identified what are
referred to as the "Big Five" traits that seem to be quite
useful in describing human personalities: extraversion,
openness,
agreeableness,
neuroticism,
and
conscientiousness (e.g., McCrae & Costa, 1987). While
any such breakdown is debatable, it seems reasonable to
examine whether users’ positions on these, or other, trait
dimensions predicts how they will respond to agents.
Background Knowledge: A user who has a good deal
of background knowledge in a domain might prefer an
agent that is reactive and that the user can call upon when
he or she needs some low-level bit of information or has a
low-level task that needs to be done. Conversely, a user
who is learning how to carry out tasks in a particular
domain might welcome strategy advice from an agent,
particularly if the agent can analyze the strategy and
provide reasons for why the strategy might be altered.
Other Variables: Other user-related variables include
gender, age, and computer experience.

Factor 2: Features of the Agent
Fidelity: Earlier studies suggest that more realisticappearing, 3D human representations are perceived as
being more intelligent, which could be viewed positively or
negatively. However, realistic-appearing agents are more
difficult to implement, so if user performance is improved
by the presence of an agent, but does not vary according to
appearance, simpler caricature style characters would be
advantageous.
Presence: Is an agent’s face always present on the screen
or does the agent only appear when it is engaged in a dialog

with the user? One might hypothesize that an ever-present
agent would make users uneasy by producing an effect of
being watched or evaluated all the time.
Role: Should an agent act as a partner in the task or
should it contribute only in clearly specified ways? For
instance, an agent might be able to offer strategy guidance
for design tasks. Alternatively, it might provide only
lower-level procedural "how to" information.
Initiative:
Should an agent proactively make
suggestions and offer guidance or should it respond only
when directly addressed? A proactive agent might be
viewed as being "pushy" and might bother users, or it could
be viewed as being extremely helpful and intelligent if it
acts in situations in which the user is unsure of how to
proceed or is so confused that he or she is unable to form a
coherent help request.
Other Variables: Other agent-related variables to
consider are expressiveness, speech quality, "gender,"
"personality," and competence.

Factor 3: Features of the Task
Tasks can vary in a variety of ways. Some tasks can be
opinion-like (e.g., choosing what to bring on a trip) while
others are more objective (e.g., solving a puzzle) in terms
of assessing the quality of a solution. Some involve a good
deal of high-level planning (e.g., writing a talk) while
others are more rote (e.g., changing boldface words into
italics). Tasks might be classified along some or all of the
dimensions listed below:
Objectiveness: The situation might be an opinion-based
one in which the user is seeking advice and
recommendations on some topic (e.g., which items to pack
for a trip to Europe). Alternatively, the user might be
carrying out an objective task such as acquiring facts (e.g.,
finding the keystroke combination for a particular
command in a software application).
I n t e n t : The user could have a learning goal or
alternatively may be carrying out a set of steps in a familiar
domain. In the latter, the user might want help with lowlevel details whereas in the former the user is looking for
guidance as to the structure of the domain.
Other Variables: Other task-related variables to
consider are domain, degree of time pressure, duration, and
consequences of the quality of task performance.
The number of variables within each factor is certainly
larger than the number we have identified here. No doubt
these factors will also interact. For instance, a novice
attempting to carry out a task in a particular domain might
welcome proactive comments/advice from an agent while
someone with more experience could get annoyed.
With respect to measuring the usefulness of an agent, we
have to consider which dependent measures are most
appropriate. Towards the more objective end, a user’s
performance on a task in terms of accuracy and time--when
such measures are meaningful--can give one indication of
usefulness. Thus, time and errors would be appropriate
measures for a text-editing task. Towards the more

subjective end, a user is likely to have a number of
affective reactions to an agent. These reactions might
manifest themselves in terms of how much users liked the
agent, how intrusive they found the agent, how they
perceived the agent’s personality, and how willing they are
to use the agent in the future. We can certainly assess a
user’s liking and satisfaction towards an agent, but if the
user can carry out the tasks more effectively with the agent
regardless of liking and satisfaction, then how important
are those variables? On the other hand, long-term use of an
agent might be predicted by liking and satisfaction.
The likelihood of a user following an agent’s advice
might be another interesting measure of the usefulness of
an agent. While advice-following would certainly be at
least partly a function of the quality of the advice, it will
also be impacted by how the user feels about the agent
(how many children ignore the advice of their parents
merely because it is the parents giving the advice?).

Experiment
Overview
One fundamental issue in the quality of agent interfaces is
competence (Maes, 1994). It appears obvious that
perceptions of anthropomorphic agent interfaces will be
strongly influenced by the competence of the supporting
software system and the quality of the replies and
suggestions made by the agent. We chose to factor out
competence as an influence. If our experiments uncover
that people’s performance is not enhanced and they dislike
anthropomorphic user interfaces even though the system is
competent, then that is an important and strong result that
other researchers and developers need to understand. To
remove competence as a factor, we employed a "Wizard of
Oz" (Dahlback, Jonsson, & Ahrenberg, 1993) methodology
(described below).
The experiment manipulated the agent fidelity and the
task objectiveness variables because prior work and our
framework suggest they seemed likely candidates to have
an affect on the perception of agents. Usefulness was
evaluated via both the performance and satisfaction
dimensions. We hypothesized that user reactions to the
agent would vary as a function of the objectiveness of task.
A task that required the user to debate the merits of his or
her opinion (about items to pack on a trip) might lead the
user to feel the agent had more of a personality (for good or
for bad) compared to a task in which the user made use of
the agent more as a reference tool (i.e., reminding the user
of keystroke commands for a text editor). We also
hypothesized that users might find the agent to be more
useful in its role as a reference source rather than as an
entity that provides opinions. Finally, we expected that the
more life-like the agent appeared, the more likely the user
might be to ascribe qualities such as personality and
intelligence to the agent, but objective performance would
likely not be affected by appearance.

Participants
Thirty-nine undergraduates participated for course credit
and were randomly assigned to conditions. Participants
had a variety of majors and computer backgrounds.

Procedure and Design
Participants were run individually using a computer
equipped with a microphone and speaker. Participants
performed two tasks: a travel task and an editing task. The
travel task was chosen to be a type of creative, opinionbased task in which interacting with an agent might be
viewed as an opportunity to think more deeply about the
task by discussing points of view about the importance of
travel items. The editing task was chosen to represent an
opportunity to use an agent primarily as a reference source
rather than as a guide or teacher.
The travel task involved a hypothetical situation in which
the participant had a friend who was flying overseas on his
first international trip. The task was to recommend six
items for the person to take with him from a pool of 12
items and to rank the six items in order of importance.
After the participant did the initial ranking using a simple
software interface, a computer agent who supposedly had
knowledge about international trips appeared. The agent
made a predefined set of suggestions in which it
recommended changing the rankings of four of the six
choices and it agreed with the ranking of two other items.
For example, the agent first suggested promoting the
person’s fourth item to the first position, demoting the first
item but keeping it in the top six. The agent explained the
reasoning for its suggestion at every stage and asked the
participant what he or she thought about the suggestion.
After the participant responded to the agent’s comment on a
particular item, the agent would say one of several
conversational conventions (e.g., "OK, let’s continue") so
that it could move on to the next suggestion. After the agent
finished providing feedback on the rankings, the original
rankings were displayed on the screen and the participant
was given the opportunity to change the rankings. After
doing the re-ranking, participants filled out a questionnaire
about the agent and were asked a few questions about the
agent and related issues by the experimenter.
The editing task required participants to use an
unfamiliar text editor to modify an existing document by
making a set of prescribed changes to the document.
Participants first viewed a short video that described the
various functions (e.g., copy, paste) and the specific key
combinations needed to issue the commands. Participants
were then shown a marked-up document that required a set
of changes such as deletions, insertions, and moves, and
they were instructed that if at any time they could not
remember the keystrokes for a particular function, they
could ask the agent for help. Pilot testing was conducted to
ensure that the number of commands was sufficiently large
so that participants would be likely to need to ask the agent
for help. After completing the editing tasks, participants

again filled out a questionnaire about the agent and
answered questions from the experimenter.
The agent was controlled through a Wizard of Oz
technique. One experimenter was in the room with the
participant to introduce the experimental materials, and a
second experimenter was in an adjacent room, monitoring
the questions and responses made by the participant. The
second experimenter insured that the agent responded in a
consistent manner using a prepared set of replies.
Two between-subjects variables were manipulated: type
of agent (animated, stiff, iconic) and task order (travel task
then editing task or vice versa). The left side of Figure 1
shows the face of the agent in the animated and stiff
conditions. The animated agent (donated by Haptek Corp.)
was 3D, with a female appearance--though somewhat
androgynous--that blinked, moved its head, and produced
certain facial expressions in addition to moving its mouth
in synchronization with the synthesized voice. The stiff
agent had the same face as the animated agent but moved
only its mouth. The iconic agent (see the right side of
Figure 1) was a light-bulb icon that had arrows appear
whenever it spoke.
One design issue about this experiment should be
flagged. Although our key task manipulation was the
"objectiveness" of the task (i.e., the travel task being less
objective and the editing task being more objective), the
nature of the agent also was varied as a function of the task.
The agent was completely reactive in the editing task; it
provided information only when requested. However, in the
travel task the agent provided feedback regardless of the
participants’ desire. A cleaner version of the experiment
would have been to hold the "nature" of the agent constant
across the tasks. We allowed this confounding to occur here
because were interested in getting participants’ reactions to
certain human-like attributes of the agent but did not have
the resources to run the additional conditions that would
have been required to completely cross this factor with the
task and appearance manipulations. In future work we plan
to systematically investigate this reactive/proactive
dimension.

Figure 1: Appearance of Agent in Animated and Stiff
Conditions (left) and Iconic Condition (right).

Measures
Both objective and subjective measures were used. One
objective measure was, for the travel task, whether

participants changed their rankings as a function of the
agent’s feedback. For the editing task we measured how
long it took participants to complete the edits. The primary
subjective variables were the responses to the individual
items in the questionnaires and the answers to the questions
posed by the experimenter. The questionnaire items used a
five-point Likert scale (1 = strongly agree, 5 = strongly
disagree) that addressed a number of qualities of the agent
(see Table 2). The questions posed by the experimenter
were open-ended and provided participants an opportunity
to give their impressions about the agent’s personality,
helpfulness, and intelligence.

Results
In the data analyses we found that the task order
manipulation did not have an effect, so in the interest of
simplicity we will collapse across that factor in the
presentation and discussion of the results.
Performance Measures. With respect to more objective
measures, Table 1 shows that participants were more likely
to change the rankings of items that the agent disagreed
with compared to items that the agent agreed with, F(1, 36)
= 38.48, MSE = .07, p < .0001). There was no effect of
type of agent, F(2, 36) = 0.9, MSE = .11, p = .42. There
was no interaction, F(2, 36) = 1.25, p = .30.
Table 1: Proportion of Travel Items with Changed
Rankings as a Function of Type of Agent & Agent Advice.

Suggested Change
Keep Rank

Animated
(n =14)
.82
.57

Stiff
(n =12)
.90
.42

Iconic
(n =13)
.77
.38

The time (in seconds) to do the editing task did not differ
as a function of agent (animated: 714.8, stiff: 568.7, iconic:
671.1); F(2, 31) = 1.78, M S E = 37637.22, p = .19 (5
participants did not do the editing task).
Questionnaire Responses. Table 2 shows the mean
responses to the questionnaire items for the different agent
conditions after the travel and editing tasks (there were 5
participants who did not do both tasks and they are
excluded from Table 2). There was no effect of agent type
for any of the questions. For two of the items, worthwhile
and intrusive, there was an effect of task (worthwhile: F(1,
31) = 15.68, MSE = .45, p = .0004; intrusive: F(1, 31) =
20.28, MSE = .23, p = .0001). The agent was rated more
worthwhile and less intrusive after the editing task
compared to the travel task. These results make sense.
First, the editing task required most participants to rely
heavily on the agent to remind them of commands, thus
making the agent seem worthwhile. Second, the uninvited
critique of participants’ rankings of travel items could
certainly have seemed intrusive.
While group differences did not exist on most of the
questionnaire items, it is interesting that for most items, the
average response tended to be in the positive direction.
Participants felt positively, on average, about the agent.
Interview Responses. While participants made a

number of interesting and insightful comments about the
agent in response to questions from the experimenter, a
simple tally of responses shows reactions to the agent that
again varied as a function of task. Virtually all participants
found the agent helpful for both tasks. Participants were
much less likely to consider the agent to have a personality
after doing the editing task compared to the travel task.
This makes sense because the agent was merely providing
subjects with information on commands in the editing task.
In the travel task the agent expressed its "opinions."
Finally, it is worth noting that in general the agent was
perceived as more intelligent after the travel task than after
the editing task. At one level this seems odd because the
agent had all the answers for the editing task. However, as
demonstrated by some participants’ comments, the agent
was perceived as very limited in the editing task; it knew
about editing commands and probably little else (despite
the fact that it also appeared to understand spoken
language!). In the travel task though it presumably gave
the impression of having sufficiently deep knowledge about
travel such that it could give feedback on the importance of
various items one might take on a trip. While some of the
participants’ responses to the agent indicated that they
disagreed with its suggestions, they appeared to believe that
the suggestions were at least thoughtful.

Discussion
In addition to the results reported above, we learned a great
deal by observing participants’ behaviors and responses in
the sessions. One key question we had was how would the
participants interact with the agent in the two different
tasks. In the editing task, participants seemed very
comfortable asking the agent for assistance. Participants
requested help an average of 6.5 times. However, in the
travel task participants seemed reluctant to engage the
agent in a dialog. Only a few replied with more than a few
words when the agent engaged them. There was clearly
awkwardness to the interaction.
The agent’s social abilities and personality (or lack
thereof) were noted by a number of the participants. In the
travel task, we intentionally had the agent begin the session
saying, "Hello, [person’s name]." Three participants
explicitly mentioned this feature, one stating, when asked if
the agent had a personality, "Yes, respectful. It said, ’[my
name]’, and ’I agree with this.’...I thought that was very
funny. That was really cool."
Other comments implying a personality included,
"Seemed a lot like a travel agent that was in a hurry," and
"helpful, but kind of annoying," and "he seemed almost
irritated when I didn’t agree with him." One participant who
did the editing task first, stated after the task that the agent
did not have a personality, "It was just directed at
answering questions. It had no inflections." But when
asked again after the travel task, the participant responded,
"It was still mechanical, but you could feel the attempt at
being more personable. It acknowledged my responses,
asking me to elaborate. The responses were at a more

personal level." Participants’ willingness to ascribe a
personality to the agent based on a few comments by the
agent in one task suggests that people might be predisposed
to "finding" a personality in an agent. If the effects of
seeing a personality in an agent can be better understood,
such a predisposition might be exploited for good purpose
by designers.

Conclusion
Anthropomorphic interface agents might be one of the best
interface approaches ever devised. Or they might not.
Equivocal results from prior research make it virtually
impossible to decide this matter. The difficulty with prior

work has been its lack of systematicity in examining key
factors and the use of dependent measures that often did not
appropriately assess subjective experience and objective
performance.
In this paper we introduced a framework for
systematically examining the effects of anthropomorphic
agents on user performance and subjective responses. We
performed an initial experiment within this framework that
suggested that type of task may play an outsized role in the
perception of agents. We plan to use our framework to
guide additional studies and hope other researchers find it
useful and that it will allow future experiments to build on
each other more effectively than in the past.

Table 2: Responses to Questionnaire Items as a Function of Type of Agent and Task.
Animated (n=12)
Stiff (n =12)
Agent was
Travel
Edit
Travel
Edit
Worthwhile
2.50
1.58
2.25
1.42
Intrusive
2.83
3.50
3.50
4.00
Friendly
2.67
2.67
2.42
2.50
Annoying
3.25
3.33
2.83
3.25
Intelligent
2.58
2.92
2.58
2.50
Cold
3.25
3.08
3.00
2.67
Agent has clear voice
2.33
2.58
2.58
2.33
Enjoyed interacting with Agent
3.08
3.17
2.75
2.83
Agent helped with task
2.25
1.50
1.67
1.50
Like to have agent
2.83
2.67
2.58
2.33
Note: Responses were on a scale from 1 (strongly agree) to 5 (strongly disagree).

References
Cassell, J. (2000). Embodied conversational interface
agents. Communications of the ACM, 43, 70-78.
Dahlback, N., Jonsson, A. & Ahrenberg, L. (1993). Wizard
of Oz studies — why and how. In Proceedings of the 1993
International Workshop on Intelligent User Interfaces,
(Orlando, FL), 193-200.
Dehn, D.M. & van Mulken, S. (2000). The impact of
animated interface agents: A review of empirical research.
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 52, 122.
Fridlund, A.J. & Gilbert, A.N. (1985). Emotions and facial
expression. Science, 230, 607—608.
King, W.J. & Ohya, J. (1996). The representation of agents:
Anthropomorphism, agency and intelligence.
In
Proceedings CHI ’ 96 Conference Companion, 289-290.
Koda, T. (1996). Agents with faces: A study on the effect of
personification of software agents. Masters thesis, MIT
Media Lab, Cambridge, MA.
Lanier, J. (1995). Agents of alienation. Interactions 2,
66—72.
Laurel, B. (1990). Interface agents: Metaphors with
character. In B. Laurel (Ed.), The art of human-computer
interface design. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 355365.
Lyman, P. & Varian, H. (2002). How Much Information?
Find at http://www.sims.berkeley.edu/how-much-info/.

Iconic (n =10)
Travel
Edit
2.30
2.10
3.40
3.80
2.40
2.80
3.20
3.80
2.40
2.70
3.70
3.30
2.50
2.40
2.70
2.90
2.00
2.30
2.20
2.40

AVG
Travel/Edit
2.35/1.57
3.24/3.76
2.50/2.65
3.09/3.44
2.53/2.71
3.29/3.00
2.47/2.44
2.85/2.97
1.97/1.74
2.56/2.47

Maes, P. (1994). Agents that reduce work and information
overload. Communications of the ACM, 37, 31-40.
McCrae, R. & Costa, P. (1987). Validation of the five-factor
model of personality across instruments and observers.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 81-90.
Nass, C., Isbister, K. & Lee, E. (2000). Truth is beauty:
Researching embodied conversational agents. In J.
Cassell, S. Prevost, J. Sullivan, and E. Churchill (Eds.),
Embodied conversational agents. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 374-402.
Nass, C., Steuer, J., & Tauber, E. (1994). Computers are
social actors. In Proceedings of CHI ’94, 72-78.
Rickenberg, R. & Reeves, B. (2000). The effects of
animated characters on anxiety, task performance, and
evaluations of user interfaces. In Proceedings of CHI
2000, 329-336.
Shneiderman, B. & Maes, P. (1997). Direct manipulation vs.
interface agents. Interactions, 4, 42-61.
Shneiderman, B. (1997). Direct manipulation versus agents:
Paths to predictable, controllable, and comprehensible
interfaces. In J.M. Bradshaw (Ed.), Software agents.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 97-106.
Takeuchi, A. & Nagao, K. (1995). Situated facial displays:
Towards social interaction. In Proceedings of CHI ’ 95,
450-455.
Walker, J.H., Sproull, L., & Subramani, R. (1994). Using a
human face in an interface. In Proceedings of CHI ’ 94,
85-91.

