UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Collaborative Interactions: The Process of Joint Production and Individual Reuse of Novel
Ideas

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9n11325b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
McGregor, Mark U
Chi, Michelene T.H.

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Collaborative Interactions:
The Process of Joint Production and Individual Reuse of Novel Ideas
Mark U. McGregor (markmc@pitt.edu)

Michelene T.H. Chi (chi@pitt.edu)

Department of Psychology and the Learning Research and Development Center,
University of Pittsburgh, 3939 O’Hara Street, Pittsburgh, PA 15260
Abstract
Collaborative problem solving involves the active exchange and
interaction of ideas between two or more people and such interactive exchanges can result in the joint production of co-constructed
ideas, some of which may be novel. We analyzed verbal data of
pairs of students collaboratively solving problems posed by a computer workplace simulation (a banking business), and then individually solving two transfer problems, in order to examine the
frequency of occurrence of co-constructed novel ideas, and the
subsequent individual reuse of these co-constructed ideas. The
results show that in collaborative interactions, about 20% of the
task-relevant ideas were produced jointly, whereas about 80% of
the utterances were produced individually (i.e., they were selfexplanations). However, about half of these jointly produced ideas
(or 10%) were novel. Moreover, individual collaborators were able
to reuse these jointly constructed ideas to solve transfer problems.
Finally, more interactive collaborative pairs produced a higher
proportion of jointly constructed ideas than less interactive pairs,
and individual members of more interactive pairs reused jointly
constructed ideas more than low interactive pairs.

Introduction
In classrooms and workplaces, individuals frequently learn
by collaborating with others, in tasks such as solving physics problem (Kneser & Plotzner, 2001), planning (Barron,
2000), and learning electricity (van Boxtel, van der Linden,
& Kanselaar, 2000). Although operational definitions of
collaboration vary widely both within and across various
fields (e.g., Psychology, Education, Artificial Intelligence,
CSCL), for the purposes of this paper, we define collaboration as the active exchange and interaction of ideas between
two or more individuals attempting to discover solutions or
create knowledge together (Damon, 1984). While some of
the results of previous collaboration research are inconsistent, the majority support the conclusion that compared to
solving a problem alone, collaborative problem solving is
often more efficient, and in some conditions, more efficacious than individual learning (SCANS, 1991; Webb &
Palinscar, 1996).
Most of the initial research on collaborative learning
focused on the environmental conditions under which
collaborative learning was more effective than individual
learning. Some examples of such environmental factors are
group composition, task features, context, and communicative medium (Dillenbourg et al., 1996). However, these
mediating factors also interact in a highly complex manner,
and this complexity has made the resulting examination of

this complexity has made the resulting examination of how
these multiple interactions produce collaborative learning
effects a very difficult pursuit.
In part due to this difficulty, an alternative approach to
the study of collaboration focuses on the interactive processes that are thought to underlie successful collaborative
learning. Examples of such processes are observing peers’
strategies, engaging in productive argumentation, explaining
one’s own thinking, sharing knowledge, and providing critique (Azmitia, 1988; Bos, 1937; Coleman, 1998; Hatano &
Iganaki, 1991; King, 1990; Phelps & Damon, 1989; Webb,
Troper, & Fall, 1995). Many of these processes are captured
more-or-less in Webb & Palinscar’s (1996) ‘Input-ProcessOutput’ model of group (collaborative) processes.
The process component of the model contains four
common collaborative learning processes: (a) resolving conflict and controversy, (b) giving and receiving explanations,
(c) providing emotional and motivational support, and (d)
co-constructing new ideas. The first two processes result in
the generation of explanations, either to resolve a conflict,
or to explain a problem or solution, and such explanation
generation is known to produce learning gains (Chi, Bassok,
Lewis, Reimann, & Glaser, 1989; Palinscar & Brown,
1984). The third process is generally comprised of personality factors (e.g., emotion regulation, motivation, social
skills, and attitudes), each of which effects how collaborators interact with one another. The fourth process, coconstruction, can potentially result in novel ideas, or ideas
that no collaborator previously possessed explicitly.
While Webb & Palinscar’s (1996) four collaborative
processes do drive collaborative learning effects, the first
three processes are not unique to collaboration -- that is,
each can also be observed and implemented in individual
learning environments. For example, conflict and controversy can arise within oneself when one thinks more deeply
about, or attempts to integrate new information with, one’s
prior beliefs. The resolution of such conflict (or self-repairs)
produces learning gains (Chi, 2000). Similarly, giving help
or explanation is akin to self-explaining one’s own thinking
without interacting with another individual, and such selfexplanations foster learning (Chi et al., 1989). Similarly,
receiving explanations has always been shown to be helpful
as well, but less so than giving explanations. Providing
emotional and motivational support is also not unique to
collaboration – individuals are capable of supporting their

own emotional and motivational needs. In the end, while all
four of Webb & Palinscar’s (1996) proposed collaborative
processes do drive collaborative learning effects, coconstruction is the only one that is unique to collaborative
learning
Co-construction has been defined as the process of the
joint production of ideas (by members of a group) that no
individual group member is likely to produce on their own
(Barron, 2000; Rafal, 1996). Thus, co-construction is a
process that may differentiate collaborative and individual
learning environments. That is, collaborators may co-create
novel ideas that were not coherently present before they
collaborated, or were unlikely to have been elaborated individually. For example, Kneser and Ploetzner (2001)
administered qualitative and quantitative pre-test, intermediate-test, and post-test questions to individuals learning
mechanics. One group of students was instructed on how to
solve mechanics problems qualitatively, while another
group was instructed quantitatively. After administering the
intermediate-test, individuals from the two contrasting
groups were placed in dyads and asked to collaboratively
solve new mechanics problems. The authors found that individuals were able to answer questions (post-test) that they
were unable to answer prior to collaborating (intermediatetest). However, the results of this study must be interpreted
cautiously since the pairs differed in expertise, which suggests that one member of the dyad may have learned from
the other member, and not that the dyads co-constructed the
answers together.
Hence, the goals of this paper are to document the extent to which collaboration facilitates the joint production of
novel ideas, and the extent to which individual members of
collaborating pairs take ownership of jointly produced novel
ideas such that they are able to assimilate and reuse those
ideas later in individual (transfer) situations. To address
these questions, we report a detailed verbal analysis of collaborative protocols collected in the context of dyads interacting with a computer simulation.

Methods
The verbal data that we analyzed were collected and described in Jeong, Taylor, and Chi (2000). Here we briefly
summarize how the verbal data were collected and the
measures that are relevant to our analysis.

Participants
Twenty-six high school students (juniors and seniors from
local urban high schools) participated in this study, comprising 13 collaborative pairs (4 male and 9 female same-sex
collaborative pairs). Data from one pair was excluded from
analysis due to a collection error, resulting in 12 collaborative pairs. Individual participants brought a friend of the
same gender to participate in the study with them, resulting
in pairs where each collaborator had known the other for a
mean of 4 years. All participants were compensated for participation in the study and all reported familiarity with com-

puters. A majority of the students reported that they had
used other computer simulations or games in the past.

Materials
Court Square Community Bank (CSCB). CSCB is a
computerized workplace simulation (SIM) in which the user
assumes the role of a new vice-president at a small local
bank. The VP is required to solve problems arising at the
bank that cover a variety of general business issues such as
facilities upgrades or customer relations. The problems encourage the VP to employ a number of business management activities (see Ferrari, Taylor, and VanLehn, 1999; and
McQuaide, Leinhardt, & Stainton, 1999; for more details on
the simulation program). We will use the more general term
SIM to refer to CSCB.
SIM Problems. The SIM is sub-divided into 14 different
episodes, 8 of which were selected for this study so that
diverse topics would be covered with a minimum amount of
overlap. Sample episode topics were reinvesting profits into
bank facilities, closing/relocating branches, approving mortgages, and selecting the best candidate for a position.
Measures. Several measures, such as definitions and general business knowledge questions, were designed to assess
participants’ overall pre-test and post-test performance. The
one relevant here is the transfer task that assessed general
and context-specific knowledge at a deeper level than the
definitions and questions measures.
The transfer task consisted of two problems (Fresh
Foods and Giant Gallery), each modeled after two problems
discussed in two SIM episodes (episode 9 and 10). The
transfer problems were designed to appear different on the
surface, but shared the same deep structure as the associated
SIM problems. During the transfer problems, participants
acted as vice-president (VP) of a grocery store company that
experiences some of the same problems that the bank experienced in the SIM. In the Fresh Foods problem, students
decided how to allot available funds to various facilities
improvement options for the grocery store – as they did for
the bank in SIM episode 9. In the Giant Gallery problem,
students decided whether to close a less profitable store
and/or open a new store – as they did for bank branches in
SIM episode 10.
Talk-aloud protocols were elicited from participants to
obtain more detailed performance data. Participants were
instructed to talk-aloud (Ericsson & Simon, 1984) during
their collaborative (simulation) and individual (transfer)
problem-solving sessions, both of which were audiotape.
All collaborative SIM sessions were also video-taped

Procedure
Participants took part in four laboratory sessions, each separated by approximately four days, in the following order: (1)
pre-test, (2) simulation session I, (3) simulation session II,
and (4) post-test.
The pre-test and post-test were administered to participants individually, and both tests asked participants to respond to the definitions, transfer, and questions tasks – and
in that order. Each simulation session consisted of four epi-

sodes. The first three episodes in each session were
performed collaboratively in dyads, and the last problem in
each session was performed individually. On the collaborative problems, the pairs were instructed to work as a team in
discussing how to handle the problems and to reach a consensus before making any decisions.

Analyses and Results
We report the results of verbal analyses (Chi, 1997) of individuals’ performance on the two transfer problems and their
associated SIM episodes 9 and 10. This section describes
each step of verbal analysis employed, followed by its result.

The Number of Task-relevant Ideas
Did collaborators produce task-relevant ideas? To assess the
number of task-relevant ideas the pairs articulated, each
pairs’ verbal protocols were coded for any combination of
utterances representing a meaningful concept. Hence, ideas
could be produced either by one individual in one turn, by
one individual over several conversational turns, or by both
individuals over several turns on one topic. Ideas were also
required to be task-relevant – that is, related either to business in general, the theme of the episode (i.e., facilities improvement), or a solution the pair considered. Task irrelevant ideas consisted of comments of several types, such as
“I guess you just gotta ask”, “We need to find out some
more information”, or “Read the memo”, and they were not
coded.
Example 1 shows an articulated task-relevant idea. Note
that examples are verbatim excerpts from protocols with
prior utterances (in brackets) added for additional context.
Example 1: Articulated Idea
A: [If we renovate the floors] we will not be able- [to
maintain our leadership because…]
B: [subjects speaking simultaneously] new technology.
A: Exactly…because we will not have the new technology.
The basic idea expressed in example 1 is that renovating the floors will consume the majority of the funds available for facilities improvements, resulting in a lack of funds
available to purchase new technology (ATMs) that would
help the bank maintain its leadership position in the marketplace.
In general, the protocols were sparse in terms of the
amount of substantive ideas produced. For example, the
total number of lines available to code from two randomly
chosen pairs were 2,131 and 1,320 (pairs 8 and 11, respectively, episode 9). Of those lines, only 3% and 1%, respectively, were substantive enough to warrant coding. This is
consistent with evidence in the literature showing that in
collaborative tasks in which concrete actions have to be
taken (such as working with a simulation), the dialogues are
action-oriented and less abstract and rich (Bennet & Duane,
1991; Pilkington & Parker Jones, 1996; van Boxtel et al.,

2000) Nonetheless, in playing the two episodes of the simulation, collaborative pairs produced a total of 365 task relevant ideas (M=30.42, SD=9.23, per pair). The remaining
analyses will be reported in the context of the total number
of task relevant ideas.

The Number of Novel and Restated Ideas
Were the task-relevant ideas produced while playing the two
simulation episodes novel or restated? To assess whether
collaborators generated novel constructions, as opposed to
merely restating information presented by the SIM, we
compared the ideas produced by collaborators to the ideas
explicitly presented by the SIM (SIM-ideas). SIM-ideas
were identified through content analysis of the two relevant
SIM episodes (9 and 10). This content analysis produced a
transcript of the virtual conversations, interactions, and materials explicitly presented by the SIM. SIM-ideas were then
identified in the SIM-transcripts following the same procedure employed to identify collaborative ideas. We then
compared the collaborative ideas produced by a pair to the
SIM-ideas that they were exposed to in order to determine
whether the collaboration idea was a novel construction (no
match), or a restatement of information embedded within
the simulation (match). When comparing ideas we focused
on their conceptual meaning rather than the literal vocabulary used.
Ideas coded as novel constructions were new reasons
generated by students (most likely from prior knowledge or
experience), inferences following from what was stated in
the SIM episode, substantial paraphrases (paraphrases of
more than one idea), and integration statements in which
students combined ideas expressed in the SIM episode in
ways that the SIM did not explicitly suggest. Restated ideas
were unsubstantial paraphrases (one idea), or verbatim restatements of information presented by the SIM. Examples
of a novel construction and a restated idea are given below:
Example 2: A Novel Construction (also jointly produced)
B: This proposal [New ATMs] helps the bank’s profitability
A: help
B: helping the bank to run
A: more smoothly
Example 2 was coded as a novel construction because
the SIM never explicitly relates the bank’s profitability with
new ATMs or with the bank running smoothly. (Note that
example 2 is also a jointly produced idea, which will be
described in the next section).
Example 3: A Restated Idea
B: [New ATM] cards will be easier to use
SIM: New ATMs are easier for the customer to use.
Example 3 was coded as a restated idea because what B
articulates is an unsubstantial paraphrase of the SIM explicated idea that new ATMs are easier to use. The results of

this analysis show that collaborators produced just as many
novel ideas (197) as restated ideas (168).

Individually and Jointly Constructed Ideas
Given that many novel ideas were produced, the question of
interest is whether they were jointly produced (i.e., coconstructed), or individually produced, as compared to restated ideas. Thus, for each of the 197 novel and 168 restated ideas we determined whether they were individually
constructed or jointly co-constructed. Co-constructed ideas
were defined as those ideas that when taken together, across
speakers, form a complete idea, but when taken individually, do not represent the same complete idea (Rafal, 1996;
Barron, 2000). Thus, we decomposed each idea unit into 3
component parts: initiation, elaboration, and completion.
Initiation was defined as the point at which the first utterance (word) of the idea occurred; completion was defined as
the point at which a meaningful statement could be identified; and elaboration was defined as the collection of utterances between initiation and completion, where the content
of the idea was articulated. We then examined how each
idea was produced in terms of who articulated each component.
For each idea, if the same collaborator produced all
three components, then the idea was coded as individually
produced. Alternatively, if different collaborators produced
any of the components of one idea, then that idea was coded
as jointly produced. Hence, jointly produced ideas required
the collaborators to display conversational moves such that
they completed each other’s ideas. The following examples
illustrate this.
Example 4: An Individually Produced Idea
A: revenues and expenses at the downtown branch
changed
B: Uhh….
A: revenues have just start like increase and decrease
and then leveled off so…
B: Umm…yeah… [typing] how do you spell fluctuate
A: fluctuating, but now it’s leveled off and…
B: How do you spell…
A: well, they generally decreased
Example 4 shows a complete idea (revenues and expenses fluctuated but decreased in general) initiated, elaborated, and completed by one collaborator (A), while the
other (B) interjects task-irrelevant utterances. The initiation
component in this case is the beginning of the statement:
“revenues…” the completion component is the point at
which a complete idea is identifiable: “…generally decreased”; while the elaboration component is the content
between the initiation and the completion of the idea.
Example 5: A Jointly Produced Idea:
B: Okay, the new system would give the- give the employees…
A: more time to deal with the customers.

Example 5 shows an idea (of a new system) initiated by
one collaborator (B), then elaborated and completed by the
other collaborator (A). Example 2 also illustrates a jointlyproduced idea.
Table 1 shows the number of novel and restated ideas
that were either individually or jointly produced. Not surprisingly, roughly four times (81%) as many ideas were
individually (297) rather than jointly (19% or 68) produced.
Proportionately, jointly produced ideas were just as likely to
be novel (59%, 40/68) as restated (41%, 28/68).
Table 1: Total Number of Jointly and Individually Produced, Novel and Restated Ideas for All Collaborative Pairs
Novel

Restated

Individually Produced

157

140

297

Jointly Produced

40

28

68

197

168

365

In sum, collaborative pairs produced ideas jointly about
20% (or 68) of the time; individually about 80% (or 297) of
the time. Given that jointly produced ideas were equally
likely to be novel as restated, about 10% (or 40/365) of the
ideas were jointly produced novel ones.

Reuse of Ideas During Transfer
Did individuals reuse the jointly produced novel ideas on
transfer problems? In other words, were the individual collaborators able to reuse the jointly produced novel ideas, to
indicate that they have, to some extent, taken ownership of
or assimilated the ideas? Each individual idea stated while
solving a transfer problem was compared to each idea originally produced by the pair when they solved the associated
SIM episodes. If an idea articulated while solving the transfer problem matched one that was produced while playing
the SIM, then the idea was coded as a reused idea.
In order to make more sensitive comparisons between
collaborative pairs during the SIM and individuals at transfer, each individual’s transfer performance was averaged
with the individual transfer performance of the other member of their original collaborative pair. This averaging procedure resulted in equal n in each condition (collaboration
vs. transfer).
In general, the transfer transcripts were sparser than the
collaborative transcripts in terms of the total number of
ideas produced (114; M=9.5, SD=3.75). Of these, 32%
(36/114) were ideas that were originally produced during
their collaborative session. Overall, individual collaborators
reused more ideas that were originally produced individually (25) than ideas that were produced jointly (11). However, recall that a significantly greater number of ideas were
originally produced individually (297, see Table 1), rather

than jointly (68). Thus, proportionately, a larger percentage
of jointly produced ideas were reused (16% or 11/68) than
individually produced (8%, or 25/276), although this difference is not significant. Basically, jointly and individually
produced ideas were equally likely to be reused.
Not surprisingly, of the individually produced ideas,
participants tended to reuse those that they generated on
their own (64% of the times, 16/25) more than those that
were generated by their partner (36% of the time, 9/25; t
(11) = 2.86, p < .05). In contrast, in the reuse of jointly produced ideas, there was no preference for self-initiated or
partner-initiated (59% or 6.5/11 versus 41%, 4.5/11). Taken
together, these results suggest that jointly produced novel
ideas were equally shared by each partner, regardless of
who initiated them, whereas individually produced ideas
were not as well assimilated by the partner.
In sum, these results show that about one-third (32%)
of the ideas individuals stated while solving the transfer
problems were originally produced during collaboration,
and these reused ideas were equally likely to have been individually produced as they were to have been jointly produced. However, collaborators had a definite preference to
reuse self-initiated, individually produced ideas, but had no
such preference when reusing jointly produced ideas. This
gives the jointly produced ideas a special status, as if the
ideas were truly shared and owned by both partners.

High and Low Collaborative Pairs
We hypothesized that pairs who were more interactive
would produce more co-constructed ideas. To test this hypothesis, we determined whether specific pairs were more or
less collaborative based on the number of conversational
turns taken by each pair while they solved SIM episodes 9
and 10. High and low collaborative groups were then
formed based on a median split (Mdn = 933 turns), and excluded two pairs extremely close to the median. The mean
number of turns for high and low groups was significantly
different (1186.4 vs. 763.8 turns, respectively; t (8) = 5.171,
p < .01,), and there was no significant difference in the total
number of ideas produced overall. (Note that from this point
forward high and low collaborative pairs will be referred to
as such, while individual members of high and low collaborative pairs will be referred to as high and low collaborators).
Once the groups were established, we compared the
proportion of ideas produced jointly versus individually by
high and low collaborative pairs. For the high collaborative
pairs, the proportion of ideas that were jointly produced was
greater (27% vs. 9%; t (8) = 3.77, p < .01); while the proportion of individually produced ideas was lower (73% vs.
91%, t (8) =3.82, p < .01). Additionally, the proportion of
jointly produced and novel ideas was also greater for high
collaborative pairs (17% vs. 6%); (t (8) =3.10, p < .05).
In sum, being a member of a high collaborative pair resulted in a redistribution of the types of ideas produced during collaboration. That is, high and low collaborative pairs
produced equal numbers of ideas overall, but high collabo-

rative pairs produced more ideas jointly and fewer ideas
individually than low collaborative pairs; and high collaborative pairs produced a greater proportion of novel coconstructed ideas than low collaborative pairs

High and Low Individuals’ Reuse of Ideas
While solving the transfer problems alone, individual members of high and low collaborative pairs produced roughly
equivalent total numbers of ideas (52 vs. 46.5, respectively),
as well as roughly equivalent numbers of reused ideas (19
vs. 13; see Table 2). However, the types of reused ideas
were again differentially distributed - high collaborators
reused more jointly produced ideas than low collaborators
(18% vs. 8%, 8.5/47 vs. 1/12; t (8) = 2.434, p < .05), and
high collaborators were more likely to reuse jointly produced novel ideas than low collaborators (20% vs. 11%,
5.5/28 vs. 1/9), although this difference was not significant
(p = 0.10).
In sum, individual members of high collaborative pairs
reused more jointly produced ideas, and had a greater tendency to reuse jointly produced novel ideas. Taken together,
this pattern of results suggests that if collaborators engage in
more interaction then they are more likely to produce coconstructed ideas, these co-constructed ideas are likely to be
novel, and both the co-constructed and novel co-constructed
ideas are likely to be reused. Hence, collaboration has the
advantage of producing co-constructed ideas and coconstructed novel ideas that are reusable.
Table 2: Number of Ideas Reused by Individuals Who Participated in High and Low Collaborative Pairs
High

Low

52

46.5

Ideas Reused

19 (36%) 1

13 (28%) 1

Individually Produced

10.5 (8%) 2

12 (9%) 2

Jointly Produced

8.5 (18%) 2

1 (8%) 2

13.5 (13.5%) 2

7.5 (10%) 2

Ideas at Transfer

Novel Ideas
1

% of ideas produced at transfer that were reused (e.g., 19/52 = 36%).
% of ideas reused at transfer given the number produced during collaboration (see Table 1); (e.g., Reused Individually Produced = 10.5; Individually Produced during collaboration = 128; 10.5/128 = 8%).
2

Discussion
These results suggest that one advantage of collaboration
may arise from the co-construction of novel ideas. Overall,
we found that collaborators tended to produce more ideas
individually than jointly, confirming the overall benefit of
self-explaining (Chi, et al, 2000). However, joint production
did occur close to 20 percent of the time, and jointly pro-

duced ideas were just as likely to be novel as restated. Overall, more novel ideas were produced individually than
jointly (again, confirming the benefit of self-explaining).
However, individuals reused fewer novel ideas that were
individually produced by their partner than were jointly
produced with their partner, suggesting that listening to
novel ideas produced by another was not as effective as coconstructing novel ideas together. These results suggest that
one does not assimilate knowledge produced by a partner as
well as knowledge co-constructed by both partners. Finally,
the more interactive collaborators reused a greater percentage of jointly produced ideas, as well as a greater percentage
of jointly produced novel ideas, thus being more interactive
provided more opportunities to co-construct and reuse novel
ideas. Thus, we may conclude, (cautiously since the numbers are small), that collaboration is an effective form of
learning in part because about 10% of collaborative efforts
result in the production of co-constructed novel ideas, a portion of which individuals take ownership of and reuse subsequently.
References
Azmitia, M. (1988). Peer interaction and problem solving:
When are two heads better than one? Child Development, 59, 87-96.
Barron, B. (2000). Achieving coordination in collaborative
problem-solving groups. Journal of Learning Sciences,
9 (4), 403-436.
Bennett, N. & Dunne, E. (1991). the nature and quality of
talk in co-operative classroom groups. Learning and
Instruction, 1, 103-118.
Bos, M.C. (1937). Experimental study of productive collaboration. Acta Psychologica, 3, 315-426.
Chi, M.T.H., Bassok, M., Lewis, M., Reimann, P., &
Glaser, R. (1989). Self-explanations: How students
study and use examples in learning to solve problems.
Cognitive Science, 13, 145-182.
Chi, M.T.H. (2000). Self-explaining expository texts: The
dual processes of generating inferences and repairing
mental models. In Glaser, R. (Ed.). Advances in Instructional Psychology. (pp. 161-238). Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Coleman, E. (1998). Using explanatory knowledge during
collaborative problem solving in science. Journal of
Learning Sciences, 7, 387-427.
Damon, W. (1984). Peer education: the untapped potential.
Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 5, 331343.
Dillenbourg, P., Baker, M., Blaye, A., & O’Malley, C.
(1996). The evolution of research on collaborative
learning. In P.Reimann & H. Spada, Learning in Human and Machines: Towards an Interdisciplinary
Learning Science. (pp. 189-211). Oxford: Elsevier Science.

Ferrari, M., Taylor, R. & VanLehn, K. (1999). Adapting
work simulations for schools. Journal of Educational
Computing Research, 21 (1), 25-53.
Hatano, G. & Inagaki, K. (1991). Sharing cognition through
a collective comprehension activity. In R.L. Resnick,
J. Levine, & S. Teasley (Eds.), Perspectives on socially shared cognition (pp. 331-348). Washington,
DC: American Psychological Association.
Jeong, H., Taylor, R., & Chi, M. (2000). Learning from a
Computer Workplace Simulation. Proceedings of the
22nd annual meeting of the Cognitive Science Society,
(pp 705-710). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates
King, A. (1990). Facilitating elaborative learning in the
classroom through reciprocal questioning. American
Educational Research Journal, 27, 664-687.
Kneser, C. & Ploetzner, R. (2001). Collaboration on the
basis of complementary domain knowledge: Observed
dialogue structures and their relation to learning success. Learning and Instruction, 11, 53-83.
McKendree, J., Stenning, K., Mayes, T., Lee, J., & Cox, R.
(1998). Why observing a dialogue may benefit learning: The vicarious learner. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 14 (2).
McQuaide, J., Leinhardt, G., & Stainton, C. (1999). Ethical
reasoning: Real and simulated. Journal of Educational
Computing Research, 21 (4), 425-466.
Phelps, E., & Damon, W. (1989). Problem solving with
equals: Peer collaboration as a context for learning
mathematics and spatial concepts. Journal of Educational Psychology, 81, 639-646.
Pilkington, R.M. & Parker-Jones, C.H. (1996). Interacting
with computer-based simulation: The role of dialogue.
Computers and Education, 27, 1-14.
Rafal, C. (1996). From co-construction to takeovers: Science talk in a group of four girls. Journal of Learning
Sciences, 5, 279-293.
Secretary’s Commission on Achieving Necessary Skills.
(1991). What work requires of schools: A SCANS report for America 2000. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Labor.
van Boxtel, C., van der Linden, J., & Kanselaar, G. (2000).
collaborative learning tasks and the elaboration of conceptual knowledge. Learning and Instruction, 10, 311330.
Webb, N.M., & Palinscar, A.S. (1996). Group processes in
the classroom. In D. Berliner & R. Calfee (Eds.),
Handbook of educational psychology (pp. 841-873).
New York: Macmillan.
Webb, N.M., Troper, J.D., & Fall, R. (1995). Constructive
activity and learning in collaborative small groups.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 87, 406-423.

